[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shakespeare](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flos17)  [Next](flos19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F209I/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folk-lore of Shakespeare*, by T.F. Thiselton Dyer, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

### CHAPTER XVI.

#### SPORTS AND PASTIMES.

<span class="smallcaps">Very</span> many of the old sports and pastimes
in popular use in Shakespeare's day, have long ago not only been laid
aside, but in the course of years have become entirely forgotten. This
is to be regretted, as a great number of these capital diversions were
admirably suited both for in and out of doors; the simplicity which
marked them being one of their distinguishing charms. That Shakespeare,
too, took an interest in these good old sources of recreation, may be
gathered from the frequent reference which he has made to them; his
mention of some childish game even serving occasionally as an
illustration in a passage characterized by its force and vigour.

   *Archery*.—In Shakespeare's day this was a very popular diversion,
and the "Knights of Prince Arthur's Round Table" was a society of
archers instituted by Henry VIII., and encouraged in the reign of
Elizabeth. <span id="fr_771"></span>[1](#fn_769) Fitzstephen, who wrote
in the reign of Henry II., notices it among the summer pastimes of the
London youth; and the repeated Statutes from the 13th to the 16th
century enforcing the use of the bow, generally ordered the leisure time
upon holidays to be passed in its exercise. <span
id="fr_772"></span>[2](#fn_770) Shakespeare seems to have been
intimately acquainted with the numerous terms connected with archery,
many of which we find scattered throughout his plays. Thus, in "Love's
Labour's Lost" (iv. 1), Maria uses the expression, "Wide o’ the bow
hand," a term which signified a good deal to the left of the mark.

   The "clout" was the nail or pin of the target, and "from

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

the passages," says Dyce, <span id="fr_773"></span>[1](#fn_771) "which I
happen to recollect in our early writers, I should say that the clout,
or pin, stood in the centre of the inner circle of the butts, which
circle, being painted white, was called the white; that, to 'hit the
white' was a considerable feat, but that to 'hit or cleave the clout or
pin' was a much greater one,—though, no doubt, the expressions were
occasionally used to signify the same thing, viz., to hit the mark." In
"Love's Labour's Lost" (iv. 1), Costard says of Boyet,—"Indeed, a’ must
shoot nearer, or he'll ne’er hit the clout"; and in "2 Henry IV." (iii.
2), Shallow says of old Double,—"A’ would have clapped i’ the clout at
twelve score,"—that is, he would have hit the clout at twelve score
yards. And King Lear (iv. 6), employs the phrase "i’ the clout, i’ the
clout: hewgh!"

   In "Romeo and Juliet" (ii. 4), where Mercutio relates how Romeo is
"shot through the ear with a love song; the very pin of his heart cleft
with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft," the metaphor of course is from
archery.

   The term "loose" was the technical one for the discharging of an
arrow, and occurs in "Love's Labour's Lost" (v. 2).

   According to Capell, <span id="fr_774"></span>[2](#fn_772) the words
of Bottom, in "A Midsummer Night's Dream" (i. 2), "hold or cut
bow-strings," were a proverbial phrase, and alluded to archery. "When a
party was made at butts, assurance of meeting was given in the words of
that phrase, the sense of the person using them being that he would
'hold' or keep promise, or they might 'cut his bow-strings,'—demolish
him for an archer." Whether, adds Dyce, "this be the true explanation of
the phrase, I am unable to determine."

   *All hid, all hid*.—Biron, in "Love's Labour's Lost" (iv. 3), no
doubt means the game well known as hide-and-seek,—"All hid, all hid; an
old infant play." The following note, however, in Cotgrave's "French and
English Dictionary," has been adduced to show that he may possibly mean
blind man's buff; "Clignemasset.—The childish play called Hod-man-blind
\[*i.e.*, blind-man's-buff\], Harrie-racket, or are you all hid."

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

   *Backgammon*.—The old name for this game was "Tables," as in "Love's
Labour's Lost" (v. 2),—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice  
 That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice."</span>

</div>

   An interesting history of this game will be found in Strutt's "Sports
and Pastimes" (1876, pp. 419–421).

   *Barley-break*.—This game, called also the "Last Couple in Hell,"
which is alluded to in the "Two Noble Kinsmen," (iv. 3), was played by
six people—three of each sex,—who were coupled by lot. <span
id="fr_775"></span>[1](#fn_773) A piece of ground was then chosen, and
divided into three compartments, of which the middle one was called
hell. It was the object of the couple condemned to this division to
catch the others, who advanced from the two extremities; in which case a
change of situation took place, and hell was filled by the couple who
were excluded by preoccupation from the other places. This catching,
however, was not so easy, as by the rules of the game, the middle couple
were not to separate before they had succeeded, while the others might
break hands whenever they found themselves hard pressed. When all had
been taken in turn, the last couple were said "to be in hell," and the
game ended.

   The game is frequently mentioned by old writers, and appears to have
been very popular. From Herrick's Poems, it is seen that the couples in
their confinement occasionally solaced themselves by kisses,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Barley-break; or, Last in Hell.  
 We two are last in hell: what may we fear  
 To be tormented, or kept pris’ners here:  
 Alas, if kissing be of plagues the worst,  
 We'll wish in hell we had been last and first."</span>

</div>

   In Scotland it was called barla-breikis, and was, says Jamieson,
"generally played by young people in a corn-yard, hence its name
barla-bracks, about the stacks." <span id="fr_776"></span>[2](#fn_774)
The term "hell," says Nares, <span id="fr_777"></span>[3](#fn_775) "was
indiscreet, and must have

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

produced many profane allusions, besides familiarising what ought always
to preserve its due effect of awe upon the mind." Both its names are
alluded to in the following passage in Shirley's "Bird in a Cage"—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                       "Shall's to barlibreak?  
I was in hell last; ’tis little less to be in a petticoat
sometimes."</span>

</div>

   *Base*.—This was a rustic game, known also as "Prison base" or
"Prison bars." It is mentioned in "Cymbeline" (v. 3) by Posthumus—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                      "Lads more like to run  
The country base than to commit such slaughter."</span>

</div>

And in "Two Gentlemen of Verona" (i. 2) by Lucetta—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus." <span
id="fr_778"></span>[1](#fn_776)</span>

</div>

   The success of this pastime depended upon the agility of the
candidates, and their skill in running. Early in the reign of Edward
III. it is spoken of as a childish amusement, and was prohibited to be
played in the avenues of the palace at Westminster during the session of
Parliament, because of the interruption it occasioned to the members and
others in passing to and fro as their business required. It was also
played by men, and especially in Cheshire and other adjoining counties,
where it seems to have been in high repute among all classes. Strutt
thus describes the game: <span id="fr_779"></span>[2](#fn_777)—"The
performance of this pastime requires two parties of equal number, each
of them having a base or home to themselves, at the distance of about
twenty or thirty yards. The players then on either side taking hold of
hands extend themselves in length, and opposite to each other, as far as
they conveniently can, always remembering that one of them must touch
the base. When any one of them quits the hand of his fellow and runs
into the field, which is called giving the chase, he is immediately
followed by one of his opponents. He is again followed by a second from
the former side, and he by a second opponent, and so on alternately
until as many are out as choose to run, every one pursuing the man he
first followed and no other; and if he overtake him near enough to touch
him, his party claims one towards their game and

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

both return home. They then run forth again and again in like manner
until the number is completed that decides the victory. This number is
optional, and rarely exceeds twenty."

   The phrase to "bid the base," means to run fast, challenging another
to pursue. It occurs again in "Venus and Adonis"—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"To bid the wind a base he now prepares."</span>

</div>

In Spenser's "Faerie Queene" (bk. v., canto 8), we read—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"So ran they all as they had been at base,  
 They being chased that did others chase."</span>

</div>

   *Bat-fowling*.—This sport, which is noticed in the "Tempest" (ii. 1)
by Sebastian, was common in days gone by. It is minutely described in
Markham's "Hunger's Prevention" (1600), which is quoted by Dyce
("Glossary," pp. 29, 30). The term "bat-fowling," however, had another
signification, says Mr Harting, <span id="fr_780"></span>[1](#fn_778) in
Shakespeare's day, and it may have been in this secondary sense that it
is used in the "Tempest," being a slang word for a particular mode of
cheating. "Bat-fowling" was practised about dusk, when the rogue
pretended to have dropped a ring or a jewel at the door of some well
furnished shop, and going in asked the apprentice of the house to light
his candle to look for it. After some peering about, the bat-fowler
would drop the candle as if by accident. "Now, I pray you, good young
man," he would say, "do so much as light the candle again." While the
boy was away the rogue plundered the shop, and having stolen everything
he could find stole himself away.

   *Billiards*.—Shakespeare is guilty of an anachronism in "Antony and
Cleopatra" (ii. 5), where he makes Cleopatra say—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Let's to billiards"</span>

</div>

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —the game being
unknown to the ancients. The modern manner of playing at billiards
differs from that formerly in use. At the commencement of the last
century, <span id="fr_781"></span>[1](#fn_779) the billiard-table was
square, having only three pockets for the balls to run in, situated on
one of the sides—that is, at each corner, and the third between them.
About the middle of the table, a small arch of iron was placed, and at a
little distance from it an upright cone called a king. At certain
periods of the game, it was necessary for the balls to be driven through
the one and round the other, without knocking either of them down, which
was not easily effected, because they were not fastened to the table.

   *Bone-ace*.—This old game, popularly called "One-and-Thirty," is
alluded to by Grumio in "Taming of the Shrew" (i. 2):—"Well, was it fit
for a servant to use his master so; being, perhaps, for aught I see,
two-and-thirty—a pip out." <span id="fr_782"></span>[2](#fn_780) It was
very like the French game of "Vingt-un," only a longer reckoning.
Strutt <span id="fr_783"></span>[3](#fn_781) says, that "perhaps
Bone-Ace is the same as the game called Ace of Hearts, prohibited with
all lotteries by cards and dice, An. 12 Geor. II., Cap. 38 sect. 2." It
is mentioned in Massinger's "Fatal Dowry" (ii. 2):—"You think, because
you served my lady's mother \[you\] are thirty-two years old, which is a
pip out, you know."

   The phrase "to be two-and-thirty," a pip out, was an old cant term
applied to a person who was intoxicated.

   *Bo-peep*.—This nursery amusement, which consisted in peeping from
behind something, and crying "Bo!" is referred to by the Fool in "King
Lear" (i. 4):—"That such a king should play bo-peep." In Sherwood's
"Dictionary" it is defined, "Jeu d’enfant; ou (plustost) des nourrices
aux petits enfans; se cachans le visage et puis se monstrant." Minsheu's
derivation of "bo-peep," from the noise which chickens make when they
come out of the shell, is, says Douce ("Illustrations of Shakspeare," p.
405) more whimsical than just."

   *Bowls*.—Frequent allusions occur to this game, which

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

seems to have been a popular pastime in olden times. The small ball, now
called the jack, at which the players aim, was sometimes termed the
"mistress." In "Troilus and Cressida" (iii. 2), Pandarus says: "So, so;
rub <span id="fr_784"></span>[1](#fn_782) on, and kiss the mistress." A
bowl that kisses the jack or mistress, is in the most advantageous
position; hence "to kiss the jack" served to denote a state of great
advantage. Thus, in "Cymbeline" (ii. 1), Cloten exclaims, "Was there
ever man that had such luck! when I kissed the jack, upon an up-cast to
be hit away! I had a hundred pound on’t." There is another allusion to
this game, according to Staunton, in "King John" (ii. 1):—"On the
outward eye of fickle France" the aperture on one side which contains
the bias or weight that inclines the bowl in running from a direct
course, being sometimes called the eye.

   A further reference to this game occurs in the following dialogue in
"Richard II." (iii. 4):—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"*Queen*. What sport shall we devise here in this
garden,  
 To drive away the heavy thought of care?  
    1 *Lady*. Madam, we'll play at bowls.  
    *Queen*. 'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,  
 And that my fortune runs ’gainst the bias."</span>

</div>

—the *bias*, as stated above, being a weight inserted in one side of a
bowl, in order to give it a particular inclination in bowling. "To run
against the bias," therefore, became a proverb. Thus, to quote another
instance, in the "Taming of the Shrew" (iv. 5), Petruchio says—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,  
 And not unluckily against the bias."</span>

</div>

   And in "Troilus and Cressida," (iv. 5), the term "bias-cheek" is used
to denote a cheek swelling out like the bias of a bowl. <span
id="fr_785"></span>[2](#fn_783)

   *Cards*.—Some of the old terms connected with card-playing

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

are curious, a few of which are alluded to by Shakespeare. Thus, in
"King Lear" (v. 1), Edmund says,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"And hardly shall I carry out my side"</span>

</div>

alluding to the cardle table, where to carry out a side meant to carry
out the game with your partner successfully. So, "to set up a side" was
to become partners in the game; "to pull or pluck down a side" was to
lose it. <span id="fr_786"></span>[1](#fn_784)

   A lurch at cards denoted an easy victory. So, in "Coriolanus" (ii.
2), Cominius says,—"He lurch’d all swords of the garland," meaning, as
Malone says, that Coriolanus gained from all other warriors the wreath
of victory, with ease, and incontestable superiority.

   A pack of cards was formerly termed "a deck of cards," as in "3 Henry
VI." (v. 1),—"The king was slily finger’d from the deck."

   Again, "to vie" was also a term at cards, and meant particularly to
increase the stakes, and generally to challenge anyone to a contention,
bet, wager, &c. So, Cleopatra (v. 2), says,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                               "Nature wants stuff  
To vie strange forms with fancy."</span>

</div>

   *Cherry Pit*.—This consisted in throwing cherry stones into a little
hole,—a game, says Nares, still practised with dumps or money. <span
id="fr_787"></span>[2](#fn_785) In "Twelfth Night" (iii. 4), Sir Toby
alludes to it,—"What, man! ’tis not for gravity to play at cherry-pit
with Satan." Nash, in his "Pierce Penilesse," speaking of the
disfigurement of ladies’ faces by painting, says,—"You may play at
cherry-pit in the dint of their cheeks."

   *Chess*.—As might be expected, several allusions occur in
Shakespeare's plays to this popular game. In the "Tempest," (v. 1),
Ferdinand and Miranda are represented playing at it; and in "King John"
(ii. 1), Elinor says:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"That thou mayst be a queen, and check the
world!"</span>

</div>

   In the "Taming of the Shrew" (i. 1), Katharina asks,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I pray you, sir, is it your will  
 To make a stale <span id="fr_788"></span>[3](#fn_786) of me amongst
these mates?"</span>

</div>

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

alluding, as Douce <span id="fr_789"></span>[1](#fn_787) suggests, to
the chess term of stale mate which is used when the game is ended by the
king being alone and unchecked, and then forced into a situation from
which he is unable to move without going into check. This is a
dishonourable termination to the adversary, who thereby loses the game.
Thus, in Bacon's Twelfth essay, "They stand still like a stale at chess,
where it is no mate, but yet the game cannot stir."

   *Dice*.—Amongst the notices of this game, may be quoted "Henry V."
(iv. prologue),

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The confident and over lusty French  
 Do the low-rated English play at dice."</span>

</div>

   Edgar, in "King Lear" (iii. 4), says,—"Wine loved I deeply, dice
dearly." Pistol, in "Merry Wives of Windsor" (i. 3), gives a double
allusion,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Let vultures gripe thy guts!—for gourd and fullam
holds,  
 And high and low beguiles the rich and poor."</span>

</div>

   "Gourds" were false dice, with a secret cavity scooped out like a
gourd. "Fullams" were also false dice, "loaded with metal on one side,
so as better to produce high throws, or to turn up low numbers, as was
required, and were hence named 'high men' or 'low men,' also 'high
fullams' and low fullams." <span id="fr_790"></span>[2](#fn_788) It has
been suggested that dice were termed *fullams* either because Fulham was
the resort of sharpers, or because they were principally manufactured
there.

   *Dun is in the mire*.—This is a Christmas sport, which Gifford <span
id="fr_791"></span>[3](#fn_789) describes as follows,—"A log of wood is
brought into the midst of the room; this is *Dun* (the cart-horse), and
a cry is raised that he is stuck in the mire. Two of the company
advance, either with or without ropes, to draw him out. After repeated
attempts, they find themselves unable to do it, and call for more
assistance. The game continues till all the company take part in it,
when Dun is extricated. Much merriment is occasioned from the awkward
efforts of the rustics to lift the log, and from sundry arch
contrivances

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

to let the ends of it fall on one another's toes. Thus, in "Romeo and
Juliet" (i. 4), Mercutio says,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the
mire."</span>

</div>

   Beaumont and Fletcher, also, in the "Woman Hater" (iv. 3), allude to
this game,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Dun's in the mire, get out again how he
can."</span>

</div>

   *Fast and Loose*.—This was a cheating game, much practised in
Shakespeare's day, whereby gipsies and other vagrants beguiled the
common people of their money; and hence was very often to be seen at
fairs. Its other name was "pricking at the belt or girdle"; and it is
thus described by Sir J. Hawkins,—"A leathern belt was made up into a
number of intricate folds, and placed edgewise upon a table. One of the
folds was made to resemble the middle of the girdle, so that whoever
could thrust a skewer into it would think he held it fast to the table;
whereas, when he has so done, the person with whom he plays may take
hold of both ends, and draw it away." In "Antony and Cleopatra" (iv.
12), the former says,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Like a right gipsy, hath, at fast and loose,  
 Beguil’d me to be the very heart of loss."</span>

</div>

   The drift of this game seems to have been to encourage wagers whether
the belt was fast or loose, which the juggler could easily make it at
his option. It is constantly alluded to by old writers, and is thus
described in Drayton's "Moon-calf,"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"He like a gypsy oftentimes would go,  
 All kinds of gibberish he hath learn’d to know,  
 And with a stick, a short string, and a noose,  
 Would show the people tricks at fast and loose."</span>

</div>

   *Fencing*.—In years gone by, there were three degrees in fencing, a
master's, a provost's, and a scholar's. <span
id="fr_792"></span>[1](#fn_790) To each of these a prize was played with
various weapons in some open place or square. In "Titus Andronicus" (i.
1), this practice is alluded to by Saturninus:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"So Bassianus, you have play’d your prize."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the "Merry
Wives of Windsor" (i. 1), Slender says, "I bruised my shin th’ other day
with playing at sword and dagger with a master of fence," *i.e.*, with
one who had taken his master's degree in the science.

   Amongst the numerous allusions to fencing quoted by Shakespeare may
be mentioned the following:—"Venue or veney" was a fencing term, meaning
an attack or hit. It is used in the "Merry Wives of Windsor" (i. 1), by
Slender, who relates how he bruised his shin "with playing at sword and
dagger with a master of fence; three veneys for a dish of stewed
prunes." It is used metaphorically in "Love's Labour's Lost" (v. 1), for
a brisk attack, by Armado:—"A sweet touch, a quick venue of wit! snip,
snap, quick and home!" <span id="fr_793"></span>[1](#fn_791) The Italian
term "Stoccado" or "Stoccata," abbreviated also into "Stock," seems to
have had a similar signification. In "Romeo and Juliet" (iii. 1),
Mercutio drawing his sword says

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Alla stoccata carries it away."</span>

</div>

In the "Merry Wives of Windsor" (ii. 1), it is used by Shallow:—"In
these times you stand on distance, your passes, stoccadoes, and I know
not what." Again, "Montant," an abbreviation of Montanto, denoted an
upright blow or thrust, and occurs also in the "Merry Wives of Windsor"
(ii. 3), where the host tells Caius that she with the others has come;
"to see thee pass thy ponto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy distance, thy
montant." Hence in "Much Ado about Nothing" (i. 1), Beatrice jocularly
calls Benedick "Signior Mountanto," meaning to imply that he was a great
fencer. Of the other old fencing terms quoted in the passage above, it
appears that "passado" implied a pass or motion forwards. It occurs in
"Romeo and Juliet" (ii. 4), where Mercutio speaks of the "immortal
passado! the punto reverso!" Again in "Love's Labour's Lost" (i. 2),
Armado says of Cupid that

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The passado he respects not, the duello he regards
not."</span>

</div>

The "punto reverso" was a backhanded thrust or stroke, and the term
"distance" was the space between the antagonists.

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

   Shakespeare has also alluded to other fencing terms, such as the
"foin," a thrust, which is used by the host in the "Merry Wives of
Windsor" (iii. 2), and in "Much Ado about Nothing" (v. 1), where Antonio
says in his heated conversation with Leonato:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Sir boy! I'll whip you from your foining fence;  
 Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will."</span>

</div>

The term "traverse" denoted a posture of opposition, and is used by the
host in the "Merry Wives of Windsor" (ii. 3) A "bout," too, is another
fencing term to which the king refers in "Hamlet" (iv. 7)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"When in your motion you are hot and dry—  
 As makes your bouts more violent to that end."</span>

</div>

   *Filliping the Toad*—This is a common and cruel diversion of boys.
They lay a board two or three feet long, at right angles over a
transverse piece two or three inches thick, then placing the toad at one
end of the board, the other end is struck by a bat or large stick, which
throws the poor toad forty or fifty feet perpendicularly from the earth;
and the fall generally kills it. In "2 Henry IV." (i. 2), Falstaff
says:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle." <span
id="fr_794"></span>[1](#fn_792)</span>

</div>

   *Flap-dragon*.—This pastime, popularly called flap-dragon <span
id="fr_795"></span>[2](#fn_793) was much in use in days gone by. A small
combustible body was set on fire, and put afloat in a glass of liquor.
The courage of the toper was tried in the attempt to toss off the glass
in such a manner as to prevent the flap-dragon doing mischief—raisins in
hot brandy being the usual flap-dragons. Shakespeare several times
mentions this custom, as in "Love's Labour's Lost" (v. 1) where Costard
says, "Thou art easier swallowed than a flap-dragon." And in "2 Henry
IV." (ii. 4),

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

he makes Falstaff say, "And drinks off candles’ ends for
flap-dragons." <span id="fr_796"></span>[1](#fn_794)

   It appears that formerly gallants used to vie with each other in
drinking off flap-dragons to the health of their mistresses—which were
sometimes even candles' ends, swimming in brandy or other strong
spirits, whence, when on fire, they were snatched by the mouth and
swallowed; <span id="fr_797"></span>[2](#fn_795) an allusion to which
occurs in the passage above. As candles’ ends made the most formidable
flap-dragon, the greatest merit was ascribed to the heroism of
swallowing them. Ben Jonson, in "The Masque of the Moon" (1838, p. 616,
ed. Gifford), says, "But none that will hang themselves for love, or eat
candles ends &c., as the sublunary lovers do."

   *Football*.—An allusion to this once highly popular game occurs in
"Comedy of Errors" (ii. 1). Dromio of Ephesus asks—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Am I so round with you as you with me,  
 That like a football you do spurn me thus?  
 If I last in this service, you must case me in leather."</span>

</div>

   In "King Lear" (i. 4), Kent calls Oswald "a base football player."

   According to Strutt, <span id="fr_798"></span>[3](#fn_796) it does
not appear among the popular exercises before the reign of Edward III.;
and then, in 1349, it was prohibited by a public edict because it
impeded the progress of archery. The danger, however, attending this
pastime occasioned James I. to say, "From this Court I debarre all rough
and violent exercises, as the football, meeter for laming than making
able the users thereof."

   Occasionally the rustic boys made use of a blown bladder, without the
covering of leather, by way of a football, putting beans and horse beans
inside, which made a rattling noise as it was kicked about. Barclay, in
his "Ship of Fools" (1508) thus graphically describes it—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Howe in the winter, when men kill the fat swine,  
 They get the bladder and blow it great and thin,  
 With many beans or peason put within:</span>

</div>

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small"><span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span>  It ratleth, soundeth, and shineth clere and fayre,  
 While it is thrown and caste up in the ayre,  
 Eche one contendeth and hath a great delite  
 With foote and with hande the bladder for to smite;  
 If it fall to grounde, they lifte it up agayne,  
 This wise to labour they count it for no payne."</span>

</div>

Shrovetide was the great season for football matches; <span
id="fr_799"></span>[1](#fn_797) and at a comparatively recent period it
was played in Derby, Nottingham, Kingston-upon-Thames, etc.

   *Gleek*.—According to Drake, <span id="fr_800"></span>[2](#fn_798)
this game is alluded to twice by Shakespeare—in "A Midsummer Night's
Dream" (iii. 1)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Nay, I can gleek upon occasion."</span>

</div>

And in "Romeo and Juliet" (iv. 5)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"*Mus*. What will you give us?  
 *Peter*. No money, on my faith, but the gleek."</span>

</div>

   Douce, however, considers that the word *gleek* was simply used to
express a stronger sort of joke, a scoffing; and that the phrase "to
give the gleek" merely denoted to pass a jest upon, or to make a person
appear ridiculous.

   *Handy Dandy*.—A very old game among children. A child hides
something in his hand, and makes his playfellow guess in which hand it
is. If the latter guess rightly, he wins the article, if wrongly, he
loses an equivalent. <span id="fr_801"></span>[3](#fn_799) Sometimes,
says Mr Halliwell-Phillipps, "the game is played by a sort of sleight of
hand, changing the article rapidly from one hand into the other, so that
the looker on is often deceived, and induced to name the hand into which
it is apparently thrown." This is what Shakespeare alludes to by
changing places in "King Lear" (iv. 6), "See how yond justice rails upon
yond simple thief. Hark, in thine ear: change places; and handy-dandy,
which is the justice, which is the thief?" <span
id="fr_802"></span>[4](#fn_800)

   *Hide fox and all after*.—A children's game, considered by

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

many to be identical with hide-and-seek. It is mentioned by Hamlet (iv.
2). Some commentators think that the term "kid-fox" in "Much Ado about
Nothing" (ii. 3), may have been a technical term in the game of
"hide-fox." Some editions have printed it "hid-fox." Claudio says—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O, very well, my lord: the music ended,  
 We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth."</span>

</div>

   *Hoodman-blind*.—The childish sport now called blind-man's buff was
known by various names, such as hood-wink, blind-hob, etc. It was termed
"hoodman-blind," because the players formerly were blinded with their
hoods, <span id="fr_803"></span>[1](#fn_801) and under this designation
it is mentioned by Hamlet (iii. 4)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                       "What devil was’t  
That thus hath cozen’d you at hoodman-blind?"</span>

</div>

   In Scotland this game was called "belly-blind;" and Gay, in his
"Shepherd's Week" (i. 96), says concerning it

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"As once I play’d at blindman's buff; it hapt  
 About my eyes the towel thick was wrapt  
 I miss’d the swains, and seiz’d on Blouzelind.  
 True speaks that ancient proverb, 'Love is blind.'"</span>

</div>

   The term "hoodman" occurs in "All's Well that Ends Well" (iv. 3), the
first lord says, "Hoodman comes!" and no doubt there is an allusion to
the game in the same play (iii. 6), "We will bind and hoodwink him;" and
in "Macbeth" (iv. 3) Macduff says, "The time you may so hoodwink." There
may also have been a reference to falconry—the hawks being hooded in the
intervals of sport. Thus, in Latham's "Falconry" (1615), "to hood" is
the term used for the blinding, "to unhood" for the unblinding.

   *Horse Racing*.—That this diversion was in Shakespeare's day
occasionally practised in the spirit of the modern turf is evident from
"Cymbeline" (iii. 2)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                 "I have heard of riding wagers,  
Where horses have been nimbler than the sands  
That run i’ the clock's behalf."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

   Burton, <span id="fr_804"></span>[1](#fn_802) too, who wrote at the
close of the Shakespearian era, mentions the ruinous consequences of
this recreation:—"Horse races are desports of great men, and good in
themselves, though many gentlemen by such means gallop quite out of
their fortunes."

   *Leap-frog*.—One boy stoops down with his hands upon his knees and
others leap over him, every one of them running forward and stooping in
his turn. It is mentioned by Shakespeare in "Henry V." (v. 2), where he
makes the king say, "If I could win a lady at leap-frog, or by vaulting
into my saddle with my armour on my back, I should quickly leap into a
wife." Ben Jonson, in his comedy of "Bartholomew Fair," speaks of "a
leappe frogge chance note."

   *Laugh-and-lie-down* (more properly laugh-and-lay-down), was a game
at cards, to which there is an allusion in the "Two Noble Kinsmen" (ii.
1)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">               "I could laugh now.  
Wait. W. I could lie down, I'm sure."</span>

</div>

   *Loggat*.—The game so called resembles bowls, but with notable
differences. <span id="fr_805"></span>[2](#fn_803) First, it is played,
not on a green, but on a floor strewed with ashes. The jack is a wheel
of *lignum vitæ*, or other hard wood, 9 inches in diameter, and 3 or 4
inches thick. The loggat, made of apple wood, is a truncated cone, 26 or
27 inches in length, tapering from a girth of 82 to 9 inches at one end
to 32 or 4 inches at the other. Each player has three loggats, which he
throws, holding lightly the thin end. The object is to lie as near the
jack as possible. Hamlet speaks of this game (v. 1), "Did these bones
cost no more the breeding, but to play at loggats with ’em?" comparing
perhaps the skull to the jack at which the bones were thrown. In Ben
Jonson's "Tale of a Tub" (iv. 5) we read—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Now are they tossing of his legs and arms,  
 Like loggets at a pear-tree."</span>

</div>

   Sir Thomas Hanmer makes the game the same as ninepins, or skittles.
He says:—"It is one of the unlawful games

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

enumerated in the Thirty-third statute of Henry VIII., <span
id="fr_806"></span>[1](#fn_804) it is the same which is now called
kittle-pins, in which the boys often make use of bones instead of wooden
pins, throwing at them with another bone instead of bowling."

   *Marbles*.—It has been suggested that there is an allusion to this
pastime in "Measure for Measure" (i. 3)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Believe not that the dribbling dart of love  
 Can pierce a complete bosom."</span>

</div>

—dribbling being a term used in the game of marbles, for shooting slowly
along the ground, in contradistinction to *plumping;* which is elevating
the hand so that the marble does not touch the ground till it reaches
the object of its aim. <span id="fr_807"></span>[2](#fn_805) According
to others, a dribbler was a term in archery expressive of
contempt. <span id="fr_808"></span>[3](#fn_806)

   *Muss*.—This was a phrase for a scramble, when any small objects were
thrown down, to be taken by those who could seize them. In "Antony and
Cleopatra" (iii. 13), the former says—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Like boys unto a muss, kings would start
forth."</span>

</div>

The word is used by Dryden in the Prologue to the "Widow Ranter"—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Bauble and cap no sooner are thrown down  
 But there's a muss of more than half the town."</span>

</div>

   *Nine-Men's-Morris*.—This rustic game, which is still extant in some
parts of England, was sometimes called "the nine men's merrils," from
*merelles*, or *mereaux*, an ancient French word for the jettons or
counters with which it was played. <span id="fr_809"></span>[4](#fn_807)
The other term *morris* is probably a corruption suggested by the sort
of dance, which in the progress of the game the counters performed. Some
consider <span id="fr_810"></span>[5](#fn_808) that it was

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

identical with the game known as "Nine-holes," <span
id="fr_811"></span>[1](#fn_809) mentioned by Herrick in his
"Hesperides"—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Raspe playes at nine-holes, and ’tis known he
gets  
 Many a tester by his game, and bets."</span>

</div>

   Cotgrave speaks of "Le jeu des merelles," the boyish game called
merills, or "five pennie morris," played here most commonly with stones,
but in France with pawns or men made of purpose, and termed merelles. It
was also called "Peg Morris," as is evidenced by Clare, who, in his
"Rural Muse," speaking of the shepherd boy, says—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Oft we may track his haunts, where he hath been  
   To spend the leisure which his toils bestow,  
 By nine-peg morris nicked upon the green."</span>

</div>

   The game is fully described by James in the "Variorum Shakespeare" as
follows:—"In that part of Warwickshire where Shakespeare was educated,
and the neighbouring parts of Northamptonshire, the shepherds and other
boys dig up the turf with their knives to represent a sort of imperfect
chessboard. It consists of a square, sometimes only a foot diameter,
sometimes three or four yards. Within this is another square, every side
of which is parallel to the external square; and these squares are
joined by lines drawn from each corner of both squares, and the middle
of each line. One party or player has wooden pegs, the other stones,
which they move in such a manner as to take up each other's men, as they
are called, and the area of the inner square is called the pound, in
which the men taken up are impounded. These figures are by the country
people called nine men's morris, or merrils; and are so called because
each party has nine men. These figures are always cut upon the green
turf or leys, as they are called, or upon the grass at the end of
ploughed lands, and in rainy seasons never fail to be choked up with
mud." This verifies the allusion made by Shakespeare in "A Midsummer
Night's Dream" (ii. 1)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The nine men's morris is fill’d up with mud,  
 And the quaint mazes in the wanton green  
 For lack of tread are undistinguishable."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This game was also
transferred to a board, and continues a fire-side recreation of the
agricultural labourer. It is often called by the name of "Mill," or
"Shepherd's Mill." <span id="fr_812"></span>[1](#fn_810)

   *Noddy*.—Some doubt exists as to what game at cards was signified in
this term. It has been suggested that cribbage is meant. Mr Singer
thinks it bore some resemblance to the more recent game of "Beat the
knave out of doors," which is mentioned together with "Ruff and new
coat" in Heywood's play of "A Woman killed with kindness." The game is
probably alluded to in "Troilus and Cressida" (i. 2), in the following
dialogue:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"*Pandarus*. When comes Troilus? I'll show you
Troilus anon: if he see me, you shall see him nod at me.  
 *Cres*. Will he give you the nod?  
 *Pan*. You shall see.  
 *Cres*. If he do, the rich shall have more." <span
id="fr_813"></span>[2](#fn_811)</span>

</div>

The term "Noddy" was also applied to a fool, because, says Minsheu, he
nods when he should speak. In this sense it occurs in "Two Gentlemen of
Verona" (i. 1):—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"*Speed*. You mistook, sir; I say, she did nod: and
you ask me if she did nod; and I say, 'Ay.'  
 *Proteus*. And that set together is noddy."</span>

</div>

   *Novem Quinque*.—A game of dice, so called from its principal throws
being five and nine. It is alluded to in "Love's Labour's Lost" (v. 2)
by Biron who speaks of it simply as "Novem."

   *Parish-top*.—Formerly a top was kept for public exercise in a
parish—a custom to which the old writers often refer. Thus in "Twelfth
Night" (i. 3), Sir Toby Belch says: "He's a coward and a coystrill that
will not drink to my niece till his brains turn o’ the toe like a
parish-top." On which passage Mr Steevens says:—"A large top was kept in
every village, to be whipped in frosty weather, that the peasants might
be kept warm by exercise and out of mischief while

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

they could not work." Beaumont and Fletcher, in "Thierry and Theodoret"
(ii. 3), speak of the practice:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                            "I'll hazard  
My life upon it, that a body of twelve  
Should scourge him hither like a parish top,  
And make him dance before you."</span>

</div>

And in their "Night Walker" (i. 3) they mention the "town-top." Evelyn,
enumerating the uses of willow-wood speaks of "great town-topps." Mr
Knight <span id="fr_814"></span>[1](#fn_812) remarks that the custom
which existed in the time of Elizabeth, and probably long before, of a
large top being provided for the amusement of the peasants in frosty
weather, presents a curious illustration of the mitigating influences of
social kindness in an age of penal legislation.

   *Primero*.—In Shakespeare's time this was a very fashionable game at
cards; and hence is frequently alluded to by him. It was known under the
various designations of *Primero*, *Prime*, and *Primavista;* and,
according to Strutt, <span id="fr_815"></span>[2](#fn_813) has been
reckoned among the most ancient games of cards known to have been played
in England. Shakespeare speaks of Henry VIII. (v. 1), playing at Primero
with the Duke of Suffolk; and makes Falstaff exclaim in "Merry Wives of
Windsor" (iv. 5), "I never prospered since I foreswore myself at
primero." That it was the Court game is shewn in a very curious picture
described by Mr Barrington in the "Archæologia" (viii. 132), which
represents Lord Burleigh playing at this pastime with three other
noblemen. Primero continued to be the most fashionable game throughout
the reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI., Mary, Elizabeth, and James I. In
the Earl of Northumberland's letters about the Gunpowder-plot, we find
that Josceline Percy was playing at Primero on Sunday, when his Uncle
the Conspirator called on him at Essex House: and in the Sydney Papers,
there is an account of a quarrel between Lord Southampton and one
Ambrose Willoughby, on account of the former persisting to play at
primero in the presence chamber, after the queen had retired to rest.
The manner of playing was thus:— <span id="fr_816"></span>[3](#fn_814)\*

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Each player had
four cards dealt to him one by one; the seven was the highest card in
point of number that he could avail himself of, which counted for
twenty-one; the six counted for sixteen, the five for fifteen, and the
ace for the same; but the two, the three, and the four, for their
respective points only.

   There may be further allusions to this game in "Taming of the Shrew"
(ii. 1), where Tranio says—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"A vengeance on your crafty wither’d hide!  
 Yet I have faced it with a card of ten."</span>

</div>

—the phrase, "to face it with a card of ten," being derived, as some
suggest, possibly from primero, wherein the standing boldly on a ten was
often successful. "To face," meant, as it still does, to attack by
impudence of face. In "1 Henry VI." (v. 3), Suffolk speaks of a "cooling
card," which Nares considers is borrowed from primero, a card so
decisive as to cool the courage of the adversary. Gifford objects to
this explanation, and says a "cooling-card" is literally a *bolus*.
There can be no doubt, however, that, metaphorically, the term was used
to denote something which damped or overwhelmed the hopes of an
expectant. Thus, in Fletcher's "Island Princess" (i. 3), Piniero says—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">              "These hot youths  
I fear will find a cooling-card."</span>

</div>

   *Push pin* was a foolish sport, consisting in nothing more than
pushing one pin across another. Biron in "Love's Labour's Lost" (iv. 3)
speaks of Nestor playing "at pushpin with the boys."

   *Quintain*.—This was a figure set up for tilters to run at, in mock
resemblance of a tournament; and is alluded to in "As You Like It" (i.
2), by Orlando, who says—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                           "My better parts  
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up  
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block."</span>

</div>

It cannot be better or more minutely described than in the words of Mr
Strutt <span id="fr_817"></span>[1](#fn_815)—"Tilting or combating at
the quintain is a military exercise of high antiquity, and antecedent, I

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

doubt not, to the jousts and tournaments. The quintain originally was
nothing more than the trunk of a tree or post set up for the practice of
the tyros in chivalry. Afterwards a staff or spear was fixed in the
earth, and a shield being hung upon it, was the mark to strike at. The
dexterity of the performer consisted in smiting the shield in such a
manner as to break the ligatures and bear it to the ground. In process
of time this diversion was improved, and instead of a staff and the
shield, the resemblance of a human figure carved in wood was introduced.
To render the appearance of this figure more formidable, it was
generally made in the likeness of a Turk or a Saracen armed at all
points, bearing a shield upon his left arm, and brandishing a club or a
sabre with his right. The quintain thus fashioned was placed upon a
pivot, and so contrived as to move round with facility. In running at
this figure, it was necessary for the horseman to direct his lance with
great adroitness, and make his stroke upon the forehead between the eyes
or upon the nose; for if he struck wide of those parts, especially upon
the shield, the quintain turned about with much velocity, and, in case
he was not exceedingly careful, would give him a severe blow upon the
back with the wooden sabre held in the right hand, which was considered
as highly disgraceful to the performer, while it excited the laughter
and ridicule of the spectators." <span id="fr_818"></span>[1](#fn_816)
In Ben Jonson's "Underwoods" it is thus humorously mentioned—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Go, Captain Stub, lead on, and show  
 What horse you come on, by the blow  
 You give Sir Quintain, and the cuff  
 You 'scape o’ the sandbags counterbuff."</span>

</div>

   *Quoits*.—This game derived its origin, according to Strutt, <span
id="fr_819"></span>[2](#fn_817) from the ancient Discus, and with us, at
the present day, it is a circular plate of iron perforated in the
middle, not always of one size, but larger or smaller to suit the
strength or conveniency of the several candidates. It is referred to in
"2 Henry IV." (ii. 4), by Falstaff, who assigns as one of the reasons
why Prince Henry loves Poins—"Because their legs are both of a bigness,
and a’ plays at quoits well," &c.

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

   Formerly in the country, the rustics not having the round perforated
quoits to play with, used horse shoes; and in many places the quoit
itself, to this day, is called a shoe.

   *Running for the ring*.—This, according to Staunton, was the name of
a sport; a ring having been one of the prizes formerly given in
wrestling and running matches. Thus, in the "Taming of the Shrew" (i.
1), Hortensio says—"He that runs fastest gets the ring."

   *Running the figure of eight*.—Steevens says that this game is
alluded to by Shakespeare in "A Midsummer Night's Dream" (ii. 1), where
Titania speaks of the "quaint mazes in the wanton green." Mr
Halliwell-Phillipps, in referring to this passage says—"Several mazes of
the kind here alluded to are still preserved, having been kept up from
time immemorial. On the top of Catherine Hill, Winchester, the usual
play-place of the school was a very perplexed and winding path, running
in a very small space over a great deal of ground, called a Miz-Maze.
The senior boys obliged the juniors to tread it, to prevent the figure
from being lost, and I believe it is still retained." <span
id="fr_820"></span>[1](#fn_818)

   *See-Saw*.—Another name for this childish sport is that given by
Falstaff, in "2 Henry IV." (ii. 4), where he calls it "riding the wild
mare." Gay thus describes this well-known game—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Across the fallen oak the plank I laid  
 And myself pois’d against the tott’ring maid;  
 High leap’d the plank, adown Buxonia fell," &c.</span>

</div>

   *Shove-Groat*.—The object of this game was to shake or push pieces of
money on a board to reach certain marks. It is alluded to in "2 Henry
IV." (ii. 4), where Falstaff says—"Quoit him down, Bardolph, like a
shove-groat shilling;" or, in other words, Bardolph was to quoit Pistol
down stairs as quickly as the smooth shilling—the shove-groat—flies
along the board. In a statute of 33 Henry VIII., shove-groat is called a
new game, and was probably originally played with the silver-groat. The
broad shilling of Edward VI. came afterwards to be used in this game,
which was no doubt the same as shovel-board, with the exception that the
latter was

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

on a larger scale. Master Slender, in "The Merry Wives of Windsor" (i.
1), had his pocket picked of "two Edward shovel-boards, that cost him
two shilling and two pence a-piece." Mr Halliwell-Phillipps, in
describing the game in his "Archaic Dictionary," says, that "a shilling
or other smooth coin was placed on the extreme edge of the shovel-board,
and propelled towards a mark by a smart stroke with the palm of the
hand. It is mentioned under various names, according to the coin
employed, as shove-groat, <span id="fr_821"></span>[1](#fn_819) &c. The
game of shove-halfpenny is mentioned in the "Times" of April 25, 1845,
as then played by the lower orders. According to Strutt it "was
analogous to the modern pastime called Justice Jervis, or Jarvis, which
is confined to common pot-houses."

   *Snow-Balls*.—These are alluded to in "Pericles" (iv. 6), and in the
"Merry Wives of Windsor" (iii. 5).

   *Span-Counter*.—In this boyish game one throws a counter, or piece of
money, which the other wins, if he can throw another so as to hit it, or
lie within a span of it. In "2 Henry VI." (iv. 2), Cade says—"Tell the
king from me, that, for his father's sake, Henry V., in whose time boys
went to span-counter for French crowns, I am content he shall reign." It
is called in France "tapper;" and in Swift's time was played with
farthings, as he calls it "span-farthing." <span
id="fr_822"></span>[2](#fn_820)

   *Stool-Ball*.—This game, alluded to in the "Two Noble Kinsmen" (v.
2), was formerly popular among young women; and occasionally was played
by persons of both sexes indiscriminately, as the following lines, from
a song written by Durfey for his play of "Don Quixote," acted at Dorset
Gardens, in 1694, show <span id="fr_823"></span>[3](#fn_821)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Down in a vale on a summer's day,  
 All the lads and lasses met to be merry;  
 A match for kisses at stool-ball to play,  
 And for cakes, and ale, and sider, and perry.  
 *Chorus*—Come all, great small, short tall, away to stool-ball."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Strutt informs us
that this game, as played in the north, "consists in simply setting a
stool upon the ground, and one of the players takes his place before it,
while his antagonist, standing at a distance, tosses a ball with the
intention of striking the stool; and this is the business of the former
to prevent by beating it away with the hand, reckoning one to the game
for every stroke of the ball; if, on the contrary, it should be missed
by the hand and touch the stool, the players change places. The
conqueror is he who strikes the ball most times before it touches the
stool."

   *Tennis*.—According to a story told by the old annalists, one of the
most interesting historical events in connection with this game happened
when Henry V. was meditating war against France. "The Dolphin," says
Hall in his "Chronicle," "thynkyng King Henry to be given still to such
plaies and lyght folies as he exercised and used before the tyme that he
was exalted to the Croune, sent to hym a tunne of tennis balles to plaie
with, as who saied that he had better skill of tennis than of warre." On
the foundation of this incident, as told by Holingshed, Shakespeare has
constructed his fine scene of the French Ambassador's Audience in "King
Henry V." (i. 2). As soon as the first Ambassador has given the
Dauphin's message and insulting gift, the English King speaks thus:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us;  
 His present and your pains we thank you for:  
 When we have match’d our rackets to these balls,  
 We will, in France, by God's grace, play a set  
 Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard.  
 Tell him he hath made a match with such wrangler  
 That all the courts of France will be disturb’d  
 With chaces."</span>

</div>

   In "Hamlet" (ii. 1), Polonius speaks of this pastime, and alludes to
"falling out at tennis." In the sixteenth century tennis-courts were
common in England, and the establishment of such places was countenanced
by the example of royalty. It is evident that Henry VII. was a
tennis-player. In a MS. register of his expenditures, made in the
thirteenth year of his reign, this entry occurs:—"Item, for the king's

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

loss at tennis, twelvepence; for the loss of balls, threepence." Stowe,
in his "Survey of London," tells us that among the additions that King
Henry VIII. made to Whitehall, were "divers fair tennis courts,
bowling-allies and a cock-pit." Charles II. frequently diverted himself
with playing at tennis, and had a particular kind of dress made for that
purpose. Pericles, when he is shipwrecked and cast upon the coast of
Pentapolis, addresses himself and the three fishermen whom he chances to
meet thus (ii. 1):—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"A man whom both the waters and the wind,  
 In that vast tennis-court, have made the ball  
 For them to play upon, entreats you pity him."</span>

</div>

   In "Much ado about Nothing" (iii. 2), Claudio referring to Benedick
says "that the old ornament of his cheek hath already stuffed
tennis-balls;" <span id="fr_824"></span>[1](#fn_822) and in "King Henry
V." (iii. 7), the Dauphin says his horse "bounds from the earth as if
his entrails were hairs." Again, "Bandy" was originally a term at
tennis, to which Juliet refers in "Romeo and Juliet" (ii. 5), when
speaking of her Nurse:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Had she affections and warm youthful blood  
 She would be as swift in motion as a ball;  
 My words would bandy her to my sweet love,  
 And his to me."</span>

</div>

Also, King Lear (i. 4), says to Oswald, "Do you bandy looks with me, you
rascal?"

   *Tick-Tack*.—This was a sort of back gammon, and is alluded to by
Lucio in "Measure for Measure" (i. 2) who, referring to Claudio's
unpleasant predicament, says "I would be sorry should be thus foolishly
lost at a game of tick-tack." In Weaver's "Lusty Juventus," Hipocrisye,
seeing Lusty Juventus kiss Abhominable Lyuing, says:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"What a hurly burly is here!  
 Smicke smacke, and all thys gere!  
 You well \[will\] to *tycke take*,  
 I fere, If thou had tyme." <span id="fr_825"></span>[2](#fn_823)</span>

</div>

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Jouer au
tric-trac" is used, too, in France in a wanton sense.

   *Trap-trip*.—This was probably a game at cards, played with dice as
well as with cards, the success in which chiefly depended upon the
throwing of treys. Thus in a satire called "Machivell's Dog" (1617):—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"But, leaving cardes, let's go to dice a while,  
 To passage, treitrippe, hazarde, or mumchance."</span>

</div>

In "Twelfth Night" (ii. 5), Sir Toby Belch asks, "Shall I play my
freedom at tray-trip, and become thy bond-slave?" It may be remembered,
too, that in "The Scornful Lady" of Beaumont and Fletcher (ii. 1), the
Chaplain complains that the Butler had broken his head, and being asked
the reason, says for—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Reproving him at tra-trip, sir, for
swearing."</span>

</div>

Some are of opinion that it resembled the game of hopscotch, or
Scotch-hop; but this, says Nares, <span id="fr_826"></span>[1](#fn_824)
"seems to rest merely upon unauthorised conjecture."

   *Troll-my-dame*.—The game of Troll-madam, still familiar as
Bagatelle, was borrowed from the French (Trou-madame). One of its names
was Pigeon-holes, because played on a board, at one end of which were a
number of arches, like pigeon-holes, into which small balls had to be
bowled. In "Winter's Tale" (iv. 2), it is mentioned by Autolycus who, in
answer to the Clown, says that the manner of fellow that robbed him was
one that he had "known to go about with troll-my-dames." Cotgrave
declares it as "the game called Trunkes or the Hole."

   *Trump*.—This was probably the triumfo of the Italians, and the
triomphe of the French—being perhaps of equal antiquity in England with
primero. At the latter end of the sixteenth century, it was very common
among the inferior classes. There is, no doubt, a particular allusion to
this game in "Antony and Cleopatra" (iv. 14), where Antony says:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                       "The queen,—  
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine;</span>

</div>

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small"><span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span>  Which whilst it was mine had annex’d unto’t  
 A million more, now lost,—she, Eros, has  
 Pack’d cards with Cæsar, and false-play’d my glory  
 Unto an enemy's triumph."</span>

</div>

The poet meant to say, that Cleopatra, by collusion, played the great
game they were engaged in falsely, so as to sacrifice Antony's fame to
that of his enemy. There is an equivoque between *trump* and *triumph*.
The game in question bore a very strong resemblance to our modern
whist—the only points of dissimilarity being that more or less than four
persons might play at trump; that all the cards were not dealt out; and
that the dealer had the privilege of discarding some, and taking others
in from the stock. In Eliot's "Fruits for the French," 1593, it is
called "a very common ale-house game in England."

   *Wrestling*.—Of the many allusions that are given by Shakespeare to
this pastime, we may quote the phrase "to catch on the hip," made use of
by Shylock in the "Merchant of Venice" (i. 3), who, speaking of Antonio,
says,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"If I can catch him once upon the hip,  
 I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him."</span>

</div>

—the meaning being, "to have at an entire advantage." <span
id="fr_827"></span>[1](#fn_825) The expression occurs again in "Othello"
(ii. 1), where Iago says—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I'll have our Michael Cassio on the hip."</span>

</div>

   Nares, <span id="fr_828"></span>[2](#fn_826) however, considers the
phrase was derived from hunting; because, "when the animal pursued is
seized upon the hip, it is finally disabled from flight."

   In "As You Like It" (ii. 3), where Adam speaks of the "bonny priser
of the humorous duke," Singer considers that a *priser* was the phrase
for a wrestler, a *prise* being a term in that sport for a grappling or
hold taken."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_769"></span>[370:1](flos18.htm#fr_771) See Drake's
"Shakspeare and His Times," ii. pp. 178–181.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[370:2](flos18.htm#fr_772) Brand's "Pop.
Antiq.," 1870, ii. p. 290.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[371:1](flos18.htm#fr_773) "Glossary," p. 84.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[371:2](flos18.htm#fr_774) "Glossary," p. 210.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[372:1](flos18.htm#fr_775) From Gifford's Note
on Massinger's Works, 1813, i. p. 204.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[372:2](flos18.htm#fr_776) See Jamieson's
"Scottish Dictionary," 2899, i. p. 122.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[372:3](flos18.htm#fr_777) "Glossary," i. p.
57.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[373:1](flos18.htm#fr_778) See Nares’
"Glossary," i. p. 58.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[373:2](flos18.htm#fr_779) "Sports and
Pastimes," 1876, p. 243.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[374:1](flos18.htm#fr_780) See Harting's
"Ornithology of Shakespeare," p. 156; Strutt's "Sports and Pastimes,"
1876, p. 98. A simple mode of bat-fowling, by means of a large clap-net
and a lantern, and called bird-batting, is alluded to in Fielding's
"Joseph Andrews" (bk. ii. chap. x.). Drake thinks that it is to a
stratagem of this kind Shakespeare alludes when he paints Buckingham
exclaiming ("Henry VIII." i. 1)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The net has fall’n upon me; I shall perish  
 Under device and practice."</span>

</div>

<span id="fn_779"></span>[375:1](flos18.htm#fr_781) Strutt's "Sports and
Pastimes," 1876, p. 396.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[375:2](flos18.htm#fr_782) A pip is a spot upon
a card.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[375:3](flos18.htm#fr_783) "Sports and
Pastimes," 1876, p. 436.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[376:1](flos18.htm#fr_784) Rub is still a term
at the game, expressive of the movement of the balls. Cf. "King Lear,"
(ii. 2), "Love's Labour's Lost" (iv. 1), where Bozet speaking of the
game, says;—"I fear too much rubbing."

<span id="fn_783"></span>[376:2](flos18.htm#fr_785) Halliwell-Phillipps’
"Handbook Index to Shakespeare," p. 43.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[377:1](flos18.htm#fr_786) Staunton's
"Shakespeare," iii. p. 592.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[377:2](flos18.htm#fr_787) See Brand's "Pop.
Antiq.," ii. p. 409.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[377:3](flos18.htm#fr_788) She means, "Do you
intend to make a mockery of me among the Companions?"

<span id="fn_787"></span>[378:1](flos18.htm#fr_789) "Illustrations of
Shakspeare," p. 20.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[378:2](flos18.htm#fr_790) Gifford's Note on
Jonson's Works, ii. p. 3.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[378:3](flos18.htm#fr_791) Note on Jonson's
Works, vii. p. 283.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[379:1](flos18.htm#fr_792) See Douce's
"Illustrations of Shakspeare," p. 35.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[380:1](flos18.htm#fr_793) See Nares’
"Glossary," ii. p, 919.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[381:1](flos18.htm#fr_794) A three-man beetle
is a heavy implement, with three handles, used in driving piles, etc.,
which required three men to lift it.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[381:2](flos18.htm#fr_795) A correspondent of
*Notes and Queries* (2 S. vii. p. 277) suggests as a derivation the
German *schnapps*, spirit, and *drache*, dragon, and that it is
equivalent to spirit-fire.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[382:1](flos18.htm#fr_796) Cf. "Winter's Tale"
(iii. 3), "But to make an end of the ship, to see how the sea
flap-dragoned it."

<span id="fn_795"></span>[382:2](flos18.htm#fr_797) See Nares’
"Glossary," i. p. 131.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[382:3](flos18.htm#fr_798) "Sports and
Pastimes," pp. 168, 169.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[383:1](flos18.htm#fr_799) See "British Popular
Customs," 1876, pp. 78, 83, 87, 401.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[383:2](flos18.htm#fr_800) "Shakspeare and his
Times," ii. 170. See Douce's "Illustrations of Shakspeare," pp. 118,
435.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[383:3](flos18.htm#fr_801) Dyce's "Glossary,"
p. 199.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[383:4](flos18.htm#fr_802) See Brand's "Pop.
Antiq.," 1849, ii. p. 420.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[384:1](flos18.htm#fr_803) See Strutt's "Sports
and Pastimes," pp. 499, 500; Brand's "Pop. Antiq.," 1849, 1i. PP. 397,
398.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[385:1](flos18.htm#fr_804) "Anatomy of
Melancholy;" Drake's "Shakspeare and His Times," 298.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[385:2](flos18.htm#fr_805) Clark and Wright's
Notes to "Hamlet." 1876, pp. 212, 213.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[386:1](flos18.htm#fr_806) See Strutt's "Sports
and Pastimes," p. 365; Nares’ "Glossary," ii. p. 522.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[386:2](flos18.htm#fr_807) Baker's
"Northamptonshire Glossary," 1854, i. p. 198.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[386:3](flos18.htm#fr_808) See Dyce's
"Glossary," p. 334.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[386:4](flos18.htm#fr_809) Douce's
"Illustrations of Shakspeare," P. 144.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[386:5](flos18.htm#fr_810) See Nares’
"Glossary," ii. p. 605.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[387:1](flos18.htm#fr_811) See Strutt's "Sports
and Pastimes," 1876, pp. 368, 369.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[388:1](flos18.htm#fr_812) See Brand's "Pop.
Antiq." 1849, ii. pp. 429, 432.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[388:2](flos18.htm#fr_813) See Nares’
"Glossary," ii. p. 606.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[389:1](flos18.htm#fr_814) "Pictorial
Shakespeare," ii. p. 145.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[389:2](flos18.htm#fr_815) "Sports and
Pastimes."

<span id="fn_814"></span>[389:3](flos18.htm#fr_816) Smith's "Festivals,
Games, and Amusements," 1831, p. 320.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[390:1](flos18.htm#fr_817) "Sports and
Pastimes," I876, p. 182.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[391:1](flos18.htm#fr_818) See Nares’
"Glossary," ii. p. 713.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[391:2](flos18.htm#fr_819) "Sports and
Pastimes," p. 141.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[392:1](flos18.htm#fr_820) See Milner's
"History of Winchester," ii. p. 155.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[393:1](flos18.htm#fr_821) According to Douce,
"Illustrations of Shakspeare" (1839, p. 280), it was known as
"slide-groat," "slide-board," "slide-thrift," and "slip-thrift." See
Strutt's "Sports and Pastimes," 1876, pp. 16, 394, 398. Nares’
"Glossary," ii. p. 791. Brand's "Pop. Antiq.," 1849, ii. p. 441.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[393:2](flos18.htm#fr_822) See Strutt's "Sports
and Pastimes," 1876, p. 491.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[393:3](flos18.htm#fr_823) Quoted by Strutt,
"Sports and Pastimes," p. 166.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[395:1](flos18.htm#fr_824) In "Love's Labour's
Lost" (v. 2), the Princess speaks of "a set of wit well play’d;" upon
which Mr Singer (ii. 263) adds that "a set is a term at tennis for a
game."

<span id="fn_823"></span>[395:2](flos18.htm#fr_825) Quoted by Dyce's
"Glossary," p. 449; see Brand's "Pop. Antiq.," 1849, ii, p. 445.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[396:1](flos18.htm#fr_826) "Glossary," ii. p.
896.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[397:1](flos18.htm#fr_827) Dyce's "Glossary,"
p. 208.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[397:2](flos18.htm#fr_828) "Glossary," i. p.
421.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Dances](flos19)
