[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pots15)  [Next](pots17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803270089/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Punishment of the Stingy and Other Indian Stories*, by George Bird
Grinnell, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

# Nothing Child

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

## Nothing Child

LONG time ago there lived in the Blackfoot camp a young man who did not
like company. He preferred to be alone. He had a wife but no children,
and one young brother who lived with him. This was his only close
relation. This man had a tame bear, which he had caught when it was a
little cub. During the day he went hunting, and set traps and snares for
game, and at night, when he returned to the camp, he did not go about
visiting at the other lodges, but stayed at home by himself.

One day he thought he would move away from the village and camp
alone—just his own lodge. They started, the man and his wife, and the
young brother and the bear. They went up towards the mountains, and
camped in the timber. The man hunted and killed plenty of game, and they
stayed there for a long time,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> While the older
brother was hunting, the younger one used to stay at home, making arrows
and shooting with them, and at length he became a very good shot.

After a time the younger brother had grown big, and he was a handsome
boy, and the woman fell in love with him, but he took no notice of her.

One day, while the young brother was sitting in the lodge making arrows,
and the woman was outside tanning a hide, she called to him and said,
"Oh, brother, come out and kill this pretty bird that is here," but the
boy was busy smoothing his arrows, and paid no attention. Pretty soon
she asked him again, and then a third time, and when she called him the
fourth time he got up and went outside and killed the bird and gave it
to her, and then went into the lodge again and kept on working at his
arrows. He did not stop and talk with her. Pretty soon the boy went off
into the timber to try his arrows. The bear was lying by the door of the
lodge.

The woman was angry at the boy because he took no notice of her, and she
made up her mind that she would be revenged on him. So

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

while he was gone she scratched and bruised her face and tore her hair.

At night her husband came home, and when he looked at his wife he saw
that her face was scratched and swollen and her hair all pulled about.
He sent out his young brother to hang up the meat that he had brought
in, and the boy went leaving arrows lying by the fire to dry. While he
was gone the woman said to her husband, "Your brother has beaten me
because I asked him to shoot a pretty bird for me." She showed her
husband the scratches and bruises she had made on herself, and said,
"See how he has used me."

When the man heard this he was angry, but he said nothing. When the boy
came back from hanging up the meat, he looked for his arrows but did not
see them. Then he asked, "Where have you put my arrows?" but no one
answered, and at length he saw the ends of them among the ashes, for his
brother had thrown them into the fire. When the boy saw that his arrows
had been burned he cried, and taking his robe and his bow and what
arrows he had left, he went out of the lodge. He made up his mind that
he could not live here with his brother

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

any longer, and decided to go away. The bear, which all this time had
been lying by the door of the lodge, listening, was angry at the lies
the woman had told, and at what her husband had done, and he got up and
went out and followed the boy. They travelled for a while and then
slept, and the next day went on again, going towards the mountains.

For two days they travelled, and on the third day, as they were going
along, the boy saw sitting in a tree-top a bird that was white as snow,
and different from any bird that he had seen before. He took an arrow
from his quiver and shot the bird, and as it fell, it caught among the
branches and lodged there. He threw sticks at it, but could not knock it
down, so he made up his mind that he would climb the tree and get the
bird and his arrow. When he had tightened his belt and was just about to
climb the tree, the bear spoke to him and said: "You had better not do
this. If you go up there something bad may happen. It will be better to
let the things go." But the boy was very anxious to get that bird and
his arrow, and would not listen to the bear's words, but began to climb
the tree.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

He reached the branch where the arrow was, but when he stretched out his
hand to take it it moved up a little higher, just beyond his fingers. So
he climbed higher and again reached for the arrow, and again it moved up
a little higher. He kept climbing and climbing, with the arrow always
moving in front of him, until at last he climbed out of sight.

For the rest of the day the bear stood at the foot of the tree, looking
upward and whining and moaning for his friend, but he saw nothing of
him. About sundown all the boy's clothing came tumbling down together,
but nothing was seen of the boy. The bear would not leave the tree. He
waited there, hoping to see what had become of the boy, but that was the
last of him. He saw him no more.

After the boy and the bear had left the camp, the older brother kept
thinking of what had taken place. When they did not come back he felt
lonesome and sad, and began to fear that something would happen to his
young brother, and at last he made up his mind that he would start out
and learn what had become of him. He left his lodge and set out in the
direction the two had taken. He found their

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

trail and followed it, and after two days came to the tree and there saw
the bear, standing on his hind feet and resting his paws against the
tree. The man asked the bear what had become of the boy, but the bear
would not reply to him. He asked him the same question again, and a
third and a fourth time, and then the bear answered and said: "All this
trouble has come upon us through your fault, because you listened to the
lies your woman told you. Your brother has climbed this tree and has
gone out of sight, and now for three days I have stood here, waiting for
him to come down. His clothing has fallen down from up above, but he
does not return." They waited by the tree longer, but the boy did not
come down, and at length the man said to the bear: "My brother is gone.
He will never come back. We had better go back to the camp where we can
live." The bear went back with him.

On their way the bear told the man how it really had been, and that it
was not the boy who had hurt the woman, but that she had done it
herself, and in this way had caused his brother to lose his life. Then
the man was angry, and when they came near to the lodge

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

he took an arrow from his quiver and shot his wife, and her shadow went
to the sand-hills.

That night the man said to the bear, "Well, we are only two now, and for
myself, I have decided to stay here and starve to death, and as for you,
you had better leave me and go your way and make your living as all
bears do." So the bear went away and did not return.

One night while the man was lying asleep, he dreamed of the bear; and
the bear spoke to him and said: "My brother, listen to the words that I
speak to you, and do now what I tell you to. Go back to the old camp of
your people, to the cliff where they drive the buffalo, the pis´ kun,
and wait there. A camp of your people is moving towards that place. They
are very poor and have but little to eat. It may be that you can help
them. Be sure to do exactly as I tell you from this time on, and in the
days to come you will be unhappy no longer, but will have plenty of
everything and will have full life. Now I wish you to-morrow, when you
awake, to eat up your lodge and everything that is in it. This seems to
you like a hard thing, something that cannot be done,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

but, by the power that I give you, you will be able to do it."

When the man awoke, in the morning, he thought for a long time over what
the bear had said to him in his sleep, and how it had said that in the
time to come he would be poor no longer, but would have full life, and
how it had said that it would give him that power, and he made up his
mind to do as the bear had told him. He tore down his lodge and began to
eat it, and found that this was not a hard thing to do. He ate the lodge
and the lining, his clothing, his wife's things—everything that he could
find in the lodge, and then took his bow and arrows and started to go to
the cliff as the bear had told him to.

Now since the bear had left, the man had had no food to eat, and on his
journey he found himself getting weak and growing smaller. When he
reached the cliff there was no camp there, so he waited, and all the
time he kept getting weaker, and smaller and smaller, until he was no
bigger than a year-old child. He thought now that he would surely die,
and hid himself under a bunch of rye grass.

The next day the people moved in and camped

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

at this place. An old woman went out to get some grass for her bed, and
while she was gathering it, she heard a sound as if a little child were
crying. She went in the direction of the sound, and under a bunch of rye
grass she found a little child. She carried him into the camp and took
good care of him. When the chief of the camp heard of how she had found
the child, he said to the old woman, "Take good care of that child; he
was put there for some good purpose."

As time passed the child grew fatter and stronger, and the old woman
grew fond and proud of him. They called him Kis´ tap i pokau (Nothing
Child.)

Near this camp stood a tree, and every day an eagle came and alighted in
the tree. The chief had tried many times to kill this eagle, and so had
other men, but no one could kill it. When they found that no one could
kill it, they wanted it all the more. The chief had two very pretty
daughters, and at length he said that he would give his daughters to any
one who would kill this eagle. When this was called out through the camp
by the old crier, all the young men came out to try to kill the eagle,

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

but no one could do it. At last Nothing Child said to the old woman,
"Grandmother, make me some arrows so that I can kill the eagle." The old
woman laughed when he asked her this, but she was very fond of him, so
she tied a string to a deer's rib for a bow and made him some little
arrows, and he set out to kill the eagle. When the young men who had
been shooting at the eagle saw the child coming with the tiny bow, they
laughed and made fun of him, but Nothing Child fitted a little arrow on
the string of his bow, and shot and killed the eagle. Then all who were
standing by were astonished, but they said, "It must have been a chance
shot." The eagle was taken to the chief's lodge, and they told him it
had been killed by the Nothing Child. So he told his daughters to go and
marry the found boy.

But the young men were not satisfied with this decision. They said that
it was not fair, that the boy had made a chance shot, and they asked the
chief to try their skill in some other way. So the chief told the young
men that they might again try their luck for the young girls, and that
whoever killed a white wolf with a black tail should have his daughters.
All the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

men went out from the camp and built their wooden traps, and Nothing
Child also went out and made a wooden trap. The next morning they all
went out to visit their traps, and in almost all the traps they found
something—wolves, foxes, badgers, and other animals. Some of the wolves
were white all over, and some were white with gray tails, but no one had
a white wolf with a black tail. The Nothing Child, with his grandmother,
went out from the camp to his trap in a different direction from the
rest, and in their trap they found a white wolf with a black tail. They
took it into camp and to the chief's lodge, and when he saw it he said
that this was the wolf he wanted.

Now all the young men in the camp were jealous of the Nothing Child, for
it was certain that he would get the chief's daughters for his wives. So
they went to the chief and asked him to try his people once more, that
they thought that the Nothing Child had not killed the wolf fairly. So
the chief now said: "Whoever will bring me a white fox with a
black-tipped tail shall have my daughters. This will be the last trial,
and after this no one need complain."

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

The young men set their traps all over the prairie, but Nothing Child
asked his grandmother to go with him, and he went to a place far from
all the others and there set his trap. The next morning the young men
all went out to look at their traps. Some had foxes and some had other
animals, but when Nothing Child went to his trap, he found in it a white
fox with a black-tipped tail, and when it was taken to the chief's lodge
he said that this was the fox he meant, and he told his daughters to get
ready and go and marry the Nothing Child. The youngest girl was willing
to do what her father ordered, but the elder was not.

They put on their finest clothing and left their father's lodge and
started for Nothing Child's home. As they walked along, the elder girl
said to her sister, "I am not going to marry this child, to be laughed
at by everybody." The younger sister said, "I am going to do what my
father told me to. It is better to do so. Besides that, the Nothing
Child must be a very powerful person. See how many wonderful things he
has done." The elder girl said, "Well, I am not going to his lodge. I am
going to marry Masto pau (Raven Arrow)." This

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

was a young man who had the power to turn himself into a raven whenever
he wished. So the elder girl went her way to Raven Arrow, but the
younger kept on towards Nothing Child's lodge.

When the girl came to the lodge and went in, the old woman told her to
sit down. Nothing Child was playing at the back of the lodge. The girl
said, "My father sent me to sit beside the person who killed the eagle,
the white wolf with the black tail, and the white fox with the
black-tipped tail." Nothing Child said, "I am the person who did that,
but I do not want any woman to sit beside me." The girl answered: "My
father sent me to sit beside you, and I shall stay here. I am not going
home any more." When the boy saw that the girl was resolved to stay, he
said, "Very well, you shall be my wife." So she stayed, and was pleasant
and nice with the boy and played with him, and he liked her. She saw
that he was very poor, but she seemed to take no notice of that.

At this time the camp was very short of food. The young men scouted far
and near over the prairie, but could find no buffalo. It was a

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

hard time; everybody was hungry. One day Nothing Child said to his wife:
"Now you stay here for a while. I am going away for a time. I am going
to try to find a band of buffalo and bring them into camp." He made
ready for his journey and started. After he had travelled a long way he
came to a wet, marshy place near the mountains, where in summer many
buffalo had been. Here he gathered up buffalo chips, and made great
piles of them in a row, and when he had finished, he went back some way,
and then came running and shouting towards the piles of chips. When he
got close to them he stopped, and then went back again, and again came
running and shouting upon the chips, but nothing happened. He repeated
this a third and a fourth time, and the fourth time, when he got near
the piles, the chips turned into buffaloes and rushed off over the
prairie, and Nothing Child ran them towards the camp and drove them over
the cliff into the pis kun, so that once more the camp was supplied with
meat.

The next day Nothing Child told his wife to go to her father's lodge for
the day, and not to return until night. After the girl had gone

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

he spoke to his grandmother and said: "Grandmother, you have seen what
strange things I have done, and you can see that I have some power. That
power which I have was given to me by a bear that has helped me, and
because I have done just what he told me to I have been able to
accomplish the things that you have seen me do. I do not know the secret
of my power, but I know that I have it. Now, Grandmother, I want you to
do something for me. I want you to take a rope and tie me by the feet to
the lodge poles, so that I may hang head downward from the poles. I am
little, and you can easily hold me up." The old woman did as he had told
her, and he hung there head downward. Pretty soon he opened his mouth,
and a little piece of cowskin stuck out. Nothing Child took hold of this
and began to pull on it, and more and more came out, and at last he had
pulled out the whole of his old lodge, and then he pulled out the
lining, and afterwards many of his old belongings. When he had eaten all
these things they had been old, but now they were new and white, and
finely ornamented. The lodge was painted, the woman's clothing was
beautifully worked

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

with porcupine quills; there was a new full set of war clothing for
himself—all very fine.

After he had done this Nothing Child asked the old woman to untie him,
and when he was on his feet again it was seen that he was no longer a
child, but a full-grown man, very handsome. He told the old woman to set
up the new lodge, and she did so. When his wife returned she was
surprised to see all the new things. They looked strange to her. Also
her husband, who, when she last saw him, was a small boy and rather
ugly, was now a big, fine-looking man. The girl was pleased with the
change, and now they lived together for a long time very happily.

After a time Raven Arrow became jealous of Nothing Child because of his
power, but Nothing Child did not notice this, and, because Raven Arrow
was poor, he asked him to come and live with him in his lodge. He did
so, and they lived together for some time, and now the elder daughter of
the chief was sorry that she had not done as her father, had told her
to.

One day, in the early summer, Nothing Child's wife said to him, "Oh, how
much I would like some fresh berries to eat!" He said

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

to her: "Do you want some fresh berries? Well, now, go out and gather a
lot of sarvis berry branches and bring them to me here in the lodge."
The woman did as he had told her, and brought in the bushes and threw
them down on the floor of the lodge. Then Nothing Child took a tanned
elk-skin and covered the bushes with it. In a short time he told his
wife to take the skin off the brush, and when she did so she was
astonished, for she found the twigs loaded with fine ripe berries, as
though they were growing.

Now, when Raven Arrow's wife saw this she felt that she too would like
some berries, and she asked her husband if he could do this. But he
said: "No. It is useless for me to try to do things that I know I cannot
do. I can change myself into a raven and can do many other things, but I
cannot make ripe berries grow in the spring, nor can I do many other
things that Nothing Child does."

After some time it happened that food again became scarce in the camp,
and the chief sent word to his son-in-law, asking him if he could not
again bring the buffalo into the camp, as he had done before. The
hunters had been out

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

and had travelled far over the prairie, but they could see nothing.
Nothing Child sent word back that this was a hard thing he was asked to
do; he feared he could not do it, but he would try.

He made ready for his journey and started, travelling a long way looking
for the buffalo, but he found none. He then went to the marsh where he
had made buffalo before, and again made many little piles of buffalo
chips in rows, and again went back some distance and then came charging
down on the piles running and shouting. And the fourth time he did this
the piles of chips changed into real buffalo and started running. And
Nothing Child ran the herd over the cliff, as he had done before, and
again the camp was supplied with meat. In this herd was one white
buffalo. His wife met him at the cliff, and he told her that this white
buffalo was hers. That she must be careful of the skin when she had
taken it off.

His wife told her husband that Raven Arrow had changed himself into a
raven, and had flown away to look for buffalo, saying that if he found
any he was going to drive them out of the country. This made Nothing
Child

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

angry, but he said nothing and waited. One day, as he was sitting by the
fire, Raven Arrow, in the shape of a white raven, flew into the lodge
and lit on the ground by him. When Nothing Child saw him he seized him
and tied him by the feet to a lodge pole high up in the smoke and kept
him there until he was nearly dead from the smoke. At last Nothing Child
asked him if he would promise never again to drive the buffalo away from
the people. Raven Arrow promised that he would never again do so, and
Nothing Child untied him and let him down, when he changed into a man
again. Up to that time ravens had always been white, but ever since the
smoking that this raven got they have been black.

Nothing Child and his wife lived to full age and always had plenty of
everything.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shield Quiver's Wife](pots17)
