[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kymf03)  [Next](kymf05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0787309923/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Know Your Magnetic Field*, by William E. Gray, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### CHAPTER THREE

#### NERVE FUEL

All life exists with the power to reproduce in kind. We are given, not
only the ability to reproduce, but the task of nourishing and fueling
each other through the positive and negative formation, in this way
increasing the strength of our magnetic field to bring our bodies and
minds to the highest level of health and vitality.

All the organs of the body, including the heart, are in reality nerve
structures working as a unit by means of human energy. The magnetic
field radiates energy to all parts of the body through the nerves and
nerve relay centers and their branches. The brain receives the energy
current, distributes it to all controlling centers and relays the
impulse back along the returning nerve channels. As he explained it to
me, the brain is one of the important switchboards of the body, similar
to an automatic switchboard in a telephone office which receives the
incoming message and relays it through the wire to its proper and
specified destination. As the energy travels upward into the brain
cells, we walk, talk and react as intelligent, coordinated human beings.

I have grown used to this person's reference to nerves as cords and
wires. Wires is the more apt description. He demonstrated to me by
placing his fingers on my body and increasing the human energy in

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

one specific nerve trunk at a time. I had immediate relief from pain and
proper function of the area controlled by that nerve. Sometimes it was
my hip, my shoulder, my leg or my heart. I was astonished but convinced.

I remember saying, "Why, we are nothing but puppets strung on wires!"

He laughed, "Actually that is all we are and human energy through those
wires operates us."

As is known, our own required energy current is taken in through the air
we breathe. When the period of adolescence is passed and as we become
matured adults, our body requirements change. For continued smooth
functioning the nervous system requires and demands a greater supply of
the human energy force, our own, plus the mating energy. This blending
is created through the sex relationship with one of our properly mated
wave energies, which is nature's method of keeping the magnetic field
vital.

Every parent has to meet the problem of explaining sex to the growing,
inquisitive child. But how many understand the purpose behind it all?
Nature's purpose is reproduction of the race but even though
reproduction is controlled by many, nerve fueling is imperative through
normal sex life, without insulation, in order to maintain health.

If those entering into marriage are instructed in its true significance
beforehand, most of the hazards can be eliminated providing they choose
a compatible energy which blends with theirs. Children resulting from
these marriages are, as a rule, healthy and normal.

One of the main fueling nerves in connection with

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the magnetic field in women is the clitoris nerve. This nerve is
important to the magnetic field in rehabilitating and vitalizing it
through natural sex life, thus enabling it to draw sufficient energy
from the atmosphere through the lungs in order that the heart and other
organs will receive their proportion of energy.

When the clitoris nerve is dormant it does not properly relay the fuel
to the magnetic field. With a partial dormancy of the magnetic field as
a result, there is insufficient distribution of the energy and nervous
tension increases. Over a period of time definite symptoms appear. These
are manifested in heart strain, shortness of breath symptoms, sinus,
bronchial trouble, eczema, allergies, indigestion, supposedly ulcers,
headaches, pain and stiffness of the neck and shoulders, as well as
being put unjustly in the class of neurotic. One would be surprised at
the ailments which originate from this source.

These complications also have their effect upon the nervous system of
the husband. As he receives an insufficient amount of his required nerve
fuel from his wife, his nervous system begins to react from starvation
of nerve energy. Tension and irritability increase and friction may
start in the home through under-stimulated nerves.

As a rule woman is slower to animate than man, but when stimulated, she
will automatically start generating. However, she must receive the
generation in return from him. He should have the wisdom to generate
energy to her in order to complete the revitalization of their magnetic
fields. Otherwise, she being more sensitive, will eventually cease
generating to him and accept the act as a marital duty.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Fueling of the magnetic field may also cease as a result of opposing
energies. When the wave energies are not properly blended, there follows
a feeling of dissatisfaction or depletion which many people don't
comprehend.

Women are more likely to be victims of a partial dormancy of the
magnetic field. This dormancy is usually caused by shock or injury of
the clitoris nerve sustained during the first sex act. This is
unintentional and is usually due to lack of knowledge of the importance
these nerves play in our health.

If a man understood this importance to himself and to his wife, he would
take all the care necessary to avoid shock and injury to those delicate
nerves. When the clitoris is aroused all the other nerves are relaxed;
muscles and tissues are receptive, and injury and pain by force are
unnecessary. Nature provided for all these things but we have
misunderstood and misused our wisdom. Prevention through understanding
is always the best remedy and that prevention lies in teaching our
children.

When it is understood that the purpose of cohabitation is replenishing
the race and also feeding the nervous system, then that force is given
its true value. The energy thus generated controls the machinery and
when the machinery runs smoothly it can be forgotten. With properly
matched wave energies this is demonstrated. The desire then assumes its
proper place and, in all contacts of daily living together, the feeding
goes on by radiation.

I talked with a young couple, husband and wife, and watched their
progress under the theory outlined. They were an example of the
consequences of opposing

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

wave energies, with a partial dormancy of the magnetic field in both. He
was a fire wave energy and she was an earth wave energy. Eight months
before he had come as a critically ill man but today he is well and
normal.

This is his experience as he told it to me.

"I was sick before I began taking these treatments. I just about
couldn't go any further. I had a bad back and heart. Everything was the
matter with me. I had been seeing a doctor for sometime but was just
getting worse. He couldn't seem to do anything for me. I was taking
shots twice a week, then every other day and finally every day but I
continually grew weaker. I had reached the point where I couldn't eat or
sleep.

"After the first two treatments I didn't notice much difference except
that I could breathe more deeply."

He was interrupted and asked: "When was it you ate the steaks?"

"That was after the first treatment." He laughed a little embarrassedly.
"When I left here I felt hungry for the first time in years and decided
a steak would taste good. I went into a restaurant and ordered it. Boy,
it was good but I was still hungry so I had a second one. For weeks
before that food sickened me but that day it took two steaks to fill me
up. I haven't missed a meal since. I got over everything quickly. After
the third visit I began to feel wonderful. I went back home entirely
well after ten treatments. My work isn't easy but I went back on the job
at once and I haven't had a sick day since. I brought my wife up this
time and I am just having a few treatments for good measure while I am
here."

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

According to this theory when he first came for treatment he had a
depleted magnetic field and nerve spasm and a troublesome heart. His
wife is in the same condition now—depleted magnetic field, a wild heart
and had had migraine headaches. They have three children but never at
any time has she had a response during sex relations, according to her.
Her clitoris was dormant with inevitable depletion of the magnetic field
and now she has a severe heart strain. There was very little if any
generation or feeding of the energy current between them. Their magnetic
fields just shorted. When they are rehabilitated they will probably be
relieved from their difficulties for some time because they are both of
good strong stock.

"You don't know what it is going to mean having my wife well again," the
husband said earnestly. "She has been in bed a good part of the time.
With three little children it has been hard. My family doctor wasn't
able to help her, although he told me what was the matter with both of
us just as you did. He explained it a little differently than you do but
he said there was nothing anybody could do about it. The doctors
apparently don't know what to do for people like us. I am going to take
my wife in to see him when we go back, have him check her and tell him
about this work. I think he will be very interested."

The wife showed her illness; she looked frail and nervous. Her heart was
"wild." I put my fingers on her pulse. It was rapid and irregular and
her breathing was fast and shallow.

This person said, "That heart is too wild now to tune. For a day or two
her magnetic field will have

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

to be revitalized. Then her heart can be tamed and cushioned."

The third day he was ready to tune her heart.

"Put your fingers on her pulse and see what happens," he told me. I put
my fingers on her wrist and he put his fingers first on her chest, the
back of her neck and then between her ribs near the heart.

The quality of her pulse changed first. It became stronger and the beat
firmer under my fingers. Then gradually it began to slow down and the
volume improve, the beat growing regular. In about three minutes her
pulse was beating at a normal rhythm and rate, her respiration slowed
and became deeper and the look of strain and apprehension was erased
from her face.

At the end of ten visits she was a different appearing young woman. She
was relaxed, smiling and rested looking. They returned home two very
happy people.

"She should go on improving and growing stronger," this person told me.
"The energy current through her field will continue working for some
time. All the nerve structures will receive their quota of energy now
that the spasm is released from her heart, until the field again becomes
depleted. It won't give her trouble for some time. Under these
conditions both of them can go on without difficulty until their
magnetic fields need revitalizing but they will need revitalizing from
time to time because of their mismated wave frequencies. However, they
aren't apt to get in that run-down condition again for some time."

In different people different sets of nerves may be affected, creating
different symptoms, but the cause is

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

still the same—depletion of the magnetic field and spasms from lack of
properly blended fuel.

I talked with one young woman where such was the case. Her recovery was
spectacular and it has completely baffled and mystified her. She told me
all her symptoms and her search for help.

"I don't remember how many doctors I actually consulted but each one
gave me a different opinion. I thought I had stomach trouble because I
had had severe pains in my stomach for years. When I had an attack my
abdomen swelled out until I could hardly breathe. Every doctor I saw
wanted to operate and each one wanted to operate for a different reason.
I wouldn't agree to an operation because I never felt sure they knew
what was the matter with me.

"For the past year I have had severe pains in the back of my legs. Four
months ago I had an attack in my back; it was torture to get around. I
saw a doctor who treated me but I just got worse so I stopped the
treatments. A neighbor told me about this form of treatment. She had
great confidence in it and urged me to try it. I had reached the point
where I didn't care any more because I had been to so many doctors and
none of them helped me. I came to this person to satisfy her, not
myself. I was badly swollen that day, hardly able to breathe.

"He didn't have his fingers on me for more than ten seconds when he said
to me, Now where is your stomach?'

"I looked down and almost fell out of the chair. The swelling was gone!
It was miraculous! It just wasn't there at all. I was flat again and
could breathe deeply for the first time in three years. When I got

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

outside I just stood awhile and took great, deep breaths of the fresh
air.

"I think this work is wonderful. I've never known anything like it in my
life. I still can't get over what happened to me. Why, all the swelling
was gone, just like that—instantly. I had five treatments and in that
time I had two attacks. The first one came on suddenly after dinner but
by the next morning it was gone. Then I had another mild one that didn't
last long. I have had none since. The pains in my legs disappeared after
the first treatment and have never recurred. I am almost through with my
series of treatments and I feel just wonderful."

This again is just another manifestation of nerves in spasm from lack of
their required mating fuel. The depleted magnetic field affected the
nerve supply to the stomach and intestines. The spasm of the nerves
created a ballooning of the bowel, producing all the pain and distress
she complained of. All the treatments she had from doctors did not
release the nerve spasm fully and there was no matching energy current
to build and feed the magnetic field and nervous system. When this
person fed the correct mating fuel through his finger tips into the
magnetic field, the spasm released in a matter of seconds and the
abdominal swelling disappeared. It collapsed as if by magic. With the
spasm and tension released she could breathe deeply, bring a full supply
of her own wave into her magnetic field, blend it with the correct
energy being distributed and send the mixture out over her entire
nervous system. When the energy had completed its full circuit she was
relieved of all pain.

The magnetic field and the branches involved were

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

consequently weakened due to the length of time of the depletion of the
magnetic field, thus causing spasm. The two recurring attacks she had
were the result of weakened nerves not being able to retain the energy,
but the attacks were milder and shorter. After the first release of the
spasm it was a matter of rehabilitating the nerves to full strength for
conduction of the energy current.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Four. Heart Energy](kymf05)
