[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kymf06)  [Next](kymf08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0787309923/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Know Your Magnetic Field*, by William E. Gray, \[1947\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### CHAPTER SIX

#### SPASTIC CONDITIONS

Spastic condition is a dreaded affliction which sometimes sets up a fear
in people about to have children, knowing that it is usually caused at
birth. I have watched this person work on several spastics and his work
and results are thrilling and gratifying. The younger the child, the
greater and faster the result.

Spastic affliction is caused by shock to the magnetic field, causing it
to retain permanent spasm, thereby not drawing the required amount of
energy through the lungs. The incoming energy current from the
atmosphere cannot be handled by the magnetic field in sufficient
quantity nor can it send the necessary nerve fuel through the nervous
system. This sets up a shrinkage causing spasm of the nerves.

There are many degrees of spastic condition, at different levels of
tension in children at birth, depending upon the nerve tension of the
mother at delivery. It is, as a rule, easy to relieve spastic conditions
if recognized a short time after birth. Almost anyone having the proper
wave frequency to blend with the frequency of the afflicted child can
feed the energy to his magnetic field by placing his hand on the child's
pelvis, thereby releasing its spasm so that he can draw the energy
through his lungs to the pelvis, thus energizing

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

his nerve structure and thereby eliminating the spastic condition.

The longer the tension or spasm continues in the magnetic field, the
greater the damage is to the body nerves and their structure, thereby
making the tension more difficult to relieve. The younger the child the
easier it is to help him by releasing the magnetic field. It is then
strengthened by recharging it with human energy.

I don't think I will ever forget the first spastic that I saw him
release and build. The baby was fifteen months old at the time and the
mother told me that she had taken her to numerous doctors all over the
state. The doctors could do nothing, only offer a thread of hope that
she might grow out of the condition.

The baby's legs were straight and rigid, her little fists clenched and
motionless since birth, and her head rolled about grotesquely. She had
never held it up. We placed her on the desk before this person. He put
his fingers over the lower abdomen, the magnetic field region, and
directed the energy current through for a few minutes. She began to make
restless, jerking movements.

He spoke gently to her, "You don't like it, do you?" with a smile. The
energy was releasing the pelvic nerves in spasm. The nerves resent it at
the start.

The restlessness stopped. Color began to creep up into her cheeks,
luster to her eyes, and the waxen quality of her skin was replaced by
healthy, normal pink glow. He removed his fingers, "Now, let's see you
kick your legs. Pull them up—that's it—now kick them out."

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

I found I was holding my breath and let it go with a deep sigh as the
little legs relaxed, came up and kicked the air and the fists unclenched
as she made spontaneous baby gestures.

"Hold the baby up now," he directed the mother. "Now," speaking to the
baby, "raise your head. That's the way, hold it up. Fine, now doesn't
that feel better?" The head wobbled, jerked a few times, then slowly
came to a normal upright position in obedience to his spoken words.

"We'd like to see her in two weeks. A few more times and she should be
all right."

The mother gathered the baby up, speechless at first. Then a torrent of
confused words of gratitude poured out. There was wonderment, hope and
thankfulness shining in her eyes.

When they had gone I turned to him and said, "That baby was not old
enough to understand the words you spoke but she did just as you told
her. How do you explain that?"

With a beaming smile he said, "No, she did not understand the words but
her nerves responded to the vibrations of my voice."

I was beginning to get used to rabbits jumping out of hats at me, so I
was not too surprised at this answer. But this rabbit turned out to be
one of the strangest yet. What he told me staggered my senses. This man
does not make statements that he has not proved for himself and can
demonstrate. I did not then question the veracity of his words but
waited for a similar situation and saw it work with my own eyes.

The next spastic baby was just a little over a year old, too young to
understand more than a few simple

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

words, but she obeyed the commands given her. Her legs stretched out,
her fists opened and she raised her head to a normal, upright position
for the first time by herself. Those words were beyond the intelligence
of a normal, healthy child of that age. How could a spastic baby know
what they meant? This is how he explained it to me.

Through lost knowledge the functions of the various parts of the body
have been erroneously interpreted. The life force is of electric energy;
consequently, the body must be mechanically constructed to conduct,
transmit and be activated by the human energy current. Thought control,
thought direction and discrimination are energy impulses supplied from
the magnetic field to the subsidiary brain within the skull, thereby
causing impulse reaction through the nerves . and their relay centers,
affecting the movements at will of all parts of the human structure.

When he placed his fingers on the lower abdomen over the magnetic field
of this baby, he relaxed and strengthened it, enabling it to draw more
energy through the lungs. As the energy current traveled through the
relays in the subsidiary brain and back, the circuit was established.
With the energy current he put into the magnetic field, he sent with it
the thought waves for action, the instructions for the nerves and brain
to respond. The spasms were relaxed, the major brain was electrified and
the minor brain ready for response. As he spoke, while generating, "Kick
your legs, pull them up, kick them out, raise your head, hold it up,"
the vibrations of his voice, the command given in his words to the
thought implanted sent the impulse upward, and the controlling

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

centers went into action and responded. The little legs pulled up,
kicked out, the head raised and slowly came into an upright position.
The thought impulse over those controlling centers or relays was started
and they began to carry on by the repetitious impulse constantly
received.

As the baby continues with her treatments, the muscles controlling the
neck, back and legs will develop and strengthen by use and the normal
progress and growth of the child will continue.

When Tommy C. was brought in both of his legs were drawn backward and
twisted—a spastic paralysis from a birth injury. Tommy could not talk
and was quite deaf but was as bright as a new penny. He didn't need
words. His eyes and gestures left one no doubt as to his meanings. He
made sounds and they ran the scale of tone and expression but he did not
use his tongue and his lips to form words. Tommy's father told me his
story.

"Tommy will soon be nine years old. He seemed normal at birth. We first
found out he wasn't when he didn't walk. He was always good natured and
seemed well until he was five months old. He had a high fever for a
short time. The doctor didn't say what it was except that it was nothing
serious.

"When he was three and a half we took him to a children's clinic. He was
one week in the hospital for a complete examination. They told us that
it was a spastic condition of the knees, perhaps from a birth injury.
They wanted to operate and lengthen the cords of his legs, then put him
in casts with weights on his legs. He was in a run-down condition so the
operation was postponed for a year. We heard about

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

an osteopath and took Tommy to him. He was going to make him walk. He
used some sort of electrical treatments but didn't accomplish anything.

"The doctors ordered braces. They were made onto a pair of shoes but
they were not successful. After wearing them awhile the skin on both
legs was galled. He was in pain all the time so we took them off his
legs.

"Oh yes, we knew then that he was deaf and could not speak. He makes
sounds and noises and he points. He is bright and seems to understand
everything. We were advised to have a tonsillectomy done. We did but we
couldn't notice any effect from that. Then they made casts for both legs
and split the casts so we could remove them. They were on for ten days
and when we took them off, his legs were galled and bruised. The doctors
were dissatisfied with that method of treatment and abandoned the idea.

"Tommy had picked up a bit and we were considering the idea of operating
when he got whooping cough and it had to be put off again. Last
September a friend recommended this form of treatment. He told us about
another little spastic boy and what wonderful work had been done for
him. We decided to bring Tommy up and just got here this summer. Several
things prevented us, along with Tommy's getting the mumps.

"Tommy has had four treatments and I already have great hopes for more
improvements. His legs have limbered up considerably and he is more
active. This method of treatment is the only one that has agreed with
Tommy. All the doctors just made him more miserable."

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

It was only a short time after I had talked with Mr. C. that Tommy had
his treatment. Great shrieks and howls penetrated from the inner room.
It didn't sound to me as though this person were getting along agreeably
with Tommy.

"What were you doing to Tommy to make him yell so?" I asked after they
had gone.

He laughed. "You know, sometimes after the vocal cords are energized
they remain lazy. By exciting them through anger they will become
active. Tommy wanted to hit me and just as his hand came close, by my
giving him a quick twist he would miss. He became more and more angry.
Pretty soon he'll get angry enough to talk, although he'll probably
swear at me first."

At the end of twelve treatments Tommy was attempting to walk by himself
from one piece of furniture to another. He had even attempted stairs and
had done quite well. By gripping the rungs in the banister he had
accomplished several himself. With his father supporting his elbows he
could mount the full flight into their house. He was also starting to
talk. "Mama," "papa" and "no" were distinct. The word "airplane" was
recognizable. Tommy is responding to his treatments rapidly.

When he first came he had a spasm in the magnetic field and in his leg
cords, causing shrinkage of the nerves, locking his legs in the
jack-knifed position. By generating the human energy through the nerves
it effected a release of the tension and there is no reason why he can't
have full recovery in time. After three visits his ear nerves were
relieved of tension so that the energy could travel through them.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

He can hear now. His father says that he hears all small noises and can
recognize an airplane by sound when he is in the house. He didn't talk
before because of his deafness. There is a certain amount of laziness
there. He gets along very well with his sign language but he is also
using words now.

Several treatments passed before I saw Tommy again. I walked into the
office and Mr. C. was sitting there. Standing by himself near a window,
straight and tall, gazing down on the busy street, was Tommy. Even I was
amazed.

"Has he done that before?" I asked.

"Not like that," Mr. C. told me proudly. "I think it is pretty good."

"Pretty good! I think it is wonderful," I said.

"It really is. It is wonderful," he answered quietly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Seven. Stroke](kymf08)
