[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp16)  [Next](dtp18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XIII

### THE LANGUAGE OF THE SOUL

"Zailm, my son, thou heardst the narration of the Saldu, Lolix. As thou
knowest, it is from things arisen out of the occurrences by her related
that thou goest on a mission to Suern. It is not a hard task, merely to
make return of acknowledgment for the gifts presented and disavowal of
our intent to keep as prisoners the people whom Rai Ernon sent hither.
We will give them asylum, but Rai Ernon must not think that we permit
their presence for any purpose except to do him a favor. Concerning
other business, on the morrow it is Rai Gwauxln's pleasure that thou
attendest at Agacoe. But wilt thou not remain here this night?"

"My father, I fain would stay; but is it not duteous that I go unto my
mother this night and set her at ease? She hath an infirmity of
nervousness that can not well withstand my absence at night."

"Thou art right, Zailm. Yet soon it must be arranged that thy mother be
domiciled in some pleasant part of this astikithlon, so that thou shalt
be under thy father's roof at night."

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

I then departed from the prince and from the sweet girl who had been
with us during a part of the evening, and went forth into the night. The
rain had ceased, and the clouds, rolling across the sky in sullen
blackness, had but one rift in their gloomy mass. In this single rent
shone a great white star, which at times flashed red. As I looked at it,
down close to the horizon, seeming that moment risen from old ocean's
phosphorescent waters, visible from Menax Heights, I thought of the
past; for this star had flashed brightly upon me while I awaited the
sunrise on Pitach Rhok. So many years it seemed since that morn! To-day
this star is called "Sirius," we named it "Corietos." As I looked upon
it, it seemed an omen auspicious of success, past, present and to come.
Raising my hands toward it, I murmured:

"Phyris, Phyrisooa Pertos!" which is: "Star, O star of my life."

It seems a little singular that the language which is translated thus
should have a similar sound and import as to-day used by the people of
my home planet. At that old day I raised my hands aloft and exclaimed:
"Star, O star of my life!" To-day I turn awhile from precipitating this
history in astral word-things, turn to my Alter Ego, and say: "Phyris,
Phyrisa." This is her own dear name, and signifies "Star of my soul."
Peculiar, is it not, that twelve thousand years should pass, and I,
member of another race of human beings, in another mansion, find so
little change in the language of the soul?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV: The Adoption of Zailm](dtp18.md)
