[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp28)  [Next](dtp30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

# SEVEN SHASTA SCENES

### INTERLUDE

## By Frederick S. Oliver, Amanuensis

### I

If there are "sermons in stones and books in the running brooks," then
is "Tchastel's" craggy pile a noble library in veritas. In it the
vastness, the grandeur and the solemnity of, nature are expressed in
mystic numbers carved in the eternal granite. On those stony, stratified
pages Nature's students may read the doings of the gnomes, Mother
Earth's treasurers. Here, too, in characters of lava, is writ Pluto's
kingly record. Aye! 'tis indeed Nature's own volume, bound between
covers of snow and ice; and marking the treasures thereof is a silvery
ribbon whose ends hang out of the vast tome, at the north one end, at
the south the other, the name of the one "McCloud" river, and of the
other the "Sacramento." Again, two lesser markers are in this sublime
epic, viz.: "Pitt" and 'Shasta" rivers. A volume of poems should bear
poetic title; so shall this. Can we bestow one more appropriate than the
aboriginal appellation, "Ieka," a name retained and used by the earliest
white mer whose eyes gazed on that land, far northern California, land
of romance, of gold and of adventure; retained through that intuitive
recognition of eternal fitness which pioneer and trapper have ever, in
all lands, exhibited toward existent nomenclature. For years the noble
mountain bore, for white as for aborigine, the name it had fetched from
out the night of time, as its sister peak far to the north, Mt. Rainier,
retained its primal christening of "Tacoma." But, alas, for human
conceit! Alas, for man's vain discontent, unable to let well enough
alone! To the one snowy mount came a Russian trapper, and thereafter
"Ieka" was no more on the tongues of men, unless, indeed, it was still
lovingly murmured by the dusky Modoc and his savage bride. To the other
glittering peak went an egotistic Englishman. His lordship found
"Tacoma" so beastly savage, "doncher know," and so over its Indian
appellate he tacked his own patronymic. Time evens

<span id="img_24200"></span> ![](img/24200.jpg)

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

all things and "ever is justice done." The patriotic Americanism of the
Northern Pacific Railroad topographers reinstated on the company maps
musical "Tacoma," tossed to rubbish the imported name, and rebuked one
egotist's vanity. That "Shasta Buttes" will ever know a parallel
experience is problematical; if not, 'tis perhaps as well, for American
gratitude willingly concedes the privilege of nomination of this proud
peak to its friend, and, in the '60s, champion of our national autonomy
-------- Russia. So much for a kind of mental view, past and present, of
this pride of the crags and peaks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II](dtp30.md)
