[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp48)  [Next](dtp50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III

### "Fair forms and hoary seers of ages put, an in one mighty sepulcher."

For a little while yet Phyris and I were not wholly one entity. But we
were come to retrospection. With arms clasping each other, we walked
slowly onward, till by the banks of the babbling brook we seated
ourselves. Then I said:

"My twin, let us scan the past; let us draw aside the curtain of bygone
ages, and see the record of the Book of Life, mirror of all events,
sights, sounds, shapes, all things. We can do this, because we are
karmaless, deathless, and are at one with the Father of Being, seeing,
knowing as he knows, because He is in us."

We pondered the scenes of our Atlantean life, lives, and I saw
ill-fated, sweet Princess Lolix, to whom I had been her ideal. Where had
her sad soul gone when Mainin petrified its clay? In the imperishable
record we saw where her life-line crossed ours. In her Poseid devachan
she had found her dream of life seem realized. Reborn into activity,
again her life-line crossed mine, her heritage pursued her, and she
conquered it, for Lolix's individuality was Elizabeth's

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

(my wife). Her crime in Poseid was expiated, and so, too, was mine.
Karma was fulfilled there. <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)

Man's course upward to God is so blind, so untaught, instinctively like
the sunward turning vine. I had so confidently, in the Sagum, taken a
step irrevocable, except for Mendocus; and then had fallen again into
blind darkness, despair, but instinctively true to law and to Elizabeth,
the object of my efforts--so upward, till at last I had gained the
immortal heights. So had my alter ago, Phyris. Down below were the
deserts of life, and fair appearing fruits, apples of Sodom. These ashes
are good, for they cause the soul to essay the heights.

Poseid, and all the lives, had meted us a large share of gall fruit, but
our errors required it, and Karma is a sure paymaster.

Sin begot karma and karma had exacted pay. Thus had I, for I am not
relating Phyris' history, given up hopes, happiness, as one gives his
open veins in the Sahara to quench the thirst of his friend. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43) By this abdication I had lost my life and
found it again. Karma, as the long record showed, was not always
requiring pay; for every good act I had ever done I saw that I had been
fully paid in kind my every jot. These were providences and benefices of
life. There is no accident in life; allow that a man may die "by
accident" and no man could be sure whether the ensuing night might not
find the earth dropping into, or else away from, the sun; or, seeing the
sun set, could feel sure it would rise again. All things, small or
great, are ordered. Not always from any pre-existent incarnation;
sometimes from one's last year's or yesterday's action the fruit
springs. In short, I, we, saw that the lesson of life was, "whatsoever a
man soweth, that shall he also reap," cause and effect. There are those
who will make cavilling argument, contend that "accident does exist, and
all is not order." I argue not, for "they that have ears to hear" will
understand. One cannot see over a mountain range save he stand on a
taller peak. To the greater vision, accident is but an are of design,
and disorder is but an arc of order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[397:1](dtp49.htm#fr_42) St. Matthew v: 17-18.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[397:2](dtp49.htm#fr_43) St. John xv: 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: The Fall Of Atlantis](dtp50)
