[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp53.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

# NOTE BY THE AUTHOR

Friends, thirteen years have become past time since the words of this
book were dictated; purposely hath publication been delayed unto the end
that statements then made might acquire weight through the coming to
pass of many of the predictions to be found within these covers;
predictions which at that time were wholly unverified, and were,
moreover, regarded by science as chimerical. Prophecy would be
impossible in a Godless universe; and were it not that vibration is the
law of laws, no mind could come into unison with the Creator or any of
His ministers; each living being is minister to the creature immediately
inferior. To-day witnesseth the faith of those who have believed in my
words swallowed up in knowledge: the predictions have numerously been
realized; all will be. So it is that to-day, in the middle of the final
year of the century I add

THE MIGHTY CAP-STONE:

The Division of the Way Hath Come; the Midnight Hour of the Cycle Which,
More Than Any Other, Formed Life's Great Divide, Hath Struck. When first
I dictated for this book there lacked, as it were, yet a few seconds to
the closing of the Sixth Day. But now for some seconds hath been
fulfilled the initiation of that saying of Him who sitteth upon the
throne: "Behold! I make all things new." The Hour hath struck. And now
presently "the one overcoming shall inherit all things and I will he his
God, and he shall be my son." This is for those who did set their hands
to the Plow and their feet to Furrow, and *looked not back, while yet
the Sixth Cycle was*. "But as for the cowards (a halt between two
opinions) and the unbelievers (in aught above earthly, finite things)
and the abominable, and takers of life, and passion and lust-servers,
sorcerers, idolaters and swervers from truth, their portion is the
(Great Karma of the World) second death." While the foolish ones were
gone to buy oil, the bridegroom came, and they who were prepared entered
in with him to the feast,

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

and the door was shut. When the foolish returned the door was not opened
unto then. Beloved, remember these words which were spoken by the
apostles of the Christ; that they said that in the Last Time before the
end of the Age "there will be mockers walking after their own impious
lusts (10). These indeed blaspheme what things they do not understand;
but that which they know naturally, as do the irrational animals, in
these things they are corrupt (19). These are they who separate at the
Dividing of the Way, going in the finite direction, not having the
Spirit (7), and are placed as an example, to endure the retributive
justice of an age-ending fire."

Many have been my references to America as being Atlantis come again;
much hath in a general way been said of the beginning, rise, growth and
destruction of that ancient prototype; a hint hath been here and there
given, rather by inference than by specific statement, that while
America should be peer and even more than Atl, just because she is Atl
returned on a higher plane, she must endure the woes as well as retrace
her precarnate glories. The penalty visited upon Poseid was the crowning
sentence of that Age. Century after century in the majestic march of
Time hath passed since the sun looked down upon a wild waste of ocean
waters where but a few days before had been the regal Island-Continent.
Another cycle hath reached its end, and its last hour hath chimed. All
that which is imperfect in the now-closed Sixth Day is come, in stately,
measured but inexorable way to face judgment by the standard, Truth.
Spot nor blemish can not hope to stand nor continue before it. Neither
can aught be amended so as now to escape its karmic penalty, for the
seal of its full time is set upon it. "The one acting unjustly, let him
be unjust still; and the filthy one, let him be filthy still; and the
righteous one, let him righteousness do still, and the holy one, let him
be holy still. Lo, I come speedily, and the reward of me is with me, to
give back unto each one as the work of him shall be found." The Great
Karma unfailingly setteth each evildoer back to the point attained ere
the animal forces in riot obtained control over the human. Wherefore
those who in the Sixth Cycle

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

lost [supremacy](errata.htm#27.md) over their lower selves won no place in
the Seventh. In the closing years of the spent cycle one deserted his
helpless wife; verily, he really deserted his birthright in the New Age.
Another sought, being weak-willed, to drown worries in wine; be but
drowned his soul's advanced merits. A wife was faithless to her wedding
vows; the Door of the New Time is fast against her. A thief stole, what?
His own life's rewards. One there was who deprived another of physical
life; he also erased his own name from TO-DAY'S roll-call. One swore to
keep a vow, but broke it often; in this New Day, after the grave shall
claim his physical being, be shall not again awaken, having lacked will
to live. A man was buried with high honors who at merciless cost to his
fellowmen enriched his bank account; a gravestone near as costly as pure
gold rears above his mortal, aye, and under it is also the dead hopes of
resurrection. She sold her body; purchased and purchaser form an
unhallowed company in Yesterday's catacombs, whence they shall not
emerge to see the light of To-day until, cycles afar hence "death and
hell give up" their inhabitants. Such is a brief glimpse into a Closed
Record. Turn the page. Another did deeds of love; love and doers thereof
live through all the days, forever. One smiled when a smile was heroic
and cheered faint souls; one visited the sick and prisoners; one clothed
a naked stranger; and one gave half of her last crust, though only to a
starving dog. Verily, all these shall receive their reward in the Day
now dawning. The bad are not all bad, neither the good wholly good. She
who lived a life of shame, yet ever kept hope of better things burning
in her inmost heart, and longed for death to release her, since man
would not:

"Looked beyond the shadow of the late unhallowed years,  
To the far, far distant upland, where yon glimmering light appears."

Verily, she shall be chastened, and made new, in the glory of To-day;
but the chastening is a weary ordeal, and slow. As the Great Karma
handles her, so handleth it all others, for it is Christ's mercy, which
healeth every soul's-hurt.

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

During many, [many](errata.htm#28.md) centuries prophecy hath looked
forward to. the end of the Age as a time of awful woe, and has pictured
dread [scenes](errata.htm#29.md) of terminal horror. Am I come to say that
all these predictions shall fail? Is the book of the Apocalypse, mere
allegory? Would it were! But as the Poseid age was stricken, this one
must also be which has just passed. Shall

America, the Glorious, together with the rest of the world, meet similar
woe? Alas, worse, though not by water but by fire. Shall all be wiped
out of existence, leaving a planet in ruins? Unto the end of full
obedience and the coming into harmony with divine law shall the lash be
applied; words may not portray the scenes. This is the Message of the
End of the Age:

"The day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is
come nigh"-Isaiah. "Behold, the day . . . that burneth as an
oven."--Malachi.

The Hour hath struck. And yet in all of this there is no mystery, no
supernatural penalty, no capricious infliction by an offended personal
God, and nothing of "man's necessity, God's opportunity." It is all of
Man's own doing. He hath wandered from the Way, and hath for the
God-nature in him, which he should have revered and nourished,
substituted worship of Self and of Mammon; hath cast out Love, and
placed violence, lust, greed and all the riotous animalism in him in
command of his life. *Man is his own judge and executioner*. Man is the
type and the universe is the print; Nature patterns after Man, not Man
after Nature. He, a being, of free-will, hath brought all coming woes of
judgment to be inevitable; he must endure; as he hath sown, so must he
reap. O Man, forgetter of Love, of Mercy, of Right; breeder of Hate, of
Cruelty, and of the inhumanity that hath and still doth make countless
millions mourn, is it possible that thou hast been blind to the
handwriting on the wall? Alas, yes, thou hast! Rampant is the Spirit of
selfishness, of greed, of merciless gain; its hand guides the trains and
steamers, clicks the telegraph keys, operates the telephone and cables,
makes a mockery of free speech, shackles the press so that it dares to

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

utter only that which cannot offend its master; every human enterprise,
all national policies and international comities, all things, even the
churches, are willing vassals to this fiend, SELF. What then? Ruin is on
all sides, the human race and all lower creatures its victims. Masons at
work on a high wan shout as a brick falls: "Stand from under!"

Aye, stand from under! A world is falling! Pile no higher the racial and
individual misdeeds now biding expiation; weary enough the awful
reckoning of the Great Karma without additions to its terrible length
that even now stretches ahead, a seeming eternity. Frenzied millions of
men and women, boys and girls, no longer free save in name, are menaced
with starvation. Hungry, cold, half-clad, shelterless only too often,
denied the chance to work, however willing they may be,
corporation-owned machinery their competitor; [monopoly](errata.htm#30.md)
and trust-ridden, sleeping or waking. This inhuman picture is the rule,
not the exception. Thou knowest this full well. I state nothing new in
this regard, and the awful facts are under drawn instead of exaggerated.
All of this, although in far, far less degree, has been so at the ending
of every age, was so in Poseid and is therefore now repeated. But it can
never be so again after this, for HERE THE WAY DIVIDES. Poseid survived;
so also shall they of the Sixth Age. In the full time by fire the Reaper
shall reap, and no place be found for physical safety by the unchanged
of heart. But the time of it shall be foreshortened, else no flesh could
remain alive. Stand from under! The roar of armed hosts must succeed the
thunderous mutterings of the times. No more is there any chance to
prevent the coming retribution (albeit it may seem unduly deferred), for
the causes have had their way. Too late is it to even modify the result
of the misguidance of that Spirit whose hand sways the helm. A short but
sharp conflict, Sanguinary past belief, even now reddens on the horizon.
The trained armies, millions of men active or in reserve, that are now
engaged in conquest, fevered with war, will but little longer,
comparatively, submit to having themselves and loved ones ground under
the heel and strangled by the hand of that organized

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

thing, Capital, which, itself merely the natural fruit of selfishness,
none the less is a riotous animal principle, compelling the few to be
masters of the many, denying the God-born declaration that all men are
created free and equal, and warping it to seem a giant lie. Soon
millions of trained soldiers will turn upon the visible representatives,
the wealthy and worldly prosperous, who in reality are not more
responsible than will be their assailants, of that Relentless Force
behind all human enterprise. Later they will break up into lawless bands
bent on satisfying Ishmaelitish tendencies, each self-server's hand
weaponed against his fellow creatures. Then will the pentup hate, the
savagery and selfishness begotten by ages of selfishness ruled by
unbridled animalism break in a storm such as the world hath never yet
seen, no, not during all the ages I scan, ages forgotten for untold
thousands of years. That loveless conflict will initiate that which,
Nature completing, will leave living but one where now are many. Hard
and fast after the human conflict will come pestilences unparalleled,
sweeping the wide earth over, for in that day none will pause to bury
the slain until the evil is wrought, nor then, for the dead of the
plagues will be as thousands for every one by violence. And all this
because the love that should grace and soften men's hearts, each for all
and all for each, dried up and became a mockery in the close of the
ended cycle, leaving but scattered oases, few and far between. Nature
follows Man. Wherefore the waters of Earth will dry out, rains be
withheld, cyclones sweep, and an earthquake come such as was not since a
man was on the earth; aye, I am mindful of Poseid! But all of this will
occur only through natural causes, and in consonance with the
selfishness, lust, greed, anger and general depravity of the Type. As
these blaze in the human breast, so shall the air, dry and vaporless
under brazen skies, develop solar heats more fierce than history ever
knew. A parched earth, furnace-like, Piling all flesh mountains high;
pestilences stalking unchecked. O ye! Blind to the Handwriting on the
wall, which flickers Still, though writ for a spent cycle. Turn now and
read, while yet the last midnight stroke reverberates.

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

The disciples asked the Great Master, saying: "Teacher, when will these
things be?" And He said: ". . . When you see surrounded by encampments
the Jerusalem, then you may know that has come near the desolation . . .
For days of vengeance these axe, to be fulfilled of all the judgments."

Friends, know ye the meaning of the name Jerusalem? That it meaneth
"Vision of Peace?" Verily, so it doth. One by one during the years all
the signs of the end of the Age but one were fulfilled; but these were
"only the beginning of sorrows," for still the Spirit of Liberty abode
here and there in the breasts of lovers of their fellowmen. That Spirit
wrapped itself in the glorious folds of the Stars and Stripes and
proclaimed the imperishable declaration, of human equality, granting
unto all that freedom which Americans for themselves demanded. But now
the "Vision of Peace" is finally encompassed by armies, the last gap
being filled with *blue-coated soldiers* forcing Mammon's commercial
shackles upon alien peoples in tropical islands. Ah, the Starry Flag
droops mourn fully low above the freedom-birthright sold for a mess of
pottage. My People, O my People! As ye have sown, so must ye reap. The
Vision of Spiritual Peace is wholly clouded by the dust of armed camps,
and no gap is left unobscured. "Then shall the end come." A Son hath
continually called from on High:

"Stand from under! Get into the shelter of that Cross."

In all the expiatory time must indeed those who thought no wrong suffer?
Ah, thought no wrong. In every life, whether theist's, atheist's or
merely one ignorant of any doctrine of belief, there comes a time when
the inward Spirit beseeches the soul to go up higher. It pleads again
and again and yet again so -long as faintest hope remains. Omission too,
hath its penalty: "How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation?" echoed throughout the past Age. Fire burns a babe's fingers
as badly as it does an adult's. There were and are those who lived and
live the Cross. These shall not suffer,

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

not even though bodily death overtake them; they have no Karma to
expiate.

What is the Cross? What is Christ? I have said, long ago, but I will
re-state it: the Divine stream of Life, the Indefinable God, that is,
the long arm of the Living Cross. Directed, purposed Human Will is the
short arm. This will power is our call upon His Name that is never
denied. Jesus, the Man of Nazareth, gave us pattern. He sacrificed self
for us. He said: "Follow me." Also: "If any man will come after me, let
him deny *himself*, and take up *his* cross and follow me." This self is
the lower self; it is the animal. All animals are in man concreted. No
hyena is so treacherous, no tiger so ferocious, no hog so brutish, no
weasel so destructive; no animal creature of any sort is so perfect in
its own peculiar nature as is the man who suffers any or all of these
animal characteristics within him to run riot; and this is because his
human soul is enslaved to the animal. Animal is only force undirected,
whether it exist in a body or not. Directed, guided by will, it ceaseth
to be animal. But in yielding to that guidance it must give up its free
lawlessness, something never pleasant and often painful. It is
sacrifice, always. Its symbol is the Cross. He sacrificed self for us on
this same cross of the Causeless, Divine Stream which containeth all
things and floweth no man knoweth whence nor whither. I would not
minimize Calvary; it is very, very real and the one great fact forever!
"Follow me." On that same Cross, day by day, aye, moment by moment,
employing our wills, as He directed, that we may grow unto His likeness,
we also, following, must sacrifice self, sacrifice the animal in us,
that is, in God's service we must never cease to direct those vagrant
forces which in running riot turn Earth into a veritable hell and
supplant Love with Self. It is written that "a little child shall lead
them." Verily the "little child" of the Spirit in the New Time shall be
ruler over the menagerie within the man, and that man shall therefore be
able, even as Quong, the Tchin, to rule any animal outside of himself. A
vast power, this. And because of it in the New Time no longer shall any
beast, whether in human form, or in

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

lower animal body, or merely apparent as a raging tempest or a disease,
be free to do evil.

When the Spirit in Man cometh fully to its own, "he shall rule them as
with a rod of iron,", this riotous throng. Rule them to their own good;
cut them off suddenly, even as Quong cut off the puma from furthering
its own will. He shall destroy that theretofore unbridled animal, by the
Cross converting it. into a servitor to the Father. All things must
become new TO-DAY, because conditions will soon so differ that they who
would hold fast to the old will, find nothing either in Nature or
elsewhere that will longer yield to the old powers.

And now here, of all places, I would indeed not be vague in expression.
The Seventh Cycle is that of the Spirit. TO-DAY existence will demand a
spiritual eye, and ear, and that every sense be raised to the Heights.
The very means of dealing with Nature will be no longer gross, but
become as in Hesperus, manageable only by those who, using the Cross in
their every life-act, swerve never to either side of the way, never,
either in least or greatest deed doing. error, even that good may come,
knowing it can not bring aught but pain and penalty. Not one can be
lost, finally, of the evildoers, for God wastes nothing. He converts all
things from lower into higher, inexorably, surely. Some must endure the
retributive justice of the Great Karma, aye., the majority must
experience more or less of this fire of transfiguration; the wrath of
God is Love's severity.

Then will be those times when "all things are made new." What now, think
ye? Shall not America, and the rest of the world, be mote glorious than
ever thou hast dreamt. Aye, truly. She shall not indeed have the great
population census-takers imagine. There shall be few where were many;
tens replacing thousands. But not in numbers is there greatness or
[magnificence](errata.htm#31.md); remember the Saldans and Rai Ernon; which
was greater, he or that ill-fated host? Yet never shall a soul be lost;
God hath place for everyone.

It is written that after a thousand years Satan shall be loosed for a
little season. That is well. For the Race possessing

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

such amazing powers, though few, will be the people, yet will there be
some who will have attained these powers through mere intellect; they
will abuse their privileges, having not the Spirit, and these sinful
ones will the Perfect in Evil assail, that karma shall overtake them.
Having had much given unto them, of them shall much be demanded,
wherefore their karmic atonement will be more intense than words can
depict.

The wrath of God is love's severity. All shall be converted from lower
into higher.

"A glory shines across the coming years,  
The glory of a race grown great and free.  
'Twas seen by poets, sages, saints and seers,  
Whose vision glimpsed the dawn that is to be.  
A shining shore is by the Future's sea,  
Whereon each man all stand among his peers  
As equal; and to none shall bend the knee.  
Awake, my soul, shake off your doubts and fears;  
Behold the hosts of darkness fade and flee  
Before the magic of the Morning's face;  
And hear the sweet and wondrous melody  
That floats to us from far-off golden days--  
It is the choral song of liberty  
It is the anthem of the coming Race".

<span id="img_sig"></span> ![](img/sig.jpg)
