[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wosf11)  [Next](wosf13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RU8U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi*, tr. by Paschal Robinson,
\[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

### I.

### LETTER TO ALL THE FAITHFUL.

The authenticity of this letter has never been called into question. The
text itself and the consensus of codices alike bespeak its genuineness.
Its inspiration is, as the Quaracchi editors have pointed out, kindred
to that of St. Francis’ other writings. Moreover, many of the sentiments
contained in this letter, written in great part in the words of the
Gospel, are expressed by the Saint in almost the self-same language in
the Rules and elsewhere. <span id="fr_374"></span>[1](#fn_374)

In the spring of 1215, St. Francis suffered again from an attack of
fever similar to that which had prostrated him in Spain. It was then,
his biographers tell us, <span id="fr_375"></span>[2](#fn_375) that the
Saint, unable as he was to preach, was moved by the zeal that devoured
him, to put his message into writing. As a result we have this the first
and longest of his letters, addressed to all the Faithful,—a precious
example of his far-reaching solicitude and all embracing sympathy. There
is a simplicity in the superscription and opening words of this letter
characteristic of the Middle Ages. Then was the time when men believed
that if they had a good idea or a deep feeling on any subject, the world
at large had but to learn of this idea or feeling and it would
immediately adopt it. It was thus that some bishops of the south of
France, having established

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the Truce of God, wrote "to all the archbishops, bishops, priests and
clerics inhabiting all Italy" to recommend to them "this new method come
from heaven" of reëstablishing and fixing peace among men. Even so
Dante, in the excess of his grief, wrote "to all the princes of the
earth" to make known to them that, in losing Beatrice, "the earth had
lost its spring and the future of the world was threatened." <span
id="fr_376"></span>[1](#fn_376) Thus too St. Francis undertook in the
present letter to recall "to all the Christians who are in the whole
world," those eternal truths which are ever old and ever new, convinced
as he was that the world must needs walk in their light if it only
realized them more. For the rest, as has been remarked, the description
it contains of the death of a rich man is, from a literary point of
view, rightly considered the most carefully composed bit of St. Francis’
writing that has come down to us.

A fragment containing this realistic picture was published in 1900 by M.
Sabatier, <span id="fr_377"></span>[2](#fn_377) who believed it to be a
new and complete opuscule of St. Francis. But the very *Incipit* of the
piece, "The body grows feeble, death approaches . . ." and the
*Explicit*, "dies a bitter death," clearly show that, with the exception
of a few words at the opening, this "nouveau opuscule" is nothing more
or less than an extract from St. Francis’ letter to all the Faithful.

Wadding, as I have already noted, following the lead of Rodolfo di
Tossignano, <span id="fr_378"></span>[3](#fn_378) unskilfully divided
this letter into two distinct epistles (I and II in his

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

edition). He has also distributed the letter into twelve chapters with
separate titles. No doubt he was justified in doing so by the example of
some codices, but the Quaracchi editors, following the best MSS., have
omitted this division and it will not be found in the present
translation. <span id="fr_379"></span>[1](#fn_379)

The letter to all the Faithful may be found entire in seventeen of the
codices mentioned above, to wit, those at *Assisi* (fol. 23); *Berlin*
(fol. 105); *Florence* (Ognissanti MS., fol. 7); *St. Floriano* (fol.
36); *Foligno* (fol. 25); *Lemberg* (fol. 341); *Liegnitz* (fol. 136);
*Munich* (fol. 31); *Oxford* (fol. 98); *Paris* (Maz. MS. 1743, fol.
137; Maz. MS. 989, fol. 193; Prot. theol. fac. MS., fol. 88); *Rome*
(St. Isidore's MSS. 1/25, fol. 18 and 1/7, fol. 15; Vatican MSS. 4354,
fol. 43, and 7650, fol. 16), and at *Düsseldorf* (cod. B 132, fol. not
numbered).

Fragments of the letter may also be found in the codices at *Luttich*
(fol. 158); *Naples* (F. 24, fol. 107), and *Volterra* (fol. 148). <span
id="fr_380"></span>[2](#fn_380) For the text contained in the Quaracchi
edition, the editors took as a basis the MSS. of Assisi and Ognissanti,
collating these with the codices at St. Isidore's and with the versions
of the letter given in the Monumenta (tract II, fol. 278 r) and the
Conformities (fruct. XII, P. 11). <span id="fr_381"></span>[3](#fn_381)
It is the Quaracchi text that I have here translated as follows:

### 1.—LETTER TO ALL THE FAITHFUL.

To all Christians, religious, clerics, and laics, men and women, to all
who dwell in the whole

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

world, Brother Francis, their servant and subject, presents reverent
homage, wishing true peace from heaven and sincere charity in the Lord.

Being the servant of all, I am bound to serve all and to administer the
balm-bearing words of my Lord. <span id="fr_382"></span>[1](#fn_382)
Wherefore, considering in my mind that, because of the infirmity and
weakness of my body, I cannot visit each one personally, I propose by
this present letter and message <span id="fr_383"></span>[2](#fn_383) to
offer you the words of our Lord Jesus Christ who is the Word of the
Father and the words of the Holy Ghost which are "spirit and
life." <span id="fr_384"></span>[3](#fn_384)

This Word of the Father, so worthy, so holy and glorious, whose coming
the most High Father announced from heaven by His holy archangel Gabriel
to the holy and glorious Virgin Mary <span
id="fr_385"></span>[4](#fn_385) in whose womb He received the true flesh
of our humanity and frailty, He, being rich <span
id="fr_386"></span>[5](#fn_386) above all, willed, nevertheless, with
His most Blessed Mother, to choose poverty.

And when His Passion was nigh, He celebrated the Pasch with His
disciples and, taking bread, He gave thanks and blessed and broke
saying: Take ye and eat: this is My Body. And, taking the chalice, He
said: This is My Blood of the New Testament, which shall be shed for you
and for many unto remission of

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

sins. <span id="fr_387"></span>[1](#fn_387) After that He prayed to the
Father, saying: "Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from
Me." <span id="fr_388"></span>[2](#fn_388) "And His sweat became as
drops of blood, trickling down upon the ground." <span
id="fr_389"></span>[3](#fn_389) But withal, He gave up His will to the
will of the Father, saying: Father, Thy will be done: not as I will, but
as Thou wilt. <span id="fr_390"></span>[4](#fn_390) Such was the will of
the Father that His Son, Blessed and Glorious, whom He gave to us, and
who was born for us, <span id="fr_391"></span>[5](#fn_391) should by His
own Blood, sacrifice, and oblation, offer Himself on the altar of the
Cross, not for Himself, by whom "all things were made," <span
id="fr_392"></span>[6](#fn_392) but for our sins, leaving us an example
that we should follow His steps. <span id="fr_393"></span>[7](#fn_393)
And He wishes that we should all be saved by Him <span
id="fr_394"></span>[8](#fn_394) and that we should receive Him with a
pure heart and a chaste body. But there are few who wish to receive Him
and to be saved by Him, although His yoke is sweet and His burden
light. <span id="fr_395"></span>[9](#fn_395)

Those who will not taste how sweet the Lord is <span
id="fr_396"></span>[10](#fn_396) and who love darkness rather than the
light, <span id="fr_397"></span>[11](#fn_397) not wishing to fulfil the
commandments of God are cursed: of them it is said by the prophet: "They
are cursed who decline from Thy commandments." <span
id="fr_398"></span>[12](#fn_398) But, O how happy and blessed

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

are those who love the Lord, who do as the Lord Himself says in the
Gospel: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart and with
thy whole soul and . . . thy neighbor as thyself." <span
id="fr_399"></span>[1](#fn_399) Let us therefore love God and adore Him
with a pure heart and a pure mind because He Himself, seeking that above
all, says: "The true adorers shall adore the Father in spirit and in
truth." <span id="fr_400"></span>[2](#fn_400) For all who "adore Him,
must adore Him in spirit and in truth." <span
id="fr_401"></span>[3](#fn_401) And let us offer Him praises and prayers
day and night, saying: "Our Father who art in heaven," for "we ought
always to pray, and not to faint." <span id="fr_402"></span>[4](#fn_402)

We ought indeed to confess all our sins to a priest and receive from him
the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. <span
id="fr_403"></span>[5](#fn_403) He who does not eat His Flesh and does
not drink His Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. <span
id="fr_404"></span>[6](#fn_404) Let him, however, eat and drink
worthily, because he who receives unworthily "eateth and drinketh
judgment to himself, not discerning the Body of the Lord," <span
id="fr_405"></span>[7](#fn_405)—that is, not discerning it from other
foods.

Let us, moreover, "bring forth fruits worthy of penance." <span
id="fr_406"></span>[8](#fn_406) And let us love our neighbors as
ourselves, and, if any one does not wish to

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

love them as himself or cannot, <span id="fr_407"></span>[1](#fn_407)
let him at least do them not harm, but let him do good to them.

Let those who have received the power of judging others, exercise
judgment with mercy, <span id="fr_408"></span>[2](#fn_408) as they hope
to obtain mercy from the Lord. For let judgment without mercy be shown
to him that doth not mercy. <span id="fr_409"></span>[3](#fn_409) Let us
then have charity and humility and let us give alms because they wash
souls from the foulness of sins. <span id="fr_410"></span>[4](#fn_410)
For men lose all which they leave in this world; they carry with them,
however, the reward of charity and alms which they have given, for which
they shall receive a recompense and worthy remuneration from the Lord.

We ought also to fast and to abstain from vices and sins <span
id="fr_411"></span>[5](#fn_411) and from superfluity of food and drink,
and to be Catholics. We ought also to visit Churches frequently and to
reverence clerics not only for themselves, if they are sinners, but on
account of their office and administration of the most holy Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which they sacrifice on the altar and
receive and administer to others. And let us all know for certain that
no one can be saved except by the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ and by
the holy words of the Lord which clerics say and announce and distribute
and they alone administer and not others. But religious

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

especially, who have renounced the world, are bound to do more and
greater things, but " not to leave the other undone." <span
id="fr_412"></span>[1](#fn_412)

We ought to hate our bodies with \[their\] vices and sins, because the
Lord says in the Gospel that all vices and sins come forth from the
heart. <span id="fr_413"></span>[2](#fn_413) We ought to love our
enemies and do good to them that hate us. <span
id="fr_414"></span>[3](#fn_414) We ought to observe the precepts and
counsels of our Lord Jesus Christ. We ought also to deny ourselves and
to put our bodies beneath the yoke of servitude and holy obedience as
each one has promised to the Lord. And let no man be bound by obedience
to obey any one in that where sin or offence is committed.

But let him to whom obedience has been entrusted and who is considered
greater become as the lesser <span id="fr_415"></span>[4](#fn_415) and
the servant of the other brothers, and let him show and have the mercy
toward each of his brothers that he would wish to be shown to himself if
he were in the like situation. And let him not be angry with a brother
on account of his offence, but let him advise him kindly and encourage
him with all patience and humility.

We ought not to be "wise according to the flesh" <span
id="fr_416"></span>[5](#fn_416) and prudent, but we ought rather to be
simple, humble, and pure. And let us hold our bodies in dishonor and
contempt because through our fault we are all wretched and corrupt,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

foul and worms, as the Lord says by the prophet: "I am a worm and no
man, the reproach of men and the outcast of the people." <span
id="fr_417"></span>[1](#fn_417) We should never desire to be above
others, but ought rather to be servants and subject "to every human
creature for God's sake." <span id="fr_418"></span>[2](#fn_418) And the
spirit of the Lord <span id="fr_419"></span>[3](#fn_419) shall rest upon
all those who do these things and who shall persevere to the end, and He
shall make His abode and dwelling in them, <span
id="fr_420"></span>[4](#fn_420) and they shall be children of the
heavenly Father <span id="fr_421"></span>[5](#fn_421) whose works they
do, and they are the spouses, brothers and mothers of our Lord Jesus
Christ. We are spouses when by the Holy Ghost the faithful soul is
united to Jesus Christ. We are His brothers when we do the will of His
Father who is in heaven. <span id="fr_422"></span>[6](#fn_422) We are
His mothers when we bear Him in our heart and in our body through pure
love and a clean conscience and we bring Him forth by holy work which
ought to shine as an example to others.

O how glorious and holy and great to have a Father in heaven! O how
holy, fair, and lovable to have a spouse in heaven! <span
id="fr_423"></span>[7](#fn_423) O how holy and how beloved, well
pleasing and humble, peaceful and sweet and desirable above all to have
such a brother who has laid down His life for His sheep, <span
id="fr_424"></span>[8](#fn_424) and who has prayed for us to the Father,

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

saying: Father, keep them in Thy Name whom Thou hast given Me. Father,
all those whom Thou hast given Me in the world were Thine, and Thou hast
given them to Me. And the words which Thou gayest Me I have given to
them; and they have received them, and have known in very deed that I
came forth from Thee, and they have believed that Thou didst send Me. I
pray for them: not for the world: bless and sanctify them. And for them
I sanctify Myself that they may be sanctified in one as We also are. And
I will, Father, that where I am, they also may be with Me, that they may
see My glory in My kingdom. <span id="fr_425"></span>[1](#fn_425)

And since He has suffered so many things for us and has done and will do
so much good to us, let every creature which is in heaven and on earth
and in the sea and in the abysses render praise to God and glory and
honor and benediction; <span id="fr_426"></span>[2](#fn_426) for He is
our strength and power who alone is good, <span
id="fr_427"></span>[3](#fn_427) alone most high, alone almighty and
admirable, glorious and alone holy, praiseworthy and blessed without end
forever and ever. Amen.

But all those who do not do penance and who do not receive the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, but who give themselves to vices and
sins and walk after evil concupiscence and bad desires and who do not
observe what they have promised, corporally they serve the world

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

and its fleshly desires and cares and solicitudes for this life, but
mentally they serve the devil, deceived by him whose sons they are and
whose works they do; blind they are because they see not the true
light,—our Lord Jesus Christ. They have no spiritual wisdom, for they
have not in them the Son of God who is the true wisdom of the Father: of
these it is said: "their wisdom was swallowed up." <span
id="fr_428"></span>[1](#fn_428) They know, understand, and do evil and
wittingly lose their souls. Beware, ye blind, deceived by your
enemies—to wit, by the world, the flesh and by the devil—for it is sweet
to the body to commit sin and bitter to serve God because all vices and
sins come forth and proceed from the heart of man, as it is said in the
Gospel. <span id="fr_429"></span>[2](#fn_429)

And you have nothing of good in this world or in the future. You think
to possess for long the vanities of this world, but you are deceived;
for a day and an hour will come of which you think not and do not know
and are ignorant of. The body grows feeble, death approaches, neighbors
and friends come saying: "Put your affairs in order." And his wife and
his children, neighbors and friends, make believe to weep. And looking,
he sees them weeping and is moved by a bad emotion, and thinking within
himself he says: "Behold, I place my soul and body and my all in your
hands." Verily, that man is cursed who confides and exposes his soul and
body and his all in such hands. Wherefore, the Lord

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

says by the prophet: "Cursed be the man that trusteth in man." <span
id="fr_430"></span>[1](#fn_430) And at once they cause a priest to come
and the priest says to him: "Wilt thou do penance for all thy sins? " He
answers: "I will." "Wilt thou from thy substance, as far as thou canst,
satisfy for what thou hast done and for the things in which thou hast
defrauded and deceived men." <span id="fr_431"></span>[2](#fn_431) He
answers: "No."—And the priest says: "Why not?"—"Because I have put
everything into the hands of my relatives and friends." And he begins to
lose the power of speech and thus this miserable man dies a bitter
death. <span id="fr_432"></span>[3](#fn_432)

But let all know that wheresoever or howsoever a man may die in criminal
sin, without satisfaction—when he could satisfy and did not satisfy—the
devil snatches his soul from his body with such violence and anguish as
no one can know except him who suffers it. And all talent and power,
learning and wisdom <span id="fr_433"></span>[4](#fn_433) that he
thought to possess are taken from him. <span
id="fr_434"></span>[5](#fn_434) And his relatives and friends take to
themselves his substance and divide it and say afterwards: "Cursed be
his soul because he could have acquired and given us more than he did,
and did

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

not acquire it." But the worms eat his body. And thus he loses soul and
body in this short life and goes into hell, where he shall be tormented
without end.

In the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen. <span id="fr_435"></span>[1](#fn_435) All to whom this letter may
come, I, Brother Francis, your little servant, pray and conjure you by
the charity which God is, <span id="fr_436"></span>[2](#fn_436) and with
the will to kiss your feet, to receive these balm-bearing words <span
id="fr_437"></span>[3](#fn_437) of our Lord Jesus Christ with humility
and charity and to put them in practice kindly and to observe them
perfectly. <span id="fr_438"></span>[4](#fn_438) And let those who do
not know how to read have them read often and let them keep them by them
with holy operation unto the end, for they are spirit and life. <span
id="fr_439"></span>[5](#fn_439) And those who do not do this shall
render an account on the day of Judgment before the tribunal of Christ.
And all those who shall receive them kindly and understand them and send
them to others as example, if they persevere in them unto the end, <span
id="fr_440"></span>[6](#fn_440) may the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost bless them. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_374"></span>[96:1](wosf12.htm#fr_374) Compare for example
the passage on [p. 101](#page_101), beginning "Let us therefore love
God," etc., with Chapter XXII of the First Rule ([p.
53](wosf06.htm#page_53)); and the prayer of Christ given on [p.
105](#page_105), with the conclusion of the same chapter ([p.
59](wosf06.htm#page_59)).

<span id="fn_375"></span>[96:2](wosf12.htm#fr_375) See Le Monnier,
*l.c.*, p. 202, and Knox Little, *l.c.*, p. 164. Wadding, *Annales*, ad.
an. 1213, places the writing of this letter two or three years earlier,
which seems less probable.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[97:1](wosf12.htm#fr_376) See Le Monnier,
*l.c.*, p. 203. To him I am indebted for these quotations.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[97:2](wosf12.htm#fr_377) See his edition of
Bartholi, *Tractatus*, Appendix, p. 132 seq.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[97:3](wosf12.htm#fr_378) See *Historiarum
Seraphicae Religionis libri tres* (Venice, 1585), fol. 194 r, for that
part of the letter which Wadding gives as *Epistola I*.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[98:1](wosf12.htm#fr_379) It has been adopted
in the new French edition of St. Francis’ works. See *Opuscules*, pp.
122-135.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[98:2](wosf12.htm#fr_380) It was from this
fourteenth century MS. that M. Sabatier edited as a new opuscule the
fragment above mentioned.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[98:3](wosf12.htm#fr_381) Bartholomew of Pisa
here inserts the greater part of the letter *passim*.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[99:1](wosf12.htm#fr_382) Cod. O. reads: "all
the words of the Lord."

<span id="fn_383"></span>[99:2](wosf12.htm#fr_383) Cod. O. reads: "by
this present letter and now."

<span id="fn_384"></span>[99:3](wosf12.htm#fr_384) John 6: 64.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[99:4](wosf12.htm#fr_385) See Luke 1: 31.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[99:5](wosf12.htm#fr_386) See II Cor. 8: 9.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[100:1](wosf12.htm#fr_387) See Matt. 26: 26-28;
Luke 22: 19-20; I Cor. 11: 24-25.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[100:2](wosf12.htm#fr_388) Matt. 26: 39.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[100:3](wosf12.htm#fr_389) Luke 22: 44.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[100:4](wosf12.htm#fr_390) See Matt. 26: 42 and
39.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[100:5](wosf12.htm#fr_391) Cod. O. omits: "and
was born for us."

<span id="fn_392"></span>[100:6](wosf12.htm#fr_392) John 1: 3.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[100:7](wosf12.htm#fr_393) See I Peter 2: 21.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[100:8](wosf12.htm#fr_394) Cod. O. omits: "And
He wishes that we should all be saved by Him."

<span id="fn_395"></span>[100:9](wosf12.htm#fr_395) See Matt. 11: 30.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[100:10](wosf12.htm#fr_396) See Ps. 33: 9.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[100:11](wosf12.htm#fr_397) See John 3: 39.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[100:12](wosf12.htm#fr_398) Ps. 118: 21.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[101:1](wosf12.htm#fr_399) Matt. 22: 37-39.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[101:2](wosf12.htm#fr_400) John 4: 23.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[101:3](wosf12.htm#fr_401) John 4: 24.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[101:4](wosf12.htm#fr_402) Luke 18: 1.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[101:5](wosf12.htm#fr_403) Cod. O. adds: "For
the Lord says, who does not eat," etc.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[101:6](wosf12.htm#fr_404) See John 6: 54.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[101:7](wosf12.htm#fr_405) I Cor. 11: 29.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[101:8](wosf12.htm#fr_406) Luke 3: 8.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[102:1](wosf12.htm#fr_407) Cod. As. and
editions omit "or cannot."

<span id="fn_408"></span>[102:2](wosf12.htm#fr_408) Cod. O. reads:
"judgment and mercy."

<span id="fn_409"></span>[102:3](wosf12.htm#fr_409) See Jas. 2: 13.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[102:4](wosf12.htm#fr_410) See Tob. 4: t 1.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[102:5](wosf12.htm#fr_411) See Eccli. 3: 32.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[103:1](wosf12.htm#fr_412) Luke 11: 42.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[103:2](wosf12.htm#fr_413) See Matt. 15: 18-19.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[103:3](wosf12.htm#fr_414) See Luke 6: 27.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[103:4](wosf12.htm#fr_415) See Luke 22: 26.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[103:5](wosf12.htm#fr_416) I Cor. 1: 26.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[104:1](wosf12.htm#fr_417) Ps. 21: 7.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[104:2](wosf12.htm#fr_418) I Peter 2: 13.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[104:3](wosf12.htm#fr_419) See Is. 11: 2.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[104:4](wosf12.htm#fr_420) See John 14: 23.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[104:5](wosf12.htm#fr_421) See Matt. 5: 45.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[104:6](wosf12.htm#fr_422) See Matt. 12: 50.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[104:7](wosf12.htm#fr_423) Cod. As. and that of
Volterra with the *Mon.* add: "the Paraclete."

<span id="fn_424"></span>[104:8](wosf12.htm#fr_424) See John 10: 15.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[105:1](wosf12.htm#fr_425) See John 17: 6-24.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[105:2](wosf12.htm#fr_426) See Apoc. 5: 13.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[105:3](wosf12.htm#fr_427) See Luke 18: 19.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[106:1](wosf12.htm#fr_428) Ps. 106: 27.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[106:2](wosf12.htm#fr_429) See Matt. 15: 19.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[107:1](wosf12.htm#fr_430) Jer. 17: 5.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[107:2](wosf12.htm#fr_431) Cod. O. and Pis.
read: "Wilt thou satisfy for the things taken unjustly,—that is, those
things by which thou hast cheated thy neighbor."

<span id="fn_432"></span>[107:3](wosf12.htm#fr_432) Cod. As. and *Mon.*
omit: "a bitter death." Cod. Pis. and Volterra omit "miserable man."

<span id="fn_433"></span>[107:4](wosf12.htm#fr_433) Cod. As. and *Mon.*
omit "wisdom."

<span id="fn_434"></span>[107:5](wosf12.htm#fr_434) See Luke 8: 18.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[108:1](wosf12.htm#fr_435) These words are not
found except in Cod. As., which omits the following sentence: "All to
whom this letter may come."

<span id="fn_436"></span>[108:2](wosf12.htm#fr_436) See I John 4: 16.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[108:3](wosf12.htm#fr_437) Cod. As. and *Mon.*
read: "that these words and others."

<span id="fn_438"></span>[108:4](wosf12.htm#fr_438) Cod. As. and *Mon.*
omit what follows up to "And all those."

<span id="fn_439"></span>[108:5](wosf12.htm#fr_439) See John 6: 64.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[108:6](wosf12.htm#fr_440) See Matt. 10: 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Letter To All the Friars](wosf13)
