[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wosf22)  [Next](wosf24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RU8U/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi*, tr. by Paschal Robinson,
\[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### VI.

### THE OFFICE OF THE PASSION.

Although the early biographies of St. Francis are silent as to this
opuscule, its authenticity is guaranteed by the Legend of St. Clare
written by Thomas of Celano toward the end of his life. <span
id="fr_570"></span>[1](#fn_570.md) In reference to the holy abbess’
devotion to the Passion we are told by Celano that she "learned and
frequently recited with attachment the Office of the Cross which
Francis, the lover of the Cross, had instituted." <span
id="fr_571"></span>[2](#fn_571.md) This passage was rightly understood by
Wadding as referring to the Office of the Passion which many early MSS.
attribute to St. Francis, and the character of which altogether squares
with the Saint's writings. Composed, as it is, of a simple and devout
combination of Scriptural texts, this document is at once a witness to
St. Francis’ ardent devotion to the Crucified and a precious example of
his method of prayer. It comprises five parts:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. For the three last days of Holy Week and for week-days throughout
the year.

2\. For the Paschal season.

3\. For Sundays and feast-days throughout the year.

4\. For Advent.

5\. For Christmas and the days following, to the close of the Epiphany
octave.

</div>

The text of the Office given in the Quaracchi edition is that of the
Assisi MS. 338, only a few rubrical notes having been omitted. The
Office may also be

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

found in MSS. at Oxford, <span id="fr_572"></span>[1](#fn_572.md)
Berlin, <span id="fr_573"></span>[2](#fn_573.md) and Liegnitz <span
id="fr_574"></span>[3](#fn_574.md) already described. <span
id="fr_575"></span>[4](#fn_575.md) It has never before, so far as I know,
been translated into English. Here it is:—

#### OFFICE OF THE PASSION OF THE LORD.

<span class="small">**Here begin the Psalms which our most blessed
Father Francis arranged to reverence and recall and praise the Passion
of the Lord. And they begin from Compline on Maundy Thursday because on
that night our Lord Jesus Christ was betrayed and taken captive. And
note that the Blessed Francis was wont to say this office thus: First he
said the Prayer which the Lord and Master taught us: *Our Father most
holy*, <span id="fr_576"></span>[5](#fn_576.md) with the Praises, to wit,
*Holy, Holy, Holy*. <span id="fr_577"></span>[6](#fn_577.md) When he had
finished the Praises with the Prayer he began this antiphon, namely:
*Holy Mary*. First he said the Psalms of the holy Virgin; besides he
said other Psalms which he had selected, and at the end of all the
Psalms which he said, he said the Psalms of the Passion, the Psalm being
finished he said the antiphon, namely, *Holy Virgin Mary*. When this
antiphon was finished, the office was completed**.</span>

I.—AT COMPLINE.

*Ant*. Holy Virgin Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 55: 9. O God, I have declared to Thee my life; Thou hast set my
tears in Thy sight.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Ps. 40: 8. All my enemies devised evils against me.

Ps. 70: 10. They have consulted together.

Ps. 108: 5. And they have repaid me evil for good and hatred for my
love.

Ps. 108: 4. Instead of making me a return of love they detracted me; but
I gave myself to prayer.

Ps. 21: 12. My holy Father, King of heaven and earth, depart not from
me; for tribulation is near and there is none to help.

Ps. 55: 10. When I cry unto Thee, then shall mine enemies be turned
back; behold I know that thou art my God.

Ps. 37: 12. My friends and my neighbors have drawn near and stood
against me; and they that were near me stood afar off.

Ps. 87: 9. Thou hast put away my acquaintance far from me; they have set
me an abomination to them; I was delivered up and came not forth.

Ps. 21: 20. Holy Father, remove not Thy help far from me: My God, look
toward my help.

Ps. 37: 23. Attend unto my help, O Lord, the God of my salvation,—Glory
be. Holy Virgin Mary, there is none like unto Thee born in the world
among women, daughter and handmaid

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

of the most high King, the heavenly Father! Mother of our most holy Lord
Jesus Christ, Spouse of the Holy Ghost; pray for us, with St. Michael
Archangel, and all the Virtues of heaven, and all the Saints, to thy
most holy, beloved Son, our Lord and Master. Glory be to the Father and
to the Son and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning is now and
ever shall be world without end. Amen.

<span class="small">**Note that the foregoing antiphon is said at all
the Hours and it is said for antiphon, chapter, hymn, versicle, and
prayer, and at Matins and at all the Hours likewise. He said nothing
else in them except this antiphon with its Psalms. At the completion of
the office Blessed Francis always said: Let us bless the Lord God living
and true; let us refer praise, glory, honor, blessing and all praise to
Him, always. Amen. Amen. Fiat. Fiat**.</span>

 

AT MATINS.

*Ant*. Holy Virgin Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 87: 2. O Lord, the God of my salvation, I have cried in the day and
night before Thee.

Ps. 87: 3. Let my prayer come in before Thee; incline Thy ear to my
petition.

Ps. 68: 19. Attend to my soul and deliver it: save me because of my
enemies.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

Ps. 21: 10. For Thou art He that hast drawn me out of the womb; my hope
from the breasts of my mother;

Ps. 21: 11. I was cast upon Thee from the womb. From my mother's womb
Thou art my God;

Ps. 21: 12. Depart not from me.

Ps. 68: 20. Thou knowest my reproach and my confusion and my shame.

Ps. 68: 21. In Thy sight are all they that afflict me: my heart hath
expected reproach and misery.  
And I looked for one that would grieve together with me, but there was
none, and for one that would comfort me and I found none.

Ps. 85: 14. O God, the wicked are risen up against me and the assembly
of the mighty have sought my soul; and they have not set Thee before
their eyes.

Ps. 87: 5. I am counted among them that go down to the pit; I am become
as a man without help,

Ps. 87: 6. free among the dead.  
Thou art my Father, most holy, my king and my God.

Ps. 37: 23. Attend unto my help, O Lord God of my salvation.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

AT PRIME.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 56: 1. Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me; for my soul
trusteth in Thee.

Ps. 56: 2. And in the shadow of Thy wings will I hope, until iniquity
pass away.

Ps. 56: 3. I will cry to my most holy Father, the Most High: to God, who
hath done good to me;

Ps. 56: 4. He hath sent from heaven and delivered me; He hath made them
a reproach that trod upon me.  
God hath sent His power and His truth.

Ps. 17: 18. He delivered me from my strongest enemies and from them that
hated me; for they were too strong for me.

Ps. 56: 7. They prepared a snare for my feet; and they bowed down my
soul; they dug a pit before my face; and they are fallen into it.

Ps. 56: 8. My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready; I will sing, and
rehearse a psalm.

Ps. 56: 9. Arise, O my glory, arise psaltery and harp;  
I will arise early.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

Ps. 56: 10. I will give praise to Thee, O Lord, among the people; I will
sing a psalm to Thee among the nations;

Ps. 56: 11. For Thy mercy is magnified even to the heavens; and Thy
truth unto the clouds.

Ps. 56: 12. Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; and Thy glory
above all the earth.

 

AT TIERCE.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 55: 2. Have mercy on me, O God, for man hath trodden me under foot;
all the day long he hath afflicted me, fighting against me.

Ps. 55: 3. My enemies have trodden on me all the day long; for they are
many that make war against me.

Ps. 40: 8. All my enemies devised evil against me;

Ps. 70: Jo. they have taken counsel together.

Ps. 40: 7. They went out and spoke to the same purpose.

Ps. 21: 8. All they that saw me have laughed me to scorn; they have
spoken with the lips and wagged the head.

Ps. 21: 7. But I am a worm and no man, a

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

reproach of men and outcast of the people.

Ps. 30: 12. I am become a reproach among all my enemies and very much to
my neighbors; and a fear to my acquaintance.

Ps. 21: 20. Holy Father, remove not Thy help far from me; my God, look
toward my defense.

Ps. 37: 23. Attend unto my help, O Lord God of my salvation. Glory be,
etc.

 

AT SEXT.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 141: 2. L cried to the Lord, with my voice; with my voice I made my
supplication to the Lord.

Ps. 141: 3. I pour out my prayer in His sight; and before Him I declare
my trouble.

Ps. 141: 4. When my spirit failed me, then Thou knewest my paths. In
this way wherein I walked, they have hidden a snare for me.

Ps. 141: 5. I looked on my right-hand, and beheld, and there was no one
that would know me. Flight hath failed me; and there is no one that hath
regard to my soul.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

Ps. 68: 8. Because for Thy sake I have borne reproach; shame hath
covered my face.

Ps. 68: 9. I am become a stranger to my brethren; and an alien to the
sons of my mother.

Ps. 68: 10. Holy Father, the zeal of Thy house hath eaten me up; and the
reproaches of them that reproached Thee are fallen upon me.

Ps. 34: 15. And they rejoiced against me and gathered together; scourges
were gathered together upon me and I knew not.

Ps. 68: 5. They are multiplied above the hairs of my head who hate me
without cause;  
My enemies are grown strong who have wrongfully persecuted me; then did
pay I that which I took not away.

Ps. 34: 11. Unjust witnesses rising up, have asked me things I knew not.

Ps. 34: 12. They repaid me evil for good and

Ps. 37: 21. detracted me; because I followed goodness.  
Thou art my Father, most holy; my King and my God.

Ps. 37: 23. Attend unto my help, O Lord God of my salvation.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

 

AT NONES.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Lam. 1: 12. O all ye that pass by, attend and see if there be any sorrow
like to my sorrow.

Ps. 21: 17. For many dogs have encompassed me; the council of the
malignant hath besieged me.

Ps. 21: 18. They looked and stared upon me;

Ps. 21: 19. they parted my garments among them and upon my vesture cast
lots.

Ps. 21: 17. They have dug my hands and my feet;

Ps. 21: 18. they numbered all my bones.

Ps. 21: 14. They have opened their mouth against me: as a lion ravening
and roaring.

Ps. 21: 15. I am poured out like water and all my bones are scattered.  
And my heart is become like melting wax in the midst of my bowels.

Ps. 21: 16. My strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue hath
cleaved to my jaws.

Ps. 68: 22. And they gave me gall for my food: and in my thirst they
gave me vinegar to drink.

Ps. 21: 16. And Thou hast brought me into the dust of death;

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

Ps. 68: 27. and they have added to the grief of my wounds.  
I slept and rose again; and my most holy Father received me with glory.

Ps. 72: 24. Holy Father, Thou hast held my right hand; and by Thy will
Thou hast conducted me and hast received me with glory.

Ps. 72: 25. For what have I in heaven; and besides Thee what do I desire
upon earth?

Ps. 45: 11. Be still and see that I am God, saith the Lord; I will be
exalted among the nations and I will be exalted in the earth.  
Blessed is the Lord God of Israel,

Ps. 33: 23. who has redeemed the souls of His servants with His own most
holy Blood; and none of them that trust in Him shall offend.

Ps. 95: 13. And we know that He cometh; for He will come to judge
justice.

 

AT VESPERS.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 46: 2. O clap your hands, all ye nations, shout unto God with the
voice of joy.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

Ps. 46: 3. For the Lord is high, terrible: He is a great king over all
the earth.  
For the most holy Father of heaven, our King, before ages sent His
beloved Son from on high:

Ps. 73: 12. and hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

Ps. 95: 11. Let the heavens rejoice and let the earth be glad, let the
sea be moved and the fulness thereof:

Ps. 95: 12. the fields and all that are in them shall be joyful.

Ps. 95: 1. Sing unto Him a new canticle; sing unto the Lord, all the
earth.

Ps. 95: 4. For the Lord is great and exceedingly to be praised;  
He is to be feared above all gods.

Ps. 95: 7. Bring to the Lord, O ye kindreds of the gentiles, bring to
the Lord glory and honor.

Ps. 95: 8. Bring to the Lord glory unto His Name.  
Bring your own bodies and bear His holy cross; and follow His most holy
precepts even unto the end.

Ps. 95: 9. Let all the earth be moved at His presence;

Ps. 95: 10. say among the gentiles that the Lord hath reigned.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="small">**It is said up to this place daily from Good Friday
until the feast of the Ascension. On the feast of the Ascension,
however, these versicles are added over and above:**</span>

And He ascended unto heaven; and sitteth on the right-hand of the most
Holy Father in heaven.

Ps. 56: 12. Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; and Thy glory
above all the earth.

Ps. 95: 13. And we know that He cometh: for He will come to judge
justice.

**And note that from the Ascension until the Advent of the Lord this
Psalm is said daily in the same manner, namely: "O clap your hands,"
with the foregoing versicles, "Glory be to the Father" being said where
the Psalm ends, namely, "for He will come to judge with justice."**

**Note that the foregoing Psalms are said from Good Friday until Easter
Sunday: they are said in the same manner from the octave of Whitsunday
until the Advent of the Lord and from the octave of the Epiphany until
Maundy Thursday, <span id="fr_578"></span>[1](#fn_578.md) except on
Sundays, and the principal feasts, on which they are not said: on the
other days however they are said daily.**

HOLY SATURDAY AT COMPLINE.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 69: 2. O God, *etc*. (Ps. 69), *as in the Psalter*.

<span class="small">**It is said daily at Compline until the octave of
Pentecost**.</span>

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

 

EASTER SUNDAY AT MATINS.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 97: 1. Sing ye to the Lord a new canticle: for He hath done
wonderful things. His right hand hath sanctified His Son; and His arm is
holy.

Ps. 97: 2. The Lord hath made known His salvation; He hath revealed His
justice in the sight of the gentiles.

Ps. 41: 9. In the day time the Lord hath commanded His mercy: and a
canticle to Him in the night.

Ps. 117: 24. This is the day which the Lord hath made: let us rejoice
and be glad in it.

Ps. 117: 26. Blessed be He that cometh in the name of the Lord.

Ps. 117: 27. The Lord is God and He hath shone upon us.

Ps. 95: 11. Let the heavens rejoice and let the earth be glad: let the
sea be moved and the fulness thereof.

Ps. 95: 12. The fields shall rejoice and all that are in them.

Ps. 95: 7. Bring to the Lord, O ye kindreds of the gentiles, bring to
the Lord glory and honor:

Ps. 95: 8. bring to the Lord glory unto His Name.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span class="small">**It is said up to this place daily from Easter
Sunday to the feast of the Ascension at all the Hours except at Vespers
and Compline and Prime. On the night of the Ascension these verses are
added:—**</span>

Ps. 67: 33. Sing ye to God, ye kingdoms of the earth: sing ye to the
Lord: sing ye to God,

Ps. 67: 34. who mounteth above the heaven of heavens to the east. Behold
He will give to His voice the voice of power:

Ps. 67: 35. give ye glory to God for Israel: His magnificence and His
power is in the clouds.

Ps. 67: 36. God is wonderful in His saints: the God of Israel is He who
will give power and strength to His people. Blessed be God.

<span class="small">**And note that this Psalm is said daily from the
Ascension of the Lord until the octave of Whitsunday with the foregoing
versicles at Matins and Tierce and Sext and Nones: "Glory be to the
Father," being said where "Blessed be God " is said, and not elsewhere.
Also note that it is said in the same manner only at Matins on Sundays
and the principal feasts, from the octave of Whitsunday until Maundy
Thursday because on that day the Lord ate the Pasch with His disciples,
or the other Psalm may be said at Matins or at Vespers when one wishes,
to wit, "I will extol Thee, O Lord," as it is in the Psalter, and this
from Easter Sunday to the feast of the Ascension and not
longer.**</span>

 

AT PRIME.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. Have mercy on me, etc.—*as above, p.* [159](#page_159.md).

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

 

AT TIERCE, SEXT AND NONES.

*Psalm*. Sing ye to the Lord, etc.—*as above, p*. [167](#page_167.md).

 

AT VESPERS.

*Psalm*. O clap your hands, etc.—*as above, p*. [164](#page_164.md).

<span class="small">**Here begin the other psalms which our most blessed
Father Francis likewise arranged which are to be said in place of the
foregoing psalms of the Passion of the Lord on Sunday and the principal
festivities from the octave of Whitsunday until Advent and from the
octave of the Epiphany until Maundy Thursday.**</span>

 

AT COMPLINE.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. O God, etc. (Ps. 69),—*as it is in the Psalter*.

 

AT MATINS.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. Sing ye to the Lord, etc.,—*as above, p*. [167](#page_167.md).

 

AT PRIME.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. Have mercy on me, etc.,—*as above, p*. [159](#page_159.md).

 

AT TIERCE.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 65: 1. Shout with joy to God, all the earth.

Ps. 65: 2. Sing ye a Psalm to His name: give glory to His praise.

Ps. 65: 3. Say unto God, How terrible are Thy works, O Lord: in the
multitude

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

of Thy strength Thy enemies shall lie to Thee.

Ps. 65: 4. Let all the earth adore Thee and sing to Thee: let it sing a
psalm to Thy Name.

Ps. 65: 16. Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will tell you
what great things He hath done for my soul.

Ps. 65: 17. I cried to Him with my mouth: and I extolled Him with my
tongue.

Ps. 17: 7. And He heard my voice from His holy temple: and my cry came
before Him.

Ps. 65: 8. O bless our God, ye gentiles: and make the voice of His
praise to be heard.

Ps. 71: 17. And in him shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed: all
nations shall magnify Him.

Ps. 71: 18. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only doth wonderful
things.

Ps. 71: 19. And blessed be the Name of His majesty forever: and the
whole earth shall be filled with His majesty. Amen. Amen.

 

AT SEXT.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 19: 2. May the Lord hear thee in the day of tribulation: may the
Name of the God of Jacob protect thee: may He

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

Ps. 19: 3. send thee help from the sanctuary and defend thee out of
Sion:

Ps. 19: 4. be mindful of all thy sacrifices, and may thy whole
burnt-offering be made fat;

Ps. 19: 5. Give thee according to thy own heart, and confirm all thy
counsels.

Ps. 19: 6. We will rejoice in thy salvation; and in the Name of our God
we shall be exalted.

Ps. 19: 7. The Lord fulfil all thy petitions: now I know that the Lord
hath sent Jesus Christ His Son,

Ps. 9: 9. and will judge the people with justice.

Ps. 9: 10. And the Lord is become a refuge for the poor: a helper in due
time of tribulation.

Ps. 9: 11. And let them trust in Thee who know Thy Name.

Ps. 143: 1. Blessed be the Lord my God:

Ps. 58: 17. for Thou art become my support and refuge in the day of my
trouble.

Ps. 58: 18. Unto Thee, O my helper, will I sing: for God is my defence,
my God, my mercy.

 

AT NONES.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 70: 1. In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped, let me never be put to
confusion.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

Ps. 70: 2. Deliver me in Thy justice and rescue me: incline Thine ear
unto and save me.

Ps. 70: 3. Be Thou unto me, O God, a protector and a place of strength:
that Thou mayest make me safe.

Ps. 70: 5. For Thou art my patience, O Lord; my hope, O Lord, from my
youth.

Ps. 70: 6. By Thee have I been confirmed from the womb, from my mother's
womb Thou art my protector: of Thee I shall continually sing.

Ps. 70: 8. Let my mouth be filled with praise, that I may sing Thy
glory; Thy greatness all the day long.

Ps. 68: 17. Hear me, O Lord, for Thy mercy is kind; look upon me
according to the multitude of Thy tender mercies.

Ps. 68: 18. And turn not away Thy face from Thy servant; for I am in
trouble, hear me speedily.

Ps. 143: 1. Blessed be the Lord my God.

Ps. 58: 17. For Thou art become my support and refuge in the day of my
trouble.

Ps. 58: 18. Unto Thee, O my helper, will I sing; for God is my defence,
my God, my mercy.

 

AT VESPERS.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. O clap your hands. . . *as above, p*. [164](#page_164.md).

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="small">**Here begin other Psalms which our most blessed
Father Francis likewise arranged; which are to be said in place of the
foregoing Psalms of the Passion of the Lord from the Advent of the Lord
until Christmas eve and not longer**.</span>

 

AT COMPLINE.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. How long, O Lord (Ps. 12), *as it is found in the Psalter*.

 

AT MATINS.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 85: 12. I will praise Thee, O Lord, most Holy Father, King of heaven
and earth; because

Ps. 85: 17. Thou hast comforted me.

Ps. 24: 5. Thou art God my Saviour.

Ps. 11: 6. I will deal confidently and will not fear.

Ps. 117: 14. The Lord is my strength and my praise; and is become my
salvation.

Exod. 15: 6. Thy right hand, O Lord, is magnified in strength;  
Thy right hand, O Lord, hath slain the enemy:

Exod. 15: 7. And in the multitude of Thy glory Thou hast put down Thy
adversaries.

Ps. 68: 33. Let the poor see and rejoice: seek ye God and your soul
shall live.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

Ps. 68: 35. Let the heavens and the earth praise Him: the sea and
everything that creepeth therein.

Ps. 68: 36. For God will save Sion and the cities of Juda shall be built
up.  
And they shall dwell there: and acquire it by inheritance.

Ps. 68: 37. And the seed of His servants shall possess it: and they that
love His Name shall dwell therein.

 

AT PRIME.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. Have mercy on me, etc.—*as above, p*. [159](#page_159.md).

 

AT TIERCE.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. Shout with joy, etc.—*as above, p*. [169](#page_169.md).

 

AT SEXT.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. May the Lord hear thee in the day, etc.—as above, [p.
170](#page_170.md).

 

AT NONES.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped—*as above, p*. [171](#page_171.md).

 

AT VESPERS.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*. O clap your hands, etc.—*as above, p*. [164](#page_164.md).

<span class="small">**Also note that the whole Psalm is not said but up
to the verse, "Let all the earth be moved"; understand**</span>

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="small">**however that the whole verse "Bring your own
bodies" must be said. At the end of this verse "Glory be to the Father"
is said. And thus it is said daily at Vespers from Advent until
Christmas eve.**</span>

 

CHRISTMAS DAY AT VESPERS.

*Ant*. Holy Mary.

*Psalm*.

Ps. 80: 2. Rejoice to God our helper.

Ps. 46: 2. Shout unto God, living and true, with the voice of triumph.

Ps. 46: 3. For the Lord is high, terrible: a great king over all the
earth.  
For the most holy Father of heaven, our king, before ages sent His
Beloved Son from on high and He was born of the Blessed Virgin, holy
Mary.

Ps. 88: 27. He shall cry out to me: Thou art my Father;

Ps. 88: 28. And I will make Him My Firstborn, high above the kings of
the earth.

Ps. 41: 9. In the day time the Lord hath commanded His mercy: and a
canticle to Him in the night.

Ps. 117: 24. This is the day which the Lord hath made: let us rejoice
and be glad in it.  
For the beloved and most holy Child has been given to us and born for us
by the wayside.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

Luke 2: 7. And laid in a manger because He had no room in the inn.

Luke 2: 14. Glory to God in the highest; and on earth peace to men of
good will.

Ps. 95: 11. Let the heavens rejoice and the earth be glad, and let the
sea be moved and the fulness thereof.

Ps. 95:12. The fields shall rejoice and all that are in them.

Ps. 95: 1. Sing to Him a new canticle; sing to the Lord, all the earth.

Ps. 95: 4. For the Lord is great and exceedingly to be praised: He is to
be feared above all gods.

Ps. 95: 7. Bring to the Lord, O ye kindreds of the gentiles, bring to
the Lord glory and honor.

Ps. 95: 8. Bring to the Lord glory unto His Name. Bring your own bodies
and bear His holy cross and follow His most holy precepts even unto the
end.

<span class="small">**And note that this Psalm is said from Christmas
until the octave of the Epiphany at all the Hours**.</span>

<span id="img_17600"></span> ![](img/17600.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_570"></span>[154:1](wosf23.htm#fr_570.md) It was soon after
the canonization of St. Clare, about 1256, that Celano undertook the
task of compiling this legend by order of Alexander IV.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[154:2](wosf23.htm#fr_571.md) See *Acta S.S.*, t.
II, Aug., p. 761.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[155:1](wosf23.htm#fr_572.md) See Little in
*Opuscules*, t. I, p. 276.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[155:2](wosf23.htm#fr_573.md) See *Spec. Perf.*
(ed. Sabatier), p. cxcvi.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[155:3](wosf23.htm#fr_574.md) See *Opuscules*, t.
I, p. 55. This MS. contains only the first part of the Office; it ends
with the words the "Lord hath reigned."

<span id="fn_575"></span>[155:4](wosf23.htm#fr_575.md) See above, p. 3-4.
Other MSS. containing the Office are enumerated by Wadding. See also
Boehmer's *Analekten*.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[155:5](wosf23.htm#fr_576.md) See above, [p.
139](wosf18.htm#page_139.md).

<span id="fn_577"></span>[155:6](wosf23.htm#fr_577.md) See above, [p.
141](wosf18.htm#page_141.md).

<span id="fn_578"></span>[166:1](wosf23.htm#fr_578.md) The Oxford Codex
here reads "until Easter Sunday."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](wosf24.md)
