[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wosf05)  [Next](wosf07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RU8U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi*, tr. by Paschal Robinson,
\[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### IV.

### RULES OF THE FRIARS MINOR.

The early history of the Seraphic legislation, to wit, the Rules of the
Friars Minor, the Poor Ladies and the Brothers and Sisters of Penance,
is intricate beyond measure, as those at all conversant with the subject
are but too well aware. Withal, as regards the Rule of the Friars Minor,
with which we are now more particularly concerned, St. Francis seems, on
the whole, to have written it twice. We have the formal testimony of St.
Bonaventure and other trustworthy authorities to this effect. Suffice it
to say that in the third year after he underwent the great spiritual
crisis we call conversion, "the servant of Christ, seeing that the
number of his Friars was gradually increasing, wrote for himself and for
them a form of life in simple words, laying as its irremovable
foundation the observance of the holy Gospel and adding a few other
things which seemed necessary for uniformity of life." <span
id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141) It was this "form of life," which has be
come known as the first Rule, that Innocent III approved *viva voce*,
April 23, 1209. <span id="fr_142"></span>[2](#fn_142) Some fourteen
years later on, when the Order had greatly increased,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Francis "desiring
to bring *into a shorter form* the Rule handed down in which the words
of the Gospel were scattered somewhat diffusely . . . caused a Rule to
be written. . . . And this Rule . . . he committed to the keeping of his
Vicar, who, after a few days had elapsed, declared that he had
carelessly lost it. Once more the holy man . . . rewrote the Rule as at
the first . . . and by Pope Honorius obtained its confirmation" <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143) on November 29, 1223. Such in briefest
outline is the genesis of the first and second Rules written by St.
Francis for the Friars Minor.

To these two Rules Prof. Karl Müller <span
id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144) and M. Paul Sabatier <span
id="fr_145"></span>[3](#fn_145) would fain add a third, written, as they
aver, in 1221. Their opinion, however, seems to rest upon a
misconception, for the Rule which they describe as dating from 1221, is
not a new one, but the same that Innocent III approved, not indeed in
its original form, which has not come down to us, <span
id="fr_146"></span>[4](#fn_146) but rather in the form it had assumed in
the course of twelve years, as a consequence of many changes and
additions. <span id="fr_147"></span>[5](#fn_147)

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

Early expositors of the Rule, such as Hugo de Digne <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148) and Angelo Clareno, <span
id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_149) in their works always represent the Rule
of which we are now speaking as the first and original one. Moreover,
none of the thirteenth century writers make mention of any third rule;
they speak only of the changes and accretions which the first Rule
suffered between 1209 and 1223. <span id="fr_150"></span>[3](#fn_150)

For example Jordan a Giano tells us that St. Francis chose Brother Cæsar
of Spires, a profound student of Scripture and a devoted friend, to
assist

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

him in putting this Rule into shape, <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151) and Jacques de Vitry, writing about
1217, relates that the Friars "meet once a year . . . and then with the
help of good men adopt and promulgate holy institutions approved by the
Pope." <span id="fr_152"></span>[2](#fn_152) One of these institutions
has been recorded for us by Thomas of Celano in his Second Life. It
appears that "on account of a general commotion in a certain chapter,
St. Francis caused these words to be written: 'Let the friars take care
not to appear gloomy and sad like hypocrites, but let them be jovial and
merry, showing that they rejoice in the Lord, and becomingly
courteous,'" <span id="fr_153"></span>[3](#fn_153) words which may be
found in the seventh chapter of the first Rule. <span
id="fr_154"></span>[4](#fn_154) Honorius III, on September 22, 1220,
issued a decree forbidding the Friars to leave the Order after having
made profession, or to roam about "beyond the bounds of obedience," and
this ordinance was added to the second chapter of the Rule. <span
id="fr_155"></span>[5](#fn_155)

All permanent and powerful rules *grow*, as a recent writer <span
id="fr_156"></span>[6](#fn_156) has justly remarked, and it was thuswise
that

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the first Rule of the Friars Minor received constant additions in the
form of constitutions enacted at the Chapters held at Portiuncula after
1212 or otherwise—it is necessary to insist on this point <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157)—during the fourteen years it was in
force. It is not hard therefore to understand why the texts we have of
this Rule do not always agree, since these changes and additions did not
come to the knowledge of all through the same channel. For example, in
the tenth chapter, which deals with "the sick brothers," we have two
different readings: the one followed in the present translation is that
found in the majority of the codices; <span
id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_158) the other, which has been incorporated
by Celano in his *Second Life*, <span id="fr_159"></span>[3](#fn_159)
has been used by Hugo de Digne in his exposition of the Rule. <span
id="fr_160"></span>[4](#fn_160) So too in the twelfth chapter, which
prescribes that the friars should avoid the company of women, we find
the following addition in the exposition of Angelo Clareno <span
id="fr_161"></span>[5](#fn_161) and the *Speculum Vitae B.
Francisci:* <span id="fr_162"></span>[6](#fn_162) "Let no one walk
abroad with them alone or eat out of the same plate with them at
table,"—words not to be found in the more common form of the Rule.

It remains to say a word about the relation of this first Rule to the
second and definitive one approved in 1223. In treating of the
difference between these two Rules, M. Sabatier errs still more
strangely. They had little in common, he avers, except the name, the
second being the very antithesis of the first, which alone was truly
Franciscan. <span id="fr_163"></span>[7](#fn_163) To say the truth

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

this assertion is less conformable to reality than it is to the theories
and prejudices of the French writer. In so far as the first and second
Rules written by St. Francis for the Friars Minor may be said to differ,
the difference lies in this that the second Rule is shorter, more
precise, and more orderly; <span id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_164) but
essentially and in substance it is clearly and truly the same as the
first Rule. Indeed, the very wording of the second Rule already exists
in great part in the first one, as any one must observe who makes an
unbiassed comparison of the two. So true is this agreement between the
two Rules that they are often regarded as one and the same. Thus Pope
Honorius III himself in his bull of 1223 confirming the second Rule
makes no distinction between the two. "We confirm," he says, "the Rule
of your Order approved by Pope Innocent, our predecessor, of happy
memory." <span id="fr_165"></span>[2](#fn_165) And Brother Elias, in a
letter addressed to the friars "living near Valenciennes," exhorts them
to observe purely, inviolably, unweariedly the "holy Rule approved by
Pope Innocent and confirmed by Pope Honorius." <span
id="fr_166"></span>[3](#fn_166) Rightly then does Hugo de Digne
("*spirituals homo ultra modum*") describe the difference between the
two Rules in his Exposition, <span id="fr_167"></span>[4](#fn_167)

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

when he says: "Some things were afterwards omitted for the sake of
brevity from the Rule approved by Pope Innocent before it was confirmed
by the bull of Pope Honorius." <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168)

For the rest, M. Sabatier's assertion that the "Spiritual" friars at the
beginning of the fourteenth century did not dream of using the first
Rule <span id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_169) can hardly be admitted. To
refute it, it suffices to cite Angelo Clareno, the leader of the
"Spiritual" friars, who so very often mentions the first Rule in his
exposition and whose citations prove that in the first quarter of the
fourteenth century there was no memory of any other Rule, even in the
camp of the rigorists. In a word, "the opposition which the
distinguished French critic would fain set up between the two Rules,
does not exist, and Chapter XV of his *Life of St. Francis* is not at
all consonant with history." Such is the assertion of the Quaracchi
editors. Its truth will be best demonstrated by an examination of the
text of both Rules, which now follow:

#### FIRST RULE OF THE FRIARS MINOR

*Which St. Francis made and which Pope Innocent III confirmed without a
Bull*. <span id="fr_170"></span>[3](#fn_170)

In the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
This is the

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

life that Brother Francis begged might be conceded to him and confirmed
by the Lord Pope Innocent. And he \[the Pope\] has conceded and
confirmed it to him and to his brothers present and future.

Brother Francis, and whoever may be at the head of this religion,
promises obedience and reverence to our Lord Pope Innocent and to his
successors. And the other brothers shall be bound to obey Brother
Francis and his successors. <span id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_171)

1.—*That the Brothers ought to live in Obedience, without Property and
in Chastity*.

The Rule and life of these brothers is this: namely, to live in
obedience and chastity, and without property, and to follow the doctrine
and footsteps of our Lord Jesus Christ, who says: "If thou wilt be
perfect, go sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven, and come, follow Me." <span
id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_172) And: "If any man will come after Me, let
him deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me;" <span
id="fr_173"></span>[3](#fn_173)

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

in like manner: "If any man come to Me, and hate not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his
own life also, he cannot be My disciple." <span
id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174) "And everyone that hath left father or
mother, brothers or sisters, or wife, or children or lands, for My sake,
shall receive an hundredfold, and shall possess life everlasting." <span
id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_175)

2.—*Of the Reception and Clothing of the Brothers*.

If any one, wishing by divine inspiration to embrace this manner of
life, comes to our brothers, let him be kindly received by them. And if
he be firmly resolved to undertake our life, let the brothers take great
care not to meddle with his temporal affairs, but let them present him
as soon as possible to their minister. Let the minister receive him
kindly, and encourage him, and diligently explain to him the tenor of
our life. This being done, if he be willing and able, with safety of
conscience and without impediment, let him sell all his goods and
endeavor to distribute them to the poor. But let the brothers and the
ministers of the brothers be careful not to interfere in any way in his
affairs, and let them not receive any money, either themselves or
through any person acting as intermediary; if however they should be in
want, the brothers may accept other necessaries for the body, money
excepted, by reason of their necessity, like other poor. And when he
\[the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

candidate\] shall have returned, let the minister grant him the habit of
probation for a year; that is to say, two tunics without a hood and cord
and breeches and a chaperon <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176)
reaching to the girdle. The year of probation being finished, let him be
received to obedience. Afterwards it shall not be lawful for him to pass
to another Order, nor to "wander about beyond obedience," according to
the commandment of the Lord Pope. <span id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_177)
For according to the Gospel "no man putting his hand to the plough, and
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God." <span
id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_178) If, however, anyone should present
himself who cannot without difficulty give away his goods, but has the
spiritual will to relinquish them, it shall suffice. No one shall be
received contrary to the form and institution of the holy Church.

But the other brothers who have promised obedience may have one tunic
with a hood, and another without a hood, if necessity require it, and a
cord and breeches. And let all the brothers be clothed with mean
garments, and they may mend them with sackcloth and other pieces, with
the blessing of God, for the Lord says in the Gospel: they that are in
costly apparel and live delicately and they that are clothed in soft
garments are in the houses of kings. <span
id="fr_179"></span>[4](#fn_179) And although they should be called
hypocrites, let

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

them not cease to do good; let them not desire rich clothes in this
world, that they may possess a garment in the kingdom of heaven.

3.—*Of the Divine Office and of the Fast*.

The Lord says: "This kind \[of devil\] can go out by nothing but by
fasting and prayer"; <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180) and again:
"When you fast be not as the hypocrites, sad." <span
id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_181) For this reason let all the brothers,
whether clerics or laics, say the Divine Office, the praises and prayers
which they ought to say. The clerics shall say the Office, and say it
for the living and the dead, according to the custom of clerics; but to
satisfy for the defect and negligence of the brothers, let them say
every day *Miserere mei*, with the *Pater noster;* for the deceased
brothers let there say *De profundis*, with *Pater noster*. And they may
have only the books necessary to perform their Office; and the
lay-brothers who know how to read the Psalter may also have one; but the
others who do not know how to read may not have a book. The lay-brothers
however shall say: *Credo in Deum*, and twenty-four *Paternosters* with
*Gloria Patri* for Matins, but for Lauds, five; for Prime, Tierce, Sext,
and Nones, for each, seven *Paternosters* with *Gloria Patri;* for
Vespers, twelve; for Compline, *Credo in Deum* and seven *Paternosters*
with *Gloria Patri;* for the dead, seven *Paternosters* with *Requiem
aeternam;* and for

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the defect and negligence of the brothers, three *Paternosters* every
day.

And all the brothers shall likewise fast from the feast of All Saints
until the Nativity of our Lord, and from Epiphany, when our Lord Jesus
Christ began to fast, until Easter; but at other times let them not be
bound to fast according to this life except on Fridays. And they may eat
of all foods which are placed before them, according to the
Gospel. <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182)

4.—*Of the Ministers and the other Brothers: how they shall be ranged*.

In the Name of the Lord let all the brothers who are appointed ministers
and servants of the other brothers place their brothers in the provinces
or places where they may be, and let them often visit and spiritually
admonish and console them. And let all my other blessed brothers
diligently obey them in those things which look to the salvation of the
soul and are not contrary to our life. Let them observe among themselves
what the Lord says: "Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do
you also to them," <span id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_183) and "what you
do not wish done to you, do it not to others." <span
id="fr_184"></span>[3](#fn_184) And let the ministers and servants
remember that the Lord says: I have not "come to be ministered unto, but
to minister," <span id="fr_185"></span>[4](#fn_185) and that to them is
committed the care of the souls of their brothers, of whom, if any
should be lost

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

through their fault and bad example, they will have to give an account
before the Lord Jesus Christ in the day of judgment.

5.—*Of the Correction of the Brothers who offend*.

Therefore take care of your souls and of those of your brothers, for "it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." <span
id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_186) If however one of the ministers should
command some one of the brothers anything contrary to our life or
against his soul, the brother is not bound to obey him, because that is
not obedience in which a fault or sin is committed. Nevertheless, let
all the brothers who are subject to the ministers and servants consider
reasonably and carefully the deeds of the ministers and servants. And if
they should see any one of them walking according to the flesh and not
according to the spirit, according to the right way of our life, after
the third admonition, if he will not amend, let him be reported to the
minister and servant of the whole fraternity in the Whitsun Chapter, in
spite of any obstacle that may stand in the way. If however among the
brothers, wherever they may be, there should be some brother who desires
to live according to the flesh, and not according to the spirit, let the
brothers with whom he is admonish, instruct, and correct him humbly and
diligently. And if after the third admonition he will not amend, let
them as soon as possible send him, or make the matter known, to his

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

minister and servant, and let the minister and servant do with him what
may seem to him most expedient before God.

And let all the brothers, the ministers and servants as well as the
others, take care not to be troubled or angered because of the fault or
bad example of another, for the devil desires to corrupt many through
the sin of one; but let them spiritually help him who has sinned, as
best they can; for he that is whole needs not a physician, but he that
is sick. <span id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_187)

In like manner let not all the brothers have power and authority,
especially among themselves, for as the Lord says in the Gospel: "The
princes of the Gentiles lord it over them: and they that are the greater
exercise power upon them." <span id="fr_188"></span>[2](#fn_188) It
shall not be thus among the brothers, but whosoever will be the greater
among them, let him be their minister and servant, <span
id="fr_189"></span>[3](#fn_189) and he that is the greater among them
let him be as the younger, <span id="fr_190"></span>[4](#fn_190) and he
who is the first, let him be as the last. Let not any brother do evil or
speak evil to another; let them rather in the spirit of charity
willingly serve and obey each other: and this is the true and holy
obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ. And let all the brothers as often
soever as they may have declined from the commandments of God, and
wandered from obedience, know that, as the prophet says, <span
id="fr_191"></span>[5](#fn_191)

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

they are cursed out of obedience as long as they continue consciously in
such a sin. And when they persevere in the commandments of the Lord,
which they have promised by the holy Gospel and their life, let them
know that they abide in true obedience, and are blessed by God.

6.—*Of the Recourse of the Brothers to their Ministers and that no
Brother may be called Prior*.

Let the brothers, in whatsoever places they may be, if they cannot
observe our life, have recourse as soon as possible to their minister,
making this known to him. But let the minister endeavor to provide for
them in such a way as he would wish to be dealt with himself if he were
in the like case. And let no one be called Prior, but let all in general
be called Friars Minor. And let one wash the feet of the other.

7.—*Of the Manner of serving and working*.

Let the brothers in whatever places they may be among others to serve or
to work, not be chamberlains, nor cellarers, nor overseers in the houses
of those whom they serve, and let them not accept any employment which
might cause scandal, or be injurious to their soul, <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192) but let them be inferior and subject to
all who are in the same house.

And let the brothers who know how to work, labor and exercise themselves
in that art they may understand, if it be not contrary to the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

salvation of their soul, and they can exercise it becomingly. For the
prophet says: "For thou shalt eat the labors of thy hands; blessed art
thou, and it shall be well with thee"; <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193) and the Apostle: "If any man will not
work, neither let him eat." <span id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_194) And
let every man abide in the art or employment wherein he was
called. <span id="fr_195"></span>[3](#fn_195) And for their labor they
may receive all necessary things, except money. And if they be in want,
let them seek for alms like other brothers. And they may have the tools
and implements necessary for their work. Let all the brothers apply
themselves with diligence to good works, for it is written: "Be always
busy in some good work, that the devil may find thee occupied;" <span
id="fr_196"></span>[4](#fn_196) and again: "Idleness is an enemy to the
soul." <span id="fr_197"></span>[5](#fn_197) Therefore the servants of
God ought always to continue in prayer or in some other good work.

Let the brothers take care that wherever they may be, whether in
hermitages or in other places, they never appropriate any place to
themselves, or maintain it against another. And whoever may come to
them, either a friend or a foe, a thief or a robber, let them receive
him kindly. And wherever the brothers are and in whatsoever place they
may find themselves, let them spiritually and diligently show reverence

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

and honor toward one another without murmuring. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198) And let them take care not to appear
exteriorly sad and gloomy like hypocrites, but let them show themselves
to be joyful and contented in the Lord, merry and becomingly
courteous. <span id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_199)

8.—*That the Brothers must not receive Money*.

The Lord commands in the Gospel: "Take heed, beware of all malice and
avarice and guard yourselves from the solicitudes of this world, and the
cares of this life." <span id="fr_200"></span>[3](#fn_200) Therefore let
none of the brothers, wherever he may be or whithersoever he may go,
carry or receive money or coin in any manner, or cause it to be
received, either for clothing, or for books, or as the price of any
labor, or indeed for any reason, except on account of the manifest
necessity of the sick brothers. For we ought not to have more use and
esteem of money and coin than of stones. And the devil seeks to blind
those who desire or value it more than stones. Let us therefore take
care lest after having left all things we lose the kingdom of heaven for
such a trifle. And if we should chance to find money in any place, let
us no more regard it than the dust we tread under our feet, <span
id="fr_201"></span>[4](#fn_201) for it is "vanity of vanities, and all
is vanity." <span id="fr_202"></span>[5](#fn_202) And if perchance,
which God

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

forbid, it should happen that any brother should collect or have money
or coin, except only because of the aforesaid necessity of the sick, let
all the brothers hold him for a false brother, a thief, a robber, and
one having a purse, unless he should become truly penitent. And let the
brothers in nowise receive money for alms <span
id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_203) or cause it to be received, seek it or
cause it to be sought, or money for other houses or places; nor let them
go with any person seeking money or coin for such places. But the
brothers may perform all other services which are not contrary to our
life, with the blessing of God. The brothers may however for the
manifest necessity of the lepers ask alms for them. But let them be very
wary of money. But let all the brothers likewise take great heed not to
search the world for any filthy lucre.

9.—*Of asking for Alms*.

Let all the brothers strive to follow the humility and poverty of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and let them remember that we ought to have nothing
else in the whole world, except as the Apostle says: "Having food and
wherewith to be covered, with these we are content. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_204)" And they ought to rejoice when they
converse with mean and despised persons, with the poor and

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

the weak, with the infirm and lepers, and with those who beg in the
streets. And when it may be necessary, let them go for alms. And let
them not be ashamed thereof, but rather remember that our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of the Living and Omnipotent God, set His face "as a
hard rock," <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205) and was not ashamed,
and was poor, and a stranger, and lived on alms, He Himself and the
Blessed Virgin and His disciples. And when men may treat them with
contempt, and refuse to give them an alms, let them give thanks for this
to God, because for these shames they shall receive great honor before
the tribunal of our Lord Jesus Christ. And let them know that the
injuries shall not be imputed to those who suffer them, but to those who
offer them. And alms is an inheritance and a right which is due to the
poor, which our Lord Jesus Christ purchased for us. And the brothers who
labor in seeking it will have a great recompense, and they will procure
and acquire a reward for those who give; for all that men leave in this
world shall perish, but for the charity and alms deeds they have done
they will receive a reward from God.

And let one make known clearly his wants to another, in order that he
may find and receive what are necessary for him. And let everyone love
and nourish his brother as a mother loves and nourishes her son, in so
far as God gives them grace. And "let not him that eateth despise

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

him that eateth not; and he that eateth not, let him not judge him that
eateth." <span id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_206) And whensoever a
necessity shall arise, it is lawful for all the brothers, wherever they
may be, to eat of all food that men can eat, as our Lord said of David,
who "did eat the loaves of proposition, which was not lawful to eat but
for the priests." <span id="fr_207"></span>[2](#fn_207) And let them
remember what the Lord says: "and take heed to yourselves, lest perhaps
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the
cares of this life: and that they come upon you suddenly. For as a snare
shall it come upon all that sit upon the face of the whole earth." <span
id="fr_208"></span>[3](#fn_208) And in like manner in time of manifest
necessity let all the brothers act in their needs, as our Lord shall
give them grace, for necessity has no law.

10.—*Of the sick Brothers*.

If any of the brothers fall into sickness, wherever he may be, let the
others not leave him, unless one of the brothers, or more if it be
necessary, be appointed to serve him as they would wish to be served
themselves; but in urgent necessity they may commit him to some person
who will take care of him in his infirmity. And I ask the sick brother
that he give thanks to the Creator for all things, and that he desire to
be as God wills him to be, whether sick or well; for all whom the Lord
has predestined to eternal

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

life <span id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_209) are disciplined by the rod of
afflictions and infirmities, and the spirit of compunction; as the Lord
says: "Such as I love I rebuke and chastise." <span
id="fr_210"></span>[2](#fn_210) If, however, he be disquieted and angry,
either against God or against the brothers, or perhaps ask eagerly for
remedies, desiring too much to deliver his body which is soon to die,
which is an enemy to the soul, this comes to him from evil and he is
fleshly, and seems not to be of the brothers, because he loves his body
more than his soul. <span id="fr_211"></span>[3](#fn_211)

11.—*That the Brothers ought not to speak or detract, but ought to love
one another*.

And let all the brothers take care not to calumniate anyone, nor to
contend in words; <span id="fr_212"></span>[4](#fn_212) let them indeed
study to maintain silence as far as God gives them grace. Let them also
not dispute among themselves or with others, but let them be ready to
answer with humility, saying: "we are unprofitable servants." <span
id="fr_213"></span>[5](#fn_213) And let them not be angry, for
"whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of the judgment.
And whosoever shall say to his brother, *Raca*, shall be in danger of
the council. And whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
hell fire." <span id="fr_214"></span>[6](#fn_214) And let them love one
another, as the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord says: "This
is My commandment, that you love one another, as I have loved you. <span
id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_215)" And let them show their love by the
works <span id="fr_216"></span>[2](#fn_216) they do for each other,
according as the Apostle says: "let us not love in word or in tongue,
but in deed and in truth." <span id="fr_217"></span>[3](#fn_217) Let
them "speak evil of no man," <span id="fr_218"></span>[4](#fn_218) nor
murmur, nor detract others, for it is written: "Whisperers and
detractors are hateful to God." <span id="fr_219"></span>[5](#fn_219)
And let them be "gentle, showing all mildness toward all men." <span
id="fr_220"></span>[6](#fn_220) Let them not judge and not condemn, and,
as the Lord says, let them not pay attention to the least sins of
others, but rather let them recount their own in the bitterness of their
soul. <span id="fr_221"></span>[7](#fn_221) And let them "strive to
enter by the narrow gate," <span id="fr_222"></span>[8](#fn_222) for the
Lord says: "How narrow is the gate, and strait is the way that leadeth
to life, and few there are that find it!" <span
id="fr_223"></span>[9](#fn_223)

12.—*Of avoiding unbecoming Looks and the Company of Women*.

Let all the brothers, wherever they are or may go, carefully avoid
unbecoming looks, and company of women, and let no one converse with
them alone. <span id="fr_224"></span>[10](#fn_224) Let the priests speak
to them honestly, giving them penance or some spiritual counsel. And let
no woman whatsoever be received

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

to obedience by any brother, <span id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_225) but
spiritual counsel being given to her let her do penance where she wills.
Let us all carefully watch over ourselves, and hold all our members in
subjection, for the Lord says: "Whosoever shall look on a woman to lust
after her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart." <span
id="fr_226"></span>[2](#fn_226)

13.—*Of the Punishment of Fornicators*.

If any brother by the instigation of the devil should commit
fornication, let him be deprived of the habit of the Order which he has
lost by his base iniquity and let him put it aside wholly, and let him
be altogether expelled from our religion. And let him afterwards do
penance for his sins.

14.—*How the Brothers should go through the World*.

When the brothers travel through the world, let them carry nothing by
the way, neither bag, nor purse, nor bread, nor money, nor a staff. And
whatsoever house they shall enter, let them first say, "Peace be to this
house," and remaining in the same house, let them eat and drink what
things they have. <span id="fr_227"></span>[3](#fn_227) Let them not
resist evil, <span id="fr_228"></span>[4](#fn_228) but if anyone should
strike them on the cheek, let them turn to him the other; and if anyone
take away their garment, let them not

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

forbid him the tunic also. Let them give to everyone that asketh them,
and if anyone take away their goods, let them not ask them again. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_229)

15.—*That the Brothers may not keep Beasts nor ride*.

I enjoin all the brothers, both clerics and laics, that when they travel
through the world, or reside in places, they in no wise, either with
them or with others or in any other way, have any kind of beast of
burden. Nor is it lawful for them to ride on horseback unless they are
compelled by infirmity or great necessity.

16.—*Of those who go among the Saracens and other Infidels*.

The Lord says: "Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves. Be
ye therefore wise as serpents and simple as doves." <span
id="fr_230"></span>[2](#fn_230) Wherefore, whoever of the brothers may
wish, by divine inspiration, to go among the Saracens and other
infidels, let them go with the permission of their minister and servant.
But let the minister give them leave and not refuse them, if he sees
they are fit to be sent; he will be held to render an account to the
Lord if in this or in other things he acts indiscreetly. The brothers,
however, who go may conduct themselves in two ways spiritually among
them. One way is not to make disputes or contentions; but let them be
"subject

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

to every human creature for God's sake," <span
id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_231) yet confessing themselves to be
Christians. The other way is that when they see it is pleasing to God,
they announce the Word of God, that they may believe in Almighty
God,—Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, the [Creator](errata.htm#1) of
all, our Lord the Redeemer and Saviour the Son, and that they should be
baptized and be made Christians, because, "unless a man be born again of
water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God." <span id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_232)

These and other things which please God they may say to them, for the
Lord says in the Gospel: "Everyone that shall confess Me before men, I
will also confess him before My Father who is in heaven;" <span
id="fr_233"></span>[3](#fn_233) and "he that shall be ashamed of Me and
My words, of him the Son of Man shall be ashamed, when He shall come in
His majesty and that of His Father, and of the holy angels." <span
id="fr_234"></span>[4](#fn_234)

And let all the brothers, wherever they may be, remember that they have
given themselves, and have relinquished their bodies to our Lord Jesus
Christ; and for love of Him they ought to expose themselves to enemies
both visible and invisible, for the Lord says: "Whosoever shall lose his
life for My sake, shall save it" <span id="fr_235"></span>[5](#fn_235)
in eternal life. "Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice’
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

heaven." <span id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_236) "If they have persecuted
Me, they will also persecute you." <span id="fr_237"></span>[2](#fn_237)
If however they should persecute you in one city, flee to another. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[3](#fn_238) "Blessed are ye when they shall revile
you, and persecute you, and speak all that is evil against you, untruly,
for My sake." <span id="fr_239"></span>[4](#fn_239) "Be glad in that day
and rejoice, for your reward is great in heaven." <span
id="fr_240"></span>[5](#fn_240) "I say to you, my friends, be not afraid
of them who kill the body, and after that have no more that they can
do." <span id="fr_241"></span>[6](#fn_241) " See that ye are not
troubled." <span id="fr_242"></span>[7](#fn_242) "In your patience you
shall possess your souls." <span id="fr_243"></span>[8](#fn_243) "But he
that shall persevere unto the end, he shall be saved." <span
id="fr_244"></span>[9](#fn_244)

17.—*Of Preachers*.

Let none of the brothers preach contrary to the form and institution of
the holy Roman Church, and unless this has been conceded to him by his
minister. But let the minister take care that he does not grant this
leave indiscreetly to anyone. Nevertheless, let all the brothers preach
by their works. And let no minister or preacher appropriate to himself
the ministry of brothers or the office of preaching, but let him give up
his office without any contradiction at whatever hour it may be enjoined
him. Wherefore I beseech in the charity which God is <span
id="fr_245"></span>[10](#fn_245) all

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

my brothers, preachers, prayers, or laborers, both clerics and laics,
that they study to humble themselves in all things and that they glory
not, nor rejoice, nor inwardly exalt themselves on account of good words
and works, nor indeed for any good which God may sometimes say or do and
operate in them or by them, according to what the Lord says: "But yet
rejoice not, in this that spirits are subject unto you." <span
id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_246) And let us know for certain that nothing
belongs to us but vices and sins. And we ought rather to rejoice when we
"fall into divers temptations," <span id="fr_247"></span>[2](#fn_247)
and when we bear some afflictions or sorrows of soul or body in this
world for the sake of eternal life. Let us then all, brothers, avoid all
pride and vainglory. Let us keep ourselves from the wisdom of this
world, and the prudence of the flesh; for the spirit of the world wishes
and cares much for words, but little for work; and it seeks not religion
and interior sanctity of spirit, but wishes and desires a religion and
sanctity appearing from without to men. And these are they of whom the
Lord says: "Amen, I say unto you, they have received their
reward." <span id="fr_248"></span>[3](#fn_248) But the spirit of the
Lord wishes the flesh to be mortified and despised, and to be considered
vile, abject, and contemptible; and it studies humility and patience,
pure simplicity, and true peace of mind, and always desires above all
things divine fear and divine wisdom, and the divine love of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

And let us refer all good to the Lord God most High and Supreme; let us
acknowledge that all good belongs to Him, and let us give thanks for all
to Him from whom all good proceeds. And may He, the most High and
Supreme, only True God, have, and may there be rendered to Him and may
He receive, all honors and reverences, all praises and benedictions, all
thanks and all glory, to whom all good belongs, who alone is good. <span
id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_249) And when we see or hear evil said or God
blasphemed, let us bless and thank and praise the Lord who is blessed
for ever. Amen.

18.—*How the Ministers should meet together*.

Each minister may assemble with his brothers every year wherever he may
please on the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, to treat of those
things which belong to God. And let all the ministers who are in parts
beyond the sea and beyond the mountains come once in three years, and
the other ministers once every year to the chapter on Whit Sunday, at
the Church of St. Mary of the Portiuncula, unless it be otherwise
ordered by the minister and servant of the whole brotherhood.

19.—*That all the Brothers must live in a Catholic way*.

Let all the brothers be Catholics, and live and speak in a Catholic
manner. But if anyone

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

should err from the Catholic faith and life in word or in deed, and will
not amend, let him be altogether expelled from our fraternity. And let
us hold all clerics and religious as our masters in those things which
regard the salvation of souls, if they do not deviate from our religion,
and let us reverence their office and order and administration in the
Lord.

20.—*Of the Confession of the Brothers and of the Reception of the Body
and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ*.

Let my blessed brothers, both clerics and laics, confess their sins to
priests of our religion. And if they cannot do this, let them confess to
other discreet and Catholic priests, knowing firmly and hoping that from
whatever Catholic priests they may receive penance and absolution, they
will undoubtedly be absolved from these sins if they take care to
observe humbly and faithfully the penance enjoined them. If however they
cannot then have a priest, let them confess to their brother, as the
Apostle James says: "Confess your sins to one another;" <span
id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_250) but let them not on this account fail to
have recourse to priests, for to priests alone the power of binding and
loosing has been given. And thus contrite and having confessed, let them
receive the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ with great humility
and veneration, calling to mind

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

what the Lord Himself says: "He that eateth My Flesh and drinketh My
Blood hath everlasting life;" <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_251) and
"Do this for a commemoration of Me." <span
id="fr_252"></span>[2](#fn_252)

21.—*Of the Praise and Exhortation which all the Brothers may make*.

And this or the like exhortation and praise all my brothers may announce
with the blessing of God, whenever it may please them among whatever men
they may be: Fear and honor, praise and bless God, give thanks <span
id="fr_253"></span>[3](#fn_253) and adore the Lord God Almighty in
Trinity and Unity, Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, the Creator of all.
"Do penance," <span id="fr_254"></span>[4](#fn_254) bring forth fruits
worthy of penance, <span id="fr_255"></span>[5](#fn_255) for know that
we must soon die. "Give and it shall be given to you;" <span
id="fr_256"></span>[6](#fn_256) "Forgive, and you shall be
forgiven." <span id="fr_257"></span>[7](#fn_257) And if you do not
forgive men their sins, the Lord will not forgive you your sins. <span
id="fr_258"></span>[8](#fn_258) Confess all your sins. <span
id="fr_259"></span>[9](#fn_259) Blessed are they who shall die in
penitence, for they shall be in the kingdom of heaven. Woe to those who
do not die in penitence, for they shall be the children of the devil,
whose works they do, <span id="fr_260"></span>[10](#fn_260) and they
shall go into eternal fire. Beware and abstain from all evil, and
persevere in good until the end.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

*22.—Of the Admonition of the Brothers*.

Let us all, brothers, give heed to what the Lord says: "Love your
enemies, and do good to them that hate you." <span
id="fr_261"></span>[1](#fn_261) For our Lord Jesus, whose footsteps we
ought to follow, <span id="fr_262"></span>[2](#fn_262) called His
betrayer friend, <span id="fr_263"></span>[3](#fn_263) and offered
Himself willingly to His crucifiers. Therefore all those who unjustly
inflict upon us tribulations and anguishes, shames and injuries, sorrows
and torments, martyrdom and death, are our friends whom we ought to love
much, because we gain eternal life by that which they make us suffer.
And let us hate our body with its vices and sins, because by living
carnally it wishes to deprive us of the love of our Lord Jesus Christ
and eternal life, and to lose itself with all else in hell; for we by
our own fault are corrupt, miserable, and averse to good, but prompt and
willing to evil; because, as the Lord says in the Gospel: from the heart
of men proceed and come evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications,
murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an
evil eye, false testimonies, blasphemy, foolishness. <span
id="fr_264"></span>[4](#fn_264) All these evils come from within, from
the heart of man, and these are what defile a man.

But now, after having renounced the world, we have nothing else to do
but to be solicitous, to follow the will of God, and to please Him.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Let us take much
care that we be not the wayside, or the stony or thorny ground,
according to what the Lord says in the Gospel: The seed is the word of
God. And that which fell by the wayside and was trampled under foot are
they that hear the word and do not understand; then the devil cometh,
and snatcheth that which has been sown in their hearts and taketh the
word out of their hearts, lest believing they should be saved. But that
which fell upon the rock are they who, when they hear the word, at once
receive it with joy; but when tribulation and persecution arise on
account of the word, they are immediately scandalized, and these have no
roots in themselves, but are for a while, for they believe for a while,
and in time of temptation fall away. But that which fell among thorns
are they who hear the word of God, and the solicitude and cares of this
world, the fallacies of riches, and the desire of other things entering
in choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful. But that sown on good
ground are they who, in a good and best heart, hearing the word
understand and keep it, and bring forth fruit in patience. <span
id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_265)

And for this reason, brothers, let us, as the Lord says, "let the dead
bury their dead." <span id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_266) And let us be
much on our guard against the malice and cunning of Satan, who desires
that man should not give his heart and mind to the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord God, and who
going about seeks to seduce the heart of man under pretext of some
reward or benefit, to smother the words and precepts of the Lord from
memory, and who wishes to blind the heart of man by
[worldly](errata.htm#2) business and cares, and to dwell there, as the
Lord says: "When an unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh
through dry places seeking rest and findeth none; then he saith: 'I will
return into my house whence I came out.' And coming he findeth it empty,
swept, and garnished. Then he goeth and taketh with him seven other
spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in, and dwell there;
and the last state of that man is made worse than the first." <span
id="fr_267"></span>[1](#fn_267) Wherefore let us all, brothers, watch
much, lest under pretext of some reward or labor or aid we lose or
separate our mind and heart from the Lord. But I beseech all the
brothers, both the ministers and others, in the charity which God
is, <span id="fr_268"></span>[2](#fn_268) that, overcoming all obstacles
and putting aside all care and solicitude, they strive in the best
manner they are able, to serve, love, and honor the Lord God with a
clean heart and a pure mind, which He seeks above all. And let us always
make in us a tabernacle and dwelling-place for Him, who is the Lord God
Omnipotent, Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, who says: "Watch,
therefore, praying at all times, that you may be accounted worthy to
escape" all the evils "that are to come,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

and to stand before the Son of Man." <span
id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_269) And when you stand to pray, <span
id="fr_270"></span>[2](#fn_270) say, "Our Father, who art in heaven."
And let us adore Him with a pure heart, for "we ought always to pray,
and not to faint," <span id="fr_271"></span>[3](#fn_271) for the Father
seeks such adorers. "God is a Spirit, and they that adore Him, must
adore Him in spirit and in truth." <span id="fr_272"></span>[4](#fn_272)
And let us have recourse to Him as the "Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls," <span id="fr_273"></span>[5](#fn_273) who says; "I am the Good
Shepherd," who feed My sheep, "and I lay down My life for My
flock." <span id="fr_274"></span>[6](#fn_274) But all you are brothers.
"And call none your father upon earth; for one is your Father who is in
heaven. Neither be ye called masters, for one is your master, who is in
heaven, Christ." <span id="fr_275"></span>[7](#fn_275) "If you abide in
Me, and My words abide in you, you shall ask whatever you will, and it
shall be done unto you." <span id="fr_276"></span>[8](#fn_276) "Where
there are two or three gathered together in My Name, there am I in the
midst of them." <span id="fr_277"></span>[9](#fn_277) "Behold, I am with
you all days, even to the consummation of the world." <span
id="fr_278"></span>[10](#fn_278) "The words that I have spoken to you
are spirit and life." <span id="fr_279"></span>[11](#fn_279) "I am the
Way, the Truth, and the Life." <span id="fr_280"></span>[12](#fn_280)

Let us therefore hold fast the words, the life and doctrine and holy
Gospel of Him who deigned for us to ask His Father to manifest to

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

us His Name, saying: Father, I have manifested Thy Name to the men whom
Thou hast given Me because the words which Thou gayest Me I have given
to them, and they have received them, and have known in very deed that I
came forth out of Thee, and they have believed that Thou didst send Me.
I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them whom Thou hast
given Me, because they are Thine and all My things are Thine. Holy
Father, keep them in Thy Name whom Thou hast given Me, that they may be
one, as We also are. These things I speak in the world that they may
have joy filled in themselves., I have given them Thy word, and the
world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, as I also am
not of the world. I pray not that Thou shouldst take them out of the
world, but that Thou shouldst keep them from evil. Sanctify them in
truth. Thy word is truth. As Thou hast sent Me into the world, I have
sent them into the world. And for them I do sanctify Myself, that they
may be sanctified in truth. Not for them only do I pray, but for them
also who through their word shall believe in Me, that they may be
consummated in one, and that the world may know that Thou hast sent Me,
and hast loved them, as Thou hast also loved Me. And I have made known
Thy Name to them, that the love wherewith Thou hast loved Me may be in
them, and I in them. Father, I will that where I am, they also whom Thou
hast

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

given Me may be with Me, that they may see Thy glory in Thy
kingdom. <span id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_281)

23.—*Prayer, Praise, and Thanksgiving*. <span
id="fr_282"></span>[2](#fn_282)

Almighty, most Holy, most High and Supreme God, Holy and Just Father,
Lord King of heaven and earth, for Thyself we give thanks to Thee
because by Thy holy will, and by Thine only Son, Thou hast created all
things spiritual and corporal in the Holy Ghost and didst place us made
to Thine image and likeness <span id="fr_283"></span>[3](#fn_283) in
paradise, whence we fell by our own fault. And we give Thee thanks
because, as by Thy Son Thou didst create us, so by the true and holy
love with which Thou hast loved us, <span
id="fr_284"></span>[4](#fn_284) Thou didst cause Him, true God and true
Man, to be born of the glorious and ever-Virgin, most Blessed holy Mary,
and didst will that He should redeem us captives by His Cross and Blood
and Death. And we give thanks to Thee because Thy Son Himself is to come
again in the glory of His Majesty to put the wicked who have not done
penance for their sins, and have not known Thee, in eternal fire, and to
say to all who have known Thee and adored Thee, and served Thee in
penance: "Come, ye blessed of My Father, possess the kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the world." <span
id="fr_285"></span>[5](#fn_285)

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

And since all we wretches and sinners are not worthy to name Thee, we
humbly beseech Thee, that our Lord Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, in
whom Thou art well pleased, <span id="fr_286"></span>[1](#fn_286)
together with the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, may give thanks to Thee as
it is pleasing to Thee and Them, for all; He suffices Thee always for
all through whom Thou hast done so much for us. Alleluia. And we
earnestly beg the glorious Mother, the most Blessed Mary ever-Virgin,
Blessed Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and all the choirs of the blessed
spirits, seraphim, cherubim, and thrones, dominations, principalities
and powers, virtues, angels and archangels, blessed John the Baptist,
John the Evangelist, Peter, Paul, the blessed patriarchs and prophets,
innocents, apostles, evangelists, disciples, martyrs, confessors,
virgins, blessed Elias and Enoch, and all the Saints who have been and
are, and shall be, for Thy love, that they may, as it is pleasing to
Thee, give thanks for these things to the most high, true God, eternal
and living, with Thy most dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy
Ghost, the Paraclete, for ever and ever. Amen. Alleluia.

And all we, brothers minor, useless servants, humbly entreat and beseech
all those within the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church wishing to serve
God, and all ecclesiastical Orders, priests, deacons, subdeacons,
acolytes, exorcists, lectors, door-keepers, and all clerics; all
religious men

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

and women, all boys and children, poor and needy, kings and princes,
laborers, husbandmen, servants and masters, all virgins, continent, and
married people, laics, men and women, all infants, youths, young men and
old, healthy and sick, all small and great, and all peoples, clans,
tribes, and tongues, all nations and all men in all the earth, who are
and shall be, that we may persevere in the true faith and in doing
penance, for otherwise no one can be saved. Let us all love with all our
heart, with all our soul, with all our mind, with all our strength and
fortitude, with all our understanding and with all our powers, <span
id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_287) with our whole might and whole
affection, with our innermost parts, our whole desires, and wills, the
Lord God, who has given, and gives to us all, the whole body, the whole
soul, and our life; who has created and redeemed us, and by His mercy
alone will save us; who has done and does all good to us, miserable and
wretched, vile, unclean, ungrateful, and evil.

Let us therefore desire nothing else, wish for nothing else, and let
nothing please and delight us except our Creator and Redeemer, and
Saviour, the only true God, who is full of good, all good, entire good,
the true and supreme good, who alone is good, <span
id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_288) merciful and kind, gentle and sweet, who
alone is holy, just, true, and upright, who alone is benign, pure, and
clean, from whom, and through whom, and in whom is all mercy,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

all grace, all glory of all penitents and of the just, and of all the
blessed rejoicing in heaven. Let nothing therefore hinder us, let
nothing separate us, let nothing come between us. Let us all,
everywhere, in every place, at every hour, and at all times, daily and
continually believe, truly and humbly, and let us hold in our hearts,
and love, honor, adore, serve, praise and bless, glorify and exalt,
magnify and give thanks to the most High and Supreme, Eternal God, in
Trinity and Unity, to the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, to the
Creator of all, to the Saviour of all who believe and hope in Him, and
love Him, who, without beginning or end, is [immutable](errata.htm#3),
invisible, unerring, ineffable, incomprehensible, unfathomable, blessed,
praiseworthy, glorious, exalted, sublime, most high, sweet, amiable,
lovable, and always wholly desirable above all forever and ever.

In the Name of the Lord, I beseech all the brothers that they learn the
tenor and sense of those things that are written in this life for the
salvation of our souls, and frequently recall them to mind. And I pray
God that He who is Almighty, Three in One, may bless all who teach,
learn, hold, remember, and fulfil those things as often as they repeat
and do what is there written for our salvation. And I entreat all,
kissing their feet, to love greatly, keep and treasure up these things.
And on the part of Almighty God and of the Lord Pope, and by obedience,
I, Brother Francis, strictly command and enjoin

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

that no one subtract from those things that are written in this life, or
add anything written to it over and above, and that the brothers have no
other Rule.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was
in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[25:1](wosf06.htm#fr_141) See Bonav. *Leg.
Maj.*, III, 8. See also 1 Cel. 1, 5, and the *Vita S. Francisci*, by
Julian of Spires, cap. iv.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[25:2](wosf06.htm#fr_142) Although M. Sabatier
(*Vie de S. François*, p. 100), following Wadding (*Annales* ad an.
1210, n. 220 seq.), fixes this event in the summer of 1210, it is far
more probable that the approbation of the Rule took place on April 23,
1209, the date given by the Bollandists and the Seraphic Breviary. This
latter date is not only more conformable to the ancient tradition of the
Order (see *Anal. Franciscana*, t. III, p. 713) but involves no historic
difficulties (see *Appunti critici sulla cronologia della Vita di S.
Francesco*, by Father Leo Patrem, O.F.M., in the *Oriente Serafico*,
Assisi, 1895, Vol. vii, nn. 4-12.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[26:1](wosf06.htm#fr_143) See Bonav. *Leg.
Maj.*, IV, 11.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[26:2](wosf06.htm#fr_144) Müller: *Anfänge des
Minoriten-Orders und der Bussbrüderschaften* (Freiburg, 1885), p. 4,
seq.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[26:3](wosf06.htm#fr_145) Sabatier: *Vie de S.
François d’Assise* (Paris, 1894), p. 288, seq.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[26:4](wosf06.htm#fr_146) More than a century
ago—in t768—Fr. Suyskens demonstrated that the lengthy Rule of
twenty-three chapters could not have been presented to Pope Innocent by
St. Francis in its present form. (See *Acta S. S.*, t. ii, Oct.) All
agree that the first Rule in its original form was very short and
simple.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[26:5](wosf06.htm#fr_147) Prof. Müller was
therefore right in attempting to reconstruct the Rule in its original
form out of this longer one. He has almost conclusively demonstrated
that the opening words of this original Rule were: "Regula et vita
istorum fratrum haec est." (See *Anfänge*, pp. 14-25; 185-188.) Prof.
Boehmer has also attempted to reconstruct it from various writings. See
his *Analekten*, p. 27. See also 2 Cel. 3, 110; *Speculum Perfectionis*
(ed. Sabatier), c. 4, n. 42.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[27:1](wosf06.htm#fr_148) His exposition of the
Rule may be found in the *Monumenta Ordinis Minorum* (Salamanca, 1511,
tract. 11, fol. 46 v) and in the *Firmamenta* (Paris, 1512, p. iv, fol.
34 v). In chapter 6 (*Mon.*, fol. 67 v; *Firm.*, fol. 48 r) he says:
"This he lays down at greater length in the original rule as follows:
'When it may be necessary let the friars go for alms,'" etc. (see below,
[p. 43](#page_43)). On Hugo de Digne see Sbaralea, *Supplementum*, p.
360; also Salimbene, *Chron. Parmensis*, 1857, passim.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[27:2](wosf06.htm#fr_149) His exposition of the
Rule has never been published, although a critical edition is promised
by Fr. Van Ortroy, S.J. (See *Anal. Bolland.*, t. xxi, p. 441 seq.)
Meanwhile it may be found at St. Isidore's, Rome, in the codex 1/92; at
the Vatican lib., in cod. Ottob. 522 (in part only) and Ottob. 666, and
at the Royal lib. of Munich in cod. 23648. In this exposition Clareno
says (cod. Ottob. 666, fol. 50 v): "In the Rule which Pope Innocent
conceded to him and approved . . . it was written thus: 'The Lord
commands in the Gospel,'" etc. (see below, [p. 41](#page_41)). Clareno
died in 2337. On his writings see Fr. Ehrle, S.J., in the *Archiv*, vol.
I (1885), pp. 509-69.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[27:3](wosf06.htm#fr_150) To be sure, the
traditional *Legend of the Three Companions* says of St. Francis: "He
made many rules and tried them, before he made that which at the last he
left to the brothers." (See *Legenda III Sociorum*, n. 35.) But unless
these words are understood as referring to different versions of the
same Rule, they only raise a new difficulty against the authenticity of
this Legend.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[28:1](wosf06.htm#fr_151) "And the Blessed
Francis seeing Brother Cæsar learned in the Scriptures commissioned him
to embellish with evangelical language the Rule which he himself had put
together in simple words." *Chron. Fr. Jordani a Jano: Analecta Franc.*,
t. I, page 6, n. 15. Brother Jordan also notes "that according to the
first Rule the Friars fasted on Wednesday and Friday." (*L.c.*, P. 4, 0.
II.)

<span id="fn_152"></span>[28:2](wosf06.htm#fr_152) See *Speculum
Perfectionis* (ed. Sabatier), Appendix, p. 300; also *Les Nouveaux
mémoires de l’Académie de Bruxelles*, t. XXIII, pp. 29-33. Jacques de
Vitry died as Cardinal Bishop of Frascati in 1244, leaving a number of
writings in which St. Francis figures prominently.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[28:3](wosf06.htm#fr_153) 2 Cel., 3, 90.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[28:4](wosf06.htm#fr_154) See below, [p.
42](#page_42).

<span id="fn_155"></span>[28:5](wosf06.htm#fr_155) See below, [p.
34](#page_34).

<span id="fn_156"></span>[28:6](wosf06.htm#fr_156) Canon Knox Little:
*St. Francis of Assisi* (1904), Appendix, p. 321.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[29:1](wosf06.htm#fr_157) See Van Ortroy, S.J.,
*Annal. Bolland.*, t. xxiv, fasc. iii, 1905, p. 413.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[29:2](wosf06.htm#fr_158) See below, [p.
44](#page_44).

<span id="fn_159"></span>[29:3](wosf06.htm#fr_159) See 2 Cel., 3, 110.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[29:4](wosf06.htm#fr_160) See *Mon.*, fol. 68
v; *Firm.*, fol. 49 r.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[29:5](wosf06.htm#fr_161) See Cod. Ottob. 666,
fol. 99 V.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[29:6](wosf06.htm#fr_162) See *Speculum*, fol.
193 V.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[29:7](wosf06.htm#fr_163) "Celle de 1210 et
celle qui fut approuvée par le pape le <span id="page_30">p. 30</span>
29 Novembre, 1223," he writes, "n’avaient guère de commun que le nom." .
. . "Celle de 1210 seule est vraiment franciscaine. Celle de 1223 est
indirectement l’œuvre de l’Église."—*Vie de S. François*, p. 289.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[30:1](wosf06.htm#fr_164) See Le Monnier:
*History of St. Francis*, p. 337.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[30:2](wosf06.htm#fr_165) See *Seraphicæ
Legislationis Textus Originales* (Quaracchi, 1897), p. 35.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[30:3](wosf06.htm#fr_166) This letter, which is
dated "in the tenth year of the Pontificate of Pope Honorius," may be
found in the *Annalibus Hannoniæ Fr. Jacobi de Guisia*, lib. XXI, cap.
xvii; see *Monumenta Germaniæ Historica, Scriptores*, t. XXX, P. I, p.
294.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[30:4](wosf06.htm#fr_167) See *Mon.*, fol. 46
V; *Firm.*, fol. 34 v.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[31:1](wosf06.htm#fr_168) See Ehrle:
"Controversen über die Anfänge des Minoritenordens" in the *Zeitschrift
für Katholische Theologie*, t. XI, p. 725, seq.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[31:2](wosf06.htm#fr_169) "À partir de
Bonaventure," he writes, "la règle primitive tombe dans l’oubli. Les
Franciscaines Spirituels du commencement du XIV siècle ne songèrent pas
à l’en tirer." See *Spec. Perf.* (ed. Sab.), p. ix.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[31:3](wosf06.htm#fr_170) In preparing the
Quaracchi text, which is the one I translate here, the codices at St.
Antony's and St. Isidore's, and <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> the
Florentine codex at Ognissanti were used, besides the versions of this
Rule found in the *Speculum*, *Minorum*, *Monumenta*, and *Firmamenta*
(see Introduction for description of these codices and editions). The
expositions of the Rule by Hugo de Digne and Angelo Clareno, already
mentioned, have often been consulted, as well as the *Conformities* of
Bartholomew of Pisa. The text of the first Rule, given in part in the
*Conformities*, often agrees with the MSS. of Ognissanti and St.
Isidore's.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[32:1](wosf06.htm#fr_171) This last sentence is
omitted in *Mon.* and *Firm.*, also by Wadding.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[32:2](wosf06.htm#fr_172) Matt. 19: 21.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[32:3](wosf06.htm#fr_173) Matt. 16: 24.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[33:1](wosf06.htm#fr_174) Luke 14: 26.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[33:2](wosf06.htm#fr_175) See Matt. 19: 29.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[34:1](wosf06.htm#fr_176) From the Latin
*caparo*. See Du Cange, *Glossar. latin*.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[34:2](wosf06.htm#fr_177) See the bull *Cum
secundum* of Honorius III, dated September 22, 1220 (*Bullarium
Franciscanum*, t. 1, p. 6.)

<span id="fn_178"></span>[34:3](wosf06.htm#fr_178) Luke 9: 62.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[34:4](wosf06.htm#fr_179) See Matt. 11: 8; Luke
7: 25.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[35:1](wosf06.htm#fr_180) See Mark 9: 28.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[35:2](wosf06.htm#fr_181) Matt. 6: 16.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[36:1](wosf06.htm#fr_182) See Luke 10: 8.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[36:2](wosf06.htm#fr_183) Matt. 7: 22.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[36:3](wosf06.htm#fr_184) See Tob. 4: 6.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[36:4](wosf06.htm#fr_185) Matt. 20: 28.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[37:1](wosf06.htm#fr_186) Heb. 10: 31.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[38:1](wosf06.htm#fr_187) See Matt. 9: 12.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[38:2](wosf06.htm#fr_188) Matt. 20: 25.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[38:3](wosf06.htm#fr_189) See Matt. 23: 11.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[38:4](wosf06.htm#fr_190) See Luke 22: 26.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[38:5](wosf06.htm#fr_191) See Ps. 118: 21.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[39:1](wosf06.htm#fr_192) See Mark 8: 36.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[40:1](wosf06.htm#fr_193) Ps. 127: 2.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[40:2](wosf06.htm#fr_194) II Thess. 3: 10.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[40:3](wosf06.htm#fr_195) See I Cor. 7: 24.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[40:4](wosf06.htm#fr_196) St. Jerome says:
"Semper facito aliquid boni operis, ut diabolus te inveniat occupatum."
Epis. 125 (alias 4), n. 11.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[40:5](wosf06.htm#fr_197) St. Anselm says:
"Otiositas inimica est animae." Epist. 49.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[41:1](wosf06.htm#fr_198) See I Peter 4: 9.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[41:2](wosf06.htm#fr_199) See above, page
[28](#page_28).

<span id="fn_200"></span>[41:3](wosf06.htm#fr_200) See Luke 12: 15, and
21: 34.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[41:4](wosf06.htm#fr_201) See *Leg. III. Soc.*,
n. 35.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[41:5](wosf06.htm#fr_202) Eccle. 1: 2.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[42:1](wosf06.htm#fr_203) O., Is. and Pis. read
"money for alms;" Clar. and Spec. read "alms of money;" An., *Mon.* and
Wadding read "money or alms."

<span id="fn_204"></span>[42:2](wosf06.htm#fr_204) I Tim. 6: 8.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[43:1](wosf06.htm#fr_205) Is. 50:7.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[44:1](wosf06.htm#fr_206) Rom. 14: 3.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[44:2](wosf06.htm#fr_207) Mark 2: 26.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[44:3](wosf06.htm#fr_208) Luke 21: 34-35.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[45:1](wosf06.htm#fr_209) See Acts 13: 48.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[45:2](wosf06.htm#fr_210) Apoc. 3: 19.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[45:3](wosf06.htm#fr_211) See 2 Cel. 3, 110;
also Hugo le Digne, *l.c.*, fol. 68 v. and *Spec. Perf.* (ed. Sabatier),
chap. 42.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[45:4](wosf06.htm#fr_212) See II Tim. 2: 14.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[45:5](wosf06.htm#fr_213) Luke 17: 10.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[45:6](wosf06.htm#fr_214) Matt. 5: 22.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[46:1](wosf06.htm#fr_215) John 15: 12.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[46:2](wosf06.htm#fr_216) Jas. 2<sup>2</sup>:
18.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[46:3](wosf06.htm#fr_217) I John 3: 18.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[46:4](wosf06.htm#fr_218) Tit. 3: 2.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[46:5](wosf06.htm#fr_219) Rom. 1: 29-30.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[46:6](wosf06.htm#fr_220) Tit. 3: 2.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[46:7](wosf06.htm#fr_221) Is. 38: 15.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[46:8](wosf06.htm#fr_222) Luke 13: 24.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[46:9](wosf06.htm#fr_223) Matt. 7: 14.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[46:10](wosf06.htm#fr_224) See above, [p.
29](#page_29).

<span id="fn_225"></span>[47:1](wosf06.htm#fr_225) This prohibition
refers to a vow of obedience made by a woman to her spiritual director,
as Fr. Van Ortroy points out. See *Anal. Boll.*, t. xxiv, fasc. iv, p.
523.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[47:2](wosf06.htm#fr_226) Matt. 5: 28.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[47:3](wosf06.htm#fr_227) See Luke 9: 3; 10:
4-8.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[47:4](wosf06.htm#fr_228) See Matt. 5: 39.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[48:1](wosf06.htm#fr_229) See Luke 6: 29-30.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[48:2](wosf06.htm#fr_230) Matt. 10: 16.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[49:1](wosf06.htm#fr_231) I Pet. 2: 13.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[49:2](wosf06.htm#fr_232) John 3: 5.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[49:3](wosf06.htm#fr_233) Matt. 10: 32.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[49:4](wosf06.htm#fr_234) Luke 9: 26.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[49:5](wosf06.htm#fr_235) Mark 8: 35; Luke 9:
24.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[50:1](wosf06.htm#fr_236) Matt. 5: 10.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[50:2](wosf06.htm#fr_237) John 15: 20.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[50:3](wosf06.htm#fr_238) See Matt. 10: 23.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[50:4](wosf06.htm#fr_239) Matt. 5: 11-12.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[50:5](wosf06.htm#fr_240) Luke 6: 23.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[50:6](wosf06.htm#fr_241) Luke 12: 4.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[50:7](wosf06.htm#fr_242) Matt. 24: 6.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[50:8](wosf06.htm#fr_243) Luke 21: 19.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[50:9](wosf06.htm#fr_244) Matt. 10: 22.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[50:10](wosf06.htm#fr_245) See I John 4: 8.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[51:1](wosf06.htm#fr_246) Luke 10: 20.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[51:2](wosf06.htm#fr_247) James 1: 2.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[51:3](wosf06.htm#fr_248) Matt. 6: 2.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[52:1](wosf06.htm#fr_249) See Luke 18: 19.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[53:1](wosf06.htm#fr_250) James 5: 16.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[54:1](wosf06.htm#fr_251) John 6: 55.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[54:2](wosf06.htm#fr_252) Luke 22: 19.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[54:3](wosf06.htm#fr_253) I Thess. 5: 18.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[54:4](wosf06.htm#fr_254) Matt. 3: 2.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[54:5](wosf06.htm#fr_255) Luke 3: 8.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[54:6](wosf06.htm#fr_256) Luke 6: 38.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[54:7](wosf06.htm#fr_257) Luke 6: 37.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[54:8](wosf06.htm#fr_258) See Mark 11: 26.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[54:9](wosf06.htm#fr_259) See James 5: 16.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[54:10](wosf06.htm#fr_260) See John 8: 44.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[55:1](wosf06.htm#fr_261) Matt. 5: 44.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[55:2](wosf06.htm#fr_262) See I Peter 2: 21.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[55:3](wosf06.htm#fr_263) See Matt. 26: 50.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[55:4](wosf06.htm#fr_264) See Matt. 15: 19, and
Mark 7: 21-22.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[56:1](wosf06.htm#fr_265) See Matt. 13: 19-23;
Mark 4: 15-20; Luke 8: 11-15.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[56:2](wosf06.htm#fr_266) Matt. 8: 22.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[57:1](wosf06.htm#fr_267) Matt. 12: 43-45; see
Luke 11: 24-26.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[57:2](wosf06.htm#fr_268) See I John 4: 16.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[58:1](wosf06.htm#fr_269) Luke 21: 36.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[58:2](wosf06.htm#fr_270) See Mark 11: 25.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[58:3](wosf06.htm#fr_271) Luke 18: 1.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[58:4](wosf06.htm#fr_272) John 4: 24.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[58:5](wosf06.htm#fr_273) I Peter 2: 25.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[58:6](wosf06.htm#fr_274) See John 20: 11 and
25.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[58:7](wosf06.htm#fr_275) See Matt. 23: 8-10.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[58:8](wosf06.htm#fr_276) John 15: 7.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[58:9](wosf06.htm#fr_277) Matt. 18: 20.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[58:10](wosf06.htm#fr_278) Matt. 28: 20.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[58:11](wosf06.htm#fr_279) John 6: 64.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[58:12](wosf06.htm#fr_280) John 14: 6.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[60:1](wosf06.htm#fr_281) See John 17: 6-26.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[60:2](wosf06.htm#fr_282) The *Speculum
Minorum* condenses this chapter.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[60:3](wosf06.htm#fr_283) See Gen. 1: 26; 2:
15.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[60:4](wosf06.htm#fr_284) See John 17: 26.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[60:5](wosf06.htm#fr_285) Matt. 25: 34.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[61:1](wosf06.htm#fr_286) See Matt. 17: 5.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[62:1](wosf06.htm#fr_287) See Deut. 6: 5; Mark
12: 30 and 33; Luke 10: 27.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[62:2](wosf06.htm#fr_288) See Luke 18: 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Rule of the Friars Minor](wosf07)
