[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wosf20)  [Next](wosf22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RU8U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi*, tr. by Paschal Robinson,
\[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

### IV.

### THE SHEET WHICH ST. FRANCIS GAVE BROTHER LEO.

The earliest witness to this document is Thomas of Celano, who in his
Second Life (written about 1247) records that "while the Saint was
remaining secluded in his cell on Mount La Verna, one of the companions
conceived a great desire to have some memorial from words of the Lord
written by the hand of St. Francis and briefly annotated by him. . . .
One day Blessed Francis called him, saying, 'Bring me paper and ink, for
I wish to write the words of God and His praises which I have been
meditating in my heart.' What he asked for being straightway brought, he
writes with his own hand the praises of God and the words which he \[his
companion\] wished, and lastly a blessing of the brother, saying: 'Take
this sheet (*chartulam*) for thyself and until the day of thy death
guard it carefully.' All temptation was at once driven away; the letter
is kept and worked wonders for the time to come." <span
id="fr_551"></span>[1](#fn_551)

The original autograph of the sheet here described by Celano is
reverently preserved in the sacristy of the Sacro Convento at
Assisi. <span id="fr_552"></span>[2](#fn_552) It has been mentioned in
the archives of the convent since 1348 and is borne in procession
annually at the opening of the feast of the "Perdono" or Portiuncula
Indulgence. Many pages have been consecrated by scholars <span
id="fr_553"></span>[3](#fn_553) to

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

this small, crumpled piece of parchment and as they are easily
accessible it would be superfluous to touch here upon the controversial
*minutiae* connected with it. Suffice it to say that on the reverse side
of the sheet containing the Praises is found the Biblical blessing. The
latter was dictated to Brother Leo, but at the bottom St. Francis
himself wrote the personal blessing, adding what Wadding described as a
"large and mysterious *thau* or letter *T*" which he was wont to use as
his signature, as both Celano <span id="fr_554"></span>[1](#fn_554) and
St. Bonaventure <span id="fr_555"></span>[2](#fn_555) inform us.

To authenticate this relic Brother Leo himself added to it three notes;
the first reads: "Blessed Francis wrote with his own hand this blessing
for me, Brother Leo;" and the second: "In like manner he made this sign
*thau* together with the head with his own hand." More valuable still is
the third annotation, since it fixes the date of this precious document.
I give it in full: "Blessed Francis two years before his death kept a
Lent in the place of Mount La Verna in honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
the Mother of the Lord, and of the blessed Michael the Archangel, from
the feast of the Assumption of the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

holy Virgin Mary until the September feast of St. Michael. And the hand
of the Lord was laid upon him; after the vision and speech of the Seraph
and the impression of the Stigmata of Christ in his body he made and
wrote with his own hand the Praises written on the other side of the
sheet, giving thanks to the Lord for the benefits conferred on him."

An examination of the original autograph shows that, while the side of
the sheet containing the Blessing is excellently preserved, the other
one on which the Praises are written, is, for the most part, illegible
and in consequence some variants are to be found in different MS.
versions of it. After a careful collation of these MSS. with the
autograph, the Quaracchi editors found the Assisi codex 344 more
conformable to the original than any other. It is after this fourteenth
century MS. of the library of the Sacro Convento and which appears to
have been copied from the autograph, that the Quaracchi editors
published the text which I now translate:—

#### PRAISES OF GOD.

Thou art holy, Lord God, who alone workest wonders. Thou art strong.
Thou art great. Thou art most high. Thou art the Almighty King, Thou,
holy Father, King of heaven and earth. Thou art the Lord God Triune and
One; all good. Thou art good, all good, highest good, Lord God living
and true. Thou art charity, love <span id="fr_556"></span>[1](#fn_556)
Thou art wisdom. Thou art humility. Thou art patience. Thou art
security. Thou art quietude. Thou art joy and gladness. Thou

<span id="img_14800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Autograph Blessing
Given by St. Francis to Brother Leo, Preserved in the Sacro Convento at
Assisi](tn/14800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14800.jpg)  
  
</span>

<span class="small">AUTOGRAPH BLESSING GIVEN BY ST. FRANCIS TO BROTHER
LEO, PRESERVED IN THE SACRO CONVENTO AT ASSISI. (See page
[146](#page_146).)</span>

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

art justice and temperance. Thou art all riches to sufficiency. <span
id="fr_557"></span>[1](#fn_557) Thou art beauty. Thou art meekness. Thou
art protector. Thou art guardian and defender. Thou art strength. Thou
art refreshment. Thou art our hope. Thou art l our faith. Thou art our
great sweetness. Thou art our eternal life, great and admirable Lord,
God Almighty, merciful Saviour.

<span class="small">After this expression of the mystical ardors which
consumed the *Poverello* comes:—</span>

### THE BLESSING OF BROTHER LEO.

May the Lord bless thee and keep thee. May He shew His face to thee and
have mercy on thee. May He turn His countenance to thee and give thee
peace. <span id="fr_558"></span>[2](#fn_558) Brother Le**T**o <span
id="fr_559"></span>[3](#fn_559) may the Lord bless thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_551"></span>[146:1](wosf21.htm#fr_551) 2 Cel. 2, 18; see
also Bonav. *Leg. Maj.*, XI, 9, where the narration is clearly borrowed
from Celano.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[146:2](wosf21.htm#fr_552) A photograph of the
reliquary containing it is here reproduced.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[146:3](wosf21.htm#fr_553) For example Papini
*La Storia di S. Francesco*, t. I, p. 130, n. 8, Grisar, see *Civilta
Cattolicà*, fasc. 1098 (1896), p. 723; Mgr. Faloci Pulignani, *Misc.
Franc.*, t. VI (1895), p. 34; Fr. <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>
Edouard d’Alençon, *La Benediction de St. François;* M. Sabatier, *Spec.
Perf.*, pp. lxvii-lxx; Reginald Balfour, The *Seraphic Keepsake;* and
Montgomery Carmichael, *La Benedizione di San Francesco*. See also Fr.
Saturnino da Caprese, O.F.M., *Guida Illustrate della Verna* (Prato,
1902), p. 93. On the testimony of three leading German palæographers,
Wattenbach, Dziatzko and Meyer, see *Theol. Literatur-Zeitung*, Leipzig,
1895, PP. 404 and 627.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[147:1](wosf21.htm#fr_554) Says Celano: "The
sign *thau* was more familiar to him than other signs. With it only he
signed sheets for despatch and he painted it on the walls of the cells
anywhere." See *Tr. de Miraculis*, in *Anal. Boll.*, t. xviii, pp.
114-115.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[147:2](wosf21.htm#fr_555) "He signed it upon
all the letters he directed." See Bonav. *Leg. Maj.*, IV, 3.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[148:1](wosf21.htm#fr_556) These words seem to
he transposed in the autograph.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[149:1](wosf21.htm#fr_557) From this point to
the end of the Praises the autograph is illegible.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[149:2](wosf21.htm#fr_558) See Num. 6: 24-26.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[149:3](wosf21.htm#fr_559) Mr. Balfour points
out that the position of. Leo's name in relation to the *thau* is
intentional and that the *thau* thus becomes a cross of blessing, St.
Francis, following the practice of all old Missals and Breviaries,
having placed it so as to divide the name of the person blessed. See
*The Seraphic Keepsake*, p. 106.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Canticle of the Sun](wosf22)
