[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wosf04)  [Next](wosf06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RU8U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi*, tr. by Paschal Robinson,
\[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

### III.

### ON REVERENCE FOR THE LORD'S BODY AND ON THE CLEANLINESS OF THE ALTAR.

The arguments already adduced to establish the authenticity of the
Admonitions may also be used in behalf of this instruction addressed "to
all clerics." It is found in eight of the codices above mentioned—to
wit, those of Assisi, Liegnitz, Paris (both Mazarin MSS. and at lib. of
Prot. theol. fac.), Rome (St. Antony's and St. Isidore's MS. 1/73), and
Düsseldorf. In Wadding's edition of the *Opuscula* this instruction on
the Blessed Sacrament is placed among the letters of St. Francis <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) (No. XIII), but the early codices do not
give it in an epistolary form, <span id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138) but
rather as it is printed here without address or salutation. For the
present edition the Assisian codex <span id="fr_139"></span>[3](#fn_139)
has

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

been used as well as the codices of St. Antony's and St. Isidore's at
Rome. The text is as follows:

#### ON REVERENCE FOR THE LORD'S BODY AND ON THE CLEANLINESS OF THE ALTAR.

Let us all consider, O clerics, the great sin and ignorance of which
some are guilty regarding the most holy Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ and His most holy Name and the written words of consecration. For
we know that the Body cannot exist until after these words of
consecration. For we have nothing and we see nothing of the Most High
Himself in this world except \[His\] Body and Blood, names and words by
which we have been created and redeemed from death to life.

But let all those who administer such most holy mysteries, especially
those who do so indifferently, consider among themselves how poor the
chalices, corporals, and linens may be where the Body and Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ is sacrificed. And by many It is left in wretched
places and carried by the way disrespectfully, received unworthily and
administered to others indiscriminately. Again His Names and written
words are sometimes trampled under foot, for the sensual man perceiveth
not these things that are of God. <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140)
Shall we not by all these things be moved with a sense of duty when the
good Lord Himself places Himself in our hands and we handle Him and
receive Him daily?

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Are we unmindful
that we must needs fall into His hands?

Let us then at once and resolutely correct these faults and others; and
wheresoever the most holy Body of our Lord Jesus Christ may be
improperly reserved and abandoned, let It be removed thence and let It
be put and enclosed in a precious place. In like manner wheresoever the
Names and written words of the Lord may be found in unclean places they
ought to be collected and put away in a decent place. And we know that
we are bound above all to observe all these things by the commandments
of the Lord and the constitutions of holy Mother Church. And let him who
does not act thus know that he shall have to render an account therefor
before our Lord Jesus Christ on the day of judgment. And let him who may
cause copies of this writing to be made, to the end that it may be the
better observed, know that he is blessed by the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[22:1](wosf05.htm#fr_137) Wadding, following
Mariano of Florence, prefaces the letter with the following Salutation:
"To my reverend masters in Christ; to all the clerics who are in the
world and live conformably to the rules of the Catholic faith: brother
Francis, their least one and unworthy servant, sends greeting with the
greatest respect and kissing their feet. Since I am become the servant
of all, but cannot, on account of my infirmities, address you personally
and *viva voce*, I beg you to receive, with all love and charity, this
remembrance of me and exhortation which I write briefly." Wadding also
(p. 45) adds at the end of this instruction the following words: "May
our Lord Jesus Christ fill all my masters with His holy grace and
comfort them."

<span id="fn_138"></span>[22:2](wosf05.htm#fr_138) Father Ubald
d’Alençon (*Opuscules de Saint François*, p. 21) is inclined, with M.
Sabatier, to regard this instruction as a kind of postscript to St.
Francis’ letter to the General Chapter and to all the Friars. (See
*Speculum Perfectionis*, ed. Sabatier, p. clxvi.)

<span id="fn_139"></span>[22:3](wosf05.htm#fr_139) Mgr. Faloci has
edited the Instruction after this codex; see *Misc. Francescana*, t. VI,
p. 95.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[23:1](wosf05.htm#fr_140) See I Cor. 2: 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Rules of the Friars Minor](wosf06)
