[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wosf08)  [Next](wosf10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RU8U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi*, tr. by Paschal Robinson,
\[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### VI.

### TESTAMENT OF THE HOLY FATHER ST. FRANCIS.

The opuscule which St. Francis called his Testament is a precious
document of the highest authority. Renan forsooth denied its
authenticity, but rashly, for, as M. Sabatier rightly remarks, <span
id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_321) this is not to be questioned. <span
id="fr_322"></span>[2](#fn_322) The Testament corresponds throughout
with the other writings of St. Francis, and moreover reveals his
character and spirit in every line. But we are not reduced to internal
proofs for its; genuinity. All the historians, including Thomas of
Celano, <span id="fr_323"></span>[3](#fn_323) and St. Bonaventure, <span
id="fr_324"></span>[4](#fn_324) mention it, <span
id="fr_325"></span>[5](#fn_325) while Gregory IX cites it textually in
his bull *Quo elongati* of September 28, 1230. We know from this bull
that the Saint's Testament was published a few days only before his
death <span id="fr_326"></span>[6](#fn_326) Everything seems to point to
its having been written at the hermitage of the Celle near Cortona,
during St. Francis’ last visit there (summer of 1226), though some think
it was dictated to Angelo Tancredi, one of the Three Companions, in the
little hut nearest the Portiuncula which served as an infirmary and in
which St. Francis died.

According to M. Sabatier, St. Francis wrote more than one testament.
Indeed, the French critic goes so far as to say that at the end of each
of his crises the Saint made his will anew, <span
id="fr_327"></span>[7](#fn_327) and in support of this assertion cites
Chapter 87 of his own edition of the

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Speculum
Perfectionis*, in which we read that during an illness (seemingly in
April, 1226), St. Francis caused Brother Benedict of Prato to write down
a blessing and some words of advice "in token of memory and benediction
and testament." But surely from this narration we may not deduce the
general proposition that St. Francis wrote "several testaments." The
early Legends are silent except as to the one Testament here given, and
all the passages which different writers quote "from the Testament'' may
be found in this one,—if we except two passages in M. Sabatier's edition
of the *Speculum Perfectionis*. But it is not difficult to see that in
both these places the *Speculum* is in error. In the ninth chapter it
repeats incorrectly what Brother Leo elsewhere <span
id="fr_328"></span>[1](#fn_328) relates, and in the fifty-fifth chapter
the compiler of the *Speculum* is still more astray, as a comparison of
this chapter with chapter twenty-seventh of Father Lemmens <span
id="fr_329"></span>[2](#fn_329) edition of the *Speculum* clearly
indicates. Both editions of the Speculum tell in almost the same words
of St. Francis’ love for the Church of the Portiuncula. M. Sabatier's
edition says: "At his death he caused it to be written in the Testament
that all the brothers should do likewise;" whereas Father Lemmens’
edition reads as follows: "Toward his death he bequeathed this Church to
the brothers as a testament.'"

The Testament is to be found among St. Francis' works in twelve of the
codices above described, <span id="fr_330"></span>[3](#fn_330) to

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

wit, those at Assisi, <span id="fr_331"></span>[1](#fn_331) Berlin,
Florence (Ognissanti MSS.), St. Floriano, Liegnitz, Paris (Nat. lib. and
Mazarin MSS. 989), Prague and Rome (St. Antony's and both Vatican MSS.),
as well as in a fifteenth century MS. at the Hague (Municip. lib. cod.
K. 54, fol. 3 v). The text here translated is that of the Assisi codex
collated with those of Ognissanti, Florence, and St. Antony's, Rome, and
with the versions of the Testament contained in the *Monumenta* (fol.
274 v) and *Firmamenta* <span id="fr_332"></span>[2](#fn_332) (fol. 16
v). Here begins the:

#### TESTAMENT OF THE HOLY FATHER ST. FRANCIS.

The Lord gave to me, Brother Francis, thus to begin to do penance; for
when I was in sin it seemed to me very bitter to see lepers, and the
Lord Himself led me amongst them and I showed mercy to them. <span
id="fr_333"></span>[3](#fn_333) And when I left them, that which had
seemed to me bitter was changed for me into sweetness of body and soul.
And afterwards I remained a little and I left the world. And the Lord
gave me so much <span id="fr_334"></span>[4](#fn_334) faith

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

in churches that I would simply pray and say thus: "We adore Thee Lord
Jesus Christ here <span id="fr_335"></span>[1](#fn_335) and in all Thy
churches which are in the whole world, and we bless Thee because by Thy
holy cross Thou hast redeemed the world."

After that the Lord gave me, and gives me, so much faith in priests who
live according to the form of the holy Roman Church, on account of their
order, <span id="fr_336"></span>[2](#fn_336) that if they should
persecute me, I would have recourse to them. And if I had as much wisdom
as Solomon had, and if I should find poor priests of this world, <span
id="fr_337"></span>[3](#fn_337) I would not preach against their will in
the parishes in which they live. And I desire to fear, love, and honor
them and all others as my masters; and I do not wish to consider sin in
them, for in them I see the Son of God and they are my masters. And I do
(his because in this world, I see nothing corporally of the most high
Son of God Himself except His most holy Body and Blood, which they
receive and they alone administer to others. And I will that these most
holy mysteries be honored and revered above all things and that they be
placed in precious places. Wheresoever I find His most holy Names and
written words in unseemly places, I wish to collect them, and I ask that
they may be collected and put in a becoming place. And we

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

ought to honor and venerate all theologians and those who minister to us
the most holy Divine Words as those who minister to us spirit and
life. <span id="fr_338"></span>[1](#fn_338)

And when the Lord gave me some brothers, no one showed me what I ought
to do, but the Most High Himself revealed to me that I should live
according to the form of the holy Gospel. <span
id="fr_339"></span>[2](#fn_339) And I caused it to be written in few
words and simply, and the Lord Pope confirmed it for me. And those who
came to take this life upon themselves gave to the poor all that they
might have and they <span id="fr_340"></span>[3](#fn_340) were content
with one tunic, patched within and without, by those who wished, <span
id="fr_341"></span>[4](#fn_341) with a cord and breeches, and we wished
for no more.

We clerics said the Office like other clerics; the laics said the
*Paternoster*, and we remained in the churches <span
id="fr_342"></span>[5](#fn_342) willingly enough. And we were simple and
subject to all. And I worked with my hands and I wish to work and I wish
firmly that all the other brothers should work at some labor which is
compatible with honesty. Let those who know not \[how to work\] learn,
not through desire to receive the price of labor but for the sake of
example and to repel idleness. And when the price of labor is not given
to us,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

let us have recourse to the table of the Lord, begging alms from door to
door.

The Lord revealed to me this salutation, that we should say: "The Lord
give thee peace." <span id="fr_343"></span>[1](#fn_343) Let the brothers
take care not to receive on any account churches, poor dwelling-places,
and all other things <span id="fr_344"></span>[2](#fn_344) that are
constructed for them, unless they are as is becoming the holy poverty
which we have promised in the Rule, always dwelling there as strangers
and pilgrims. <span id="fr_345"></span>[3](#fn_345)

I strictly enjoin by obedience <span id="fr_346"></span>[4](#fn_346) on
all the brothers that, wherever they may be, they should not dare,
either themselves or by means of some interposed person, <span
id="fr_347"></span>[5](#fn_347) to ask any letter in the Roman curia
either for a church <span id="fr_348"></span>[6](#fn_348) or for any
other place, nor under pretext of preaching, nor on account of their
bodily persecution; but, wherever they are not received let them flee to
another land to do penance, with the blessing of God. And I wish to obey
the, minister general of this brotherhood strictly and the guardian whom
it may please him to give me. And I wish to be so captive in his hands
that I cannot go or act beyond his obedience and his will because he is
my master. And although I

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

am simple and infirm, I desire withal always to have a cleric who will
perform the office with me as it is contained in the Rule.

And let all the other brothers be bound to obey their guardian and to
perform the office according to the Rule. And those who may be found not
performing the office according to the Rule and wishing to change it in
some way, or who are not Catholics, let all the brothers wherever they
may be, if they find one of these, be bound by obedience to present him
to the custos who is nearest to the place where they have found him. And
the custos shall be strictly bound, by obedience, to guard him strongly
day and night as a prisoner so that he cannot be snatched from his hands
until he shall personally place him in the hands of his minister. And
the minister shall be firmly bound by obedience to send him by such
brothers as shall watch him day and night like a prisoner until they
shall present him to the Lord of Ostia, who is master protector, and
corrector of this brotherhood. <span id="fr_349"></span>[1](#fn_349)

And let not the brothers say: This is another Rule; for this is a
remembrance, a warning, and an exhortation and my Testament which I,
little Brother Francis, make for you, my blessed brothers, in order that
we may observe in a more Catholic way the Rule which we have promised to
the Lord. And let the minister general and all the other ministers and
custodes be bound by

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

obedience not to add to these words or to take from them. And let them
always have this writing with them beside the Rule. And in all the
Chapters they hold, when they read the Rule let them read these words
also. And I strictly enjoin on all my brothers, clerics and laics, by
obedience, not to put glosses on the Rule or on these words saying: Thus
they ought to be understood; but as the Lord has given me to speak and
to write the Rule and these words simply and purely, so shall you
understand them simply and purely <span id="fr_350"></span>[1](#fn_350)
and with holy operation observe them until the end.

And whoever shall observe these things <span
id="fr_351"></span>[2](#fn_351) may he be filled in heaven with the
blessing of the Most High Father and may he be filled on earth with
blessing of His Beloved Son together with the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete,
and all the Powers of heaven and all the saints. And I, Brother Francis,
your little one and servant, in so far as I am able, I confirm to you
within and without, this most holy blessing. <span
id="fr_352"></span>[3](#fn_352) Amen. <span
id="fr_353"></span>[4](#fn_353)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_321"></span>[79:1](wosf09.htm#fr_321) Sabatier; *Vie de S.
François; Étude des Sources*.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[79:2](wosf09.htm#fr_322) See also Goetz,
*l.c.*, t. XXII, pp. 372 seq.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[79:3](wosf09.htm#fr_323) See 1 Cel. 17; 2 Cel.
3, 99.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[79:4](wosf09.htm#fr_324) See Bonav., *Leg.
Maj.*, III, a.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[79:5](wosf09.htm#fr_325) It is also expressly
cited in the *Leg. III Soc.* 11 and 29.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[79:6](wosf09.htm#fr_326) "Circa ultimum vitae
suae," etc. See *Bullarium Franc.*, t. I, p. 63.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[79:7](wosf09.htm#fr_327) "À la fin de chacune
de ces crises, il faisait de nouveau <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> son
testament." *Speculum Perf.* (ed. Sabatier), p. xxxiii, note 2. See also
*Speculum* (ed. Lemmens), No. 30.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[80:1](wosf09.htm#fr_328) See *S. Francisci
Intentio regulae*, nn. 14 and 15, in the *Documenta Antiqua
Franciscana*, P. I, p. 97.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[80:2](wosf09.htm#fr_329) See *Documenta
Antiqua Franciscana*, P. II, p. 60.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[80:3](wosf09.htm#fr_330) See page
[3](wosf03.htm#page_3).

<span id="fn_331"></span>[81:1](wosf09.htm#fr_331) The text of the
Testament given by M. Sabatier in his edition of the *Speculum Perf.* is
that of this Assisi MS.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[81:2](wosf09.htm#fr_332) It may also be found
in the *Speculum Minorum* (Tract. III, 8 r) and in the *Annales* of
Wadding (ad an. 1226, 35).

<span id="fn_333"></span>[81:3](wosf09.htm#fr_333) See 1 Cel. 17, where
this passage of the Testament is quoted. See also Bonav. *Leg. Maj.*,
II, 6; and *Leg. III Soc.* 11. Some texts instead of "*feci
misericordiam cum illis*" give "*feci moram cum illis*": "I made a
sojourn with them." See *Miscell. Franc.*, III (1888), p. 70. It is
interesting to note here how St Francis on the eve of his death, casting
a backward glance over the ways by which he had been led, dwells on this
incident which had marked a new era in his life.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[81:4](wosf09.htm#fr_334) Cod. As. reads
"*talem fidem*," "such faith."

<span id="fn_335"></span>[82:1](wosf09.htm#fr_335) Cod. As. and O. omit
"here." (See 1 Cel. 45; and Bonav. *Leg. Maj.* 43, where this prayer may
be found.) Cod. An. *Firm.* and Wadd. insert "here."

<span id="fn_336"></span>[82:2](wosf09.htm#fr_336) Order, *i.e.*,
sacerdotal character.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[82:3](wosf09.htm#fr_337) Priests of the world,
*i.e.*, secular priests.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[83:1](wosf09.htm#fr_338) See 2 Cel. 3, 99,
where this passage of the Testament is quoted; see also Bonav. *Epis. de
tribus quaestionibus* in which it is also referred to. (*Opera Omnia*,
t. VIII, p. 335.)

<span id="fn_339"></span>[83:2](wosf09.htm#fr_339) See *Leg. III Soc.*
29, for reference to this passage.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[83:3](wosf09.htm#fr_340) Cod. O. reads:
*eramus* "we were content."

<span id="fn_341"></span>[83:4](wosf09.htm#fr_341) Cod. As. omits *qui
volebant*, "by those who wished."

<span id="fn_342"></span>[83:5](wosf09.htm#fr_342) Firm, and Wadd. add:
"poor and neglected churches."

<span id="fn_343"></span>[84:1](wosf09.htm#fr_343) See Bonav. *Leg.
Maj.*, 111, 2.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[84:2](wosf09.htm#fr_344) Cod. As. omits "other
things," and O. omits "all other things."

<span id="fn_345"></span>[84:3](wosf09.htm#fr_345) See *Documenta
antiqua Franciscana*, P. I, page 98, n. 15, where this passage is cited
among the *Verba quae scripsit Frater Leo*.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[84:4](wosf09.htm#fr_346) Cod. O. omits "by
obedience."

<span id="fn_347"></span>[84:5](wosf09.htm#fr_347) Cod. An. omits this
clause.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[84:6](wosf09.htm#fr_348) Cod. O. omits "either
for a church."

<span id="fn_349"></span>[85:1](wosf09.htm#fr_349) Cardinal Ugolino,
afterward Gregory IX, was then Bishop of Ostia, and Protector of the
Order.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[86:1](wosf09.htm#fr_350) Cod. As. and *Mon.*
for "purely" read "without gloss;" *Firm.* and Wadd. add "without
gloss."

<span id="fn_351"></span>[86:2](wosf09.htm#fr_351) Cod. An. and O. read
"this" for, "these things."

<span id="fn_352"></span>[86:3](wosf09.htm#fr_352) Cod. O. adds "to him
who caused these words to be written, be all honor, all praise and glory
forever and ever."

<span id="fn_353"></span>[86:4](wosf09.htm#fr_353) See 1 Cel. 34, for
the blessing given by St. Francis on his deathbed to Elias and the
Order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Of Living Religiously in a Hermitage](wosf10)
