[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wosf17)  [Next](wosf19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RU8U/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi*, tr. by Paschal Robinson,
\[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

# PART III

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

# PRAYERS OF ST. FRANCIS

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### I.

### THE PRAISES.

THIS opuscule is composed of two parts: a paraphrase of the Lord's
Prayer and the Praises properly so-called. It is contained in all the
early MS. collections of St. Francis’ works <span
id="fr_527"></span>[1](#fn_527) either in its entirety as it is given
here, or in part—that is, the Paraphrase without the Praises or vice
versa. With the exception of a single codex which attributes the
paternity of this paraphrase to the Blessed Brother Giles, <span
id="fr_528"></span>[2](#fn_528) the third companion of St. Francis, the
MSS. authorities are unanimous in ascribing the entire work to St.
Francis. This fact, taken in conjunction with the internal argument in
its favor, puts the authority of the Praises beyond doubt, in the
opinion of the Quaracchi editors. M. Sabatier is of like mind and even
expresses regret <span id="fr_529"></span>[3](#fn_529) that Professor
Boehmer <span id="fr_530"></span>[4](#fn_530) should have been

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

misled into classing the Praises as doubtful or unauthentic. Those who
accept the French critic's views as to the value of his *Speculum
Perfectionis* will find in that remarkable work an additional argument
in favor of the genuinity of the complete opuscule now engaging our
attention. In particular M. Sabatier applies to the present Praises what
is said in the *Speculum* of the penance imposed by St. Francis on the
brothers at Portiuncula for speaking idle words. <span
id="fr_531"></span>[1](#fn_531)

The Quaracchi Fathers have edited the text of the Praises according to
the Assisian, Antonian, and Isidorean (1/25) MSS. and have collated
these early versions with the editions of the Praises given in the
*Monumenta* (fol. 275 v), *Firmamenta* (fol. 18 v), and the *Liber
Conformitatum* (fruct. xii, P. II, c. vi). <span
id="fr_532"></span>[2](#fn_532) The result of their labors is here
translated as follows:—

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

#### PRAISES.

Here are begun the Praises which the most blessed Father Francis
composed; and he said them at all the Hours of the day and night and
before the Office of the Blessed Virgin Mary, beginning thus: "Our
Father, most holy, who art in heaven," etc., with "Glory be to the
Father." Then the Praises, Holy, Holy, etc., are to be said. <span
id="fr_533"></span>[1](#fn_533)

*Our Father*, most holy, our Creator, Redeemer, and Comforter.

*Who art in heaven*, in the angels and in the saints illuminating them
unto knowledge, for Thou, O Lord, art light; inflaming them unto love,
for Thou, O Lord, art Love; dwelling in them and filling them with
blessedness, for Thou, O Lord, art the highest Good, the eternal Good
from whom is all good and without whom is no good.

*Hallowed be Thy Name:* may Thy knowledge shine in us that we may know
the breadth of Thy benefits, the length of Thy promises, the height of
Thy majesty, and the depth of Thy judgments. <span
id="fr_534"></span>[2](#fn_534)

*Thy Kingdom come*, that Thou mayest reign in us by grace and mayest
make us come to Thy Kingdom, where there is the clear vision of Thee,

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

the perfect love of Thee, the blessed company of Thee, the eternal
enjoyment of Thee.

*Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven*, that we may love Thee
with the whole heart by always thinking of Thee; with the whole soul by
always desiring Thee; with the whole mind by directing all our
intentions to Thee and seeking Thy honor in all things and with all our
strength, by spending all the powers and senses of body and soul in the
service of Thy love and not in anything else; and that we may love our
neighbors even as ourselves, drawing to the best of our power all to Thy
love; rejoicing in the good of others as in our own and compassionating
\[them\] in troubles and giving offence to no one.

*Give us this day*, through memory and understanding and reverence for
the love which He had for us and for those things which He said, did,
and suffered, for us,—our daily bread, Thy Beloved Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ.

*And forgive us our trespasses*, by Thy ineffable mercy in virtue of the
Passion of Thy Beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and through the
merits and intercession of the most Blessed Virgin Mary and of all Thy
elect.

*As we forgive their that trespass against us*, and what we do not fully
forgive, do Thou, O Lord, make us fully forgive, that for Thy sake we
may truly love our enemies and devoutly intercede for them with Thee;
that we may render no evil for evil, but in Thee may strive to do good
to all.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

*And lead us not into temptation*, hidden or visible, sudden or
continuous.

*But deliver us from evil*, past, present, and to come. Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, who is and who was and who is to
come. <span id="fr_535"></span>[1](#fn_535) Let us praise and exalt Him
above all forever. <span id="fr_536"></span>[2](#fn_536)

Worthy art Thou, O Lord, our God, to receive praise, glory and honor,
and benediction. <span id="fr_537"></span>[3](#fn_537) Let us praise and
exalt Him above all forever.

The Lamb that was slain is worthy to receive power and divinity and
wisdom and strength and honor and benediction. <span
id="fr_538"></span>[4](#fn_538) Let us praise and exalt Him above all
forever.

Let us bless the Father and the Son with the Holy Ghost. Let us praise
and exalt Him above all forever.

All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord. <span
id="fr_539"></span>[5](#fn_539) Let us praise and exalt Him above all
forever.

Give praise to God all ye His servants and you that fear Him, little and
great. <span id="fr_540"></span>[6](#fn_540) Let us praise and exalt Him
above all forever.

Let the heavens and the earth praise Him, the Glorious, and every
creature which is in heaven and on earth and under the earth, in the
seas and all that are in them. <span id="fr_541"></span>[7](#fn_541) Let
us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. Let us
praise and exalt Him above all forever.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be world without end.
Amen. Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

*Prayer*.

Almighty, most holy, most high, and supreme God, highest good, all good,
wholly good, who alone art good. To Thee we render all praise, all
glory, all thanks, all honor, all blessing, and we shall always refer
all good to Thee. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_527"></span>[137:1](wosf18.htm#fr_527) It is found in the
Assisi MS. 338 and in the compilation beginning *Fac secundum exemplar*
contained in the Berlin, Lemberg, Liegnitz MSS. and the Vatican codex
4354, as well as in the other family of MSS. represented by the
Ognissanti and Foligno MSS. and the codices of St. Isidore's (1/25) and
the Vatican 7650.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[137:2](wosf18.htm#fr_528) A fourteenth century
codex at St. Isidore's Rome (MS. 1/73, fol. 10 v). But I have not found
it in any of the collections of Brother Giles’ *Dicta* which I have had
occasion to consult in preparing the new English version of the same I
hope soon to publish.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[137:3](wosf18.htm#fr_529) See *Opuscules*,
fasc. x, pp. 136-537. As a postscript to his Examen M. Sabatier gives
the text of the paraphrase of the *Our Father* after the rare edition of
the *Speculum* (Morin).

<span id="fn_530"></span>[137:4](wosf18.htm#fr_530) See *Analekten*, p.
75.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[138:1](wosf18.htm#fr_531) "He also ordained
and ordered it to be strictly observed that any friar who either when
doing nothing or at work with the others, uttered idle words, shall say
one Our Father, praising God at the beginning and end of the prayer; and
if conscious of his fault he accuse himself, he shall say the one Our
Father and the Praises of the Lord for his own soul. . . . And if on
reliable testimony he is shown to have used idle words, he shall repeat
the Praises of the Lord at the beginning and at the end aloud so as to
be heard and understood by the surrounding friars," etc. Further on we
read: "The Praises of the Lord the most Blessed Father always said
himself, and with ardent desire taught and impressed upon the friars
that they should carefully and devotedly say the same." See *Spec.
Perf.* (ed. Sabatier), c. 82. I have quoted this passage from Lady de la
Warr's translation, pp. 121-122. See also *Opuscules*, fasc. x, p. 137,
where M. Sabatier, speaking of the relation of the *Speculum* to the
Praises, says: "Les deux documents se correspondent, se corroborent et
se garantissent l’un l’autre."

<span id="fn_532"></span>[138:2](wosf18.htm#fr_532) The *Conformities*,
edition of 1510, gives the complete text as the handiwork of St.
Francis.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[139:1](wosf18.htm#fr_533) Such is the rubric
which precedes the Praises in the Assisian MS.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[139:2](wosf18.htm#fr_534) See Eph. 3: 18.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[141:1](wosf18.htm#fr_535) See Apoc. 4: 8.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[141:2](wosf18.htm#fr_536) See Dan. 3: 57.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[141:3](wosf18.htm#fr_537) See Apoc. 4: 11.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[141:4](wosf18.htm#fr_538) See Apoc. 5: 12.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[141:5](wosf18.htm#fr_539) See Dan. 3: 57.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[141:6](wosf18.htm#fr_540) See Apoc. 19: 5.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[141:7](wosf18.htm#fr_541) See Apoc. 5: 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Salutation of the Blessed Virgin](wosf19)
