[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ait04)  [Next](ait06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*American Indian Fairy Tales*, by Margaret Compton, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### SNOWBIRD AND THE WATER-TIGER

<span id="img_00500"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![S](img/00500.jpg) |

NOWBIRD was the much-loved wife of Brown Bear, the brave hunter whose
home was on the shore of the Great Lake. He kept the wigwam well
supplied with food; and Snowbird's moccasins were the finest in the
tribe, save only those of the Chief's daughters. Even those owed much of
their beauty to the lovely feathers that Snowbird had given them. If you
had asked her where she got them she would have answered proudly, "My
husband brought them from the chase."

Besides Brown Bear and his wife, there lived in the wigwam their own,
dear, little papoose whom they called "Pigeon," because he was always
saying, "Goo, goo;" but they hoped that he would win a nobler name some
day, when he should fight the enemy, or kill some beast that was a
terror to the tribe, and so take its name for his own.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

These three would have been a very happy family; nor would the little
orphan boy whom they had adopted long before Pigeon was born, have made
them any trouble; he was a great help to them. But there was still
another inmate, Brown Bear's mother, a wicked, old squaw, whom none of
the other sons' wives would have in their wigwams. Brown Bear was her
youngest son, and had always been her favorite. She was kind to him when
she was not to any one else; and he loved her and took good care of her,
just as much after he brought Snowbird home to be his wife, as he had
done before. But the old woman was jealous; and when Brown Bear brought
in dainty bits, such as the moose's lip and the bear's kidney, and gave
them to his wife, she hated her and grumbled and mumbled to herself in
the corner by the fire.

Day after day she sat thinking how she could get rid of the "intruder,"
as she called her daughter-in-law. She forgot how she had married the
only son of a brave Chief and had gone to be the mistress of his wigwam;
and he had been as kind and good to her as her son was to Snowbird.

One day when the work was all done,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

the old woman asked her daughter-in-law to go out to see a swing she had
found near the Great Lake. It was a twisted grapevine, that hung over a
high rock; but it was stout and strong, for it had been there many years
and was securely fastened about the roots of two large trees. The old
woman got in first and grasping the vine tightly, swung herself further
and further until she was clear out over the water. "It is delightful,"
said she; "just try it."

So Snowbird got into the swing. While she was enjoying the cool breeze
that rose from the lake, the old woman crept behind the trees, and, as
soon as the swing was in full motion, and Snowbird was far out over the
water, she cut the vine and let her drop down, down, down, not stopping
to see what became of her.

She went home and putting on her daughter-in-law's clothes sat in
Snowbird's place by the fire, hiding her face as much as possible, so
that no one should see her wrinkles.

When Brown Bear came home he gave her the dainties, supposing she was
his wife; and she ate them greedily, paying no attention to the baby,
who was crying as if its heart would break.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

"Why does little Pigeon cry so?" asked the father.

I don't know," said the old woman, "I suppose he's hungry."

Thereat, she picked up the baby, shook it soundly and made believe to
nurse it. It cried louder than ever. She boxed its ears and stuffed
something into its mouth to keep it quiet.

Brown Bear thought his wife very cross, so he took his pipe and left the
wigwam.

The orphan boy had watched all these doings and had grown suspicious.
Going to the fire he pretended to brush away the ashes; and, when he
thought the old woman was not looking at him, he stirred the logs and
made a bright flame leap up so that he could plainly see her face. He
was sure there was something wrong.

"Where is Snowbird?" asked he.

"Sh—!" said the old woman; "she is by the lake, swinging." The boy said
no more, but went out of the wigwam and down to the lake. There he saw
the broken swing, and guessing what had happened, he went in search of
Brown Bear and told him what he had discovered.

Brown Bear did not like to think any wrong of his mother, and therefore
asked her no questions. Sadly he paced up and

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

down outside the door of his wigwam. Then taking some black paint he
smeared his face and body with it as a sign of mourning. When this was
done he turned his long spear upside down, and pressing it into the
earth, prayed for lightning, thunder and rain, so that his wife's body
might rise from the lake.

Every day he went thither, but saw no sign of his dear Snowbird, though
the thunder rolled heavily and the lightning had split a great oak near
the wigwam from the top to the base. He watched in the rain, in the
sunlight, and when the great, white moon shone over the lake, but he saw
nothing.

Meanwhile the orphan boy looked after little Pigeon, letting him suck
the dantiest, juiciest bits of meat, and bringing him milk to drink. On
bright afternoons he would take the baby to the lake shore and amuse him
by throwing pebbles into the water. Little Pigeon would laugh and crow
and stretch out his tiny hands, then taking a pebble would try to throw
it into the water himself, and, though it always dropped at his feet, he
was just as well pleased.

One day as they were playing in this manner they saw a white gull rise
from

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the center of the lake and fly towards the part of the shore where they
were. When it reached them it circled above their heads, flying down
close to them until little Pigeon could almost touch its great, white
wings. Then, all of a sudden, it changed to a woman— Snowbird, little
Pigeon's mother!

The baby crowed with delight and caught at two belts, one of leather and
one of white metal, that his mother wore about her waist. She could not
speak; but she took the baby in her arms, fondled it and nursed it. Then
she made signs to the boy by which he understood that he was to bring
the child there every day.

When Brown Bear came home that night the boy told him all that had
happened.

The next afternoon when the baby cried for food the boy took him to the
lake shore, Brown Bear following and hiding behind the bushes. The boy
stood where he had before, close to the water's edge, and, choosing a
smooth, round pebble, raised his arm slowly and with careful aim threw
it far out into the lake.

Soon the gull, with a long, shining belt around its body, was seen
rising from the

<span id="img_01000"></span>

[![“Then, all of a sudden it changed to a woman.”](tn/01000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01000.jpg)  
“Then, all of a sudden it changed to a woman.”  

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

water. It came ashore, hovered above them a moment, and, as on the
previous day, changed into a woman and took the child in her arms.

While she was nursing it her husband appeared. The black paint was still
on his body, but he held his spear in his hand.

"Why have you not come home?" he cried, and sprang forward to embrace
her.

She could not speak, but pointed to the shining belt she wore.

Brown Bear raised his spear carefully and struck a great blow at the
links. They were shivered to fragments and dropped on the sands, where
any one seeing them would have supposed they were pieces of a large
shell.

Then Snowbird's speech returned and she told how when she fell into the
lake, a water-tiger seized her and twisting his tail around her waist,
drew her to the bottom.

There she found a grand lodge whose walls were blue like the bluejay's
back when the sun shines upon it, green like the first leaves of the
maize and golden like the bright sands on the island of the Caribs; and
the floor was of sand, white as the snows of winter. This was the

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

wigwam of the Chief of the water-tigers, whose mother was the Horned
Serpent and lived with him.

The Serpent lay on a great, white shell which had knobs of copper that
shone like distant campfires. But these were nothing to the red stone
that sparkled on her forehead. It was covered with a thin skin like a
man's eyelid, which was drawn down when she went to sleep. Her horns
were very wonderful, for they were possessed of magic. When they touched
a great rock the stone fell apart and there was a pathway made through
it wherever the Serpent wanted to go.

There were forests in the Water-Tiger's country, trees with leaves like
the willow, only longer, finer and broader, bushes and clumps of soft,
dark grass.

When night came and the sun no longer shone down into the lodge and the
color went out of the walls, there were fireflies—green, blue, crimson,
and orange—that lighted on the bushes outside the Water-Tiger's wigwam;
and the most beautiful s of them passed inside and fluttered about the
throne of the Serpent, standing guard over her while the purple snails,
the day sentinels, slept.

Snowbird trembled when she saw these

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

things and fell down in a faint before the great Horned Serpent. But the
Water-Tiger soothed her, for he loved her and wanted her to become his
wife. This she consented to do at last on condition that she should be
allowed to go back sometimes to the lake shore to see her child.

The Water-Tiger consulted his mother, who agreed to lend him a
sea-gull's wing which should cover his wife all over and enable her to
fly to the shore. He was told, however, to fasten his tail securely
about her waist, lest she should desert him when she found herself near
her old home. He did so, taking care to put a leather belt around her,
for fear the links of white metal might hurt her delicate skin.

So she lived with the Water-Tiger, kept his lodge in order and made
moccasins for the little water-tigers out of beaver skin and dried fish
scales, and was as happy as she could have been anywhere away from her
own Brown Bear and Little Pigeon.

When the old woman, Brown Bear's mother, saw them at the door of the
wigwam, she leaped up and flew out of the lodge and was never seen
again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Coyote or Prairie Wolf.](ait06)
