[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ait12)  [Next](ait14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*American Indian Fairy Tales*, by Margaret Compton, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="page_101">p. 101</span>
<span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

### THE FIGHTING HARE.

<span id="img_10300"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![T](img/10300.jpg) |

HE Prince of the Hares was playing with his children in front of his
burrow, one day, when, growing tired, he threw back his ears, drew in
his feet, and lay down to sleep.

Meanwhile the sun came up and passed so close to the earth that it burnt
his back full of holes. The Hare felt very sore; and as he rubbed
himself, his fur came off in great patches, so that his beauty was
spoiled. He was furiously angry, and starting up, cried out that he
would fight the sun; and in spite of all that his friends could say,
went at once in pursuit of him.

The land where the Hare lived was a vast plain. When he had come to the
end of it, he climbed a high hill in order to look over the country. He
saw below him on the other side a field of green plumes nodding to the
west wind. He had never seen corn growing before, and did not know what
these plumes were.

He ran eagerly to the place, broke off

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

as many as he could carry, and hid them behind the rocks. Then he rubbed
two dead branches together and made a fire, in which he roasted the
corn.

Presently the owner came along, and seeing the damage done, called his
warriors to fight the thief.

The Hare had burrowed a hole at the side of the rock, and when the
arrows were hurled at him, he blew them back with his magic breath. The
warriors ran to catch him, but so great was their haste that one rushed
upon another, and each caught only the other's fists. Then they thought
of digging him out. They worked until the Sun Prince was half way home,
but before they had caught sight of the Hare, he had escaped through a
secret passage.

He ran to a rock a little way off and higher than the one beneath which
they were digging, and hurled his magic ball at the burrow, breaking
away the floor and the sides, so that it fell in, burying the Chief and
all his followers.

The next morning the Hare saw two men making arrowheads of hot rocks. He
watched them heating the rocks, and when they were red hot, he cried
out: "Oho! hot rocks will not burn me!"

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

The men looked up, and one of them said: "Are you a wizard?"

"No," said the Hare, "but I am a better man than you are, or the man who
is working with you. I will lie on the hot rocks, if you will let me
hold you on them in the same manner."

They agreed. So, when the rocks were glowing, the Hare laid himself on
top of them, and the men pressed him down against them with their hands.
But he breathed heavily, and his magic breath so cooled the part on
which he was lying that not a particle of his fur was singed.

The men having no such protection, soon begged for mercy, but the Hare
held them to their promise and they both perished. "So much for making
one's self equal to a wizard," said the Hare to himself as he continued
his journey.

The following day he passed by a high cliff round which the winds blew
so hard that it was known by the men of that country as Hurricane Cliff.
It overhung a deep ravine in which were sunflowers as tall as trees and
the heads were heavy with seeds.

The Hare took a handful of seeds and amused himself by throwing them
into the air and catching them in his mouth.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> While doing this
he heard voices, and looking up, saw a group of women who were plotting
to kill him.

"Oho!" they said, "let us call the hurricane to hurl a rock down on
him."

The Hare said nothing, but went in full sight of them and began eating
the seeds with great relish. The women looked at them longingly, and
finally asked him to share his dainties with them, not knowing what he
really had.

He tossed a handful of seeds into the air, and they tried hard to catch
them, but failed again and again, each time going nearer to the edge of
the cliff till, in her eagerness, the one nearest the edge reached out
too far and fell into the ravine. The others were so close that they
fell over her; so all but two were dashed to pieces, and these vowed
vengeance on the Hare.

He met them soon afterwards gathering berries, and called out that he
would give them the revenge they wished. "Come," said he, "you may blow
these blackberry thorns and leaves into my eyes. I will let you try
first and if you do not blind me you must let me do the same to you."

They took him at his word and threw

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

a handful of little else than thorns. But by breathing as he had done
when on the hot rocks, he blew them all from him.

The women trusted to their hands to protect them, but the Hare aimed
well and the thorns passed between their fingers and put their eyes
quite out.

He had one more adventure with women. While passing through a lonely
place he saw several women weaving jugs of willow which they made
water-tight by smearing them inside with pitch. They, too, were planning
to destroy him.

He went boldly up to them and proposed that they should put him inside
one of the jugs. As he could not get into those already made they put
him into one that was not finished and wove the neck of the jug about
him, making it very small, so that he should not escape.

While they were laughing at the ease with which he had been caught he
burst the jug open and stepped out unhurt.

He then compelled them to get inside of the jugs and to let him weave
the necks about them. He worked slowly at first to make them think that
he did not know how to weave, but he made the necks strong and fastened
them well.

Then he rolled the jugs about till the

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

women were shaken and badly bruised. They threatened to be revenged, but
when he knocked them harder and their blood ran out over the ground,
they begged him to let them out.

He would not, but, after a time, thinking that they had suffered enough,
he struck each jug with his magic ball and put them out of their misery.

A tarantula who had watched the Hare resolved to punish him by his own
methods. The spider had a magic club which poisoned everything it
struck, but never injured him. He called to the Hare and asked to be
struck with the club.

The Hare raised it and beat him on the head and back, but the spider
remained unhurt. He began to suspect something wrong, and just before it
was his turn to be struck he changed the spider's club for his magic
ball and killed the insect with one blow.

Thus he traveled on, conquering all who opposed him or plotted against
him, till he came to the edge of the world. There he saw a high cliff
covered with trees of all sizes and kinds. He went up to the maple and
said: "What are you good for, pray?"

The maple shook its leaves in great disdain

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

and said: "I am the food of the Great Head. The blood of my children is
sweet and nourishing, and they give it freely to the nations."

The Hare next went to the larch and asked: "What are you good for?"

"I," said the larch, "bind together the canoes of the people. If it were
not for me they could not sail upon the lakes and rivers."

The cedar answered the question by saying: "I make the canoes strong, so
that they will bear the weight of the great warriors. If it were not for
me, none but women and children could sail on the waters."

The birch stood next in his way and said: "If it were not for me you
could make no canoes at all. My bark is for the picture-writing of the
people. How, but for me, could one Chief talk to his brother who lives
by the distant river?"

The fir-tree boasted of its balsam without which the canoe could not
glide upon the water.

"Ugh!" said the Hare. "You all say that no canoe could be made without
you. You, Linden, you have no part in these canoes; what are you good
for?"

"I," said the Linden, "am for the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

cradles of the children. Without me where could they be rocked and put
to sleep when the beautiful red has gone from the sky and the night
comes? From me you take the basswood for your bowls and your
drinking-cups."

The Oak stood in his path, and before the question was put to it,
touched his head with its lower branches and said in a deep voice: "I
shelter the great warriors. I mark the spot for their councils. From my
boughs are made the swift arrows that bring food to the feet of the
hunter and carry death to his enemies."

The Ash sighed and whispered: "From me is taken the bow that speeds the
arrow in its flight."

The Red Willow drooped its head as it said: "My bark is for the pipe of
the Indian, my wands are to bid him to the feast. My osiers are for his
baskets, his mats and his water-jugs."

Thus every tree claimed to be of so much use that men could not do
without it. At last the Hare came to a little tree hardly more than a
shrub, many of whose leaves were blighted. "Of what use are you?" asked
he.

"None," said the tree, "unless you can use me."

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span id="img_11100"></span>

[![“He went to the top of the cliff and saw the sun just
rising.”](tn/11100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11100.jpg)  
“He went to the top of the cliff and saw the sun just rising.”  

"We shall see, we shall see," said the Hare.

He went to the top of the cliff and saw the sun just rising. It caught
sight of him at the same moment, and knowing that he had come for
vengeance, it retreated quickly into its cave.

It stayed there three days and all the world suffered from cold and
darkness. At last the noise of the people in their discontent reached
the sun and he was obliged to come out.

The Hare had his arrows ready and aimed many at him, but they fell short
of their mark. When the sun was directly overhead he drew forth a magic
arrow, which he dipped into a magic tear that escaped from his eye. With
this he took good aim. It struck the sun and broke it into thousands of
fragments.

The flying pieces set the whole world on fire. It burned the forest, the
prairie, the villages, the corn and the wild rice, the pumpkin vines and
the gourds, the grapes and the nuts.

The children of the Hare Prince ran into their burrow and the Great Elk
led many of the other animals into a vast field in the Rocky Mountains,
around which was drawn a sacred line that no fire could cross.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

The fire burnt the cliff at the edge of the world. The Hare sought
refuge first in one tree and then in another; but they were all
destroyed except the little one that had said it was of no use. It was
so small that it could not wholly protect him. His tail, his back, his
feet and the tips of his ears were burnt, every part of him except his
head.

He rolled over and over trying to get relief, but his pain was so great
that his eyes burst, and the water gushing from them put out the fire.

The sun had been conquered and was summoned to appear before the
council. They found him guilty of cruelty and indifference to the
welfare of men; so he was compelled to travel the same trail day after
day for all time and at a fixed distance from the earth. Thus he can no
longer burn trees or animals, nor can he leave them in cold and
darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Great Head](ait14)
