[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ait13)  [Next](ait15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*American Indian Fairy Tales*, by Margaret Compton, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span id="page_114">p. 114</span>
<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

### THE GREAT HEAD.

<span id="img_11500"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![L](img/11500.jpg.md) |

ONE WOLF was an Indian, who with his wife and ten sons moved some
distance from their tribe and built themselves a lodge in the forest.
The man and his wife were both old, and when sickness came they had no
strength to fight it, but died within a few moons of each other. The
sons were too young to live by themselves, and therefore went to the
wigwam of their uncle, Deep Lake, their mother's brother. He gave them
food and shelter until the elder ones were able to hunt and so provide
for their brothers.

One morning several of them started out, each going in a different
direction. The eldest went towards the north, because he was better able
to travel far and to fight the fierce animals which lived in that
region.

The night came, bright with many stars, but he did not return.

The next morning the second brother

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

set out in the same direction, thinking he might find the trail of the
other. He did not return. Then the third brother went in search of those
who had disappeared, and he, too, was seen no more.

Thus they all followed one another, until only the youngest, Little Elk,
was left with his uncle. He was too small and feeble to hope to succeed
where his brothers had failed; and Deep Lake forbade him going out
alone, for fear the witch or giant who had destroyed his brothers should
do him harm.

One day while Deep Lake and Little Elk were in the woods together they
heard a deep groan which seemed to come from the ground. They searched
and found a man covered with mold and lying under a great log.

"Quick," said Deep Lake to his nephew, "run to the lodge and get the
bear's oil."

Little Elk hurried to the wigwam and returned with a jar of bear's oil,
with which he rubbed the man until he became conscious and was able to
speak. His words were very strange, considering that he had never seen
either of them before.

"You," said he, looking at the boy, "are Little Elk. You had nine
brothers

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

who set out towards the barren place to hunt, and not one of them ever
returned."

The old man began to suspect magic, and asked, tremblingly, "Who are
you?"

"I," said the stranger, "am Rotten Foot, the brother of the Great Head."

Deep Lake knew well about the Great Head. It was an enormous head
without any body. It had large eyes that rolled about fearfully, and
long, coarse hair like that of the grizzly bear, and it streamed over
the huge cleft rock that was his home. Seen or unseen, if it caught
sight of any living thing it would shriek in a shrill voice, "I see
thee, I see thee; thou shalt die!"

Deep Lake had been a brave chief, and he thought perhaps he could
conquer the Great Head, or that at least he could find out about his
nephews, whom he felt sure the Head had destroyed, and the plan which
occurred to him was to be kind to the Head's brother, so that he might
learn more about him.

He therefore invited Rotten Foot to his wigwam, gave him the most
comfortable seat by the fire, rubbed his stiff limbs with bear's oil,
and set dainty food before him.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

When he was warm and well fed, Deep Lake began to question him about the
Head. "Could you bring him here?" he said at last.

"He would not come merely for the asking, but I might lure him hither,"
was the reply.

The next day Rotten Foot set out in search of his brother. He promised
to use all his skill and magic, if necessary, to bring him to the lodge.
"Have ready some blocks of the maple tree for the Head's food, in case
he should return with me," said he, as he set out on his journey.

He pulled up a hickory tree and made arrows of its roots; then he crept
cautiously along until he saw the cleft rock in the distance. Fearing
that he might be seen, he used his magic and crawled inside a mole and
told the animal to burrow in the ground, so as to hide him.

It was not long before he heard the Head growl, "I see thee, I see thee;
thou shalt die!"

He looked out and saw that his brother was watching an owl, which
immediately dropped from the tree, its flesh crumbled and its bones
immediately lay bare.

Rotten Foot drew out an arrow and aimed it at his brother. It was but a

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

small arrow when it started, but it grew larger and larger as it neared
the Head. It did not strike him, but flew back, growing smaller and
smaller until it was its original size, and slipped itself into the
quiver at Rotten Foot's side.

Feeling sure that the Head would follow him, he turned and ran towards
Deep Lake's wigwam. The ridge that the mole made as it passed along
completely hid him from the view of the Head, who soon followed in a
roaring tempest.

Deep Lake heard him tearing through the forest, and provided himself and
Little Elk with war-clubs in case he should attack the wigwam.

Just as Rotten Foot reached the wigwam and was about to jump out of the
mole's skin, the Head recognized his brother. He was delighted to see
him, for he had long since supposed him dead. He laughed so loudly that
the clouds were broken and a rainbow appeared above the trees.

On hearing the change in his voice, from fierce anger to laughter, Deep
Lake and Little Elk dropped their clubs and brought out the blocks of
the maple tree.

The Head devoured them greedily, and when he had finished he told them
that

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

he had made up his mind to kill a witch who lived towards the north, and
who destroyed twice as many animals and men as he did. "I never kill the
brave or the innocent," said he; "but she has no mercy, and draws men to
their death by her sweet songs. They lull the unwary hunter as the snow
lulls him when he staggers and falls in the forest."

Deep Lake then said, "Let me go with you, for the witch has slain my
nephews, nine men, all brothers of this lad."

"No," said the Head, "I will take the boy, and he shall help to avenge
their death."

They traveled in the night, and early in the morning came in sight of
the witch's lodge. It was a cave filled with dead men's bones. Their
fingers hung from the roof, their scalps were heaped together for her
couch, their skulls were her bowls and kettles.

She sat rocking herself to and fro, singing a low, sweet song, the notes
of which made all who heard it turn cold and shiver till all their flesh
was shaken off them and they became nothing but dry bones.

The Head had told Little Elk to put two clover blossoms into his ears so
that he could not hear her. When they were

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

near her lodge he said to the lad: "I will ask her the question, 'How
long have you been here?' This will break the charm of her song upon me,
but you will see the hair fall from my head. You must put it back as
fast as it comes out and it will grow at once and very long; then I will
jump upon her and bite her. You must take the pieces of flesh from my
mouth and throw them from you, saying, 'Be a fox, a bird,' or anything
you choose, so they will run off and never return."

As they crept up to the cave, the Head shouted, "How long have you been
here?"

His hair began to fall out in long, thick locks, which Little Elk at
once replaced. The Head then jumped upon the witch, and she screamed and
begged for mercy; but he answered, "You had no mercy on others; you must
die!"

He bit her and killed her, and all the plain was covered with animals
and the river was filled with fish from the pieces of her body. To make
sure of her never coming to life again, they burned her bones and
scattered them on the river.

Then the Head told Little Elk to search for the year-old bones, which
would be whiter than the others, and lay them

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

together. "Now," said he, "I am going home, and as I go I will raise a
tempest that will strike into the mouth of this cave. As it touches the
bones, you must say, 'All arise.'"

Little Elk had just laid down the last bone when he heard the wind
rising in the forest. As it blew into the cave he called loudly, "All
arise!"

The bones stood up and were immediately covered with flesh. The brothers
recognized one another, and one and all praised Little Elk for his
courage and his patience. Then they vanished down the trail in the
forest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Adventures of Living Statue](ait15.md)
