[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oph04)  [Next](oph06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V

The Sun and Fire as emblems---The Serpent and the Sun---Taut and the
Serpent---Horapollo and the Serpent symbol---Sanchoniathon and the
Serpent---Ancient Mysteries of Osiris, &c.----Rationale of the
connection of Solar, Phallic, and Serpent Worship---The Aztec
Pantheon---Mexican Gods---The Snake in Mexican Mythology---The Great
Father and Mother---Quetzalcoatl, the Feathered Serpent---Researches of
Stephens and Catherwood---Discoveries of Mr. Stephens.

 

That fire should be taken to be the physical, of what the sun is the
celestial emblem, is sufficiently apparent; we can readily understand
also how the bull, the goat, or ram, the phallus, and other symbols
should have the same import; also how naturally and almost inevitably
and universally the sun came to symbolize the active principle, the
vivifying power, and how obviously the egg symbolized the passive
elements of nature, but how the serpent came to possess, as a symbol, a
like significance with these is not so obvious. That it did so, however,
cannot be doubted, and the proofs will appear as we proceed; likewise
that it sometimes symbolized the great hermaphrodite first principle,
the Supreme Unity of the Greeks and Egyptians.

Although generally, it did not always symbolize the sun, or the power of
which the sun is an emblem; but, invested with various meanings, it
entered widely into the primitive mythologies. It typified wisdom,
power, duration, the good and evil principles, life, reproduction---in
short, in Egypt, Syria, Greece, India, China, Scandinavia, America,
everywhere in the globe it has been a prominent emblem. In the somewhat
poetical language of a learned author, "It entered into the mythology of
every nation, consecrated almost every temple, symbolized almost every
deity, was imagined in the heavens, stamped on the earth, and ruled in
the realms of everlasting sorrow." Its general acceptance seems to have
been remarked at a very early period. It arrested the attention of the
ancient sages, who assigned a variety of reasons for its adoption,
founded upon the natural history of the reptile. Among these
speculations, none are more curious than those preserved by
Sanchoniathon, who says:---"Taut first attributed something of the
Divine nature to the Serpent, in which he was followed by the Phœnicians
and Egyptians. For this animal was esteemed by him to be the most
inspirited of all reptiles, and of a fiery nature, inasmuch as it
exhibits an incredible celerity, moving by its spirit, without hands or
feet, or any of the external members by which the other animals effect
their motion: and, in its progress, it assumes a variety of forms,
moving in a spiral course, and darting forward with whatever degree of
swiftness it pleases."

It is, moreover, long lived, and has the quality not only of putting off
its old age, and assuming a second youth, but of receiving at the same
time an augmentation of its size and strength; and when it has filled
the appointed measure of its existence, it consumes itself, as Taut has
laid down in the Sacred Books, upon which account this animal is
received into the sacred rites and mysteries.

Horapollo, referring to the serpent symbol, says of it:---"When the
Egyptians would represent the Universe they delineate a serpent
bespeckled with variegated scales, devouring its own tail, the scales
intimating the stars in the Universe. The animal is extremely heavy, as
is the earth, and extremely slippery like the water, moreover, it every
year puts off its old age with its skin, as in the Universe the annual
period effects a corresponding change and becomes renovated, and the
making use of its own body for food implies that all things whatever,
which are generated by divine providence in the world, undergo a
corruption into them again."

Nothing is more certain than that the serpent at a very remote period
was regarded with high veneration as the most mysterious of living
creatures. Its habits were imperfectly understood, and it was invested,
as we perceive from the above quotations, with the most extraordinary
qualities. Alike the object of fear, admiration, and wonder, it is not
surprising that it became early connected with man's superstitions, but
how it obtained so general a predominance it is difficult to understand.

Perhaps there is no circumstance in the natural history of the serpent
more striking than that alluded to by Sanchoniathon, viz.: the annual
sloughing of its skin, or supposed rejuvenation.

"As an old serpent casts his scaly vest,

Wreaths in the Sun, in youthful glory dressed,

So when Alcides' mortal mould resign'd,

His better part enlarged, and grew refin'd."---Ovid.

It was probably this which connected it with the idea of an eternal
succession of forms, constant reproduction and dissolution, a process
which was supposed by the ancients to have been for ever going on in
nature. This doctrine is illustrated in the notion of a succession of
Ages which prevailed among the Greeks, corresponding to the Yugs of the
Hindus, and Suns of the aboriginal Mexicans. It is further illustrated
by the annual dissolution and renovation exhibited in the succession of
the seasons, and which was supposed to result from the augmentation and
decline of the active principle, the Sun.

The mysteries of Osiris, Isis, and Horus, in Egypt; Atys and Cybéle, in
Phrygia; Ceres and Proserpine, at Eleusis; of Venus and Adonis in
Phœnicia; of Bona Dea, and Priapus, in Rome, are all susceptible of one
explanation. They all set forth and illustrated, by solemn and
impressive rites and mystical symbols, the grand phenomena of nature,
especially as connected with the creation of things and the perpetuation
of life. In all, it is worthy of remark, the serpent was more or less
conspicuously introduced, always as symbolical of the invigorating or
active energy of nature. In the mysteries of Ceres and Proserpine, the
grand secret communicated to the initiated was thus enigmatically
expressed: Taurus Draconem genuit, et Taurum Draco; "The bull has
begotten a serpent, and the serpent a bull." The bull, as already seen,
was a prominent emblem of generative force, the Bacchus Zagreus, or
Tauriformis.

The doctrine of an unending succession of forms was not remotely
connected with that of regeneration, or new birth, which was part of the
phallic system, and which was recognised in a form more or less distinct
in nearly all the primitive religions. In Hindustan, this doctrine is
still enforced in the most unequivocal manner, through the medium of
rites of portentous solemnity and significance to the devotees of the
Hindu religion. "For the purpose of regeneration," says Wilford, "it is
directed to make an image of pure gold of the female powers of nature in
the shape of either a woman or a cow. In this statue the person to be
regenerated is enclosed, and afterwards dragged out through the usual
channel. As a statue of pure gold, and of proper dimensions would be too
expensive, it is sufficient to make an image of the sacred Yoni, through
which the person to be regenerated is to pass.

We have seen the serpent as a symbol of productive energy associated
with the egg as a symbol of the passive elements of nature. The egg does
not, however, appear except in the earlier cosmogonies. "As the male
serpent," says Faber, "was employed to symbolize the Great Father, so
the female serpent was equally used to typify the Great Mother. Such a
mode of representation may be proved by express testimony, and is wholly
agreeable to the analogy of the entire system of Gentile mythology. In
the same manner that the two great parents were worshipped under the
hieroglyphics of a bull and cow, a lion and lioness, &c., so they were
adored under the cognate figures of a male and female serpent."

Nearly every enquirer into the primitive superstitions of men has
observed a close relationship, if not an absolute identity, in what are
usually distinguished as Solar, Phallic, and Serpent Worship, yet the
rationale of the connection has been rarely detected. They really are
all forms of a single worship. "If (as it seems certain) they all three
be identical," observes Mr. O'Brien, "where is the occasion for surprise
at our meeting the sun, phallus, and serpent, the constituent symbols of
each, occurring in combination, embossed upon the same table, and
grouped upon the same architrave."

We turn again to America. The principal God of the Aztecs, subordinate
to the great Unity, was the impersonation of the active, creative
energy, Tezcatilopoca or Tonacatlecoatl. He was also called
Tonacateuctli.

Like the Hindu Brahma, the Greek Phanes, and the Egyptian Phtha, he was
the "Creator of heaven and earth," "the Great Father," "the God of
Providence," who dwells in heaven, earth, and hades, and attends to the
government of the world. To denote this unfailing power and eternal
youth, his figure was that of a young man. His celestial emblem was
Tonatiuh, the Sun. His companion or wife was Cihuacohuatl or
Tonaeacihua, "the Great Mother" both of gods and men.

The remaining gods and goddesses of the Aztec Pantheon resolve
themselves into modified impersonations of these two powers. Thus, we
have Ometuctli and Omecihuatl, the adorable god and goddess who preside
over the celestial paradise, and which, though generally supposed to be
distinct divinities, are, nevertheless, according to the Codex
Vaticanus, but other names for the deities already designated. We have
also Xiuhteuctli, "Master of the Year," "the God of Fire," the
terrestrial symbol of the active principle, and Xochitli, "the Goddess
of Earth and Corn;" Tlaloc and Cinteotl, or Chalchiuhcueije, "the god
and goddess of the waters;" Mictlanteuctli and Mictlancihuatl, "the god
and goddess of the dead;" the terrible Mexitli or Huitzlipochtli,
corresponding to the Hindu Siva, in his character of destroyer, and his
wife Teoyamiqui, whose image, like that of Kali, the consort of Siva,
was decorated with the combined emblems of life and death.

In the simple mythology and pure Sabianism of Peru, we have already
shown the existence of the primeval principles symbolized, the first by
the Sun and the second by his wife and sister the Moon. That the sun was
here regarded as symbolizing the intermediate father, or demiurgic
creator, cannot be doubted. The great and solemn feast of Raimi was
instituted in acknowledgment of the Sun as the great father of all
visible things, by whom all living things are generated and sustained.
The ceremonies of this feast were emblematical, and principally referred
to the sun as the reproductive and preserving power of nature. In
Mexico, where the primitive religion partook of the fiercer nature of
the people, we find the Raimaic ceremonies assuming a sanguinary
character, and the acknowledgment of the reproductive associated with
the propitiation of its antagonist principle, as we see in the orgies of
Huitzlipochtli in his character of the Destroyer. The same remarks hold
true of Central America, the religion and mythology of which country
correspond essentially with those of the nations of Anahuac.

We have said that the principal god of the Aztec pantheon, subordinate
only to the Unity and corresponding to the Hindu Brahma, was
Tezcatlipoea, Tonacatlecoalt, or Tonacateuctli. If we consult the
etymology of these names we shall find ample confirmation of the
correctness of the deductions already drawn from the mythologies of the
East. Thus Tonacateuctli embodied Lord Sun from Tonatiuh, Sun, nacayo or
catl, body or person, and teuctli, master or lord. Again, Tonacatlcoatl,
the Serpent Sun, from Tonctiah and catl, as above, and coatl, serpent.
If we adopt another etymology for the names (and that which seems to
have been most generally accepted by the early writers) we shall have
Tonacateuctli, Lord of our Flesh, from to, the possessive pronoun
plural, nacatl, flesh or body, and teuctli, master or lord. We shall
also have Tonacatlecoatl, Serpent of our Flesh, from to, and nacatl, and
coatl, serpent.

According to Sahagim, Tezcatlipoca, in his character of the God of
Hosts, was addressed as follows by the Mexican High Priest:---"We
entreat that those who die in war may be received by thee, our Father
the Sun, and our Mother the Earth, for thou alone reignest." The same
authority informs us that in the prayer of thanks, returned to
Tezcatlipoca by the Mexican kings on the occasion of their coronation,
God was recognised as the God of fire, to whom Xiuthteuctli, Lord of
Vegetation, and specifically Lord of Fire, bears the same relation that
Suyra does to the first person of the Hindu Triad. The king petitions
that he may act "in conformity with the will of the ancient God, the
Father of all Gods, who is the God of Fire; whose habitation is in the
midst of the waters, encompassed by battlements, surrounded by rocks as
it were with roses, whose name is Xiuteuctli," etc.

Tonacateuctli, or Tezcatlipoca, is often, not to say generally, both on
the monuments and in the paintings, represented as surrounded by a disc
of the sun.

The name of the primitive goddess, the wife of Tezcatlipoca, was
Cihuacohuatl or Tonacacihua. She was well known by other names, all
referring to her attributes. The etymology of Cihuacohuatl is clearly
Cihua, woman or female, and coatl, serpent---Female Serpent. And
Tonacacihua is Female Sun, from Tonatiuh nacatl (as before) and cihua,
woman or female. Adopting the other etymology, it is Woman of our Flesh.

Gama, who is said to be by far the most intelligent author who has
treated with any detail of the Mexican Gods, referring to the serpent
symbols belonging to the statue of Teoyaomiqui, says---"These refer to
another Goddess named Cihuacohuatl, or Female Serpent, which the
Mexicans believe gave to the light, at a single birth, two children, one
male and the other female, to whom they refer the origin of mankind; and
hence twins, among the Mexicans, are called cohuatl or coatl, which is
corrupted in the pronunciation by the vulgar into coate."

Whichever etymology we assign to Tonaca in these combinations, the
leading fact that the Great Father was designated as the male serpent,
and the Great Mother as the female serpent, remains unaffected. Not only
were they thus designated, but Cinacoatl or Cihuacohuatl was generally
if not always represented, in the paintings, accompanied by a great
snake or featherheaded serpent (Tonacatlecoatl "serpent sun") in which
the monkish interpreters did not fail to discover a palpable allusion to
Eve and the tempter of the garden.

Pursuing the subject of the connection of the Serpent Symbol with
American Mythology, we remark the fact that it was a conspicuous symbol
and could not escape the attention of the most superficial of observers
of the Mexican and Central American monuments, and mythological
paintings. The early Spaniards were particularly struck with its
prominence.

"The snake," says Dupaix, "was a conspicuous object in the Mexican
mythology, and we find it carved in various shapes and sizes, coiled,
extended, spiral or entwined with great beauty, and sometimes
represented with feathers and other ornaments. These different
representatives," he continues, "no doubt denoted its different
attributes."

The editor of Kingsborough's great work observes:---"Like the Egyptian
Sphynx, the mystical snake of the Mexicans had its enigmas, and both are
beyond our power to unravel;" this, however, is a matter of opinion, and
the conclusion is one from which many will strongly dissent.

In almost every primitive mythology we find, not only a Great Father and
Mother, the representatives of the reciprocal principles, and a Great
Hermaphrodite Unity from whom the first proceed and in whom they are
both combined, but we find also a beneficial character, partaking of a
divine and human nature, who is the Great Teacher of Men, who instructs
them in religion, civil organization and the arts, and who, after a life
of exemplary usefulness, disappears mysteriously, leaving his people
impressed with the highest respect for his institutions and the
profoundest regard for his memory. This demi-god, to whom divine honours
are often paid after his withdrawal from the earth, is uaually the Son
of the Sun, or of the Demiurgic Creator, the Great Father, who stands at
the head of the primitive pantheons and subordinate only to the Supreme
Unity; he is born of an earthly mother, a virgin, and often a vestal of
the Sun, who conceives in a mysterious manner, and who, after giving
birth to her half-divine son, is herself sometimes elevated to the rank
of goddess. In the more refined and systematized mythologies he appears
clearly as an incarnation of the Great Father and partaking of his
attributes, his terrestial representative, and the mediator between him
and man. He appears as Buddha in India; Fohi in China; Schaka in Thibet;
Zoroasta in Persia; Osiris in Egypt; Taut in Phœnicia; Hermes or Cadmus
in Greece; Romulus in Rome; Odin in Scandinavia; and in each case is
regarded as the Great Teacher of Men, and the founder of religion.

In the mythological systems of America, this intermediate demi-god was
not less clearly recognised than in those of the Old World; indeed, as
these systems were less complicated because less modified from the
original or primitive forms, the Great Teacher appears here with more
distinctness. Among the savage tribes his origin and character were, for
obvious reasons, much confused; but among the more advanced nations he
occupied a well defined position.

Among the nations of Anahuac, he bore the name of Quetzalcoatl
(Feathered Serpent) and was regarded with the highest veneration. His
festivals were the most gorgeous of the year. To him it is said the
great temple of Cholula was dedicated. His history, drawn from various
sources, is as follows:---The god of the "Milky Way"---in other words,
of Heaven---the principal deity of the Aztec Pantheon, and the Great
Father of gods and men, sent a message to a virgin of Tulan, telling her
that it was the will of the gods that she should conceive a son, which
she did without knowing any man. This son was Quetzalcoatl, who was
figured as tall, of fair complexion, open forehead, large eyes and a
thick beard. He became high priest of Tulan, introduced the worship of
the gods, established laws displaying the profoundest wisdom, regulated
the calendar, and maintained the most rigid and exemplary manners in his
life. He was averse to cruelty, abhorred war, and taught men to
cultivate the soil, to reduce metal from their ores, and many other
things necessary to their welfare. Under his benign administration the
widest happiness prevailed amongst men. The corn grew to such a size
that a single ear was a load for a man; gourds were as long as a man's
body; it was unnecessary to dye cotton for it grew of all colours; all
fruits were in the greatest profusion and of extraordinary size; there
were also vast numbers of beautiful and sweet singing birds. His reign
was the golden age of Anahuac. He however disappeared suddenly and
mysteriously, in what manner is unknown. Some say he died on the
sea-horse, and others say that he wandered away in search of the
imaginary kingdom of Tlallapa. He was deified; temples were erected to
him, and he was adorned throughout Anahuac.

Quetzalcoatl is, therefore, but an incarnation of the "Serpent Sun"
Tonacatlecoalt, and, as is indicated by his name, the feathered serpent
was his recognised symbol. He was thus symbolized in accordance with a
practice which (says Gama) prevailed in Mexico, of associating or
connecting with the representatives of a god or goddess, the symbols of
the other deities from whom they are derived, or to whom they sustain
some relation. His temples were distinguished as being circular, and the
one dedicated to his worship in Mexico, was, according to Gomera,
entered by a door "like unto the mouth of a serpent, which was a thing
to fear by those who went in thereat, especially by the Christians, to
whom it represented very hell."

The Mayas of Yucatan had a demi-god corresponding entirely with
Quetzalcoatl, if he was not the same under a different name---a
conjecture very well sustained by the evident relationship between the
Mexican and Mayan mythologies. He was named Itzamna or Zamna, and was
the only son of the principal God, Kinchanan. He arrived from the East,
and instructed the people in all that was essential to their welfare.
"He," says Cogolludo, "invented the characters which they use as
letters, and which are called after him, Itzamna, and they adore him as
a god."

There was another similar character in Yucatan, called Ku Kulcan or
Cuculcan, another in Nicaragua named Theotbilake, son of their principal
god Thomathoyo, and another in Colombia bearing the name of Bochia. Peru
and Guatemala furnish similar traditions, as do also Brazil, the nations
of the Tamanac race, Florida, and various savage tribes of the West.

The serpent, as we show elsewhere, was an emblem both of Quetzalcoatl
and of Ku Kulcan---a fact which gives some importance to the statement
of Cabrera that Votan of Guatemala as above was represented to be a
serpent, or of serpent origin.

Torquemada states that the images of Huitzlipochtli of Mexico,
Quetzalcoatl, and Tlaloc were each represented with a golden serpent,
bearing different symbolical sacrificial allusions. He also assures us
that serpents often entered into the symbolical sacrificial ceremonies
of the Mexicans, and presents the following example:---

"Among the many sacrifices which these Indians made, there was one which
they performed in honour of the mountains, by forming serpents out of
wood or of the roots of the trees, to which they affixed serpents'
heads, and also dolls of the same, which they called Ecatotowin, which
figures of serpents and fictitious children they covered with dough,
named by them Tzoalli, composed of the seeds of Bledos, and placed them
on supports of wood, carved in the representation of hills or mountains,
on the tops of which they fixed them. This was the kind of offering
which they made to the mountains and high hills.

The mother of Huitzlipochtli was a priestess of Tezcatlipoca (a cleanser
of the temple, says Gama) named Coatlantona, Coatlcué, or Coatlcyue
(serpent of the temple or serpent woman). She was extremely devoted to
the gods, and one day when walking in the temple, she beheld, descending
in the air, a ball made of variously coloured feathers. She placed it in
her girdle, became at once pregnant, and afterwards was delivered of
Mexith or Huitzlipochtli, full armed, with a spear in one hand, a shield
in the other, and a crest of green feathers on his head. He became,
according to some, their leader into Anahuac, guiding them to the place
where Mexico is built. His statue was of gigantic size, and covered with
ornaments each one of which had its significance. He was depicted placed
upon a seat, from the four corners of which issued four large serpents.
"His body," says Gomeza, "was beset with pearls, precious stones and
gold, and for collars and chains around his neck ten hearts of men made
of gold. It had also a counterfeit vizard, with eyes of glass, and in
its neck death painted, all of which things had their considerations and
meanings." It was to him in his divine character of the destroyer that
the bloodiest sacrifices of Mexico were performed. His wife, Teoyaomiqui
(from Teo, sacred or divine; Yaoyotl, war; and Miqui, to kill) was
represented as a figure bearing the full breats of a woman, literally
enveloped in serpents, and ornamented with feathers, shells, and the
teeth and claws of a tiger. She had a necklace composed of six hands.
Around her waist is a belt to which death's heads are attached. One of
her statues, a horrible figure, still exists in the city of Mexico. It
is carved from a solid block of basalt, and is nine feet in height and
five and a half in breadth.

It is not improbable that the serpent-mother of Huitzlipochti was an
impersonation of the great female serpent Cinacohuatl, the wife of
Tonacatlecoatl, the serpent-father of Quetzalcoatl. However this may be,
it is clear that a more intimate connection exists between the several
principal divinities of Mexico, than appears from the confused and
meagre accounts which have been left us of their mythology. Indeed, we
have seen that the Hindu Triad, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, has very
nearly its counterpart in Tezcatlipoca, Tlaloc, and the celestial
Huitzlipochtli, the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer and Reproducer. In
the delineations of Siva or Mahadeo, in his character of the destroyer,
he is represented as wrapped in tiger skins. A hooded snake is twisted
around him and lifts its head above his shoulder, and twisted snakes
form his head-dress. In other cases he holds a spear, a sword, a
serpent, and a skull, and has a girdle of skulls around his waist. The
bull Nandi (emblem of generative force), as also the lingham, are among
his emblems. To him were dedicated the bloodiest sacrifices of India.
Durga, or Kali (an impersonation of Bhavin, goddess of nature and
fecundity) corresponds with the Mexican Tesyaomiqui, and is represented
in a similar manner. She is a war goddess and her martial deeds give her
a high position in the Hindu pantheon. As Kali, her representatives are
most terrible. The emblems of destruction are common to all; she is
entwined with serpents; a circlet of flowers surrounds her head; a
necklace of skulls; a girdle of dissevered human hands; tigers crouching
at her feet---indeed every combination of the horrible and the loathsome
is invoked to portray the dark character which she represents. She
delights in human sacrifices and the ritual prescribes that, previous to
the death of the victim, she should be invoked as follows: "Let the
sacrificer first repeat the name of Kali thrice, Hail, Kali! Kali! Hail,
Devi! Hail, Goddess of Thunder! iron-sceptered, hail, fierce Kali! Cut,
slay, destroy! bind, secure! Cut with the axe, drink blood, slay,
destroy!" "She has four hands," says Patterson, "two of which are
employed in the destruction which surrounds her, and the other upwards,
which seems to promise the regeneration of nature by a new creation. "On
her festivals," says Coleman, "her temples literally stream with blood."
As Durga, however, she is often represented as the patroness of Virtue
and her battles with evil demons form the subject of many Hindu poems.
She is under this aspect the armed Phallas.

We have seen that the Creator of the World, the Great Father of the
Aztecs, Tonacatlecoatl or Tezcatlipoca, and his wife Cihuacohuatl, were
not only symbolized as the Sun and Moon, but also that they were
designated as the male and female serpent, and that in the mythological
pictures the former was represented as a feather-headed snake. We have
also seen that the incarnate or human representative of this deity
Quetzalcoatl, was also symbolized as a feathered serpent. This was in
accordance with the system of the Aztecs, who represented cognate
symbols, and invested the impersonations or descendants of the greater
gods with their emblems.

These facts being well established, many monuments of American
antiquity, otherwise inexplicable, become invested with significance. In
Mexico, unfortunately, the monumental records of the ancient inhabitants
have been so ruthlessly destroyed or obliterated that now they afford us
but little aid in our researches. Her ancient paintings, although there
are some which have escaped the general devastation, are principally
beyond our reach and cannot be consulted particularly upon these points.
In Central America, however, we find many remains which, although in a
ruined state, are much more complete and much more interesting than any
others concerning which we possess any certain information.

The researches and explorations of Messrs. Stephens and Catherwood have
placed many of these before us in a form which enables us to detect
their leading features. Ranking first among the many interesting groups
of ruins discovered by these gentlemen, both in respect to their extent
and character, are those of Chichen-itza. One of the structures
comprising this group is described as follows:---"The building called
the Castillo is the first which we saw, and is, from every point of
view, the grandest and most conspicuous object that towers above the
plain. The mound upon which it stands measures one hundred and
ninety-seven feet at the base, and is built up, apparently solid, to the
height of seventy-five feet. On the west side is a stairway thirty-seven
feet wide; on the north another, forty-four feet wide, and containing
ninety steps. On the ground at the foot of the stairway, forming a bold,
striking, and well-conceived commencement, are two colossal serpents'
heads (feathered) ten feet in length, with mouths wide open and tongues
protruding."

"No doubt they were emblematic of some relgious belief, and, in the
minds of the imaginative people passing between them, must have excited
feelings of solemn awe. The platform on the mound is about sixty feet
square and is crowned by a building measuring forty-three by forty-nine
feet. Single doorways face the east, south and west, having massive
lentils of zapote wood, covered with elaborate carvings, and the jambs
are ornamented with sculptured figures. The sculpture is much worn, but
the head-dress of feathers and portions of the rich attire still remain.
The face is well preserved, and has a dignified aspect. All the other
jambs are decorated with sculptures of the same general character, and
all open into a corridor six feet wide, extending around three sides of
the building. The interior of this building was ornamented with very
elaborate but much obliterated carvings.

"The sacred character of this remarkable structure is apparent at the
first glance, and it is equally obvious that the various sculptures must
have some significance. The entrance between the two colossal serpents'
heads remind us at once of Gomera's description of the entrance to the
temple of Quetzalcoatl in Mexico, which 'was like unto the mouth of a
serpent and which was a thing to fear by those who entered in thereat.'"

The circumstance that these heads are feathered seems further to connect
this temple with the worship of that divinity. But in the figures
sculptured upon the jambs of the entrances, and which, Mr. Stephens
observes, were of the same general character throughout, we have further
proof that this structure was dedicated to a serpent divinity. Let it be
remembered that the dignified personage there represented is accompanied
by a feathered serpent, the folds of which are gracefully arrayed behind
the figure and the tail of which is marked by the rattles of the
rattle-snake---the distinguishing mark of the monumental serpent of the
continent, whether represented in the carvings of the mounds or in the
sculptures of Central America. This temple, we may therefore reasonably
infer, was sacred to the benign Quetzalcoatl, or a character
corresponding to him, whose symbolical serpent guarded the ascent to the
summit, and whose imposing representations was sculptured on its
portals. This inference is supported by the fact that in Mexican
paintings the temples of Quetzalcoatl are indicated by a serpent
entwined around or rising above them, as may be seen in an example from
the Codex Borgianus in Kingsborough.

But this is not all. We have already said that amongst the
Itzaes---"holy men"---the founders of Chichen-itza and afterwards of
Mayapan, there was a character, corresponding in many respects with
Quetzalcoatl, named Ku Kulcan or Cuculcan. Torquemada, quoted by
Cogolludo, asserts that this was but another name for Quetzalcoatl.
Cogolludo himself speaks of Ku Kulcan as "one who had been a great
captain among them," and was afterwards worshipped as a god. Herrara
states that he ruled at Chichen-itza; that all agreed that he came from
the westward, but that a difference exists as to whether he came before
or afterwards or with the Itzaes. "But," he adds, "the name of the
structure at Chichen-itza and the events of that country after the death
of the lords, shows that Cuculcan governed with them. He was a man of
good disposition, not known to have had wife or children, a great
statesman, and therefore looked upon as a god, he having contrived to
build another city in which business might be managed. To this purpose
they pitched upon a spot eight leagues from Merida, where they made an
enclosure of about eighth of a league in circuit, being a wall of dry
stone with only two gates. They built temples, calling the greatest of
them Cuculcan. Near the enclosures were the houses of the prime men,
among whom Cuculcan divided the land, appointing towns to each of them.

"This city was called Mayapan (the standard of Maya), the Mayan being
the language of the country. Cuculcan governed in peace and quietness
and with great justice for some years, when, having provided for his
departure and recommended to them the good form of government which had
been established, he returned to Mexico the same way he came, making
some stay at Chanpotan, where, as a memorial of his journey, he erected
a structure in the sea, which is to be seen to this day."  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

We have here the direct statement that the principal structure at
Mayapan was called Cuculcan; and from the language of Herrara the
conclusion is irresistible that the principal structure of Chichen-itza
was also called by the same name. These are extremely interesting facts,
going far to show what the figure represented in the "Castillo," and
which we have identified upon other evidence as being that of a
personage corresponding to Quetzalcoatl, is none other than the figure
of the demi-god Ku Kulcan, or Cuculcan, to whose worship the temple was
dedicated and after whom it was named.

If we consult the etymology of the name Ku Kulcan we shall have further
and striking evidence in support of this conclusion. Ku in the Mayan
language means God, and can serpent. We have, then, Ku Kulcan,
God---Kul, Serpent, or Serpent-God. What Kul signifies it is not
pretended to say, but we may reasonably conjecture, that it is a
qualifying word to can serpent. Kukum is feather, and it is possible
that by being converted into an adjective form it may change its
termination into Kukul. The etymology may therefore be Kukumcan
Feather-Serpent, or Kukulcan Feathered Serpent. We, however, repose on
the first explanation, and unhesitatingly hazard the opinion that, when
opportunity is afforded of ascertaining the value of Kul, the
correctness of our conclusions will be fully justified.

And here we may also add that the etymology of Kinchahan, the name of
the principal god of the Mayas and corresponding to Tonacatlcoatl of
Mexico, is precisely the same as that of the latter. Kin is Sun in the
Mayan language, and Chahan, as every one acquainted with the Spanish
pronunciation well knows, is nothing more than a variation in
orthography for Cään or Can, serpent. Kin Chahan, Kincaan, or Kincan is,
therefore, Sun-serpent.

The observation that Quetzalcoatl might be regarded as the incarnation
of Tezcatlipoca, or Tonacatlcoatl, corresponding to the Buddha of the
Hindus, was based upon the coincidences in their origin, character, and
teachings, but there are some remarkable coincidences between the
temples dedicated to the worship of these two great teachers---or
perhaps we should say, between the religious structures of Central
America and Mexico and Hindustan and the islands of the Indian
Archipelago, which deserve attention.

From the top of the lofty temple at Chichen-itza, just described, Mr.
Stephans saw, for the first time, groups of columns or upright stones
which, he observes, proved upon examination to be among the most
remarkable and unitelligible remains he had yet encountered. "They stood
in rows of three, four and five abreast, many rows continuing in the
same direction, when they collectively changed and pursued another. They
were low, the tallest not more than six feet high. Many had fallen, in
some places lying prostrate in rows, all in the same direction, as if
thrown intentionally. In some cases, they extended to the bases of large
mounds, on which were ruins of buildings and large fragments of
sculptures, while in others they branched off and terminated abruptly. I
counted three hundred and eighty, and there were many more; but so many
were broken and lay so irregularly that I gave up counting them."

Those represented by Mr. Stephens, in his plate, occur in immediate
connection with the temple above described, and enclose an area nearly
four hundred feet square.

In the third volume of the "Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society"
is an account of the mixed temples of the ancient city of Anarajapura
(situated in the centre of the island of Ceylon) by Captain Chapman, of
the British Army. The remarkable character of these ancient structures
and the decided resemblances which they sustain to those in Central
America, and particularly to the group of Chichen-itza, justify a
somewhat detailed notice of them.

According to native records, Anarajapura was, for a period of thirteen
hundred years, both the principal seat of the religion of the country
and residence of its kings. It abounded in magnificent buildings,
sculptures, and other works of art, and was, as it still is, held in the
greatest veneration by the followers of Buddha as the most sacred spot
in the island.

"At this time," says Captain Chapman, "the only remaining traces of the
city consist of nine temples; of two very extensive banks; of several
smaller ones in ruins; of groups of pillars, and of portions of walls,
which are scattered over an extent of several miles. The nine temples
are still held in great reverence, and are visited periodically by the
Buddhists. They consist of first of an enclosure, in which are the
sacred trees called the Bogaha; the Thousand Pillars called Lowá Mahá
Payá; and the seven mounds or Dagobas, each one of which has a distinct
name given it by its founder."

The temple of Bo Malloa, especially sacred to Buddha, is of granite and
consists of a series of four rectangular terraces, faced with granite,
rising out of each other and diminishing both in height and extent, upon
which are situated the altars and the sacred Bogaha trees, or trees of
Buddha. The total height of the terraces is about twenty feet and the
extent of the largest thirty paces by fifteen. These terraces are
ascended by flights of steps. At the foot of the principal flight are
slabs of granite, placed perpendicularly , upon which figures are boldly
sculptured; and between is a semi-circular stone with simple mouldings
let in the ground. Upon the east of the building projects a colossal
figure of Buddha. Another similar, but smaller, structure is placed a
little to the eastward of that first described. Both are surrounded by a
wall, enclosing a space one hundred and twenty-five paces long by
seventy-five wide, within which are planted a variety of odoriferous
trees.

A few paces to the eastward of this enclosure are the ruins of the
"Thousand Pillars." These consisted originally of 1600 pillars, disposed
in a square. The greater part are still standing; they consist, with a
few exceptions, of a single piece of gneiss in the rough state in which
they were quarried. They are ten or twelve feet above the ground; twelve
inches by eight square, and about four feet from each other; but the two
in the centre of the outer line differ from the rest in being of hard
blue granite, and in being more carefully finished. These pillars were
said to have been covered with chunam (plaster) and thus converted into
columns having definite forms and proportions. There is a tradition that
there was formerly in the centre of this square a brazen chamber, in
which was contained a relic held in much veneration. A few paces from
this was a single pillar of gneiss in a rough state, which was from
fourteen to sixteen feet high.

Captain Chapman observes that structures, accompanied by similar groups
of columns, exist on the opposite or continental coast. The temples of
Rámiseram, Madura, and the celebrated one of Seringham, have each their
"Thousand Pillars." In Rámiseram the pillars are arranged in colonnades
of several parallel rows, and these colonnades are separated by tanks or
spaces occupied by buildings in the manner indicated by Mr. Stephans at
Chichen-itza. Some of these pillars are carved; others are in their
rough state or covered with plaster. In Madura the pillars are disposed
in a square of lines radiating in such a manner that a person placed in
the centre can see through in every direction. This square is on a
raised terrace, the pillars rude and only about eight feet high. At
Seringham the pillars also form a square.

The dagobas, occurring in connection with the temple of Buddha and the
"Thousand Pillars" at Anarájapura, deserve a notice, as they correspond
in many respects with some of the structures at Chichen. They are of
various dimensions and consist generally of raised terraces or platforms
of great extent, surrounded by mounds of earth faced with brick or
stone, and often crowned with circular, dome-shaped structures. The base
is usually surrounded by rows of columns. They vary from fifty to one
hundred and fifty feet in height. The dagobas, of intermediate size,
have occasionally a form approaching that of a bubble, but in general
they have the form of a bell. They constitute part of the Buddhist
Temples, almost without exception. We have, in the character of these
singular columns and their arrangement in respect to each other and the
pyramidal structures in connection with which they are found, a most
striking resemblance between the ruins of Chichen-itza in Central
America, and Anarájapura in Ceylon---between the temples of Buddha and
those of Quetzalcoatl, or some corresponding character. The further
coincidences which exist between the sacred architecture of India and
Central America will be reserved for another place. We cannot, however,
omit to notice here the structure at Chichen-itza designated as the
"Caracol," both from its resemblance to the dagobas of Ceylon and its
connection with the worship of the Serpent Deity. Mr. Stephens describes
it as follows:---

"It is circular in form and is known by the name of the Caracol, or
Winding Staircase, on account of its interior arrangements. It stands on
the upper of two terraces. The lower one measuring in front, from north
to south, two hundred and twenty three feet, and is still in good
preservation. A grand staircase, forty-five feet wide, and containing
twenty steps, rises to the platform of this terrace. On each side of the
staircase, forming a sort of balustrade, rest the entwined bodies of two
gigantic serpents, three feet wide, portions of which are still in
place; and amongst the ruins of the staircase a gigantic head, which had
terminated, at one side the foot of the steps. The platform of the
second terrace measured eighty feet in front and fifty-five in depth,
and is reached by another staircase forty-two feet wide and having
forty-two steps. In the centre of the steps and against the wall of the
terrace are the remains of a pedestal six feet high, on which probably
once stood an idol. On the platform, fifteen feet from the last step,
stands the building. It is twenty-two feet in diameter and has four
small doorways facing the cardinal points. Above the cornice the roof
sloped off so as to form an apex. The height, including the terraces, is
little short of sixty feet. The doorways gave entrance to a circular
corridor five feet wide. The inner wall has four doorways, smaller than
the others, and standing intermediately with respect to them. These
doors give entrance to a second circular corridor, four feet wide, and
in the centre is a circular mass, apparently of solid stone, seven feet
six inches in diameter; but in one place, at the height of eleven feet
from the floor, was a small square-opening, which I endeavoured to clear
out but without success. The roof was so tottering that I could not
discover to what this opening led. The walls of both corridors were
plastered and covered with paintings, and both were covered with a
triangular arch."

Mr. Stephens also found at Mayapan, which city, as we have seen, was
built by Ku Kulcan, the great ruler and demi-god of Chichen-itza, a
dome-shaped edifice of much the same character with that here described.
It is the principal structure here, and stands on a mound thirty feet
high. The walls are ten feet high to the top of the lower cornice, and
fourteen more to the upper one. It has a single entrance towards the
west. The outer wall is five feet thick, within which is a corridor
three feet wide, surrounding a solid cylindrical mass of stone, nine
feet in thickness. The walls have four or five coats of stucco and were
covered with remains of paintings, in which red, yellow, blue and white
were distinctly visible. On the south-west of the building was a double
row of columns, eight feet apart, though probably from the remains
around, there had been more, and by clearing away the trees others might
be found. They were two feet and a half in diameter. We are not informed
upon the point but presumably the columns were arranged, in respect to
the structure, in the same manner as those accompanying the dagobas in
Ceylon, or the mounds of Chichen-itza.

Among the ruins of Chichen are none more remarkable than that called by
the natives "Egclesia" or the Church. It is described by Mr. Stephens as
consisting of "two immense parallel walls each two hundred and
seventy-five feet long, thirty feet thick, and placed one hundred and
twenty feet apart. One hundred feet from the northern extremity, facing
the space between the walls, stands, on a terrace, a building
thirty-five feet long, containing a single chamber, with the front
fallen, and rising among the rubbish the remains of two columns
elaborately ornamented, the whole interior wall being exposed to view,
covered from top to bottom with sculptured figures in bas-relief much
worn and faded. At the southern end also, placed back a hundred feet and
corresponding in position, is another building eighty-one feet long, in
ruins, but also exhibiting the remains of this column richly sculptured.
In the centre of the great stone walls, exactly opposite each other, and
at the height of thirty feet from the ground, are two massive stone
rings, four feet in diameter and one foot one inch thick, the diameter
of the hole is one foot seven inches. On the rim and border are
sculptured two entwined serpents; one of them is feather-headed, the
other is not." May we regard them as allusive to the Serpent God and the
Serpent Goddess of the Aztec mythology? Mr. Stephens is disposed to
regard the singular structure here described as a Gymnasium or Tennis
Court, and supports his opinion by a quotation from Herrara. It seems to
others much more probable that, with the other buildings of the group,
this had an exclusively sacred origin. However that may be, the entwined
serpents are clearly symbolical, inasmuch as we find them elsewhere, in
a much more conspicuous position, and occupying the first place among
the emblematic figures sculptured on the aboriginal temples.

Immediately in connection with this singular structure and constituting
part of the eastern wall, is a building, in many respects the most
interesting visited by Mr. Stephens, and respecting which it is to be
regretted he has not given us a more complete account. It requires no
extraordinary effort of fancy to discover in the sculptures and
paintings with which it is decorated the pictured records of the
teachings of the deified Ku Kulcan, who instructed men in the arts,
taught them in religion, and instituted government. There are
represented processions of figures, covered with ornaments, and carrying
arms. "One of the inner chambers is covered," says Mr. Stephens, "from
the floor to the arched roof, with designs in painting, representing, in
bright and vivid colours, human figures, battles, horses, boats, trees,
and various scenes in domestic life." These correspond very nearly with
the representations on the walls of the ancient Buddhist temples of
Java, which are described by Mr. Crawford as being covered with designs
of "a great variety of subjects, such as processions, audiences,
religious worship, battles, hunting, maritime, and other scenes."

Among the ruins of Uxmal is a structure closely resembling the Egclesia
of Chichen. It consists of two massive walls of stone, one hundred and
twenty-eight feet long, and thirty in thickness, and placed seventy feet
apart. So far as could be made out, they are exactly alike in plan and
ornament. The sides facing each other are embellished with sculpture,
and upon both remain the fragments of entwined colossal serpents which
run the whole length of the walls. In the centre of each facade, as at
Chichen, were the fragments of a great stone ring, which had been broken
off and probably destroyed. It would therefore seem that the emblem of
the entwined serpents was significant of the purposes to which these
structures were dedicated. The destruction of these stones is another
evidence of their religious character; for the conquerors always
directed their destroying zeal against those monuments, or parts of
monuments, most venerated and valued by the Indians, and which were
deemed most intimately connected with their superstitions.

Two hundred feet to the south of this edifice is another large and
imposing structure, called Casa de las Monjas, House of the Nuns. It
stands on the highest terraces, and is reached by a flight of steps. It
is quadrangular in form, with a courtyard in the centre. This is two
hundred and fourteen by two hundred and fifty-eight. "Passing through
the arched gateway," says Mr. Stephens, "we enter this noble courtyard,
with four great facades looking down upon it, each ornamented from one
end to the other with the richest and most elaborate carving known in
the art of the builders. The facade on the left is most richly
ornamented, but is much ruined. It is one hundred and sixty feet long,
and is distinguished by two colossal serpents entwined, running through
and encompassing nearly all the ornaments is most entire, the tail of
one serpent is held up nearly over the head of the other, and has an
ornament upon it like a turban with a plume of feathers. There are marks
upon the extremity of the tail, probably intended to represent the
rattlesnake, with which the country abounds. The lower serpent has its
monstrous jaws wide open, and within there is a human head, the face of
which is distinctly visible in the stone. The head and tail of the two
serpents at the south end of the facade are said to have corresponded
with those at the north, and when the whole was entire, in 1836, the
serpents were seen encircling every ornament of the building. The bodies
of the serpents are covered with feathers. Its ruins present a lively
idea of the large and many well-constructed buildings of lime and stone,
which Bernal Diaz saw at Campeachy, with figures of serpents and idols
painted on their walls." Mr. Norman mentions that the heads of the
serpents were adorned with plumes of feathers, and that the tails showed
the peculiarity of the rattlesnake.  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

The eastern facade, opposite that just described, is less elaborately,
but more tastefully ornamented. Over each doorway is an ornament
representing the Sun. In every instance there is a face in the centre,
with the tongue projected, surmounted by an elaborate head-dress;
between the bars there is also a range of many lozenge-shaped ornaments,
in which the remains of red paint are distinctly visible, and at each
end is a serpent's head with the mouth open. The ornament over the
principal doorway is much more complicated and elaborate, and of that
marked and peculiar style which characterizes the highest efforts of the
builders.

The central figure, with the projecting tongue, is probably that of the
Sun, and in general design coincides with the central figure sculptured
on the great calendar stone of Mexico, and with that found by Mr.
Stephens on the walls of Casa No. 3 at Palenque, where it is represented
as an object of admiration. The protrusion of the tongue signified,
among the Aztecs, ability to speak, and denoted life or existence. Among
the Sclavonian nations, the idea of vitality was conveyed by ability to
eat, as it is by to breathe among ourselves, and to walk among the
Indians of the Algonquin stock.

Although Central America was occupied by nations independent of those of
Mexico proper, yet some of them (as those inhabiting the Pacific coast,
as far south as Nicaragua) were descended directly from them, and all
had striking features in common with them. Their languages were in
general different, but cognate; their architecture was essentially the
same; and their religion, we have every reason for believing, was not
widely different, though doubtless that of the south was less ferocious
in its character, and not so generally disfigured by human sacrifices.

We may therefore look with entire safety for common mythological
notions, especially when we are assured of the fact that, whatever its
modifications, the religion of the continent is essentially the same;
and especially when we know that whatever differences may have existed
amongst the various nations of Mexico and Central America, the elements
of their religion were derived from a common Tottecan root.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](oph05.htm#fr_0) Herrara, Hist. America, vol.
iv., pp. 162-3

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](oph05.htm#fr_1) Trav. in Yucatan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](oph06)
