[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei04)  [Next](jei06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# CHAPTER II.

## THE NEBULA AND ITS EVOLUTION

Probably the most important concept in the whole realm of astronomy is
that of the nebula; for it was only when the idea of the nebula as the
original material of planetary evolution was advanced, that astronomy
could be put upon a really scientific basis. Until the actual genesis of
solar systems and planets could be accounted for in some measure,
astronomy was merely descriptive. The credit for stating the nebular
hypothesis goes to Kant and Laplace, who, however, based their
speculations upon the law of gravity only. Since that day the nebular
hypothesis has undergone many modifications, as actual observation of
the heavens through telescopes and later through photographic means, to
say nothing of our general knowledge of physics, has progressed.

### HOW CELESTIAL BODIES ARE DERIVED FROM NEBULAE

The latest modification of the theory of how other celestial bodies are
derived from nebula is the one proposed in this book. That the reader
may understand both the original theory and the chain of logic and
observation by which this new theory grows out of it, we shall briefly
summarize the older ideas, giving the scientific authorities for them,
and showing

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span id="img_03600"></span></p>
<p><a href="img/03600.jpg"><img src="tn/03600.jpg" alt="Ring Nebula in Lyra" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
<br />
</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><span id="img_03601"></span></p>
<p><a href="img/03601.jpg"><img src="tn/03601.jpg" alt="A Spiral Nebula" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
<br />
</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>Photographed at Lick Observatory</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p><a href="errata.htm#5">Photographed</a> at Yerkes Observatory, January 3, 1912</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>The ring or hollow shell nebula in Lyra was evolved from masses of nebulous matter, showing the polar opening and central sun, which will finally evolve itself into a new planet.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="327"><p>A spiral nebula showing the central nucleus projecting masses of nebulous matter which forms a ring or wall around this central body, as clearly shown in the accompanying reproduction of a ring nebula.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

how these authorities have gradually worked to a point, without knowing
it, of course, where our theory and ours alone, fits all their facts and
draws them together in a consistent explanation of what is actually
happening in the heavens as the stars form and go through their
immensely long life-cycles.

### THE MILKY WAY AND ANDROMEDA

But the reader will first wish to get a very general idea of the field
we are to discuss in this chapter. Probably to most people the word
nebula conveys an idea almost as hazy as the Milky Way to the naked eye.
In fact many people think that the Milky Way is a nebula and let it go
at that. Others think that nebula are merely clusters of very distant
stars--such as we do see in the Milky Way. But as a matter of fact there
is only one nebula in the whole sky that can be seen without the aid of
a telescope, and that is the so-called "Great Nebula in Andromeda". Of
this nebula, George F. Chambers, in his little book, "The Story of the
Stars," says:

"There is one elliptic nebula which stands out beyond all the rest, yet
its great size, brilliancy, and peculiar features forbid its being
regarded as a typical elliptic nebula. I am here alluding to the 'Great
Nebula in Andromeda,' Messier's 31st. Its ellipticity is considerable;
it is likewise very long, and has a bright central condensation which
renders it readily discoverable by the naked eye on a clear night."

Of course, with the naked eye we cannot see any

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

details, but with the telescope this nebula is found to have a well
defined structure, and all other nebulæ are found to have certain
structural characteristics in common, the nearer ones giving every
evidence, as we shall see later on, that they are not clusters of stars
at all that idea having been absolutely exploded.

### ARE NEBULAE STELLAR OR GASEOUS?

We need to accentuate that last point because it is still overlooked in
many of the more popular books. Thus in Mr. Chamber's book just referred
to, the author begins his chapter on nebulæ by saying that "many or most
are [probably](errata.htm#6.md) stellar in their constitution, though some
of them, however, may be not such but gaseous." As a matter of fact a
few of the early discoveries of glowing masses in the sky were thought
to be nebula but later research has shown them to be extremely distant
star-clusters, so far away that only the highest power telescopes would
resolve them, some so far away that we cannot resolve them at all into
their constituent stars. Then how, asks the reader, can you tell that
all nebula are not stars?

### THE SPECTROSCOPE SUPPLIES THE ANSWER

The answer is, by the spectroscope. Later on in this chapter we shall
see astronomers referring to this instrument and its discoveries more
than once--in fact on it depends our whole theory in a way, for if the
nebulæ were really stars our theory would fall to the ground. So a word
here may not be amiss.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

The spectroscope is simply a prism with a sort of small telescope at one
side of it, through which is led, by suitable means, the light from any
object from a candle flame to a star. At the other side is a barrel
containing other lenses which act more as a microscope and magnify and
define the ray of light which has been led into the prism. Now a ray of
white light is split up by the prism into the seven colors of the
rainbow, and the light of a candle flame is split up in-to its
constituents. Also when any chemical substance is burned and the
incandescence from it's burning is analysed in this way, we can read by
the colors of the broken up light just what elements are present in the
chemical substance. In this way we can identify the elements in the sun
and in other burning or incandescent heavenly bodies. And the light from
bodies like the stars gives one sort of "spectrum," as the colored band
of broken light in the prism is named. And the light from nebulæ gives
an altogether different sort of effect, due to the presence of luminous
gasses. Thus the spectroscope has proven absolutely that the
[nebula](errata.htm#7.md) is not made up of stars.

### SIMON NEWCOMB ON LAPLACE'S THEORY

As Simon Newcomb summarizes the matter in his "Popular Astronomy,"
Laplace observed that the planets moved around the sun--of our solar
system--in the same direction in which the sun rotates on its axis, and
in the same plane. Laplace explained this

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

uniformity of motion by assuming that once the atmosphere of the sun had
occupied all the space now occupied by the planets of the solar system.
From mechanical laws he knew that the sum total of rotary motion must at
all times be the same in the same system. In the beginning, therefore,
he assumed, the sun with its immense fiery atmosphere had a slow
rotation upon its axis. The mass, being extremely hot, would cool off
and as it did so would contract toward the center. But as it contracted
its velocity of rotation would increase--that is a fundamental law of
physics--so that at a certain time the mass would be whirling so rapidly
that the centrifugal force due to the rotation--the force, that is, that
causes a weight whirled at the end of a string to fly away when one
releases the string--would counterbalance the attractive force of the
central mass. Then those outer portions would be left as a ring,
rotating around the center, while the inner portions would continue to
contract until in their turn their velocity caused them to stay on a
circular course of their own, forming an inner ring. In this way a
succession of rings would be formed, revolving around the common center
in the same direction.

Soon, however, these rings would begin to cool off, and as their denser
materials would cool sooner than the others and begin to condense; then
the denser parts would attract the less dense parts, by gravitation, and
at last we should have a single solid mass

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

surrounded by vapor, revolving around the sun at the same distance and
in the same plane in which the ring had revolved from which it was
derived. Laplace thus accounted for the evolution of a whole solar
system from a nebula, and in the same way he accounted for the formation
of the satellites that surround the planets in some cases as the planets
surround the sun. In the case of the planet Saturn, he observed that the
gas of the rings was so uniform in density that none of it had cooled in
advance of the rest, and so the ring has remained as we see it today
through our telescopes.

### PROFESSOR MOULTON CRITICIZES LAPLACE

But there were weak places in Laplace's hypothesis. If we turn to
Professor Forest Ray Moulton's "An Introduction to Astronomy", page 454,
we shall find these objections summarized. The author, in collaboration
with Chamberlin in 1900, studied the problem from actual observations
tested by the principles of dynamics, and found a number of phenomena
that contradicted the hypothesis. We need not enter into all of these,
but one or two of them are very important from our standpoint. For
instance, if a ring were formed as Laplace supposed, "it
[would](errata.htm#8.md) be so widely extended that the mutual gravitation
of its parts would be very feeble, and according to the kinetic theory
of gases"--which describes how their particles repel one another and
states the laws governing

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

that repulsion--"the lighter elements would escape. But the lightest
known element, hydrogen, is abundant on the earth, though it is now in
chemical combination with other elements". It is also very doubtful,
according to Moulton, whether the rings would condense into masses in
the way Laplace assumes. And Moulton further thinks that the theory is
rendered quite untenable by the fact that the amount of rotation which
the whole nebula originally had, and which in its present evolved form
it still ought to have (according to the law of the conservation of
energy) is only one two-hundredth of what it ought to be. So Mouton
dismisses the Laplacean hypothesis and then goes on to discuss its
successor, Chamberlin's Planetesimal hypothesis or Spiral hypothesis, in
which it is assumed that the solar system is evolved from a spiral
nebula.

### TELESCOPIC OBSERVATION OF NEBULAE

But before going into that, let us see what the nebula are actually like
when studied by telescope and telescopic photograph. Let us see what a
spiral nebula is and what other forms beside the spiral they take. One
of the best general descriptions of the various forms of nebulæ will be
found in "Curiosities of the Sky" by Garrett P. Serviss, chapter VI. In
1899, Garrett tells us, Professor Keeler discovered, by photographing
them, that the majority of nebula were not only glowing masses of
gaseous matter,

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

but had definite forms. They were, for the most part, spiral with a
central nucleus, and while there are other forms of nebula, the "ring"
and the "planetary," it is a question, says Serviss, whether every
nebula has not at least a tendency to be spiral. But at least, Serviss
says the ring and planetary nebulæ serve, insofar as they exist at all,
to support Laplace's theory, while the spiral nebula apparently play
into the hands of Professor Chamberlin and his planetesimal hypothesis.

### DO THE NEBULAE POINT TO A NEW THEORY?

If now we approach the nebula with mere detailed examination, can we see
anything common to all forms of nebula, something which might lead to a
theory which is neither that of Laplace nor of Chamberlin. To answer
this question let us turn to a very detailed description of the nebula,
that of the great English astronomer, Sir Robert Ball, given in his
wonderfully illustrated volume, "A Popular Guide to the Heavens". Here
is his description, accompanied by a plate, of "The Spiral Nebula in
Canes Venatici".

### THE SPIRAL NEBULA IN CANES VENATICI

"This, the most famous of the Spiral Nebula, had its true character
first recognized by Lord Rosse with his great reflector at Parsonstown
in Ireland. We are so happily situated with respect to it that we get a
fair view of it, and can trace in considerable detail

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

how its branches are interlaced and studded with condensations which
look as if they are on the way to become stars. Recent photographic work
has shown that a large proportion of the nebula, both known and hitherto
unknown, are spirals, and this form must now be considered almost the
rule instead of the exception".

Our only observation here would be that the condensed portions are
certainly not destined to become stars or planets but that they are
destined to become central suns of planets.

### THE GREAT NEBULA IN ORION

Of "The Great Nebula in Orion" Professor Ball says:

". . . And in this, as in many nebula, we find black holes with edges
surprisingly sharp which are very hard to explain, except upon the
highly speculative assumption that they represent dark material
structures of some kind interposed between us and the shining nebula."

The observation there, is a most interesting one. Its explanation may be
rendered unnecessary by our own further consideration of the matter.

### THE RING NEBULA IN LYRA

But here is Professor Ball's most [interesting](errata.htm#9.md)
description, that of "The Ring Nebula in Lyra": "The central star which
is so conspicuous in the

photograph, is barely visible in the largest telescopes.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

It is much brighter photographically than visibly, probably because its
light is composed chiefly of those rays of short wave length to which
the plate is sensitive but the eye nearly insensitive.

"The photograph shows quite plainly that the ring is not uniformly
bright; there are even some indications that it is composed of several
interlacing or overlapping rings, and it is remarkable how the ring
thins out at the ends of its longest diameter. 'With longer exposures
the center of the ring fills up, and the nebula becomes a disc. It
follows that the ring-like appearance is in a sense deceptive; that the
real shape of the nebula is something like a hollow shell of gas. Of
which the border looks brighter, perhaps, because one is then looking
through a greater depth of the shining matter; but this is at best a
conjecture."

### THE DUMB-BELL NEBULA

Professor Ball also describes the nebula which was discovered to be
whirling around the star Nova Persei in 1901 in which the existence of
the nebula was unnoticed until it was illuminated by a burst of light
from the star. But perhaps the most remarkable photograph of a nebula in
his book is that of "The Dumb-Bell Nebula," in which the spherical
character of the nebula with the two large and not well formed openings
at the two ends of a diameter--that is at opposing poles--are plainly
seen. And Professor Ball himself recognises the kinship of this

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

nebula with that of "The Ring in Lyra" described previously, for he
says:

"It is a striking illustration of the power of photography in depicting
nebula, that it has brought out a distinct resemblance between the
Dumb-Bell in Vulpecula and the Ring in Lyra which could hardly have been
suspected from the visual appearance of these objects. If we imagine the
nebulosity, which exists inside the ring, to shine a little more
brightly, so that it fills up the Ring, and at the same time imagine the
tendency towards thinning out at the ends of the longest diameter to be
a little more pronounced, we shall see how easily the ring might be
transformed into the Dumb-Bell. Both are gaseous and both have a central
star. It is difficult to resist the conclusion that the two nebula are
closely related in kind."

### THE EVIDENT EVOLUTION OF NEBULAE

What does that mean but that the nebulæ are evolving toward a certain
form? Toward a form that is roughly suggested by the last described
nebula with its spherical skin broken at two opposite poles and its
central star, or, why not call it its central sun?

Sir Robert Ball then gives us a link between an annular and what may be
called a planetary nebula. Fortunately we are able to pursue the subject
a little further. Writing in the *Scientific American Supplement*, Vol.
XXXIV, page 13909, Miss A. M. Clerke tells about the advances in
observing planetary

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

nebula made possible through photography. By photography the lines in
the nebular spectrum can be examined and the central nuclei are seen to
be masses of luminous gas, on its progress toward condensation. It will
have been noticed that some of the investigators quoted, refer to these
nuclei as stars. If they had really been stars seen through the haze of
the nebula itself, then good-bye to our theory. But here Professor
Moulton may be quoted in corroboration:

"All the nebula except the spirals have bright-line spectra instead of
dark-line spectra like those of the sun and stars. This shows, in
accordance with the principle of spectrum analysis, that the nebulas are
masses of incandescent gas rather than luminous solids or liquids
shining through cooler gases. Be-fore these results were obtained by the
spectroscope it was supposed that perhaps the nebula were other galaxies
of stars so far away that their individual members were not separately
visible. The spectroscope, however, proves they are gaseous and this
conclusion is in harmony with other considerations regarding the
evolution of suns."--*Descriptive Astronomy*.

But to return to Miss Clerke. She, too, refers to the nebula in Lyra
whose description by Ball we have quoted. When it was photographed by a
French astronomer, M. Trepied, it was found that the difference between
its type and that of the planetary nebulæ

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

was more apparent to the eye than real by the test of the camera. And in
fact, she goes on:

"The distinction between annular and planetary nebulæ has been to a
great extent abolished by the use of improved optical appliances. Each
kind seems to be made up of three essential parts: a faintly shining
disc--or globe projected into a disc--a ring-like condensation near its
outer margin, and a central nucleus presenting the appearance of a star.
The last feature is often seen only with extreme difficulty, but there
is reason to believe that it always exists. Mr. Burnham, who has
measured a large number of these objects with the 36-inch Lick, for the
purpose of providing a standard of comparison for the determination of
their possible future movements, goes so far as to suggest that the
presence of a central star should be regarded as the criterion of
classification for planetary nebulæ."

### BURNHAM IN CENTRAL NUCLEI

Miss Clerke then quotes Burnham to the effect that he considers these
central nuclei to be true stars, that is to say, stars already formed
irrespective of the gasses that surround them; and she goes on to show,
through photographic data that they are not true stars at all. She gives
Professor Holden's description of the nebula in Aquarius which was a
pale blue with a white nucleus and with "interior arrangements" which
were "evidently extremely intricate." She goes on:

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

"A strikingly similar object is situated in the constellation Andromeda.
Imperfectly seen at first as a uniform, greenish blue disc, an interior
vacuity detected at Parsonstown betrayed its true nature to be rather
annular than simply planetary. Nor is the ring it includes by any means
[symmetrically](errata.htm#10.md) shaped. Lassell considered it to be
bi-annular. Professor Vogel was impressed with the warped and twisted
aspect of what may conceivably prove to be a multiple combination of
rings thrown off in various planes. Closely wound spiral branches, and a
central star were observed with the Ross reflector.

### DR. SCHEINER'S PHOTOGRAPHS

"The photographic study of these two nebula/ lately set on foot by Dr.
Schemer at Potsdam, may be expected to add much and rapidly to our
knowledge of their nature and conformation. The images obtained of them,
although only half a [millemetre](errata.htm#11.md) in diameter, show a
considerable amount of detail. They confirm the annular shape attributed
to them on the warrant of telescopic observations, and bring out, with
singular strength the central nuclei which the best telescopes have not
always availed to display. In the photographs these are, nevertheless,
the brightest parts of each conformation. Yet they are mere irregular
condensations with no pretentions to a stellar nature. The superiority
of their actinic power repeats the phenomenon first brought into notice
by

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

photographs of the Lyra nebula, and seems to point to a general law. Dr.
Schemer thinks it can only be accounted for by supposing a predominant
quantity of some peculiar gas emitting, in the main a highly refrangible
light, to be collected in the central regions of planetary nebulæ, yet
the resulting nuclei, when they can be seen at all, shine with a white
light, bear a star-like aspect, and probably give continuous spectra.
The problem of their real constitution is thus far from easy to solve.
But whatever the secret of their photographic effectiveness, it is
already tolerably evident that they, play a part of fundamental
importance in primary seats of the forces by which these interesting
objects are moulded into characteristic shapes . . ".

### A PROPHETIC SENTENCE

There is something prophetic about the last sentence quoted. Coming as
it does after the remarks upon the light emitting powers of the
nuclei--a suggestion, it will be noticed, that they may be small suns,
certainly lurks in those remarks about the action of the nucleus on the
camera plate--coming after those remarks, that last sentence, although
its author does not seem to recognize it, plainly hints at the planetary
and annular nebula as systems in which a central sun not only
illuminates but controls (the "primary seats of the forces," etc.) the
outer rings or discs--that is, holds them by gravity.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### CONCERNING PLANETARY NEBULAE

But before pursuing this further we may as well obtain more
evidence--for there is plenty of it. Miss Clerke, in an article in the
*Scientific American Supplement*, Vol. LVIII, page 24122, remarks that
in all planetary nebulæ the nuclear star "appears to act as the pivot of
the surrounding vaporous structure." But she admits that "the question,
however, is still open as to the real nature of the connection between
the planetaries and their central star." She mentions a theory that the
central star is "fed" by the outer nebula, but she admits that there are
not enough facts to back it up. She discusses the centripetal tendency
which would cause the central star in every case gradually to attract
and incorporate the larger outside shell, but she reminds us that
repulsive forces are active in such systems as well as concentrative
ones, and she admits that as far as orthodox astronomy is concerned the
riddles of nebula formation are not solved.

### EARLY OBSERVATIONS OF NEBULAE

It is interesting to note that the central star, although its
observation has been made much more detailed by photographic methods,
was clearly seen by the earliest investigators. According to Professor
C. A. Chant, writing in the Scientific American Supplement, Vol. LXXV,
page 88, Simon Marius made the first of such observations in 1612, two
years after Galileo had invented the telescope. Marius' description

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

of the nebular nucleus is very suggestive; he compares it to "the flame
of a candle seen through a transparent horn." Many years later Hershel
observing this same nebula--it is the Great Nebula in the Constellation
of Andromeda--notices that the central point "though very much brighter
than the rest, is decidedly not a star."

### NUMBER OF NEBULÆ IN THE VISIBLE HEAVENS

Russell Sullivan, writing in the *Scientific American Supplement*, Vol.
LXXIX, page 287, on the planetary nebulæ, remarks that their number is
very small compared with the spirals, the known ones being counted by
the score, while it has been calculated that there are over 500,000
nebulæ in the heavens as we know them. He notes that there is "often" a
central star or haze,--really always, as we have seen--so that the
nebula is not, as Herschell had supposed, a mere hollow sphere. It is,
however, hollow, often presenting an elliptical appearance.

### THE SHELL-LIKE STRUCTURE AND THE CENTRAL STAR

That the typical nebula has a remarkable shell-like structure and a
central star--which together form the basis of the evolution of every
planet according to our theory--is well brought out in a remarkable
series of observations described by Dr. Heber D. Curtis of the
Astronomical Society of the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Pacific, briefly reported in the *Scientific
American* of October 14, 1916. The report follows:

"Fifty of these nebulæ have been studied
[photographically](errata.htm#12.md) with the Crosly reflector, using
different lengths of exposure in order to bring out the structural
details of the bright central portions as well as of the fainter,
outlying parts. Most planetary nebulæ show a more or less regular ring
or shell structure generally with a central star."

A paper by Messrs. Campbel and More presented at the same meeting gave
the results of a search made with a spectrograph and the Lick 36-inch
telescope for rotation effects in 33 planetary nebulæ. Definite evidence
of rotation was found in 16 and suspected in five others.

### CONDENSATION AND ROTATION

There it will be seen are evidences of all the phenomena which we claim
are associated with the beginnings of planets, a separation of the
nebulous mass into a central star or sun and an outer envelope whose
inner walls are probably repelled in some degree at least by the light
from the central star--as light has been proved to exert a small but
definite pressure--and the rotation of the whole affair which causes it
to take the form which later condenses into the planets as we know them.
It may also be noted here that in planetary nebula a greenish color is
always noticeable showing that condensation has preceded further than
the purely incandescent stage.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

But the orthodox astronomer pays less attention to the shell-like nebula
than he does to the spiral, and as we have seen, Chamberlin would derive
the evolution of our solar system from a spiral nebula. Professor T. J.
J. See writes about this in the *Scientific American Supplement*, Vol.
LXIII, page 26,008. He points out that we have no proof as yet that the
nebula do form stars or systems of stars. (Our sun is a star; the earth
is not) He says that speculation on the spiral nebula has gone wild and
that it is time to call a halt.

"There is not the slightest probability that our solar system was ever
part of a spiral nebula, and such a suggestion is simply misleading and
mischievous. The great circularity of the planetary orbits shows the
absurdity of such a hypothesis, and this leading characteristic of our
system as bearing on its mode of origin was carefully considered by
Leplace more than a century ago.

"At present we must frankly admit that the nature of the spiral nebula
is quite unknown. And while we cannot be sure that nebulæ develop into
stars we may justly hold that the stars are outgrowths of gravitational
condensation of matter which was once dark."

In other words, whatever spiral nebula developed into, according to See
they do not develop into stars or suns. We doubt, he says, "whether the
forms of the nebulæ can be expected to disclose the processes of stellar
evolution."

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

But there is certainly evolution going on in them. If it be not the
evolution of suns or stars, may it not be the evolution of planets?

### SERVISS ON LAPLACE

But if the reader wishes more detailed criticism of the idea so opposed
by See, let him turn to Garrett P. Serviss'"Curiosities of the Sky". Mr.
Serviss points out that it is much easier to criticize Laplace's theory
of nebular evolution than it is to replace it. He pictures the great
whirling nebula observed by Lord Rosse with its striking "appearance of
violent whirling motion," and its apparent tearing up by centrifugal
force--which is apparent only, as further observation shows that the
masses apart from the center are not being hurled off but have definite
orbits. There is there, says Serviss, no confirmation of the Laplacean
hypothesis, but, he asks, "What hypothesis will fit the facts?"

### OUR ANSWER TO THIS CHALLENGE

Let us endeavor to answer him.

The foregoing observations may have seemed to the reader who is
unacquainted with astronomy to be tedious and to lead nowhither. But
they have been necessary and we will now proceed to draw the threads
together. What have we really discovered? We have discovered, in the
first place that there are large gaseous bodies in the sky with glowing
nuclei and shell-like or spiral outer boundaries, and that in

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

some way planets come from these. But neither Laplace's theory or
Chamberlin's theory of how this evolution comes about fits the facts. We
have read admissions from more than one astronomer that the facts they
observe cannot be fitted into any coherent theory of planetary
evolution. We have adduced abundant evidence from the best sources that
any one force, centrifugal or otherwise, cannot account for what we see.

### WHAT WE ACTUALLY SEE GOING ON

Now what is it that we actually do see? In the first place a very large
number of spiral nebular; in the second place a much smaller number of
nebulæ which look either annular or planetary shaped to the eye, but
which Sir Robert Ball tells us, in the quotation given before, are
related and tend to have a shell-like circumference and always have a
central nucleus which is not a star. We remember also the quotation from
the *Scientific American* in which Dr. Heber Curtis told the
Astronomical Society of the Pacific that recent observations of
planetary nebulæ showed them to have a shell-like structure and a
central nucleus. Now there is no way of telling by looking at these
nebulæ which are the oldest, the spirals or the shells. To tell that, we
have to make an inference, but it is a very obvious one. Evolution is
always from the relatively unorganized and chaotic to the relatively
organized and orderly. Obviously, if there

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

is any evolution at all, it must be from the wildly whirling, chaotic
spiral nebulæ to the shell form with its relatively stable exterior and
its nucleus within. In other words the spiral nebula is the first stage;
the shell-like nebula is the second. What is the third?

### MOULTON AND CHAMBERLIN'S THEORIES

The usual answer is: a solar system. But Moulton has shown the
impossibility of this in his criticism of the Laplacean theory. The
reader will remember that, among other things, he argued that all the
lighter elements such as hydrogen would fly off first and be present
only in the outer planets of the so-evolved solar system, while we know
that that has not been the case in our own--there is hydrogen on earth
and even in the sun. And Chamberlin's theory on the other hand can only
successfully deal with the spiral nebulæ; it ignores the evolution of
the spiral into a shell-like nebula; to say nothing of the fact that
Serviss in the book already referred to in this chapter, criticised that
theory in a number of details. The Laplacean theory, he says, is
infinitely simpler, "and with proper modifications could probably be
made more consonant with existing facts in our solar system than that
which is offered to replace it. Even as an explanation of the spiral
nebulæ, not as solar systems in process of formation, but as the
birth-places of stellar clusters, the Planetesimal Hypothesis

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

would be open to many objections. Granting its assumptions, it has
undoubtedly a strong mathematical framework, but the trouble is not with
the mathematics but with the assumptions. . . . . . "

### WHY NOT A PLANET?

But supposing the final stage in the evolution of a nebula is not a sun
or a solar system but a single planet? We should then be able to explain
the evolution of the nebula satisfactorily but we should have to revise
our notion of the structure of the typical planet. But that is precisely
what we are willing to do, because we have all sorts of evidence, in
varying fields, that the actual structure of the earth, Mars, and
Venus,--and hence, we may assume of every planet throughout the stellar
universe, is just what we should expect from the period of their
evolution that is open to our discovery in the observation of the
nebulæ.

### OUR THEORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF THE NEBULA

In short, we hold that the shell-like structure so well described by Sir
Robert Ball, grows more and more definite as the nebula cools, until it
solidifies. We hold that the central sun which holds it by gravitational
contraction in its spherical circumference also cools and contracts but
keeps its relative position. And we further hold that the black
apertures which Ball also describes (and pictures) as characterizing

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

the Dumb-bell Nebula are typical of the two openings which are always
left when the nebula cools into a planet. Owing to the fact that the
planets are not spherical but are oblate spheroids, that is to say
having their greatest circumference at the equator, and owing, too, to
such force-factors as the varying centrifugal force due to the unequal
sphericity of the orb and the oscillation of the outer envelope around
its axis, the two polar openings which are so distinctly shown in the
Dumb-bell nebula are gradually formed.

### REFERRING TO THE DUMB-BELL NEBULA

If the reader refer to any book on astronomy preferably Ball's--which
contains a picture of this nebula he will readily see how this occurs.
The nebula is so called because the two larger polar openings form two
scooped-out spaces in what would otherwise be a spherical, or more
exactly spheroidal body. Imagine an apple with two very large bites
taken out of opposite sides, the center of each bite being one end of a
diameter, and you have a very clear representation of this particular
nebula. But why, the reader may ask, should this particular shaping take
place rather than any other. Why should this whirling motion and
differentiation of parts end in the formation of planets with two polar
openings, one at each terminus of the axis of rotation? The answer is
simple. We know that the earth is not a

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

spherical body but an oblate spheroid, that is to say it is a body whose
equatorial diameter is greater than its polar diameter; in other words,
the polar axis is shorter--the poles are flattened. This is the case in
all planets we can observe with the telescope. That it would naturally
be the case follows from the nature of the centrifugal force. If a
spindle is revolved very rapidly, and water thrown upon it, the water is
hurled away again, in a direction away from the spindle, at right angles
to its axis of rotation. Now, in the case of the nebula that became the
earth--or we can substitute the case of any other planet--we have the
force of gravity holding the whole envelope of the nebula in a clustered
mass around the central nucleus; we have the centrifugal force throwing
it off in an envelope and always tending to throw off the outer portions
of it away from its axis of rotation and more toward the equator than
toward the poles--for that is the direction in which the centrifugal
force acts--so that the equatorial diameter would be established as soon
as the centrifugal force and the gravitational force balanced, and the
attraction of the greater mass of the envelope for the very thin part of
the envelope at the poles would cause the opening gradually to define
itself. As soon as the very thin vapor at the actual poles was attracted
a little toward the equator it would come within the play of the
centrifugal force and would then also be pushed out a little so that the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

lips of the polar opening would gradually be defined, as indeed, in the
Dumb-bell nebula we see them gradually getting defined. Then, as the
mass liquefied and ultimately hardened, the inner sun would also have
shrunk, and the light that once shone through the outer envelope would
now be illuminating its inner side and only escaping through the polar
openings. And from that point the evolution of the surface of the planet
goes on in the way that has so often been described, with constant
[upheavals](errata.htm#13.md) at first, with the separation of land and
water after the planet has cooled to the point where water can form, and
who can doubt that some similar sort of evolution has gone on in the
inside and hidden portion of the planet?

### DETAILED PROOFS WILL FOLLOW

The reader who is astonished at the idea of such an evolution as this
must remember that in the succeeding pages we shall give detailed proofs
from the observations of such near planets as Mars, Mercury and Venus,
and from explorations of the earth itself to support this theory. But
before considering the planets let us here consider another body met
with in the heavens--the comet.

### THE COMET EXPLAINED

Our theory explains the comet, and the comet agrees with the other
celestial bodies in illustrating our theory. A comet is a body, coming
from outer

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

space across our skies, with a relatively small solid or fused head, and
with an enormous gaseous tail streaming behind. Whether some travel in
orbits which are not closed curves and so will never bring them back to
our sky--or whether they do have extremely eccentric but closed orbits
is a mooted question. Many of them, however, do return, but it is known
that when the comet approaches the head contracts and a nucleus is
clearly seen, a nucleus which alone is solid or fused while all the rest
of the comet is gaseous.

The mystery of the comet lies in its tail. Serviss quotes Herschell as
declaring that a profound secret lay there. But if we suppose that the
nucleus of a comet is the same as the nucleus of a planet, does it not
follow that the tail of exceedingly imponderable and scattered matter is
the remains of what had once been an outer shell. In other words a comet
is a planet which has died. Either through coming into the orbit of some
immensely greater planet or into that of a sun, it has been torn from
its own orbit, brought into an area of contending forces, possibly even
has collided with another planet, had its outer shell broken up and
sublimated by the great heat into the most tenuous sort of a gas which
trails after the nucleus which was once central but which now heads the
strange celestial procession of matter that we call a comet.

 

<span id="img_06200"></span>

[![A PHOTOGRAPHIC REPRODUCTION OF A DRAWING SHOWING THE HEAD OF DONATI'S
COMET AS SEEN IN 1853](tn/06200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06200.jpg.md)  
A PHOTOGRAPHIC REPRODUCTION OF A DRAWING SHOWING THE HEAD OF DONATI'S
COMET AS SEEN IN 1853  

Nothing could more strikingly support our theory than the above
illustration. It is taken from a drawing of Donati's Comet, as seen from
Cambridge Observatory on October 1st, 1853. The central nucleus is very
plainly seen, surrounded by a sphere of glowing gases, and enclosed by
an outer envelope. The comet is passing through an area of conflicting
forces, and this, and perhaps the excessive heat of the body has caused
the great split which extends through the envelope to the central sun
itself. A comet is simply a planet which is disintegrating, and this
photograph shows us the disintegration taking place, and just far enough
advanced so that we can see the inner structure of the planet. And that
structure is precisely what our theory says is the actual structure of
all planets, our earth included. As the reader continues in this book
let him bear this picture in mind, and he will be more and more struck
by the happy manner in which the theory is verified by the structure
here shown. And let him remember that this picture was not made up to
support our theory, for it was made many years before our theory was
promulgated.

 

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### MOULTON ON COMETS

How closely this view fits may be seen from Moulton's "Descriptive
Astronomy" in which he tells us that while the head with its "small
bright nucleus" measures from ten thousand to a million miles and the
tail may stream away 100,000,000 miles, the actual nucleus itself only
measures a few hundred miles in diameter, varying "in an irregular
fashion". But that is precisely what we should expect if the nucleus had
once been an interior sun, for a few hundred miles or to the most a few
thousand would be just the dimensions which we should expect the
interior suns to have varying, of course, with the size of the planets.
And here is still more remarkable testimony. Hector MacPherson tells us
in his book, "The Romance of Modern Astronomy" that the great comet of
1811, with a tail stretching for a hundred million miles behind and
fifteen million miles in breadth, had a nucleus that according to
measurements by [Herschell](errata.htm#14.md) was only 428 miles in
diameter. The comet of Donati, detected from a Florence observatory in
1858, had a nucleus which "shone with a brilliance equal to that of the
Polar Star" and which was 630 miles in diameter. MacPherson also tells
us how comets tend to break up into showers of meteors. They are "not
lasting" bodies but "even in the short period of man's life comets have
been seen to break up and disappear". Surely that fact coupled with the
size of the average nucleus shows us that a

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

comet is in very truth the last state of a planet after it had been
broken up, and before its last vestige--the central sun--in its turn is
broken into fragments.

### CELLULAR STRUCTURE [THROUGHOUT](errata.htm#15.md) THE UNIVERSE

It is perhaps aside from our main argument, but the likeness between the
cellular structure of the living body, the cellular structure of the
atom, which is now thought to be a highly complex thing, and the
supposed cellular structure of the heavenly bodies has not hitherto been
pointed out. But only if our theory be true are the heavens really
filled with cellular bodies. If our theory be true, the planet is seen
to be a body very like the protoplasmic sell of the living animal or
plant, which has its outer envelope and its central nucleus. And we must
remember too, that the atom, as modern science views it, is a system of
tiny particles which form a sort of envelope around a pivotal point. At
all events the analogy is a striking one although we do not wish to push
it too far or to deduce anything from it. After all, there is so much
direct evidence from every angle to support this theory that we can
afford to leave severely alone all mere reasoning from analogy and
fantastic comparison.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Mars](jei06.md)
