[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei09)  [Next](jei11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

## NORDENSKIOLD'S VOYAGES

The next Arctic explorer whom we shall follow in his voyages is Adolf
Erik Nordenskiold whose experiences in the Arctic extended over
twenty-one years. Nordenskiold was a Finnish professor, and on all his
expeditions he was accompanied by a staff of scientists. So the
following observations are no mere pieces of unsupported guess-work but
the findings of a man whose name has been made known the world over by
the brilliant and thorough-going nature of the discoveries he made.

### TWENTY-ONE YEARS' WORK

Nordenskiold's Arctic expeditions were made under the auspices of the
Swedish government. His first serious attempt at a polar voyage was made
in 1861, starting out from Tromsoe for a comprehensive survey of
Spitzbergen. The party had just passed Amsterdam Island, according to
Alexander Leslie who prepared the book, "The Arctic Voyages of Adolf
Erik Nordenskiold," when a very interesting observation was made. Here
is the account of it:

### BIRD AND INSECT LIFE

"During the whole voyage no birds had been seen but auks and black
guillemots, on their way northward

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

in immense flocks to revisit their old breeding grounds. The same night,
however, (23rd May), great numbers of barnacle geese (Anser bernicla)
were seen flying towards the northwest, perhaps to some land more
northerly then Spitzbergen. The existence of such a land is considered
quite certain by the walrus-hunters, who state that at the most
northerly point hitherto reached such flocks of birds are seen steering
their course in rapid flight yet farther toward the north."

Passing over Nordenskiold's notes on the abundance of insect and other
life in Spitzbergen, we note his surprise at the sudden way in which
summer heat set in. In July the ice suddenly began to break up
especially where it had been undermined by the waves--which would also
sound as if the water of the sea had already reached a fairly high
temperature. He was also surprised at the immense number of auk which he
found as soon as he began his summer expeditions. "Between Dym Point and
Cape Fanshawe the Swedes passed the greatest auk-fell they had hitherto
seen. . . . The air is darkened by the number of fowl flying out of such
a fell when a gun is fired, without it being possible to distinguish any
diminution in consequence in the number of those which sit still so
quietly that some, which had made their nests, could be reached from the
boat and taken with the hand."

"The party next entered Lomme Bay and after

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

landing found a grassy terraced slope on which they killed three deer.
The party could hardly believe them to be the same species of deer that
they had seen at Treurenbery bay four weeks before. Then they were as
lean as if they had consisted entirely of skin, bones, and sinew; these,
on the contrary, might have competed as fat stock. . . ."

### VOYAGE AFTER VOYAGE CONFIRMS OBSERVATIONS

Now it is interesting to note that these observations were confirmed and
extended by Nordenskiold's further researches, and eleven years later we
find him making similar discoveries and having this to say about them
(this observation being made when he was on Parry Island):

"Numerous traces and remains showed that even these islands lying in the
neighborhood of 81 degrees are inhabited in great numbers by very large
animals, which, if the facility of procuring the necessaries of life
were the only condition of their choice of habitat, ought to betake
themselves to far more southerly regions. Numerous foot-prints of bears,
often following the traces of the reins for long distances, showed that
a dangerous enemy to the reindeer lives in this neighborhood."

A little later the explorer notices that the reindeer they shoot are, as
he had once noticed before, much

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

fatter than those shot in his southerly journeyings.

Now those facts. are sufficiently remarkable, but we will not dwell upon
them now because we have further evidence along the same line that will
be developed later in this book and that simply explains once and for
all the reason of these observations which puzzled this great scientist.

More in line with the sort of evidence which we are now particularly
considering are Nordenskiold's observations upon the actual character of
the northern lands. We first note that his views coincide with the other
authorities we have quoted as to the ice only reaching to a certain
latitude and then ending. Here is what he says on that subject:

### EXPLORERS TOO AFRAID OF ICE, HE SAYS

"Of this inland ice the natives entertain a superstitious fear, an awe
or prejudice, which has, in some degree, communicated itself to such
Europeans as have resided long in Greenland. It is only thus that the
curious fact that in the whole thousand years during which Greenland has
been known, so few efforts have been made to pass over the ice farther
into the country can be explained. There are many reasons for believing
that the inland ice merely forms a continuous ice frame, running
parallel with the coast, and surrounding a land free from ice, perhaps
even wooded in its southern parts, which might, perhaps,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

be of great economical importance to the rest of Greenland."

### ESKIMOS GO NAKED

Again, some years later than the time at which the above observation was
made, the explorer on his "North-east passage expedition" noticed that
at certain points which he was enabled to visit along the northeastern
coast of Siberia, the absence of what geologists call "erratic blocks"
or blocks of earth and rock moved by glaciers. This absence proved to
him that there does not exist "in the sea to the northward any such
glacial land as Greenland." He also made an observation which is very
interesting taken in connection with our note in the last chapter about
the Eskimos. The women of the Eskimo tribes with whom he came in contact
on this voyage, whenever they are in their inner tents, "go quite naked,
with the exception of a narrow girdle, probably a reminiscence of the
dress the people wore when they lived in a milder climate."

It will be noticed that between the Eskimo memories of a milder climate
and all the evidence of a milder climate provided by the abundance of
animal life always going to the north to feed or breed we are having
quite a lot of warmth in our polar explorations. And Nordenskiold noted
on this same voyage that the north seemed to be the source of heat. He
says in one place:

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

### WARM WEATHER COMES WITH WIND FROM NORTH

"The wind had now changed from west to north and northwest. The
temperature became milder and the weather rainy, a sign that there must
have been great stretches of open water to the north and northwest."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. With Nansen in the North](jei11.md)
