[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei15)  [Next](jei17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

# CHAPTER XIII.

## OTHER INTERESTING ANIMALS OF THE INTERIOR

The mammoth and mastodon, while giving us our chief evidence that there
is habitable land within the interior of the globe, are not the only
animals which may be studied in this connection. There are records of
other animals living in that land whose like has never been seen on any
portion of the outside globe, only their fossilized or semi-fossilized
remains telling their story.

### OBSERVATIONS OF ANIMALS

Robert B. Cook, writing in *Knowledge* for 1884, tells of the remains
not only of mammoths but of hairy rhinoceros, reindeer, hippopotamus,
lion, and hyena, found in northern glacial deposits, and he claims that
these animals, which are not able to endure cold weather, must either
have been summer visitors during the severity of the glacial period or
have been permanent residents while the country had--as he thinks--a
milder climate. But as the reindeer, lion, and hyena are present day
forms of life and not as old as the mammoth (at least in the form in
which we know them today and in which these remains show them to have
been when they

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

were alive), it is evident that these animals visited the spots where
their remains were found not from southerly climates during early
glacial epochs, but that they are remains of visitors from the land of
the interior. Otherwise these present day forms would not be found
alongside those of the mammoth which we have shown to be a present day
inhabitant of the interior of the earth. Not knowing this, Mr. Cook has
great difficulty in explaining the [occurrence](errata.htm#71) together
of these forms which in his view are earlier and later forms of life.
But when we see that they are really contemporaneous the difficulty
vanishes.

### THE "ARCLA," A HITHERTO UNKNOWN ANIMAL

That some of the animal denizens of the interior world are species quite
unknown to us will not seem at all strange when we think of the
conditions that obtain there, and if that were the case it would not be
so very strange if at times a specimen of some kind of these unknown
creatures wandered out over the lip, perhaps carried by a glacier, and
was seen by some inhabitant of the far northern regions. As a matter of
fact there is just such a case recorded by J. W. Buel in his survey of
scientific and exploratory progress entitled "The World's Wonders". He
quotes Captain Hall, who lived among the Eskimos for five years, who
says that this and similar stories are worthy of credence because
strange things

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

that the Eskimos have told on other occasions have been verified
afterwards.

It seems that the Eskimos often described to Captain Hall an animal
which they, called the arcla: "but which is not mentioned in any book of
natural history, nor did he ever see a specimen himself. . . ." The
natives speak of this animal as being larger than the bear, and as very
ferocious and as much more difficult to be killed. It has grayish hair,
a long tail, and short thick legs, its forefeet being divided into three
parts, like the partridge's, its hind feet are like a man's heels. When
resting it sits upright like a man. A Neitchille Innuit, crawling into a
hole for shelter, in the night, had found one asleep and quickly
despatched it with his knife. It may be added here that Ebierbing, who
was Hall's interpreter, now residing in the United States, confirms such
accounts of the arcla, and says that the animal once inhabited his
native country on Cumberland Sound.

### CURIOUS ANIMALS IN THE FAR SOUTH

There is another curious fact that could be explained easily on the
ground of our theory but that otherwise is very puzzling. When
Nordenskiold was exploring the Antarctic regions he visited Patagonia,
the most southern of inhabited lands. When there he explored a large
cave in which he found a large piece of skin covered with greenish brown
hair, and studded on the inner side with little knobs

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

of bone. He identified it as the skin of a prehistoric animal called the
mylodon, although along with the remains of the mylodon--for further
exploration discovered no less than twenty specimens there were found
many bones, teeth, and horny hoofs of a long extinct animal of the horse
family, and as Mr. Edwin S. Grew says in his "Romance of Modern Geology"
(where he recounts the episode), the whole thing is very puzzling (to
the orthodox scientist, that is):

"It was supposed that the mylodon, like all the peculiar gigantic
animals of South America, had become extinct as long ago as the mammoth
or as the wooly rhinoceros. All these extinct South American animals
were distinguished by peculiarly shaped teeth, and had no teeth at all
in front. They are called, therefore, Edentata, and their
representatives today are much smaller."

### THE MYLODON

So there is no doubt that the animal which Dr. Nordenskiold discovered
was a prehistoric form. But on the other hand there was a very
remarkable circumstance:

"The skin was dry but sound. When it was placed in water it gave out a
smell which, though unpleasant was very interesting, for it showed that
the animal which had worn it could not have been dead thousands or even
hundreds of years. It was in fact, evidently a piece of the skin of a
mylodon, which had survived in this region until modern times.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

"Further explorations were made in the cavern by Dr. Moreno of La Plata,
and other naturalists, and an immense quantity of bones was obtained,
and more portions of the skin of the mylodon with the hair on. The
cavern had been inhabited probably several centuries ago by Indians, for
human bones and weapons were obtained.

"The remains of as many as twenty mylodons have been obtained from the
cavern, and many of the bones are cut or broken in a way which leads us
to suspect that the human inhabitants of the cave cut up the dead
mylodons for food, and split their bones to obtain the marrow.

"Some of the mylodon bones, skulls, jaw-bones, leg-bones, etc., are
smeared with blood and have pieces of cartilage and tendon attached.
There are other evidences which go to show that the Indians may have
kept the mylodons alive in the cave and fed them with hay brought from
the outside.

"Besides the relics of the mylodon and of man the cavern has yielded
bones and teeth, and many horny hoofs belonging to a kind of extinct
horses; and this constitutes one of the puzzling things about this cave
treasure . . . . . .

"The bones that were found are not buried in lime or any preserving
stone; but lie in sand where one would expect them to have perished long
ago if they had been of any great age. Yet side by side with them are
the bones of a long extinct horse; and

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

there is no tradition among the Indians today of any huge beast
corresponding to the mylodon. . . . . . Possibly, though it does not
seem very likely, the mylodon is still living in similar caverns in this
region, as yet unvisited by man."

Now the above is very interesting in the light of our theory. The fact
that the mylodon was not a relic of untold ages ago is beyond dispute:
the relative freshness of its skin proves that, to say nothing of the
fact that it was alive when Indians who knew how to domesticate animals
were in the land--and that is very recent in the scale of time in which
the mastodon and mylodon figure. But the fact that the bones of a long
extinct horse-like animal were found alongside those of the mylodon,
showing that the mylodon, an animal known to be very old and yet, in
this case, proved also to be very recent, and the horse-like creature
were contemporary. That means that the horse-like animal is not so old
as we think.

Where, then, could either one of them have come from? Although the
country has been explored since Mr. Grew's book was written no mylodons
have been found as he suggests they might be. Evidently these were the
remains of some specimens that in some way had wandered from the
interior over the Antarctic polar lip and either through being caught on
a floe or carried by a glacier they drifted on to some land which
connects with [Patagonia](errata.htm#72).

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

\[paragraph continues\] That the Indians, whose bones were found in the
cave, died on the same spot as that in which they had lived and where
they kept these animals, might almost prove that they were among the
last of their kind. Otherwise as soon as their supply of food was
exhausted these Indians would have gone forth in search of more and
their bones would not have been found beside their banquet board.

### AN ESKIMO TRADITION

It may be well to add at this point that the Eskimos have a well defined
tradition that the mammoth lives underground. Two writers in the
*Scientific American Supplement* independently make this assertion, and
while the Eskimos are wrong, of course, in thinking that a large animal
like the mammoth could burrow like a mole, the very fact that they have
this idea shows that they are accustomed to seeing the mammoth at
intervals and then lose sight of it for some time, the animal suddenly
appearing again. If we allow that the mammoth has its present habitat in
the interior of the earth, it is quite easy to see how this idea arose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The Aurora](jei17)
