[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei19)  [Next](jei21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

# CHAPTER XVII

## THE JOURNEY TO THE EARTH'S INTERIOR

Having actually established the facts in the case we shall, in this
chapter, use those facts in an imaginative and constructive way to show
the reader what an actual journey into the interior of the earth would
be like. We shall not invent any new facts or "make up" any mere tale of
fancy, but we shall simply use the facts we have already gathered in a
new way, grouping them together in the order in which an actual traveler
would observe them.

### ON AN EXPEDITION, WHAT SHOULD WE SEE?

In the first place, if the writer of this book and a company of readers
were setting off on this expedition, we should take with us not only the
usual equipment of an Arctic explorer but we should also provide for
travel in very warm regions, for we know in advance that we are going to
find a very warm and damp climate after we have braved the rigors of the
cold weather to be found before we get to what are usually called the
polar regions. And we should take more instruments for scientific
observations than have usually been taken on polar explorations because
we know from the experiences of former explorers how difficult it is to
make the ordinary observations

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

in the northern regions, and how important it is that everything
possible be noted and compared with those observations which have
already been made. We should not only have the ordinary instruments of
navigation but delicate apparatus for making observations. When the
auroral light was shining we should use a spectroscope to analyse it,
and show that it was really the same as sunlight in its composition. We
should have microscopes for examining botanical and biological
specimens. And we should certainly have a trained geologist along, for
we should wish his expert observations on the geology of the interior.

### OUR START

Thus equipped we should leave some [northern](errata.htm#84) port, we
may suppose it to be St. Johns, Newfoundland. In a little over a week we
have arrived at Godhaven, Greenland. Here we would pick up a number of
Eskimo helpers, some sleds and dogs, and other necessities for the
voyage. We would then proceed up the coast of Greenland to about 82 or
83 degrees, which could be done without very much trouble. But by the
time we have reached that far we will have noticed several surprising
things. We will find that whenever there is a wind from the north the
weather is much warmer than when the wind is from the south. And we
shall notice that ever since we passed the latitude of say 75 degrees
the average temperature has not been growing any colder. Furthermore

 

<span id="img_32200"></span>

[![Diagram of the Earth's Interior](tn/32200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/32200.jpg)  
  

Diagram showing the earth as a hollow sphere with its polar openings and
central sun. The letters at top and bottom of diagram indicate the
various steps of an imaginary journey through the planet's interior. At
the point marked "D" we catch our first glimpse of the corona of the
central sun; at the point marked "E" we can see the central sun in its
entirety.

 

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

we shall notice that there is a steady warm current of water coming from
the north. From time to time we see birds in the air, and if our trip is
being made at all late in the season--and knowing what we do know we
shall not be afraid of some delays, for it is a hospitable country to
which we are going and not a land of perpetual ice--if, we say, our
trip' is being made rather late in the season we shall see many of these
birds flying north. Suppose we were to leave our ship at any point along
the coast of Greenland and carrying gasoline launches in sections on our
sledges were to go overland until we came to the open polar sea which
Dr. Hayes discovered. In that case we should have to camp every so
often, and we would find plenty of game along our route and comfortable
temperatures for sleeping in our tents. If it were during the summer
weather, mosquitoes would be quite a nuisance. While our friends at home
were picturing us as freezing with cold we would as a matter of fact be
sweating with the exertions of moving camp and similar activities.
Traveling in this way we could come to the coast of Grant Land or of
Peary Land, and then going out on the ice-surface for a little we should
come at last to the open polar sea. Then, let us suppose, we were able
to set up the gasoline launches which we had brought with us in parts,
loaded on the sledges, launch them, with a good supply of fuel on each,
and start on the last lap of our journey.

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

### GETTING INTO WARMER WATER

As we proceed the water rapidly becomes warmer, all trace of ice is left
behind, the flocks of seabirds thicken, and perhaps we run into an
immense shoal of herring going to or from their breeding grounds which
are to the north of us. Our first night on the water we shall be
surprised to see, after the setting of the sun, a glow in the sky which
gradually defines itself as a ring covering the whole visible horizon
while long streamers of light wave in fantastic patterns overhead. The
Aurora, for such it is, is now no longer only to the north of us, as it
would be if we saw it from a lower latitude, but it is directly over our
heads and even to the south of us because we are almost on the edge of
the aperture, and the reflections from the central sun come from higher
strata of the atmosphere which are illuminated for an immense area by
the diverging rays of the central sun coming through this immense
aperture. As we proceed these auroral displays become ever more bright
and steady and symmetrical. And the sun we have been accustomed to
seeing in the heavens is each day a little nearer the horizon. At last
there comes a time when we cannot make any more observations by it, and
one day when we wake up or rather, perhaps are awakened by the members
of our crew who have been keeping watch, we find an extraordinary thing
has taken place. It is apparently daylight when, perhaps, by the
checking up of our time pieces it ought

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

to be dark. Only it is a peculiar daylight. It is the sort of light
which usually precedes a storm, an angry reddish light with a heavy
atmosphere. If we were unprepared we would think that some terrible
atmospheric disturbance was about to take place. But if we are prepared
we know now that we have sailed far enough over the rim of the earth's
aperture so that the sun we see is no longer the sun of the outer
firmament but the inner sun which never sets. And even if our feelings
did not, our instruments do tell us of a great increase in the
temperature of the water and the temperature and humidity of the air. We
take off some of our outer clothing. Perhaps we find that we are in one
of those currents from the north which we met with before we began to
sail across the edge of the aperture. If so we may find it a great deal
stronger and the water a great deal warmer at this point.

As we proceed two things forcibly strike our attention: one in the "sky"
as it still appears to be, and one in the water. The first is that the
sun is no longer moving. It is stationary in the sky, for the small
distances that we are able to traverse will only cause a very slight
apparent motion of the sun, so slight that it would take a great deal
more than a day's journey to make it appreciable. The other thing is
that the water is fairly alive with organisms of one sort or another.
Perhaps we shall see immense shoals of herring. It may be that in
pursuit of them are creatures

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

the like of which we have only seen illustrated in books on geology.
When we come to very shallow water we shall certainly see species of
shell fish that we have previously only seen in their fossilized
condition in our museums.

### LANDING IN THE INTERIOR

But we are approaching land and all eyes are strained to see what lies
ahead. Perhaps it will turn out to be a [low-lying](errata.htm#85)
beach, and we make for it and quickly disembark, pull up our boats, take
out our tents and prepare to make our first camp. We will naturally want
fresh water, and as we are now no longer in a region where it is to be
obtained from ice or snow, for it is almost too hot for us here,
unaccustomed as we have been by the previous journey north to warm
weather. So we look around and perhaps we are lucky enough to find that
we have camped near a stream. After due rest and the necessary
preparations we prepare to follow its meanderings and explore the new
territory.

### VEGETATION THAT IS NEW TO US

Very soon we come to vegetation. But it is of a kind that is either
quite new to us or at least only reminds us of similar forms that we
have seen on the outside of the earth. Immense trunks, of a sort of
plant which geologists and botanists call gymnosperms, tower above the
stream and stretch as far as the eye can reach on either side of its
banks. They

 

<span id="img_32600"></span>

[![Bisected Hollow Earth](tn/32600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/32600.jpg)  
  

Showing the earth bisected centrally through the polar openings and at
right angles to the equator, giving a clear view of the central sun and
the interior continents and oceans. (Reproduced from photograph of
working model.) Made by the author, 1912. Patented May 12, 1914, No.
1096102.

 

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

remind us of the trees which we call conifers--such as the pine. They
are covered with spinelike leaves which cling to both trunk and branches
and they have no flowers. The air is warm and steamy, and dragon-flies
and mosquitoes are hovering over the water of the stream and over the
vegetation. Below these large conifer-like trees are species of fern,
somewhat like the ferns we know but more solid and much larger, in many
cases the fern clusters rising from the top of a very thick trunk,
almost half the length of the larger trees, and really constituting what
we would call a fern-tree and not merely a fern. Over the ground are
studded great masses of Lycopods or club mosses, and green stretches of
smaller mosses cover the ground. As long as the land on which we are
traveling is low and near the water surface this is the predominating
strain of vegetation. Later when we reach higher ground, we shall find
that vegetation more like that of our own tropics has found a home. We
shall see some flowers that we can recognize and we shall see some that
are new to us. One very common flower will be the original starting
place of that red pollen which, as we have seen, is deposited on the ice
cliffs of the outer world. Judging from the quantities of that pollen we
have seen on the ice cliffs of the exterior of the planet we shall not
be surprised when we see that the flower itself is one which grows in
immense banks or areas

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

covering the whole ground, so that the moss or grass between the
different plants is invisible. And when a strong breeze blows over these
immense areas we shall see how the pollen is carried so far for it is a
very light, fine, powdery pollen, and the very air is colored as the
wind blows it toward the polar opening. Our clothes are covered with it,
if we happen to be in the path of the wind, and for a time it hangs in
the air and is even breathed in by us as we inhale the air.

### A SPONGY AND PEATY SOIL

If we dig into the soil of this low-lying land we shall find that it is
a spongy and peaty soil, formed of the debris of the vegetable matter
which towers above our heads. Owing to the heat and the moisture this
vegetable growth is not only rank and luxuriant, but it grows four times
as rapidly as the vegetable matter on the earth's outer surface. They do
not stop growing as our outer plants do, because there is no setting of
the sun, and they do not pause in their growth in the winter because
there is no winter. This rapid growth means that they are spongy and
weak in their texture. They keep expanding all the time, and so do not
consolidate themselves as plants in the outer world do which grow more
slowly and build their cells together more compactly. And as these
plants grow quickly so do they decay quickly. Each plant soon reaches
its limit, and, lying in a damp earth, its roots being spongy rather
than firm, it is

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

soon ready to topple over when a wind storm comes along. It topples and
rots and soon is reduced to humus again, and in this humus of rotten
leaves and branches, half buried and decaying trunks, other plants
spring from the myriad seeds which are scattering around all the time.
By and by the weight of these further growths on the soil pushes the old
humus down and compresses it more and more, and were we to dig down a
little into this soil we should find the same thing that they burn in
the cabins in Ireland--peat, that mass of vegetable matter which may be
called coal in the making. If we were to dig a little lower still we
would undoubtedly find natural gas, for it is a well known geological
fact that a layer of peat seven inches deep will give off enough gas
during its decomposition, that by the time it is ready to turn into
actual coal that layer will no longer be seven but only one inch deep.

### FERN-LIKE AND PARASITE PLANTS

We next notice a tree that is thirty feet or so in height but which
reminds us of a very small plant we have observed on the outside and
called Mare's Tail. We should hardly think of calling this tree anything
so undignified for it branches out in a most amazing fashion and its
main trunk is thick and sturdy looking, but we find upon close
examination that the two are identical in all but size. This tree has
the same jointed branches looking like a collection

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

of immense fishing poles, and each branch is covered with a coat of
flinty roughness, due to the silica with which it covers itself in
minute spicules. We can pull the branches off very easily because they
are jointed together in detachable bits, but we shall probably cut our
hands if we do so and very painfully--just as in our childhood days we
have often cut our hands on certain rough grasses.

Looking up we see parasitic fern-like plants and some with flowers like
orchids drape themselves all over the larger vegetation, and these are a
very active cause in its early downfall, as they quickly sap these trees
not equipped to offer much resistance to such a process. Further away
from the water we should find seed-bearing trees like our own of the
tropics, and small plants of every description up to many of our common
varieties of temperate climates, but all growing here in a ranker and
more luxuriant fashion.

### INSECT AND ANIMAL LIFE

We should be amazed at the abundance of insect life. On the water would
be water flies of various kinds and sizes. Newt-like forms would be
scrambling from water to land or sunning themselves in the pools.
Occasionally under the dense undergrowth we should espy a serpent or
serpent-like creature wending its silent way. Probably we would find
that these were amphibious creatures.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

### HOW THE MAMMOTH IS TRAPPED

A longer journey into the land would disclose to us animals which it
were well to avoid meeting unless we were well armed. Certainly before
long we should see herds of mammoths or at least small groups, perhaps a
male and female and a young one--whom both would savagely defend if we
gave any cause to suspect us as enemies. Doubtless these creatures would
be met with very early in our journey, for they are fond of wandering,
are not afraid, even, as we have seen, to venture to the very icebound
limit of their confines; in fact their character, and probably the fact
that they need certain elements in their diet given by foliage of trees
that grow only near the lip, seem to cause them to wish to cover a very
wide range of territory, and it is very probable that between their
breeding seasons--during which time they would be further inland they
venture out into the relatively colder lands of the interior near the
lip. In this part of the interior there would, of course be glaciers,
owing to the influence of the cold coming from the outerworld, and it is
a well known fact that such continuous cold is enough to form glaciers
even though the actual temperature be almost as high as the melting
point of ice. One scientist tells us how, in Switzerland, he has stood
on the surface of a glacier and plucked ripe cherries from off the
branches of a cherry tree. We might see these mammoths walking along the
surfaces of

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

glaciers, perhaps lured on by edible pine-needles growing on the high
ground. Very often they will fall into crevasses, perhaps concealed from
them by snow, and the moment they fall in they will be covered by the
snow and snow-water from above and hermetically sealed. That would
account for the fresh condition in which they are found after these
glaciers have gradually worked their way over the lip and out into the
Siberian wastes where the mammoth is found in perfectly eatable
condition.

### ARE THERE HUMAN INHABITANTS?

Would we find any people in this strange land? While we cannot speak
with certainty here it is well to remember that the Eskimo, as we have
shown in another chapter, always point to this part of the earth as
their [ancestral](errata.htm#86) abode. And it is also note-worthy that
there is a great deal of uncertainty as to the origin of the Chinese,
and that it has been thought by some that the Chinese and Eskimo had a
common origin. It is therefore likely that we would meet tribes here
with a resemblance to both those races. That there is that common
resemblance is shown by Peary's tale of the Eskimo girl he brought to
New York with him, who would take no notice of the people around her but
was filled with excitement when she met a Chinese in the street, and who
wished at once to make friends with him. And here is another point that
the reader may think speculative,

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

but at all events it is suggestive: From where comes the up and outward
position of the eye that we associate with the Chinese? May it not be a
modification of the ordinary eye position induced by the fact that in
the interior the sun is always in the zenith?

Certainly these tribes if we found them would find it easy living in the
interior. Besides the huge plants of very early origin which we have
described, the seeds of many of our own plants could have been carried
to the interior by ocean currents or by birds in their crops, and we
should expect to see vines and fruits of all kinds. Perhaps these tribes
would have learned to cultivate them. Certainly the more interior parts
of the countries we traversed would be wonderful sights from a botanical
point of view. The plants which give the red pollen would, alone,
probably cover areas of acres and acres in extent, judging from the
amount of pollen that drifts as far away as the latitudes in which it
has been seen to cover whole cliff sides and glaciers. Over these lands
would roam immense herds of deer and other animals, the tribes would
certainly be numerous and prosperous owing to the easy living
conditions, although we might expect to find them very lazy, being so
well provided for.

We should also find here the explanation of the dust which Nansen and
other explorers have re-marked about in the Arctic--dust which
undoubtedly

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

had a volcanic source. Here are the volcanoes from which that dust
comes, and this is the first time its presence in the Arctic has been
explained.

We shall also have a physicist in the party, and he will be very much
interested in the interior sun. It never rises and sets, and hence there
is no night but one continuous day in the interior, and there are no
changes of season. The country lies in a perpetual drowsy summer, the
sunlight only being tempered by the dampness of the climate and the cold
that enters from each end and makes the interior of the earth have a
climate ranging from very cold at the actual polar lips, what might be
called Alpine, with glaciers, and quite tropical as we pass the Alpine
section and get really into the interior.

It is very probable that our scientists will find that what keeps up the
heat of the interior sun, for it is a very small one and would doubtless
have cooled much more quickly than the exterior sun, is its supply of
radium. In fact it is radium that is thought now to have so much to do
with the upkeep of energy of our exterior sun, and so it will not be at
all surprising if we find that in the interior many interesting
observations are to be made relative to the part that radium plays in
solar radiation of heat.

If we have a geologist with the expedition he will be very anxious to
excavate as much as possible, for he has always associated iron ore with
coal seams, and knows that an abundance of carbonic acid gas in

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

the air (such as there is in the interior, for it is the gas exhaled by
plants) always means that iron will be combined with it as ferrous
carbonate and deposited in close connection with coal deposits. In fact
we will even predict that if he does find iron ore it will be the kind
called "black band ore" which is iron ore closely mixed with
carbonaceous matter.

If after this trip of exploration we go back to the shore we shall find
myriads of shells cast up once inhabited by various kinds of
Brachyopods; clinging to the rocks will be crinoids and perhaps
trilobites--creatures which we have never seen alive before, but
recognize from geologists' descriptions.

Suppose that after this we penetrate our new world a little more
systematically. Before we have been in it long we shall see that ranging
from the plants and amphibious animals and shell fish which we have just
described there are to be found here representatives of every group of
animals and vegetables which we have seen since the beginning of the
carboniferous [epoch](errata.htm#87) as occupying successive land
surfaces on the outside of our globe. Always when great climatic changes
took place which of course happened slowly, giving gradual warning--or
when geological changes wiped out a species on the exterior--always
there was this world of refuge within the globe. Here the climate was
equable all through, so that excepting for any volcanic or other changes
there was no destructive agency to blot out a whole species. And

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

so here we shall find not one missing link--for which the man in the
street has always asked when he read about organic evolution--but many
missing links. Certainly that animal described by the Eskimo and named
by them the arcla, may well be a representative of one of the cretaceous
animals with a general outline somewhat after that of the kangaroo.
These animals were reptiles, however, feeders on vegetable matter and
with teeth set in several rows like a [tessellated](errata.htm#88)
pavement. As birds are well fitted to escape from both geological
[upheavals](errata.htm#89) and climatic changes by their power of flight
we should doubtless find in this refuge some of the very earliest
species of birds, such as those with lizard-like beaks in which many
teeth were set, birds entirely different from any existing orders on the
outside of the globe. If we have an entomologist with the party he will
be kept busy collecting insects. There will be the most gorgeous and
large butterflies, all sorts of dragon flies, ants of several species,
and in fact there will be several thousands of species of insects many
of which are not known to exist on the earth today.

### THE IRISH ELK AND OTHER ANIMALS

Among mammals, besides the mammoth already mentioned, we shall find
Carnivores, [Insectivores](errata.htm#90), Herbivores, and Primates, and
many [representatives](errata.htm#91) of each class. Prominent among
them will be an animal like our tapir or ant-eater, but his form will

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

have more of a resemblance, anatomically, to the horse than it will to
the actual tapir with which we are acquainted. We shall find animals
which have affinities with the marsupials of Australia but which have
the long proboscis of the elephant. Our geologist will tell us that
until we saw these animals all that mankind knew about them was based on
a few fossil remains which had been discovered in a rich deposit of
fossils near the base of the Himalayas and later in a few places in
Europe, and named Dinotherium and Sivatherium. Of the first named of
those fossil animals the head alone was five feet long, but it does not
follow that under the much easier conditions of life in the interior the
animal has kept its formidable dimensions. In all evolution, variations
are always taking place, and perhaps under the conditions in the
interior of the earth a smaller animal had a better chance of life owing
to greater ease in getting about. In that case the smaller animal would
survive. We should find here, too, the species of animal which once
lived in Europe and Ireland but died out largely because it was not
adapted anatomically to its environment. This was the Great Irish Elk,
and numbers of their skeletons have been taken from Irish peat-bogs. The
head and antlers of this animal were so disproportionately developed
that it bent over to drink from the bog only at a considerable risk. And
the fact that its remains are found in these bogs is pretty good
evidence of the main cause of

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

death among these animals after the countries in which they lived became
swampy or boggy. And it is certain that the changed conditions in the
interior of the earth will have had effects upon these earlier types of
animals which we cannot forecast. But they will be there in their main
features and an enormous number of distinct species will have
survived--species so different that no inter-breeding will have taken
place, and so different too that one will not have entirely killed off
another, for, the extent to which one class of animals preys on another
is limited.

We must also be prepared to greet early representatives of the cat and
dog families. The sabre-toothed tiger goes back as far as the Quaternary
epoch on the outside of the globe, and it is quite possible that we
shall also meet him on the inside.

### MINERAL WEALTH

It is a remarkable fact that in the mines on the surface of the earth
some metals are very common and others are extremely rare, found only in
such small fragments and thin veins that they are available for use as
standards of value. Both gold and platinum have been used as standard of
value metals because their supply is not variable. We know that there
will not be much more gold in the world tomorrow than there is today.
But it is quite likely that the veins of gold and platinum which are so
meagre on our side of the earth's surface may be plentiful on the

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

inner side. At all events there is rock formation there that will yield
us metals as well as swampy land that will yield us coal in the making,
and petroleum and gas. And we shall make all haste to explore the rocky
parts of the surface--although it is very improbable that any of the
rocky land will be exposed, for vegetation is so rank everywhere--and
the chances are that we shall find many interesting minerals. In fact
when we consider that when our outer earth was hot enough to fuse carbon
into the brilliant diamond it is quite likely that at some time not far
removed, the inner sun, which at that time would be enormously hot,
could fuse the carbon of the interior surface in a like manner. Of
course that would be when the earth was just beginning to cool, when
probably its whole outer envelope was still hot enough to be
plastic--for diamonds are only crystallized at a tremendously high
temperature and pressure but it is a safe speculation at any rate. And
while that discovery would be of sensational interest because diamonds
are so sought after, other discoveries of even greater scientific
interest would be made.

### EMERGING AT THE OTHER POLAR OPENING

Finally, if our expedition were well enough equipped with ships we could
sail through the oceans of this interior world, explore its coasts, sail
up its rivers, and finally, come out on the outer side. Here,

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

however, we would need every aid that the Antarctic explorer has to
have, for the journey from the Antarctic polar lip to the nearest
civilization would be a far more arduous one than is the similar journey
in the north. But if we had taken our aeroplanes through the interior
with us, success would doubtless crown our flight and we should return
to civilization having explored the last part of the earth that is left
to explore and having added nearly as much again to the area and
resources of the lands on which life may flourish and from which may be
dug or taken by cultivation. We should be hailed as the greatest
explorers in the history of the world. We should be honored by republics
and by kings; by scientists and by magnates of commercial enterprise.

And so we leave this part of our subject, hoping that we have fired the
ambition of the reader to see within a very short time this work of
exploration undertaken. Our country has the men, the aeroplanes, the
enterprise, and the capital. Let our country go ahead with this great
work. Or if our country hangs back let private citizens earn the glory
that will be theirs if they assume the glorious task of opening up this
new and teeming realm. It is the greatest privilege that has ever been
offered to an explorer, and we are very sure that there will be many
explorers eager to grasp it and certain to succeed when they have
grasped it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Formation of the Earth](jei21)
