[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei22)  [Next](jei24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

# CHAPTER XX.

## THE MOON AND OUR THEORY

How on our theory do we account for the moon and what do we claim to be
its structure? We may answer those questions wholly in the words of the
orthodox scientists and the [answer](errata.htm#105.md) will show how
inevitably all real research into the structure of the heavenly bodies
fits into the facts as we have discovered them--and this fitting in of
every separate fact is the conclusive demonstration of the soundness of
our ideas. Many theories fit some of the facts. Almost any theory is
thought to be true as long as there are no facts to contradict it. But
that is not enough. If a theory be true, every fact that can possibly be
discovered will fit in with it.

### WAS THE MOON HURLED OFF?

Now it would be quite possible that in the rotation of the hollow nebula
which afterwards condensed to the planet Earth a nebulous mass might
have been hurled off, perhaps owing to the attraction exercised upon it
by a passing comet of large dimensions. Scientists, in fact, have said,
in the past, that the hurling off of the moon from the earth--which they
thought took place when the earth was in a fluid or plastic
condition--that this hurling off was

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

responsible for the depression in the earth's surface that formed the
earliest ocean. But since that time astronomers are tending to abandon
that theory and to give their allegiance to the "capture" theory.
Professor See is the proposer of the capture theory, and by that
expression he means that the earth captured the moon by its attraction;
that the moon was a very small planet which came very near the earth and
was deflected out of its path and caused to revolve around the earth
instead. An article on Professor See's researches which appeared in the
*Scientific American Supplement* for February 15, 1910, says:

### THE CAPTURE THEORY

"Our moon, likewise, was originally a planet which neared the earth and
was finally captured and made a satellite. It was no part of the
terrestrial globe detached by rapid rotation, as has been generally
believed since the time of Anaxagoras, B. C. 500-428, and more recently
taught by LaPlace, Lord Kelvin, Sir George Darwin, Poincare, Pickering,
and other eminent writers."

Of course this is not absolutely proven, but astronomers base the
conclusion on certain calculations which show, or seem to show, that the
rotation of the earth was not of such a speed that a body the size we
know the moon to be, would be thrown off.

We do not wish to decide that question, however, but simply to point out
to the reader that if the moon

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

is a captured small planet it ought--if it is true that a planet is a
hollow body as we have contended--it ought, we say, to be hollow.

Now if the scientists themselves--not those who know of our theory, but
men who wrote before our theory was published to the world--if these
men, quite independently of us, were to say that the moon was hollow,
would not that be a very remarkable confirmation of our theory? Would
not any candid reader have to admit that we had scored a very strong
point, all the stronger because we do not argue it ourselves but simply
set down what the orthodox scientists are saying, and let it speak for
itself.

### SCIENTISTS ADMIT THE MOON HOLLOW

Very well, then. Let the reader turn to page 123 of Edwin S. Grew's "The
Romance of Modern Geology". There he quotes from a book that Mr. Wells
wrote about the moon. Mr. Wells made it the scene of a story but he
wished to have a really scientific background for this tale, and, as
Grew says, he "has gathered together all the more reasoned speculations
on the subject". And the result of these speculations is that Mr. Wells
came to the conclusion that there was not only some atmosphere on the
moon but:

"There are gases of some kind on the moon. There must be gases, for
example, shut up in the moon's rocks; there may be gases in the moon's
interior.

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Mr. Wells imagined that there was a good deal of
gas inside the moon; indeed he went so far as to suppose that the moon
was partly hollow."

And then Mr. [Grew](errata.htm#106.md) himself goes on to say that only in
case Mr. Wells were right, only indeed if the moon were hollow could he
explain what is known to be a fact that the moon is very much lighter in
proportion to its size than the earth. Not only that but it is lighter,
he says, "than we should expect it to be."

Why is that? Simply because being a much smaller spheroid than the earth
its shell is proportionally thinner.

### RELATIVE WEIGHTS OF EARTH AND MOON

It is obvious that if the earth and the moon were both solid bodies as
the astronomers have thought, they would be of proportionately equal
weights, for both being made up of the same substances the specific
gravity of the one would be approximately equal to the specific gravity
of the other.

Only on our theory that both moon and earth are hollow can this
difference be explained.

And so whatever facts of astronomy or [cosmogony](errata.htm#107.md) the
reader wishes to bring forward it will be seen that our theory fits them
fully and links them up into one consistent body of knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. A Note on Gravitation](jei24.md)
