[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jei20)  [Next](jei22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

# CHAPTER XVIII.

## THE FORMATION OF THE EARTH

We shall now proceed to explain the shape and the formation of the earth
which has resulted from the evolution of our planet from the nebula, a
shape which we are quite ready to understand after our study of Mars and
the other planets. For convenience of description we have assumed
certain measurements to be true. Of course we do not pretend that we
have actually made these measurements, for no one is yet in a position
to make them. But basing them upon the relative proportions of the polar
cap of Mars and upon other considerations, we put them forward as the
most likely approximations. The polar openings then, we should put at
not less than 1400 miles across in each case. And it is probable that
the crust of the earth is 800 miles thick. This means that when a ship
sails over the lip of the polar orifice it is sailing over what may be
compared to the circumference of a circle whose diameter is 800 miles.
That means that the curvature would be just as imperceptible as the
ordinary curvature of the surface of the earth--which indicates how
absurd are some of the notions which our critics have of the nature of
the aperture. The interior sun may be supposed to be 600 miles in
diameter, so that the distance

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

between it and any point on the inner surface which it warms is 2900
miles, and these figures added give us 8,000 miles which, as we know, is
the diameter of the earth.

### HOW PEOPLE DISAGREE ON THIS SUBJECT

Now if we asserted that this was the shape of the earth and had no
evidence drawn from other planets or from polar exploration, we should
be laughed at but the laughter would come from two sets of people each
one of which may also laugh at the other set. So, if they disagree among
themselves it looks all the more likely that neither may be right.

These people are the old fogies who believe that the earth is a solid
shell enclosing a vast seething mass of molten matter which occasionally
breaks out of the shell in the form of volcanoes, and the newer thinkers
who claim that the earth is the most rigid of solids it is possible to
conceive. 'We shall now proceed to show how both of these theories fail.

### THE OLD LIQUID INTERIOR IDEA

Of the old liquid-interior people it is not necessary to say very much.
Their day is over. Scientists no longer put any credence in that
notion--it is only in school books that it survives. If the earth had
been a thin shell over a liquid interior it never would have survived in
the form which these people allege. For just as the moon attracts the
tides of the water on the surface, so it would have attracted the

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

liquid interior which would have pushed through the crust at whatever
point the moon happened to be, as fast as that crust was formed.

### WHAT CAUSES VOLCANOES?

What, then, says the reader, causes volcanoes and earthquakes? Let us
ask the scientists. In Edwin S. Grew's, "The Romance of Modern Geology,"
we are told that the earth is continually indulging in small shivers--a
thing which can much more easily be explained on out theory than if we
suppose it to be a rigid solid. These are probably due to the fact that
the crust is seamed with great cracks, and occassionally there is a sort
of cave-in which will send a tremor throughout the whole shell. When
these cracks are on a very large scale we get a chain of volcanoes as is
the case in South America. Here is what Grew says about it:

"The volcanoes of the great chains of the Andes lie along a straight
crack reaching from Southern Peru to Terra del Fuego, 2500 miles in
length. The volcanoes of the Aleutian islands lie along a curved track
equally long. Other shorter lines of volcanoes are very numerous, and
since countless others existed in former times the cracks in the earth's
crust must be exceedingly numerous. There is one crack which comes to
the surface in various places in Eastern Asia and Western Africa, and
stretching from the Dead Sea to Lake Nyassa, reaches the enormous length
of 3500 miles."

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

### WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF INTERIOR WERE LIQUID?

Now it is obvious that with such surface flaws as that, a molten
interior would break through upon any such attraction as that of the
moon, and if the break once started it would extend all along those vast
territories just mentioned.

### SURFACE MANIFESTATIONS

That both earthquakes and volcanoes are phenomena of the surface of the
earth only and do not go deep, is further shown by Mr. Grew in the
volume from which we have already quoted. Many of them he lays to the
existence of what are called, in England, "pot-holes," which are deep
and ramifying caverns in the earth which may extend to a depth of nearly
a thousand feet, disclosing to the explorer vast chambers hundreds of
feet high, connected by smaller passages. Obviously where the earth is
thus [honeycombed](errata.htm#92.md) a subterranean landslide may take
place at any time, due, perhaps, to water erosion in the caverns, and
the result would be a local earthquake.

It is also interesting to note that, if the earth were a thin crust
covering a center of molten lava, in any earthquake or volcano in which
that lava came to the surface, the solid rocks of the surface being
heavier than the molten material, would sink until they came to rest at
the center, and this process would soon eat up the whole surface of the
earth, and that

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

process would have begun to take place as soon as the earth began to
cool. For as soon as any part of the crust solidified it would sink. It
is impossible to suppose that the whole exterior of the earth solidified
at one moment and so imprisoned forever the molten material underneath.
But merely to state this theory is to show how ridiculous it is. As one
critic puts it:

"These savants have managed somehow to keep those raging fires burning
from the very earliest periods of even the sun's history, without any
abatement or cessation, and they tell us it is now raging with
inconceivable fury in the bowels of our own earth and within all the
planets, and, in accordance with their ideas, it seems likely to
continue burning on forever. They conclude by computation that this fire
occupies more than [thirty-five](errata.htm#93.md) out of thirty-six parts
of this globe, and in some inexplicable manner, they have been enabled
to keep this positive element in active operation, without furnishing
one particle of combustible material to replenish its exhausted
resources. This, we must admit, is the most astounding feat that
philosophy has ever performed in the whole range of celestial and
terrestrial mechanics, if it has been successfully accomplished."

And here is a point which renders the igneous theory of the earth's
interior quite unnecessary to account for volcanoes:

"Professor Denton remarks that . . . coal may exist in layers or
stratifications alternately with shales

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

and underclays for 'more than eight miles,' or even a greater distance.
Now, if we look about us we think we may find a sufficiency of explosive
and combustible materials, to produce all those volcanic and thermal
phenomena, without resorting to a vast interior fire globe for the
original cause."

That volcanoes are purely surface manifestations is shown by the fact
that on many occasions it has been proved that the cause of a volcanic
eruption was the access of sea water through one or more fissures to the
hot base of the mountain. The proof of this is the presence of compounds
formed by the salt of the sea water in the lava which was ejected.

But nowadays the scientists themselves admit that this igneous theory is
an impossible one. Grew, in his "The Romance of Modern Geology," in
fact, gives the whole case away when he says:

"The earth is not so solid as it looks and not so solid as it feels."

### AN IMPOSSIBLE OCEAN

And furthermore he supports us in what we have said of the impossibility
of a molten interior being held in by a crust:

"For that would leave a molten ocean more than 7900 miles across any way
in which it was measured: 7900 miles deep, 7900 miles broad, 7900 miles
long if we take 8000 miles to be the diameter of the earth. We all know
what great tides the sun and moon by

 

<span id="img_34600"></span>

[![The Symmes Model of the Hollow Earth](tn/34600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/34600.jpg.md)  
  

As so many people have thought our theory was in some way like that of
Symmes we present herewith a diagram of the sort of earth that Symmes
supposed to be under our feet. A study of this diagram will show at once
the absurdity of thinking our theory is in any way like Symmes'. Each of
the five shells represented above is, according to Symmes, revolving on
its own axis at a rate differing from the rate at which any other shell
is revolving. In the interior of each individual shell there are great
hollow spaces or cavities and in each of these large spaces there is
life, as well as there being life on the surface of each of the shells.
Besides [these](errata.htm#94.md) immense spaces in each shell there are
smaller spaces or gas pockets. And it should be noticed that on Symmes'
theory there is no central sun. And as there is no central sun there can
be no light in the interior except the very little that reaches the
outer surface of the spheres by filtering through the openings from the
outer sun. Not only would that he a very inadequate amount of light and
heat--not enough to maintain life, but there is absolutely no provision
at all for lighting the inner spaces or cavity of the spheres--although
Symmes claims they are inhabited. We simply ask the reader to imagine
such a collection of whirling spheres, each with its great hollows which
can neither he entered or left, and yet each supporting life, and put to
himself the question how such a conglomeration as that could ever be
evolved from a nebula. And yet some people read about our theory and
then state that our theory is related to Symmes' ideas. How absurd.

 

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

their attractions raise in the earth's outer ocean of water. Think what
tides they would raise in this inner ocean of molten rock and metal. The
earth's crust would not be able to hold such tides in. The molten stuff
would always be breaking through the flimsy thirty miles of outer solid
rock as if it were egg-shell. Twice a day there would be outbreaks of
lava vast enough to submerge continents."

He then quotes Lord Kelvin to the effect that the heat of the earth's
crust does not continue the further down we go, as had always been
supposed, but that that increase only holds for a short distance, and
then ceases. And then what?

### EARTH DOES NOT WEIGH ENOUGH TO BE SOLID

Grew does not know, and the scientists don't know, but Grew does make
this very significant confession:

"We know that the earth cannot be solid all through because it does not
weigh enough." He then gives a number of conflicting theories as to what
is to be found in the further interior--whether solids, liquids or
gases. The fact that scientists conflict at this point shows that they
have not sufficient data to build a consistent theory that will not
conflict with the facts. And they never will be able to reconcile their
conflicting views until they accept all the evidence--and that has been
given for the first time in the present book.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

### OBSERVATIONS CONTRADICT SCIENTIFIC THEORIES

Now as a matter of fact the actual observations made by scientists
contradict both the usual scientific theories. We have spoken of the
idea that the earth is molten in its interior. When we say that one
writer in the *Scientific American Supplement* for January, 1909, lays
it down as proven that the crust of the earth is so thin that it can
only be called a "scum" formed by the oxidizing of the metals and other
elements of the earth--just as a scum of oxide is formed when air comes
in contact with the surface of molten lead. When this scientist claims,
furthermore, that this scum is only twenty miles in depth, the reader
will readily see how ridiculous the idea is on the face of it. As we
have said, the attraction of the moon for the molten tides underneath
would burst that scum as fast as it could form. It was the recognition
of such absurdity that threw scientific opinion over to the other
extreme--to-wit, that the earth was a very rigid solid.

### WAS THE EARTH EVER MOLTEN?

Of course there are varieties of this theory. One variety is that which
says that the earth was once molten but is now entirely solid. But some
scientists hold another variety of the theory: that the earth never was
molten. Dr. Arthur Holmes who has analyzed rocks and meteors for their
radium content thinks that the earth as a whole never was molten but
that

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

when it was a nebulous gas it attracted and caught what he calls
"planetesimals"--which were solid, and so built itself up. Probably,
dear reader, you did not know that scientists disagreed among themselves
to that extent, did you?

In fact scientists have been so puzzled because their observations of
the behavior of the earth's crust under various strains and attractions,
did not agree with their theories that, some years ago, the celebrated
Professor Geikie, one of the world's greatest geologists, was forced to
admit that the problems arising from consideration of the evolution of
the surface of the earth were still in a state where no solution was
visible. And to escape the difficulties propounded by Professor Geikie,
Professors Le Conte and Shaller suggested that the earth was neither a
solid spheroid nor a shell with a liquid interior but that it consisted
of an outer, solid crust, then, inside of that, a liquid or viscous
stratum, and then a solid core inside of that again. 'What strange
theories the scientists are reduced to when they ignore the facts!

### DR. HERZ ON EARTH'S SOLIDITY

As for the theory that the earth is a solid, rigid body with its
rigidity equal to that of steel,. here is what Dr. N. Hertz has to say
about the idea:

"All the calculations which give the earth a rigidity as high as that of
steel are based upon the erroneous assumption that the great pressure
existing in

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

the interior of the earth (the pressure at the earth's center is
estimated to be about three and one-fourth million atmospheres) is a
true measure of the rigidity of the earth. This is as incorrect as an
assumption that the pressure of 800 atmospheres which exists at the sea
bottom, five miles below the surface, is a true measure of the rigidity
of the water at that point. In either case the pressure is the
hydrostatic pressure due to the weight of the mass above, and the
comparatively very thin solid crust of the earth is as susceptible to
deformation by centrifugal forces as a shell of solid elastic material,
sixteen inches in diameter and 1-30th of an inch thick would be."

Here we see is more contradiction. We agree with Dr. Herz that it is
absurd to speak of the enormous pressure down at the center of the
earth. But the earth is certainly not to be compared to his globe full
of water--that we have already shown.

While, then, these scientific theories all conflict, what scientifically
observed facts are there that will help us to the true solution?

### LET US LEAVE THE THEORIES FOR FACTS

Let us ask those scientists who have been observing instead of
theorizing.

First we will call to the witness stand Professor A. E. H. Love who
wrote for the Science Progress, Volume of 1912, a review of the third
edition of Sir G. H. Darwin's book, "The Tides and Kindred
[Phenomena](errata.htm#95.md)

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

of the Solar System." He notes that Sir G. H. Darwin is the world's
greatest authority on this subject and he also notes that in this third
edition of his celebrated book one-quarter is either added or
rewritten--showing that what seemed true only a few years ago has been
superseded by new ideas. This ought to warn us against the dogmatism of
clinging to the older ideas about the earth's constitution. For this
book in the reader's hands is simply a step in advance of the orthodox
scientists of today, and tomorrow they may change their ideas and accept
ours.

### G. H. DARWIN'S OBSERVATIONS

Now, as a result of his observations, Sir G. H. Darwin comes to the
conclusion that:

"The body of the earth, on which the oceans rest, cannot be absolutely
rigid. No body is. It must be deformed more or less by the attractions
of the Sun and Moon." So he will try, he says, to find out just how
those changes can be observed. His first attempt was to find out the
"actual height of the so-called fortnightly tide." By fortnightly tide
is meant "a minute inequality in the tide-height, having a period of
about a fortnight, depending upon the inclination of the moon's orbit to
the plane of the equator. . . Now the amount which the fortnightly
oceanic tide would have if the Earth were absolutely rigid can be
calculated." But the results show that the earth is not absolutely rigid
and they also show that it is

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

not as far from rigid as it would be if it were a shell surrounding a
liquid center. In other words the shape of the earth does yield to some
extent under the force of the moon's attraction, and the yielding is not
small enough to justify us in saying that the earth is practically rigid
and it is not large enough to suggest that the earth is a viscous mass.
The reviewer goes on to say:

"It is true that Lord Kelvin proved long ago that, if the earth were
homogeneous and incompressible, it would have to be as rigid as steel to
make the observable height of the fortnightly tide as much as that
calculated from other data, before the actual observation was made."
But, the reviewer goes on to say, other experiments show that the earth
is not a rigid solid, among them being the experiments with a pendulum
conducted by Prof. O. Hecker in Potsdam who showed that the actual
movements of a pendulum, compared over a long time, are not as great as
they would be if the earth were a solid body.

Now if the earth is not a solid, rigid body on the one hand or a
shell-encrusted viscous or fluid body on the other hand and as we have
seen scientists can prove neither the one thing nor the other--there is
left only one possibility--that the earth is hollow, and that is the
possibility which every page in this books shows to be the actuality.

And here are further scientific observations that make this more certain
still, from the actual observation

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

of the earth itself. (For, of course, it is absolutely certain from the
other standpoints already discussed.) The most interesting of these
observations are along the line of earth tremors. Some of these
observations were made as early as 1882 when a writer in the *London
Times* described how he felt the earth shake when a party of friends
were ascending a hill on whose crest he was lying at full length. This
observation, he said, made him quite ready to understand the statements
made by George H. Darwin--quoted above in another connection--and Horace
Darwin, at a meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science--when they described how the earth was in a constant state of
tremor. Experiments carried on by the two brothers showed that the earth
was in a constant condition of vibration, not discernible to us, of
course, but clearly shown by the pendulum and other delicate apparatus
by which the tremors were magnified and recorded. The writer goes on to
say:

### EARTH TREMBLES LIKE A SOAP BUBBLE

"When regular series of observations are made it is found that the
pendulum is hardly ever steady. . . . Some days it may be more quiet
than others and generally there is evidence of distinct
[diurnal](errata.htm#96.md) periods, but the minor zig-zags constantly
interrupt and sometimes reverse for an hour together the slower march
northward or southward."

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

Now it is evident that a solid globe of great rigidity would not behave
in this way, but if the reader remembers how a curved sounding board to
a violin or other musical instrument vibrates he can easily see how the
lunar, solar and other attractions bearing upon the earth and constantly
changing--the earth tides in short--would cause just such tremors.

J. Milne, writing in *Nature* in 1894 also speaks of these and larger
vibrations. He says:

### EARTHQUAKES SCIENTIFICALLY UNIMPORTANT

"Earthquake observations, although still capable of yielding much that
is new, are for the present relegated to a subordinate position, while
the study of the tide-like movements of the surface of our earth, which
have been observed in Japan and Germany, earth tremors and a variety of
other movements, which we are assured are continually happening beneath
our feet, are to take their place. Only in a few countries do
earthquakes occur with sufficient frequency to make them worthy of
serious attention. . . . The new movements to which we are introduced
are occurring at all times and in all countries. . . . Great cities like
London and New York are often rocked to and fro; but these world-wide
movements which may be utilized in connection with the determination of
physical constants relating to the rigidity of our planet's crust,
because they are so gentle, have escaped attention.

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

### CRUST IN CONSTANT VIBRATION

"That the earth is breathing, that the tall buildings upon its surface
are continually being moved to and fro, like the masts of ships upon an
ocean, are, at present, facts which have received but little
recognition. . . . It seems desirable that more should be done to
advance our knowledge of the exact nature of all earth movements, by
establishing seismological observations, or at least preventing those in
existence from sinking into decay."

But the usual scientific theories to account for these tremors are very
confused and contradictory. Thus Abbe T. H. Moreux, writing in *Cosmos*,
1907, says that the tremors which precede earthquakes travel through the
earth so quickly that they must be generated under conditions which are
not found in any solid. He then goes on to try to prove that the earth's
interior is fluid but under exceedingly high pressure. He argues
strenuously for this view, but as we have seen, it is an outworn view.

### CONFESSION OF SCIENTIFIC BANKRUPTCY

For instance, writing even before the scientist quoted above, a reviewer
of scientific progress says:

"Gradually the very existence of the molten nucleus of our planet became
more and more problematical. Already the mathematical investigations of
Fourier and Poisson had shown that, owing to our

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

very imperfect knowledge of the physical aspects of the question, we are
reduced to mere conjectures as regards the state of the inner parts of
our globe. Later on the admirable investigations of Sir 'William
Thomson, G. H. Darwin, Mellard Reade, Osmond Fisher, R. S. Woodward, and
others rendered the existence of a molten nucleus surrounded by a thin,
solid crust, less and less probable. And the geologist had to conclude
that, as long as physics would not supply more reliable data for a
mathematical investigation, he had better leave the question as to the
physical state of the inner parts of the earth unsolved, and study the
[dynamic](errata.htm#97.md) processes which are going on in the superficial
layers of the planet."

Now if that is not a confession of the bankruptcy of orthodox science in
this realm we do not know what would be so considered. The problem is
frankly and totally given up. Does not that [justify](errata.htm#98.md) a
man, who is not a scientist but who has observed the facts, to enter the
field and propound a theory, especially when the theory shows just why
the problem has to be given up by the scientists: because it concerns
something which does not exist--the constitution of the material of the
earth below the "superficial layers." That part of the earth is neither
solid nor liquid because it is filled for the most part with the earth's
atmosphere covering an earth surface very like our own.

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

### EARTH IS NOT HOTTER AS ONE PENETRATES TOWARD CENTER

Let us refer to one more point. Every reader is acquainted with the
fact, as reported by miners and other observers, that the further one
digs into the earth the hotter it gets. It was that idea that led people
to believe that if they dug far enough they would come to a depth where
it was so hot that everything would be in a molten condition. But that
idea, too, must go, as being no longer in accordance with the evidence.
Prof. Mohr of Bonn has written a very important paper on thermometric
investigations of a 4,000 feet boring at Speremberg who finds that while
there is an increase of temperature„ as we go down, the rate of that
increase gets less and less all the time, so that soon it will be nil;
that is to say there will no longer be any increase, and the point at
which the heat would cease to increase would be about 13,550 feet.

Well, we could quote other scientists who disagree one with the other
but it would simply be a repetition of what we have already said. So let
us simply take their confessions of ignorance and ask them to
investigate our claim to have dispelled that ignorance by a theory which
cuts clear from all their contradictory ideas and goes to the root of
the matter and is capable of the direct proof of observation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. How Our Theory Differs From That of Symmes](jei22.md)
