[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14024) 
[Next](m14026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXV

"The Brahmana said, 'In this connection is recited the ancient story of
what the institution is of the Chaturhotra (sacrifice). The ordinances
are now being duly declared of that in its entirety. Listen to me, O
amiable lady, as I declare this wonderful mystery. The agent, the
instrument, the action and Emancipation,--these, O beautiful lady, are
the four sacrificing priests by whom the universe is enveloped. Hear in
its entirety the assignment of causes (relating to this topic). The
nose, the tongue, the eye, the skin, the ear numbering the fifth, the
mind, and the understanding,--these seven should be understood as being
caused by (the knowledge of) qualities. Smell, taste, colour, sound,
touch, numbering the fifth, the objects of the mind, and the objects of
the understanding, these seven are caused by action. He who smells, he
who eats, he who sees, he who speaks, he who hears, numbering the fifth,
he who thinks, and he who understands--these seven should be known as
caused by the agent. Possessed of qualities, these enjoy their own
qualities, agreeable or disagreeable. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67) As regards the Soul, that is destitute of
qualities. These seven are the causes of Emancipation. With them that
are learned and possessed of sufficient understanding, the qualities,
which are in the position of deities, eat the oblations, each in its
proper place, and agreeably to what has been ordained. The person who is
destitute of learning, eating diverse kind of food, becomes seized with
the sense of mineness. <span id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_68) Digesting
food for himself, he becomes ruined through the sense of mineness. The
eating of food that should not be eaten, and the drinking of wine, ruin
him. He destroys the food (he takes), and having destroyed that food, he
becomes destroyed himself. The man of learning, however, being possessed
of puissance, destroys his food for reproducing it. The minutest
transgression does not arise in him from the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

food he takes. Whatever is thought of by the mind, whatever is uttered
by speech, whatever is heard by the ear, whatever is seen by the eye,
whatever is touched by the (sense of) touch, whatever is smelt by the
nose, constitute oblations of clarified butter which should all, after
restraining the senses with the mind numbering the sixth, be poured into
that fire of high merits which burns within the body, *viz.*, the
Soul. <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) The sacrifice constituted by
Yoga is going on as regards myself. The spring whence that sacrifice
proceeds is that which yields the fire of knowledge. The upward
life-wind Prana is the Stotra of that sacrifice. The downward life-wind
Apana is its Sastra. The renunciation of everything is the excellent
Dakshina of that sacrifice. Consciousness, Mind, and
Understanding--these becoming Brahma, are its Hotri, Adhwaryyu, and
Udgatri. The Prasastri, his Sastra, is truth. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70) Cessation of separate existence (or
Emancipation) is the Dakshina. In this connection, people conversant
with Narayana recite some Richs. Unto the divine Narayana were animals
offered in days of yore. <span id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_71) Then are
sung some Samanas. On that topic occurs an authority. O timid one, know
that the divine Narayana is the soul of all.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[45:1](m14024.htm#fr_66) I give a close
rendering of these verses, without endeavouring to bring out the sense
as explained by the commentators. The printed texts are not correct. The
text adopted by Nilakantha differs from that of Arjuna Misra. The very
order of the verses is not uniform in all the texts.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[45:2](m14025.htm#fr_67) 'These' refers to
action, agent and instrument. The qualities of which they are possessed
are goodness, passion, and darkness.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[45:3](m14025.htm#fr_68) What is stated in these
two verses is this: it is the Senses that enjoy; and not the Soul. This
is well known to those that are learned. On the other hand, those that
are not learned, regard this or that to be theirs, when in reality they
are different from them. They are their selves, and not their senses,
although they take themselves for the latter, ignorantly identifying
themselves with things which they are not.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[46:1](m14025.htm#fr_69) What is stated here is
this: Restraining the senses and the mind, the objects of those senses
and the mind should be poured as libations on the sacred fire of the
Soul that is within the body.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[46:2](m14025.htm#fr_70) *i.e.*, truth is the
Sastra of the Prasastri.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[46:3](m14025.htm#fr_71) *Narayana* is taken by
Nilakantha to stand here for either the Veda or the Soul. The animals
offered up to Narayana in days of old were the senses offered up as
sacrifices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXVI](m14026)
