[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14069) 
[Next](m14071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXX

"Vaisampayana said, 'When the Brahma-weapon was withdrawn by Krishna, at
that time, the laying-in room was illumined by thy father with his
energy. All the Rakshasas (that had come there) were forced to leave the
room and many of them met with destruction. In the welkin a voice was
heard, saying, 'Excellent, O Kesava, Excellent!'--The blazing
Brahma-weapon then returned to the Grandsire (of all the worlds). Thy
sire got back his life-breaths, O king. The child began to move
according to his energy and might. The Bharata

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

ladies became filled with joy. At the command of Govinda, the Brahmanas
were made to utter benedictions. All the ladies, filled with joy,
praised Janarddana. Indeed, the wives of those Bharata lions, *viz.*,
Kunti and Drupada's daughter and Subhadra, and Uttara, and the wives of
other lions among men, like (ship-wrecked) persons who have reached the
shore after having obtained a boat, became exceedingly glad. Then
wrestlers and actors and astrologers and those who enquire after the
slumbers (of princes), and bands of bards and eulogists all uttered the
praises of Janarddana, while uttering benedictions fraught with the
praises of the Kuru race, O chief of the Bharatas. Uttara, rising up at
the proper time, with a delighted heart and bearing her child in her
arms, reverentially saluted the delighter of the Yadus. Rejoicing
greatly, Krishna made gifts unto the child of many valuable gems. The
other chiefs of the Vrishni race, did the same. Then the puissant
Janarddana, firmly adhering to truth, bestowed a name on the infant who
was thy sire, O monarch.--'Since this child of Abhimanyu has been born
at a time when this race has become nearly extinct, let his name be
Parikshit!' Even this is what he said. Then thy father, O king, began to
grow, and gladden all the people, O Bharata. When thy father was a month
old, O hero, the Pandavas came back to their capital, bringing with them
a profusion of wealth. Hearing that the Pandavas were near, those
foremost ones of the Vrishni race went out. The citizens decked the city
called after the elephant with garlands of flowers in profusions, with
beautiful pennons and standards of diverse kinds. The citizens also, O
king, adorned their respective mansions. Desirous of doing what was
beneficial to the sons of Pandu, Vidura ordered diverse kinds of worship
to be offered to the deities established in their respective temples.
The principal streets of the city were adorned with flowers. Indeed, the
city was filled with the hum of thousands of voices which resembled the
softened roar of distant ocean waves. With dancers all engaged in their
vocation, and with the voice of singers, the (Kuru) city then resembled
the mansion of Vaisravana himself. <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_185)
Bards and eulogists, O king, accompanied by beautiful women were seen to
adorn diverse retired spots in the city. The pennons were caused by the
wind to float gaily on every part of the city, as if bent upon showing
the Kurus the southern and the northern points of the compass. All the
officers also of the government loudly proclaimed that that was to be a
day of rejoicing for the entire kingdom as an indication of the success
of the enterprise for bringing a profusion of gems and other
valuables.'" <span id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_186)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[121:1](m14069.htm#fr_184) Before performing
any rite or act of a grave nature, Hindus are required to touch water or
perform what is called the 'achamana'. A little quantity of water is
taken on the palm of the right hand, and with it are touched the lips,
the nostrils, the ears, and the eyes.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[122:1](m14070.htm#fr_185) The abode of
Vaisravana is called Alaka. Vaisravana is, of course, Kuvera, the lord
of treasures, friend of Mahadeva, and chief of the Yakshas.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[122:2](m14070.htm#fr_186) The last line is
slightly expanded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXXI](m14071)
