[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14017.md) 
[Next](m14019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XVIII

"--The Brahmana said, 'The acts, good and bad, that a Jiva does are not
subject to destruction. Upon attainment of body after body, those acts
produce fruits corresponding with them. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md) As a fruit-bearing tree, when the season
comes of productivity, yields a large quantity of fruit, similarly
merit, achieved with a pure heart, yields a large crop (of felicity).
After the same fashion, sin, done with a sinful heart, produces a large
crop of misery. The Soul (or Jiva), placing the mind ahead, addresses
himself to action. Hear then how Jiva, equipt with all his acts and
overwhelmed with lust and wrath, enters the womb. The vital seed, mixed
with blood, enters the womb of females and becomes the field (of Jiva),
good or bad, born of (his) acts. In consequence of his subtlety and the
condition of being unmanifest, Jiva does not become attached to anything
even after attaining to a body. Therefore, he is called Eternal
Brahman. <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16.md) That (*viz.*, Jiva or
Brahman) is the seed of all creatures. It is in consequence of Him that
living creatures live. That Jiva, entering all the limbs of the foetus
part by part, accepting the attribute of mind, and residing within all
the regions that belong to Prana, supports (life). In consequence of
this, the foetus becoming endued with mind begins to move its
limbs. <span id="fr_17"></span>[3](#fn_17.md) As liquified iron, poured
(into a mould), takes the form of the mould, know that the entrance of
Jiva into the foetus is even such. As fire, entering a mass of iron,
heats it greatly, do thou know that the manifestation of Jiva in the
foetus is such. As a lamp, burning in a room, discovers (all things
within it), after the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

same manner mind discovers the different limbs of the body. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) Whatever acts, good or bad, Jiva does in a
former body, have certainly to be enjoyed or endured by him. By such
enjoyment and endurance former acts are exhausted, and other acts,
again, accumulate, till Jiva succeed in acquiring a knowledge of the
duties included in that contemplation which leads to Emancipation.
Regarding this, I shall tell thee those acts by which Jiva, O best of
men, while coursing through a repeated round of re-births, becomes
happy, Gifts, observances of austerity, Brahmacharyya, bearing Brahman
according to the ordinances laid down, self-restraint, tranquillity,
compassion for all creatures, restraint of passions, abstentions from
cruelty as also from appropriating what belongs to others, refraining
from doing even mentally all acts that are false and injurious to living
creatures on the Earth, reverently serving mother and father, honouring
deities and guests, worship of preceptors, pity, purity, constant
restraint of all organs, and causing of all good acts, are said to
constitute the conduct of the good. From observance of such conduct,
arises Righteousness which protects all creatures eternally. Such
conduct one would always behold among persons that are good. Verily,
such conduct resides there eternally. That course of practices to which
persons of tranquil souls adhere indicates Righteousness. Among them is
thrown that course of practices which constitutes eternal Righteousness.
He who would betake himself to that Righteousness would never have to
attain to a miserable end. It is by the conduct of the good that the
world is restrained in the paths of Righteousness when it falls away. He
that is a Yogin is Emancipated, and is, therefore, distinguished above
these (*viz.*, the good). <span id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19.md)
Deliverance from the world takes place, after a long time, of one who
acts righteously and well on every occasion as he should. A living
creature thus always meets with the acts done by him in a former life.
All these acts constitute the cause in consequence of which he comes
into this world in a state different from his true form. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[3](#fn_20.md) There is a doubt in the world as regards
the question. By what was the acceptance (by Jiva) of a body first
determined. The Grandsire of all the worlds, *viz.*, Brahma having first
formed a body of his own, then created the three worlds, in their
entirety, of mobile and immobile creatures. Having first himself assumed
a body, he then created Pradhana. That Pradhana is the material cause of
all embodied creatures, by whom is all this covered and whom all came to
know as the highest. This that is seen is said to be destructible; while
the other is immortal and indestructible. This that (is seen) is said to
be Kshara (the destructible); that, however, which is *Para* (the other)
is the Immortal, (as also) Akshara (the Indestructible). Of each Purusha
taken distributively, the whole is duality among these three. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[4](#fn_21) Seen first (to appear in an embodied form.md)

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Prajapati (then) created all the primal elements
and all immobile creatures. Even this is the ancient audition. Of that
(acceptance of body), the Grandsire ordained a limit in respect of time,
and migrations among diverse creatures and return or rebirth. All that I
say is proper and correct, like to what a person who is endued with
intelligence and who has seen his soul, would say on this topic of
previous births. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) That person who
looks upon pleasure and pain as inconstant, which, indeed, is the
correct view, who regards the body as an unholy conglomeration, and
destruction as ordained in action, and who remembers that what little of
pleasure there is, is really all pain, will succeed in crossing this
terrible ocean of worldly migration that is so difficult to cross.
Though assailed by decrepitude and death and disease, he that
understands Pradhana beholds with all equal eye that Consciousness which
dwells in all beings endued with consciousness. Seeking the supreme
seat, he then becomes utterly indifferent to all (other) things. O best
of men, I shall now impart instruction to thee, agreeably to truth,
concerning this. Do thou, O learned Brahmana, understand in completeness
that which constitutes the excellent knowledge, as I declare it, of that
indestructible seat.--'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[29:1](m14018.htm#fr_15.md) *Pachante* is *phalam
prayachhanti*.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[29:2](m14018.htm#fr_16.md) Nilakantha explains
this verse in a different way. According to him it means,--'in
consequence of his subtlety and imperceptibility, Jiva does not become
attached to anything. For this reason, one possessed of a knowledge of
Brahman, having become cognisant of Brahman and attained the great
object of his desire, succeeds in becoming so (*i.e.*, dissociated from
all things). This interpretation seems to be a little far-fetched.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[29:3](m14018.htm#fr_17.md) *Chetasa* indicates
*upadhibhutena*, for previously, Jiva was without *upadhi*.
*Pranasthaneshu* implies *Indriyagolokeshu* or those vital parts which
constitute the seats of the senses. *Chetana* does not, I think, mean
'consciousness.' It implies mind.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[30:1](m14018.htm#fr_18.md) Causes them to grow. I
do not follow Nilakantha here.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[30:2](m14018.htm#fr_19.md) Nilakantha points out
that one of the *cha's* indicates the reason or cause. Hence, the use of
'therefore' in the text.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[30:3](m14018.htm#fr_20.md) *Vikrita* does not
necessarily mean degraded. It implies 'changed or altered.' Jiva, who is
pure and immaculate, takes birth in this world, failing away from his
true status of Brahman owing to his acts. Acts, again, are eternal, no
beginning being conceivable.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[30:4](m14018.htm#fr_21.md)
*Parantwa-maritam-aksharam* indicates two things, *viz.*, *Amritam* and
*Aksharam*. The <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> first line speaks of
Kshara, or the material case, or body; then of that which is *para* or
other. This other is of two kinds, *viz.*, *Amritam* or
*suddha-chaitanyam*, implying Brahman in its condition of purity; and
*Aksharamt* or Jiva as existing in the material case. In the second
line, *trayanam* refers to *Kshara*, *Amrita*, and *Akshara*. *Mithunam*
is duality, referring to that which is composed of *Kshara* and
*Akshara*. What is stated in this verse is that every Purusha is a
duality, made up of *Kshara* and *Akshara*. Telang gives a different
version of the verse. He ignores the word *trayanam* totally, and takes
*Mithunam* as implying a couple (male and female). All the texts I have
seen contain *trayanam*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[31:1](m14018.htm#fr_22.md) *Atra purvajamnani*
(*vishaye*) *yatha kaschit Medhavi* etc., (*vadet*). seems to be the
correct order of the words. Telang translates the first line
differently.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XIX](m14019.md)
