[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14018) 
[Next](m14020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XIX

"--The Brahmana said, 'He who becomes absorbed in the one receptacle (of
all things), freeing himself from even the thought of his own identity
with all things,--indeed, ceasing to think of even his own
existence,--gradually casting off one after another, will succeed in
crossing his bonds. <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23) That man who is
the friend of all, who endures all, who is attached to tranquillity, who
has conquered all his senses, who is divested of fear and wrath, and who
is of restrained soul. succeeds in emancipating himself. He who behaves
towards all creatures as towards himself, who is restrained, pure, free
from vanity and divested of egoism is regarded as emancipated from
everything. He also is

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

emancipated who looks with an equal eye upon life and death, pleasure
and pain, gain and loss, agreeable and disagreeable. He is in every way
emancipated who does not covet what belongs to others, who never
disregards any body, who transcends all pairs of opposites, and whose
soul is free from attachment. He is emancipated who has no enemy, no
kinsman, and no child, who has cast off religion, wealth, and pleasure,
and who is freed from desire or cupidity. He becomes emancipated who
acquires neither merit nor demerit, who casts off the merits and
demerits accumulated in previous births, who wastes the elements of his
body for attaining to a tranquillised soul, and who transcends all pairs
of opposites. He who abstains from all acts, who is free from desire or
cupidity, who looks upon the universe as unenduring or as like an
Aswattha tree, ever endued with birth, death and decrepitude, whose
understanding is fixed on renunciation, and whose eyes are always
directed towards his own faults, soon succeeds in emancipating himself
from the bonds that bind him. <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) He
that sees his soul void of smell, of taste and touch, of sound, of
belongings, of vision, and unknowable, becomes emancipated. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) He who sees his soul devoid of the
attributes of the five elements to be without form and cause, to be
really destitute of attributes though enjoying them, becomes
emancipated. <span id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26) Abandoning, with the
aid of the understanding, all purposes relating to body and mind, one
gradually attains to cessation of separate existence, like a fire unfed
with fuel. <span id="fr_27"></span>[4](#fn_27) One who is freed from all
impressions, who transcends all pairs of opposites, who is destitute of
all belongings, and who uses all his senses under the guidance of
penances, becomes emancipated. <span id="fr_28"></span>[5](#fn_28)
Having become freed from all impressions, one then attains to Brahma
which is Eternal and supreme, and tranquil, and stable, and enduring,
and indestructible. After this I shall declare the science of Yoga to
which there is nothing superior, and how Yogins, by concentration,
behold the perfect soul. <span id="fr_29"></span>[6](#fn_29) I shall
declare the instructions regarding it duly. Do thou learn from me those
doors by which directing the soul within the body one beholds that which
is without beginning and end. <span id="fr_30"></span>[7](#fn_30)
Withdrawing the senses from their objects, one should fix the mind upon
the soul; having previously undergone the severest austerities, one
should practise that concentration of mind which leads to

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Emancipation. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) Observant of penances and always
practising concentration of mind, the learned Brahmana, endued with
intelligence, should observe the precepts of the science of Yoga,
beholding the soul in the body. If the good man succeeds in
concentrating the mind on the soul, he then, habituated to exclusive
meditation, beholds the Supreme soul in his own soul. Self-restrained,
and always concentrated, and with all his senses completely conquered,
the man of cleansed soul, in consequence of such complete concentration
of mind, succeeds in beholding the soul by the soul. As a person
beholding some unseen individual in a dream recognises him,
saying,--This is he,--when he sees him after waking, after the same
manner the good man having seen the Supreme Soul in the deep
contemplation of Samadhi recognises it upon waking from Samadhi. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32) As one beholds the fibrous pith after
extracting it from a blade of the *Saccharum Munja*, even so the Yogin
beholds the soul, extracting it from the body. The body has been called
the *Saccharum Munja*, and the fibrous pith is said to stand for the
soul. This is the excellent illustration propounded by persons
conversant with Yoga. When the bearer of a body adequately beholds the
soul in Yoga, he then has no one that is master over him, for he then
becomes the lord of the three worlds. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33) He succeeds in assuming diverse bodies
according as he wishes. Turning away decrepitude and death, he neither
grieves nor exults. The self-restrained man, concentrated in Yoga, can
create (for himself) the godship of the very gods. Casting off his
transient body he attains to immutable Brahma. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[4](#fn_34) No fear springs up in him at even the
sight of all creatures falling victims to destruction (before his eyes).
When all creatures are afflicted,--he can never be afflicted by any one.
Devoid of desire and possessed of a tranquil mind, the person in Yoga is
never shaken by pain and sorrow and fear, the terrible effects that flow
from attachment and affection. Weapons never pierce him; death does not
exist for him. Nowhere in the world can be seen any one that is happier
than he. Having adequately concentrated his soul, he lives steadily on
himself. Turning off decrepitude and pain and pleasure, he sleeps in
comfort. Casting off this human body he attains to (other) forms
according to his pleasure. While one is enjoying the sovereignty that
Yoga bestows, one should never fall away from devotion to Yoga. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[5](#fn_35) When one, after adequate devotion to Yoga,
beholds the Soul in

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

oneself, one then ceases to have any regard for even him of a hundred
sacrifices (Indra). <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) Hear now how
one, habituating oneself to exclusive meditation, succeeds in attaining
to Yoga. Thinking of that point of the compass which has the Sun behind
it, the mind should be fixed, not outside, but in the interior of that
mansion in which one may happen to live. Residing within that mansion,
the mind should then, with all its outward and inward (operations),
behold in that particular room in which one may stay. At that time when,
having deeply meditated, one beholds the All (*viz.*, Brahman, the Soul
of the universe), there is then nothing external to Brahman where the
mind may dwell. Restraining all the senses in a forest that is free from
noise and that is uninhabited, with mind fixed thereon, one should
meditate on the All (or universal Brahman) both outside and inside one's
body. One should meditate on the teeth, the palate, the tongue, the
throat, the neck likewise; one should also meditate on the heart and the
ligatures of the heart! <span id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37)

"The Brahmana continued, 'Thus addressed by me, that intelligent
disciple, O slayer of Madhu, once more asked me about this religion of
Emancipation that is so difficult to explain. How does this food that is
eaten from time to time become digested in the stomach? How does it
become transformed into juice? How, again, into blood? How does it
nourish the flesh, the marrow, the sinews, the bones? How do all these
limbs of embodied creatures grow? How does the strength grow of the
growing man? How occurs the escape of all such elements as are not
nutritive, and of all impurities separately? How does this one inhale
and again, exhale? Staying upon what particular part does the Soul dwell
in the body? How does Jiva, exerting himself, bear the body? Of what
colour and of what kind is the body in which he dwells again (leaving a
particular body)? O holy one, it behoveth thee to tell me all this
accurately, O sinless one,--even thus was I interrogated by that learned
Brahmana, O Madhava. I replied unto him, O thou of mighty arms, after
the manner I myself had heard, O chastiser of all foes. As one placing
some

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

precious object in one's store-room should keep one's mind on it, so,
placing the mind within one's own body, one should then, restraining all
the senses, seek after the Soul, avoiding all heedlessness. One would,
becoming always assiduous in this way and gratified with one's own self,
within a very short time attain to that Brahma by beholding which one
would become conversant with Pradhana. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) He is not capable of being seized by the
eye; nor even by all the senses. <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) It
is only with the lamp of the mind that great Soul can be seen. He has
hands and feet on all sides; he has ears on all sides; he dwells,
pervading all things in the world. <span id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40)
Jiva beholds the Soul as extracted from the body (like the stalk from a
blade of Saccharum Munja, when knowledge comes). Then casting off Brahma
as invested with form, by holding the mind in the body, he beholds
Brahma as freed from all attributes. <span id="fr_41"></span>[4](#fn_41)
He sees the Soul with his mind, smiling as it were at the time.
Depending upon that Brahma, he then attains to Emancipation in me. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[5](#fn_42) O foremost of regenerate ones, all this
mystery has now been declared by me. I ask thy permission, for I shall
leave this spot. Do thou (also) go withersoever thou pleasest. Thus
addressed by me, O Krishna, on that occasion, that disciple of mine,
endued with austere penances, that Brahmana of rigid vows, went away
according to his pleasure.

"Vasudeva continued, 'That best of Brahmanas, O son of Pritha, having
said these words unto me, on that occasion, properly relating to the
religion of Emancipation, disappeared then and there. Has this discourse
been heard by thee, O son of Pritha, with mind directed solely towards
it? Even this was what thou didst hear on that occasion while thou wert
on thy car. It is my opinion, O son of Pritha, that this is difficult of
being comprehended by one whose understanding is confused, or who has
acquired no wisdom by study, or who eats food
[incompatible](errata.htm#1) with his body, or whose Soul is not
purified. <span id="fr_43"></span>[6](#fn_43) O chief of Bharata's race,
this is a great mystery among the deities that has been declared (to
thee). At no time or place, O son of Pritha, has this been heard by man
in this world. O sinless one, no other man than thyself is deserving of
hearing it. It is not, at this time, capable of being easily understood
by one whose inner soul is confused. The world of the deities is filled,
O son of Kunti, with those who follow the religion of actions. The
cessation of the mortal

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

form (by practising the religion of inaction) is not agreeable to the
deities. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) That goal, O son of Pritha,
is the highest which is constituted by eternal Brahman where one,
casting off the body, attains to immortality and becomes always happy.
By adhering to this religion, even they who axe of sinful birth, such as
women and Vaisyas and Sudras, attain to the highest goal. What need be
said then, O son of Pritha, of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas possessed of
great learning, always devoted to the duties of their own orders and who
are intent on (the acquisition of) the region of Brahma? This has been
laid down with the reasons (on which it rests); and also the means for
its acquisition; and its complete attainment and fruit, *viz.*,
Emancipation and the ascertainment of the truth regarding pain. O chief
of Bharata's race, there is nothing else that is fraught with happiness
greater than this. That mortal, O son of Pandu, who, endued with
intelligence, and faith, and prowess, renounces as unsubstantial what is
regarded as substantial by the world, succeeds within a short time in
obtaining the Supreme by these means. This is all that is to be
said,--there is nothing else that is higher than this. Yoga takes place
in his case, O son of Pritha, who devotes himself to its constant
practice for a period of six months.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[31:2](m14019.htm#fr_23) *Ekayana* is the one
receptacle of all things, *viz.*, Brahman. *Tushni* implies *ahamevedam
sarvamasmityabhimanamapyakurvan* *i.e.*, 'without even retaining the
consciousness of his own identity with everything.'
*Kinchikachintayan*--*i.e.*, not even thinking that he is existing.
*Purvam purvam parityajya* implies the gradual merging of the grosser in
the subtler. *i.e.*, the successive stages of Yoga before absorption
into Brahman. I follow Nilakantha.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[32:1](m14019.htm#fr_24) The first half of the
second line of 8 is read differently in the Bengal texts.
*Aswasthamavasam mudham* implies 'without ease or happiness, endued with
slavery and ignorance.'

<span id="fn_25"></span>[32:2](m14019.htm#fr_25) The Soul being
destitute of these becomes *Chinmatra*, *i.e.*, a pure Chit without the
attributes superinduced upon it by Ne-science or ignorance.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[32:3](m14019.htm#fr_26) Formlessness implies
subtlety. 'Without cause' implies increate or as identical with eternal
Brahman. Dissociation from attributes while enjoying them implies an
emancipate condition.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[32:4](m14019.htm#fr_27) *Nirvana*, according to
orthodox commentators, implies the annihilation or cessation of separate
or individual existence by absorption into universal and eternal
Brahman.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[32:5](m14019.htm#fr_28) The impressions caused
by objects outside self are destroyed by those belonging to
contemplation. The latter, again, should be destroyed before absorption
into Brahman can occur.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[32:6](m14019.htm#fr_29) *Siddham* is explained
as 'destitute of the errors due to Ne-science.'

<span id="fn_30"></span>[32:7](m14019.htm#fr_30) *Attnanam* is
*Chittam*; *atmani* is *dehe*; *charayan* is *antarmukham kritwa*;
*nityam* is *adyantasunyam*. So Nilakantha.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[33:1](m14019.htm#fr_31) 'Fixing the mind upon
the soul' is that concentration which leads to Emancipation. This
becomes possible in consequence of severe austerities undergone
previously.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33:2](m14019.htm#fr_32) I expand the verse a
little to make it intelligible. The sense is this: having seen the
supreme Soul in Samadhi, upon awaking from it, he recognises it in the
universe, *i.e.*, regards the universe to be nothing else than the
Supreme Soul.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[33:3](m14019.htm#fr_33) This may also mean 'he
has none superior to him; not even he that is the Lord of the universe.'

<span id="fn_34"></span>[33:4](m14019.htm#fr_34) The first line seems to
be doubtful. The sense, as I understand it, is,--such a person becomes
the god of the very gods. The causal verb *karayate* may be taken as
equivalent to *karoti*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[33:5](m14019.htm#fr_35) I follow Nilakantha in
rendering the second line. The sense is clear, *viz.*, that one should
not fall away from the practice of Yoga, tempted by the puissance that
Yoga brings. Telang renders the line 'one practising concentration
should never become despondent.' I think, Nilakantha is right.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[34:1](m14019.htm#fr_36) Nilakantha notes that
this indicates that only that Yogin who has not advanced much may be
tempted by the desire of enjoyment. He, however, who has adequately
devoted himself to Yoga feels no regard for Indra himself but can turn
him away like Diogenes dismissing Alexander the Great.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[34:2](m14019.htm#fr_37) I have endeavoured to
render verses 33 to 37 as literally as possible, under the guide of
Nilakantha, omitting his inferences. The passage relates to the
mysteries of Yoga. In the second line of 33, *drishtapurvam disam*,
which has been rendered 'that point of the compass which has the Sun
behind it,' means the instructions laid down in the Vedanta as based
upon Srutis. *Drishtam* implies 'Sruti', for it is as authoritative as
anything seen. 'Pura' implies a city, a citadel, or a mansion. Here it
refers to the body. The *avasatha* within the *pura* refers to the
*chakra* or nervous centres beginning with what is called the
*muladhara*. At the time when Brahman is realised, the whole universe
appears as Brahman and so nothing exists, besides Brahman, upon which
the mind can then dwell. Telang, I think, is not correct in rendering
*manaschasya ... vahyatah* as 'his mind should not any way wander
outside'. The correct version would 'the mind is then nowhere,' implying
that at that time the mind has nothing else to dwell upon.
*Kayamabhyantaram* is *kayamabhi* and *antaram*, *i.e.*, both within and
without the body. The several parts of the body named, beginning with
teeth, etc, refer to eating and other operations, all of which influence
the mind and dispose it for purity and otherwise.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[35:1](m14019.htm#fr_38) *i.e.*, that from which
the entire universe has been created.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[35:2](m14019.htm#fr_39) Probably, 'by any of
the senses'. The plural form occurs in the original.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[35:3](m14019.htm#fr_40) This answers the
questions respecting the form of the Soul, says Nilakantha.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[35:4](m14019.htm#fr_41) I render this verse,
following Nilakantha's gloss. The second line of 50, according to that
commentator, refers to the ascension of the Yogin from Brahma vested
with attributes to Brahma divested of all attributes. The *tam* does not
refer to body, as Telang takes it, but to Brahma as endued with hands
and feet on all sides, etc. *Deheswam dharayan* means 'restraining the
mind within the body'. *Kevalam Brahma* is Brahma without attributes.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[35:5](m14019.htm#fr_42) The speaker here is the
regenerate visitor of Krishna. The latter is repeating the words of that
visitor. In this verse, Krishna, forgetting that he is merely reciting
the words of another, refers to himself as the Supreme Brahman in whom
one must merge for attaining to Emancipation.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[35:6](m14019.htm#fr_43) The second line of 56
is read variously.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[36:1](m14019.htm#fr_44) Heaven is the reward of
those who follow the religion of *Pravritti* or acts, such as
sacrifices, religious observances, etc. The followers, however, of the
religion of *Nivritti* or inaction, *i.e.*, they who betake themselves
to the path of knowledge, become emancipated. The deities derive their
sustenance from the former and become even jealous of the latter, for
the emancipate state is higher than that of the deities themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XX](m14020)
