[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m14029) 
[Next](m14031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXX

"The Pitris said, 'In this connection is cited this old history. Having
heard it, thou shouldst act according to it, O foremost of all
regenerate persons. There was a royal sage of the name Alarka endued
with the austerest of penances. He was conversant with all duties,
truthful in speech, of high soul, and exceedingly firm in his vows.
Having, with his bow, conquered the whole Earth extending to the seas,
and thereby achieved an exceedingly difficult feat, he set his mind on
that which is subtle. While sitting at the root of a tree, his thoughts,
O thou of great intelligence, abandoning all those great feats, turned
towards that which is subtle.'

"Alarka said, 'My mind has become strong. Having conquered the mind,
one's conquest becomes permanent. Though surrounded by foes, I shall
(henceforth) shoot my arrows at other objects. Since in consequence of
its unsteadiness, it sets all mortals to accomplish acts, I shall shoot
very sharp-pointed shafts at the mind.'

"The mind said, 'These arrows, O Alarka, will never pierce me through.
They will pierce only thy own vital parts, Thy vital parts being
pierced, thou shalt die. Do thou look out for other arrows with which to
destroy me.' Hearing these words and reflecting upon them, he said as
follows.

"Alarka said, 'Smelling very many perfumes, the nose hankers after them
only. Hence I shall shoot whetted arrows at the nose.'

"The nose said, 'These arrows will never cross through me, O Alarka.
They will pierce only thy own vital parts, and thy vital parts being
pierced, thou shalt die. Do thou look for other arrows with which to
destroy me.'

Hearing these words and reflecting upon them, he said as follows.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

"Alarka said, This one (*viz.*, the tongue), enjoying savoury tastes,
hankers after them only. Hence I shall shoot whetted shafts at the
tongue.'

"The tongue said, 'These arrows, O Alarka, will not cross through me.
They will only pierce thy own vital parts and thy vital parts being
pierced, thou shalt die. Do thou look for other arrows with which to
destroy me.' Hearing these words and reflecting upon them, he said as
follows.

"Alarka said, 'The skin, touching diverse objects of touch, hankers
after them only. Hence, I shall tear off the skin with diverse arrows
equipt with the feathers of the Kanka.'

"The skin said, 'These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through me. They
will pierce thy own vital parts only, and thy vital parts being pierced,
thou shalt die. Do thou look for other arrows with which to destroy me.'
Hearing these words and reflecting on them, he said as follows.

"Alarka said, 'Hearing diverse sounds, (the ear) hankers after them
only. Hence, I shall shoot whetted shafts at the ear.'

"The ear said, 'These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through me. They
will pierce thy own vital parts only, and thy vital parts being pierced,
thou shalt die. Do thou then look for other arrows with which to destroy
me.' Hearing these words and reflecting upon them, he said as follows.

"Alarka said, 'Seeing many colours, the eye hankers after them only.
Hence, I shall destroy the eye with sharp-pointed arrows.'

"The eye said. 'These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through me at
all. They will pierce thy own vital parts only, and thy vital parts
being pierced, thou shalt die. Do thou then look for other arrows with
which to destroy me!' Hearing these words and reflecting upon them, he
said as follows.

"Alarka said, 'This (*viz.*, the understanding) forms many
determinations with the aid of ratiocination. Hence, I shall shoot
whetted arrows at the understanding.'

"The understanding said, 'These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through
me at all. They will pierce thy vital parts only, and thy vital parts
being pierced, thou shalt die. Do thou then look for other arrows with
which to destroy me!'

"The Brahmana continued, 'Then Alarka, employing himself, even there, on
penances difficult to perform and exceedingly austere, failed to obtain,
by the high power (of his penances) arrows for casting at these seven.
Endued with puissance, he then, with mind well concentrated, began to
reflect. Then O best of regenerate ones, Alarka, that foremost of
intelligent men, having reflected for a long time, failed to obtain
anything better than Yoga. Setting his mind on one object, he remained
perfectly still, engaged in Yoga. <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82)
Endued with energy, he quickly slew all the senses with one arrow,
having entered by Yoga into his

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

soul and thereby attained to the highest success. Filled with wonder,
that royal sage then sang this verse: Alas, it is a pity that we should
have accomplished all acts that are external! Alas, that we should have,
endued with the thirst for enjoyment, courted (the pleasures of)
sovereignty before now! I have learnt this afterwards. There is no
happiness that is higher than Yoga.--Do thou know this, O Rama. Cease to
slay the Kshatriyas. Do thou practise the austerest of penances. Thou
wilt then attain to what is good.--Thus addressed by his grandsires,
Jamadagni's son practised the austerest penances, and having practised
them, that highly blessed one attained to that success which is
difficult to reach.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[52:1](m14029.htm#fr_81) *Kshatriya-bandhu*
always implies low or inferior Kshatriyas, as *Brahma-bandhu* implies
low or inferior Brahmanas. The expression, very probably, is similar to
*Brahman-sangat* in current Bengali. It does not surely mean 'kinsmen of
Kshatriyas'.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[53:1](m14030.htm#fr_82) The vocative, 'O
foremost of regenerate ones' applies to Jamadagni's son. The narration
is that of the Pitris. All the copies, however, represent this as the
Brahmana's speech to his wife. Indeed, the Brahmana is only reciting to
his wife the speech of the Pitris to Rama. The Yoga here spoken of is,
as Nilakantha explains the Raja-Yoga. Previously, Alarka had been bent
upon Hatha-Yoga which frequently ends in the destruction of the person
practising it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXXI](m14031)
