[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gafm52)  [Next](gafm54.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book IV: Cats Heads and Dog Heads

NINE of the Fianna set out one time, looking for a pup they wanted, and
they searched through many places before they found it. All through Magh
Leine they searched, and through the Valley of the Swords, and through
the storm of Drum Cleibh, and it is pleasant the Plain of the Life
looked after it; but not a pup could they find. Then they went searching
through Durlass of the generous men, and great Teamhair and Dun Dobhran
and Ceanntsaile, men and dogs searching the whole of Ireland, but not a
pup could they find.

And while they were going from place to place, and their people with
them, they saw the three armies of the sons of the King of Ruadleath
coming towards them. Cat-headed one army was, and the one alongside of
it was Dog-headed, and the men of the third army were White-backed.

And when the Fianna saw them coming, Finn held up his shining spear, and
light-hearted Caoilte gave out a great shout that was heard in Almhuin
and in Magh Leine, and in Teamhair, and in Dun Reithlein. And that shout
was answered by Goll, son of Morna, and by Faolan, Finn's son that was
with him, and by the Stutterers from Burren, and by the two sons of
Maith Breac, and by Iolunn of the Sharp Edge, and by Cael of the Sharp
Sword, that never gave his ear to tale-bearers.

It is pleasant the sound was then of the spears and the armies and of
the silken banners that were raised up in the gusty wind of the morning.
And as to the banners, Finn's banner, the Dealb-Greine, the Sun-Shape,
had the likeness of the sun on it; and Goll's banner was the Fulang
Duaraidh, that was the first and last to move in a battle; and Faolan's
banner was the Coinneal Catha, the Candle of Battle; and Oisin's banner
was the Donn Nimhe, the Dark Deadly One; and Caoilte's was the Lamh
Dearg, the Red Hand; and Osgar's was the Sguab Gabhaidh that had a Broom
of rowan branches on it, and the only thing asked when the fight was at
the hottest was where that Broom was; and merry Diarmuid's banner was
the Liath Loinneach, the Shining Grey; and the Craobh Fuileach, the
Bloody Branch, was the banner of Lugaidh's Son. And as to Conan, it is a
briar he had on his banner, because he was always for quarrels and for
trouble. And it used to be said of him be never saw a man frown without
striking him, or a door left open without going in through it.

And when the Fianna had raised their banners they attacked the three
armies; and first of all they killed the whole of the Cat-Heads, and
then they took the Dog-Heads in hand and made an end of them, and of the
White-Backs along with them.

And after that they went to a little hill to the south, having a double
dun on it, and it is there they found a hound they were able to get a
pup from.

And by that time they had searched through the whole of Ireland, and
they did not find in the whole of it a hundred men that could match
their nine.

And as well as their banners, some of the Fianna had swords that had
names to them, Mac an Luin, Son of the Waves, that belonged to Finn; and
Ceard-nan Gallan, the Smith of the Branches, that was Oisin's; and
Caoilte's Cruadh-Chosgarach, the Hard Destroying One; and Diarmuid's
Liomhadoir, the Burnisher; and Osgar's Cosgarach Mhor, the Great
Triumphant One.

And it is the way they got those swords: there came one time to where
Finn and Caoilte and some others of the Fianna were, a young man, very
big and ugly, having but one foot and one eye; a cloak of black skins he
had over his shoulders, and in his hand a blunt ploughshare that was
turning to red. And he told them he was Lon, son of Liobhan, one of the
three smiths of the Kings of Lochlann. And whether he thought to go away
from the Fianna, or to bring them to his smithy, he started running, and
they followed after him all through Ireland, to Slieve-na-Righ, and to
Luimnech, and to Ath Luain, and by the right side of the Cruachan of
Connacht, and to Ess Ruadh and to Beinn Edair, and so to the sea.

And wherever it was they found the smithy, they went into it, and there
they found four smiths working, and every one of them having seven
hands. And Finn and Caoilte and the rest stopped there watching them
till the swords were made, and they brought them away with them then,
and it is good use they made of them afterwards.

And besides his sword, Mac an Luin, Finn had a shield was called Sgiath
Gailbhinn, the Storm Shield; and when it called out it could be heard
all through Ireland.

And whether or not it was the Storm Shield, Finn had a wonderful shield
that he did great deeds with, and the story of it is this:

At the time of the battle of the Great Battle of Magh Tuireadh, Lugh,
after he had struck the head off Balor of the Evil Eye, hung it in the
fork of a hazel-tree. And the tree split, and the leaves fell from it
with the dint of the poison that dropped from the head. And through the
length of fifty years that tree was a dwelling-place of crows and
ravens. And at the end of that lime Manannnn, son of Lir, was passing
by, and he took notice of the tree that it was split and withered, and
he bade his men to dig it up. And when they began to dig, a mist of
poison rose up from the roots, and nine of the men got their death from
it, and another nine after them, and the third nine were blinded. And
Luchtaine the Carpenter made a shield of the wood of that hazel for
Manannan. And after a while Manannan gave it, and a set of chessmen
along with it, to Tadg, son of Nuada; and from him it came to his
grandson, Finn son of Muirne and of Cumhal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book IV: Lomna's Head](gafm54.md)
