[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gafm50)  [Next](gafm52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book IV: Donn, Son of Midhir

ONE time the Fianna were at their hunting at the island of Toraig to the
north of Ireland, and they roused a fawn that was very wild and
beautiful, and it made for the coast, and Finn and six of his men
followed after it through the whole country, till they came to
Slieve-nam-Ban. And there the fawn put down its head and vanished into
the earth, and none of them knew where was it gone to.

A heavy snow began to fall then that bent down the tops of the trees
like a willow-gad, and the courage and the strength went from the Fianna
with the dint of the bad weather, and Finn said to Caoilte: "Is there
any place we can find shelter to-night?" Caoilte made himself supple
then, and went over the elbow of the hill southward.

And when he looked around him he saw a house full of light, with cups
and horns and bowls of different sorts in it. He stood a good while
before the door of the house, that he knew to be a house of the Sidhe,
thinking would it be best go in and get news of it, or to go back to
Finn and the few men that were with him. And he made up his mind to go
into the house, and there he sat down on a shining chair in the middle
of the floor; and he looked around him, and he saw, on the one side,
eight-and-twenty armed men, each of them having a well-shaped woman
beside him. And on the other side he saw six nice young girls,
yellow-haired, having shaggy gowns from their shoulders. And in the
middle there was another young girl sitting in a chair, and a harp in
her hand, and she playing on it and singing. And every time she stopped,
a man of them would give her a horn to drink from, and she would give it
back to him again, and they were all making mirth around her.

She spoke to Caoilte then. "Caoilte, my life," she said, "give us leave
to attend on you now." "Do not," said Caoilte, "for there is a better
man than myself outside, Finn, son of Cumhal, and he has a mind to eat
in this house to-night." "Rise up, Caoilte, and go for Finn," said a man
of the house then; "for he never refused any man in his own house, and
he will get no refusal from us."

Caoilte went back then to Finn, and when Finn saw him he said: "It is
long you are away from us, Caoilte, for from the time I took arms in my
hands I never had a night that put so much hardship on me as this one."

The six of them went then into the lighted house and their shields and
their arms with them. And they sat down on the edge of a seat, and a
girl having yellow hair came and brought them to a shining seat in the
middle of the house, and the newest of every food, and the oldest of
every drink was put before them. And when the sharpness of their hunger
and their thirst was lessened, Finn said: "Which of you can I question?"
"Question whoever you have a mind to," said the tallest of the men that
was near him. "Who are you yourself then?" said Finn, "for I did not
think there were so many champions in Ireland, and I not knowing them."

"Those eight-and-twenty armed men you see beyond," said the tall man,
"had the one father and mother with myself; and we are the sons of
Midhir of the Yellow Hair, and our mother is Fionnchaem, the fair,
beautiful daughter of the King of the Sidhe of Monaid in the east. And
at one time the Tuatha de Danaan had a gathering, and gave the kingship
to Bodb Dearg, son of the Dagda, at his bright hospitable place, and he
began to ask hostages of myself and of my brothers; but we said that
till all the rest of the Men of Dea had given them, we would not give
them. Bodb Dearg said then to our father: 'Unless you will put away your
sons, we will wall up your dwelling-place on you.' So the
eight-and-twenty brothers of us came out to look for a place for
ourselves; and we searched all Ireland till we found this secret place,
and we are here ever since. And my own name," he said, "is Donn, son of
Midhir. And we had every one of us ten hundred armed men belonging to
himself, but they are all worn away now, and only the eight-and-twenty
of us left." "What is it is wearing you away?" said Finn. "The Men of
Dea," said Donn, "that come three times in every year to give battle to
us on the green outside." "What is the long new grave we saw on the
green outside?" said Finn. "It is the grave of Diangalach, a man of
enchantments of the Men of Dea; and that is the greatest loss came on
them yet," said Donn; "and it was I myself killed him," he said. "What
loss came next to that?" said Finn. "All the Tuatha de Danaan had of
jewels and riches and treasures, horns and vessels and cups of pale
gold, we took from them at the one time." "What was the third greatest
loss they had?" said Finn. "It was Fethnaid, daughter of Feclach, the
woman-harper of the Tuatha de Danaan, their music and the delight of
their minds," said Donn.

"And to-morrow," he said, "they will be coming to make an attack on us,
and there is no one but myself and my brothers left; and we knew we
would be in danger, and that we could make no stand against them. And we
sent that bare-headed girl beyond to Toraig in the North in the shape of
a foolish fawn, and you followed her here. It is that girl washing
herself, and having a green cloak about her, went looking for you.

"And the empty side of the house," he said, "belonged to our people that
the Men of Dea have killed."

They spent that night in drinking and in pleasure. And when they rose up
in the morning of the morrow, Donn, son of Midhir, said to Finn, "Come
out with me now on the lawn till you see the place where we fight the
battles every year." They went out then and they looked at the graves
and the flag-stones, and Donn said: "It is as far as this the Men of Dea
come to meet us." "Which of them come here?" said Finn.

"Bodb Dearg with his seven sons," said Donn; "and Angus Og, son of the
Dagda, with his seven sons; and Finnbharr of Cnoc Medha with his
seventeen sons; Lir of Sidhe Fionnachaidh with his twenty-seven sons and
their sons; Tadg, son of Nuada, out of the beautiful hill of Aimhuin;
Donn of the Island and Donn of the Vat; the two called Glas from the
district of Osraige; Dobhran Dubthaire from the hill of Liamhain of the
Smooth Shirt; Aedh of the Island of Rachrainn in the north; Feral and
Aillinn and Lir and Fainnle, sons of Eogobal, from Cnoc Aine in Munster;
Cian and Coban and Conn, three sons of the King of Sidhe Monaid in
Alban; Aedh Minbhreac of Ess Ruadh with his seven sons; the children of
the Morrigu, the Great Queen, her six-and-twenty women warriors, the two
Luaths from Magh Lifé; Derg and Drecan out of the hill of Beinn Edair in
the east; Bodb Dearg himself with his great household, ten hundred ten
score and ten. Those are the chief leaders of the Tuatha de Danaan that
come to destroy our hill every year."

Finn went back into the hill then, and told all that to his people. "My
people," he said, "it is in great need and under great oppression the
sons of Midhir are, and it is into great danger we are come ourselves.
And unless we make a good fight now," he said, "it is likely we will
never see the Fianna again."

"Good Finn," every one of them said then, "did you ever see any
drawing-back in any of us that you give us that warning?" "I give my
word," said Finn, "if I would go through the whole world having only
this many of the Fianna of Ireland with me, I would not know fear nor
fright. And good Donn," he said, "is it by day or by night the Men of
Dea come against you?" "It is at the fall of night they come," said
Donn, "the way they can do us the most harm."

So they waited till night came on, and then Finn said: "Let one of you
go out now on the green to keep watch for us, the way the Men of Dea
will not come on us without word or warning."

And the man they set to watch was not gone far when he saw five strong
battalions of the Men of Dea coming towards him. He went back then to
the hill and he said: "It is what I think, that the troops that are come
against us this time and are standing now around the grave of the Man of
Enchantments are a match for any other fighting men."

Finn called to his people then, and he said: "These are good fighters
are come against you, having strong red spears. And let you all do well
now in the battle. And it is what you have to do," be said, "to keep the
little troop of brothers, the sons of Midhir, safe in the fight; for it
would be a treachery to friendship any harm to come on them, and we
after joining them; and myself and Caoilte are the oldest among you, and
leave the rest of the battle to us."

Then from the covering time of evening to the edge of the morning they
fought the battle. And the loss of the Tuatha de Danaan was no less a
number than ten hundred ten score and ten men. Then Bodb Dearg and
Midhir and Fionnbhar said to one another: "What are we to do with all
these? And let Lir of Sidhe Fionnachaidh give us an advice," they said,
"since he is the oldest of us." And Lir said: "It is what I advise, let
every one carry away his friends and his fosterlings, his sons and his
brothers, to his own place. And as for us that stop here," he said, "let
a wall of fire be made about us on the one side, and a wall of water on
the other side." Then the Men of Dea put up a great heap of stones, and
brought away their dead; and of all the great slaughter that Finn and
his men and the sons of Midhir had made, there was not left enough for a
crow to perch upon.

And as to Finn and his men, they went back into the hill, hurt and
wounded and worn-out.

And they stopped in the hill with the sons of Midhir through the whole
length of a year, and three times in the year the Men of Dea made an
attack on the hill, and a battle was fought.

And Conn, son of Midhir, was killed in one of the battles; and as to the
Fianna, there were so many wounds on them that the clothing was held oft
from their bodies with bent hazel sticks, and they lying in their beds,
and two of them were like to die. And Finn and Caoilte and Lugaidh's Son
went out on the green, and Caoilte said: "It was a bad journey we made
coming to this hill, to leave two of our comrades after us." "It is a
pity for whoever will face the Fianna of Ireland," said Lugaidh's Son,
"and he after leaving his comrades after him." "Whoever will go back and
leave them, it will not be myself," said Finn. Then Donn, son of Midhir,
came to them. "Good Donn," said Finn, "have you knowledge of any
physician that can cure our men?" "I only know one physician could do
that," said Donn; "a physician the Tuatha de Danaan have with them. And
unless a wounded man has the marrow of his back cut through, he will get
relief from that physician, the way he will be sound at the end of nine
days." "How can we bring that man here," said Finn, "for those he is
with are no good friends to us?" "He goes out every morning at break of
day," said Dorm, "to gather healing herbs while the dew is on them."
"Find some one, Donn," said Caoilte, "that will show me that physician,
and, living or dead, I will bring him with me."

Then Aedh and Flann, two of the sons of Midhir, rose up. "Come with us,
Caoilte," they said, and they went on before him to a green lawn with
the dew on it; and when they came to it they saw a strong young man
armed and having a cloak of wool of the seven sheep of the Land of
Promise, and it full of herbs of healing he was after gathering for the
Men of Dea that were wounded in the battle. "Who is that man?" said
Caoilte. "That is the man we came looking for," said Aedh. "And mind him
well now," he said, "that he will not make his escape from us back to
his own people."

They ran at him together then, and Caoilte took him by the shoulders and
they brought him away with them to the ford of the Slaine in the great
plain of Leinster, where the most of the Fianna were at that time; and a
Druid mist rose up about them that they could not be seen.

And they went up on a little hill over the ford, and they saw before
them four young men having crimson fringed cloaks and swords with gold
hilts, and four good hunting hounds along with them. And the young man
could not see them because of the mist, but Caoilte saw they were his
own two sons, Colla and Faolan, and two other young men of the Fianna,
and he could hear them talking together, and saying it was a year now
that Finn, son of Cumhal, was gone from them. "And what will the Fianna
of Ireland do from this out," said one of them, "without their lord and
their leader?" "There is nothing for them to do, said another, but to go
to Teamhair and to break up there, or to find another leader for
themselves." And there was heavy sorrow on them for the loss of their
lord; and it was grief to Caoilte to be looking at them.

And he and the two Sons of Midhir went back then by the Lake of the Two
Birds to Slieve-nam Ban, and they went into the hill.

And Finn and Donn gave a great welcome to Luibra, the physiclan, and
they showed him their two comrades that were lying in their wounds.
"Those men are brothers to me," said Donn, "and tell me how can they be
cured?" Luibra looked then at their wounds, and he said: "They can be
cured if I get a good reward." "You will get that indeed," said Caoilte;
"and tell me now," he said, "how long will it take to cure them?" "It
will take nine days," said Luibra. "It is a good reward you will get,"
said Caoilte, "and this is what it is, your own life to be left to you.
But if these young men are not healed," he said, "it is my own hand will
strike off your head."

And within nine days the physician had done a cure on them, and they
were as well and as sound as before.

 

 

And it was after that time the High King sent a messenger to bring the
Fianna to the Feast of Teamhair. And they all gathered to it, men and
women, boys and heroes and musicians. And Goll, son of Morna, was
sitting at the feast beside the king. "It is a great loss you have had,
Fianna of Ireland," said the king, "losing your lord and your leader,
Finn, son of Cumhal." "It is a great loss indeed," said Goll.

"There has no greater loss fallen on Ireland since the loss of Lugh, son
of Ethne," said the king. "What orders will you give to the Fianna now,
king?" said Goll. "To yourself, Goll," said the king, "I will give the
right of hunting over all Ireland till we know if the loss of Finn is
lasting." "I will not take Finn's place," said Goll, "till he has been
wanting to us through the length of three years, and till no person in
Ireland has any hope of seeing him again."

Then Ailbe of the Freckled Face said to the king: "What should these
seventeen queens belonging to Finn's household do?" "Let a safe, secret
sunny house be given to every one of them," said the king; "and let her
stop there and her women with her, and let provision be given to her a
month and a quarter and a year till we have knowledge if Finn is alive
or dead."

Then the king stood up, and a smooth drinking-horn in his hand, and he
said: "It would be a good thing, men of Ireland, if any one among you
could get us news of Finn in hills or in secret places, or in rivers or
invers, or in any house of the Sidhe in Ireland or in Alban."

With that Berngal, the cow-owner from the borders of Slieve Fuad, that
was divider to the King of Ireland, said: "The day Finn came out from
the north, following after a deer of the Sidhe, and his five comrades
with him, he put a sharp spear having a shining head in my hand, and a
hound's collar along with it, and he bade me to keep them till he would
meet me again in the same place." Berngal showed the spear and the
collar then to the king and to Goll, and they looked at them and the
king said: "It is a great loss to the men of Ireland the man is that
owned this collar and this spear. And were his hounds along with him?"
he said.

"They were," said Berngal; "Bran and Sceolan were with Finn, and Breac
and Lainbhui with Caoilte, and Conuall and Comrith with Lugaidh's Son."

The High King called then for Fergus of the True Lips, and he said: "Do
you know how long is Finn away from us?" "I know that well," said
Fergus; "it is a month and a quarter and a year since we lost him. And
indeed it is a great loss he is to the Fianna of Ireland," he said,
"himself and the men that were with him." "It is a great loss indeed,"
said the king, "and I have no hope at all of finding those six that were
the best men of Ireland or of Alban."

And then he called to Cithruadh, the Druid, and he said: "It is much
riches and treasures Finn gave you, and tell us now is he living or is
he dead?" "He is living," said Cithruadh then. "But as to where he is, I
will give no news of that," he said, "for he himself would not like me
to give news of it." There was great joy among them when they heard
that, for everything Cithruadh had ever foretold had come true. "Tell us
when will he come back?" said the king. "Before the Feast of Teamhair is
over," said the Druid, "you will see the Leader of the Fianna drinking
at it."

And as to Finn and his men, they stopped in the House of the Two Birds
till they had taken hostages for Donn, son of Midhir, from the Tuatha de
Danaan. And on the last day of the Feast of Teamhair they came back to
their people again.

And from that time out the Fianna of Ireland had not more dealings with
the people living in houses than they had with the People of the Gods of
Dana.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book IV: Hospitality of Cuanna's House](gafm52.md)
