[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm60)  [Next](gafm62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book IV: Finn and the Phantoms

FINN went to a gathering one time at Aonach Clochair, and a great many
of the men of Munster crowded to it. And the horses of the Fianna were
brought there, and the horses of the men of Munster, and they ran races
against one another.

And Fiachu, son of Eoghan, was in it; and when the games were over he
gave good presents to Finn, a lasting black horse that won the three
prizes of the gathering, and a chariot, and a horse for the
chariot-driver, and a spear, having a deadly spell, and weapons of
silver, and three comely bounds, Feirne and Derchaem and Dialath, having
collars of yellow gold and chains of white bronze.

And Finn rose up and gave his thanks to Fiachu, son of Eoghan, and he
and his people set out to the house of Cacher at Cluain-da-loch. And
they stopped three days feasting in Cacher's house, and then Finn gave
him the price of his feast and of his ale, fifty rings, and fifty horses
and fifty cows.

And he himself and the Fianna went on from that over Luachair to the
strand at Berramain. And Finn went trying his black horse on the strand,
and Caoilte and Oisin went racing against him; but it was only folly for
them to do that, for he gave a blow to his horse, and away with him to
Traigh Liath and over the Plain of Health to the Old Yew of the Old
Valley, and to the inver of the Flesc and the inver of the Lemain to
Loch Lein, till he came to the hill of Bairnech, and Caoilte and Oisin
after him.

"Night is coming on us," said Finn then; "and go look for some place
where we can sleep," he said. He looked round then at the rocks on his
left band and he saw a house, and a fire shining out from it in the
valley below. "I never knew of a house in this valley," he said.

"It is best for us to go see it," said Caoilte, "for there are many
things we have no knowledge of."

The three went on then to the house, and they heard screams and dying
from it; and when they came to the house, the people of it were very
fierce and rough; and a big grey man took hold of their horses and
brought them in and shut the door of the house with iron hooks. "My
welcome to you, Finn of the great name," he said then; "it is a long
time you were in coming here."

They sat down then on the hard boards of a bed, and the grey man kindled
a fire, and he threw logs of elderwood on it, till they went near being
smothered with the smoke. They saw a hag in the house then having three
heads on her lean neck; and there was on the other side a man without a
head, having one eye, and it in his breast. "Rise up, you that are in
the house, and make music for the King of the Fianna," said the grey man
then.

With that nine bodies rose up out of the corner nearest the Fianna, and
nine heads rose up on the other side of the bed, and they raised nine
harsh screeches together, that no one would like to be listening to. And
then the hag answered to them, and the headless man answered; and if all
of that music was harsh, there was none of it that you would not wish to
hear sooner than the music of the one-eyed man. And the music that was
sung went near to breaking the bones of their heads; and indeed it is no
sweet music that was.

Then the big grey man rose up and took the axe that was for cutting
logs, and he began striking at the horses, flaying and destroying them.
Then there were brought fifty pointed spits of the rowan-tree, and he
put a piece of the horse's flesh on each one of the spits, and settled
them on the hearth. But when he took the spits from the fire and put
them before Finn, it is raw the flesh was on them yet. "Take your food
away," said Finn then, "for I have never eaten meat that was raw, and I
never will eat it because of being without food for one day." "If you
are come into our house to refuse our food," said the grey man, "we will
surely go against yourselves, Finn and Caoilte and Oisin."

With that all in the house made an attack on the three; and they were
driven back into the corner, and the fire was quenched, and the fight
went on through the whole night in the darkness, and but for Finn and
the way he fought, they would have been put down.

And when the sun rose and lighted up the house on the morrow, a mist
came into the head of each of the three, so that they fell as if dead on
the floor.

But after a while they rose up again, and there was nothing to be seen
of the house or of the people of the house, but they had all vanished.
And their horses were there and they took them and went on, very weak
and tired, for a long way, till they came to the strand of Berramain.

And those three that fought against them were the three Shapes out of
the Valley of the Yew Tree that came to avenge their sister, Cuillen of
the Wide Mouth.

Now as to Cuillen, she was a daughter of the King of Munster, and her
husband was the King of Ulster's son. And they had a son that was called
Fear Og, the Young Man; and there was hardly in Ireland a man so good as
himself in shape and in courage and in casting a spear. And one time he
joined in a game with the Fianna, and he did better than them all, and
Finn gave him a great reward.

And after that he went out to a hunt they made, and it was by him and by
none of the Fianna the first blood was got of pig or of deer. And when
they came back, a heavy sickness fell on the young man through the eyes
and the envy of the Fianna, and it left him without life at the end of
nine days. And he was buried under a green hill, and the shining stone
he used to hold in his hand, and he doing his feats, was put over his
head.

And his mother, Cuillen, came to his grave keening him every day through
the length of a year. And one day she died there for grief after her
son, and they put her into the same green hill.

But as to Finn, he was afraid of no earthly thing, and he killed many
great serpents in Loch Cuillinn and Loch Neathach, and at Beinn Edair;
and Shadow-Shapes at Loch Lein and Drom CleIb and Loch Liath, and a
serpent and a cat in Ath Cliath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book IV: The Pigs of Angus](gafm62)
