[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gafm47)  [Next](gafm49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book III: Credhe's Lament

THEN there came the women and the musicians and the singers and the
physicians of the Fianna of Ireland to search out the kings and the
princes of the Fianna, and to bury them; and every one that might be
healed was brought to a place of healing.

And Credhe, wife of Cael, came with the others, and went looking through
the bodies for her comely comrade, and crying as she went. And as she
was searching, she saw a crane of the meadows and her two nestlings, and
the cunning beast the fox watching the nestlings; and when the crane
covered one of the birds to save it, he would make a rush at the other
bird, the way she had to stretch herself out over the birds; and she
would sooner have got her own death by the fox than her nestlings to be
killed by him. And Credhe was looking at that, and she said: "It is no
wonder I to have such love for my comely sweetheart, and the bird in
that distress about her nestlings."

Then she heard a stag in Druim Ruighlenn above the harbour, that was
making great lamentations for his hind from place to place, for they had
been nine years together, and had lived in the wood at the foot of the
harbour, Fidh Leis, and Finn had killed the hind, and the stag was
nineteen days without tasting grass or water, lamenting after the hind.
"It is no shame for me," said Credhe, "I to die for grief after Cael,
since the stag is shortening his life sorrowing after the hind."

Then she met with Fergus of the True Lips. "Have you news of Cael for
me, Fergus?" she said. "I have news," said Fergus, "for he and the last
man that was left of the foreigners, Finnachta Fiaclach, are after
drowning one another in the sea."

And at that time the waves had put Cael back on the strand, and the
women and the men of the Fianna that were looking for him raised him up,
and brought him to the south of the White Strand.

And Credhe came to where he was, and she keened him and cried over him,
and she made this complaint:--

"The harbour roars, O the harbour roars, over the rushing race of the
Headland of the Two Storms, the drowning of the hero of the Lake of the
Two Dogs, that is what the waves are keening on the strand.

"Sweet-voiced is the crane, O sweet-voiced is the crane in the marshes
of the Ridge of the Two Strong Men; it is she cannot save her nestlings,
the wild dog of two colours is taking her little ones.

"Pitiful the cry, pitiful the cry the thrush is making in the Pleasant
Ridge, sorrowful is the cry of the blackbird in Leiter Laeig.

"Sorrowful the call, O sorrowful the call of the deer in the Ridge of
Two Lights; the doe is lying dead in Druim Silenn, the mighty stag cries
after her.

"Sorrowful to me, O sorrowful to me the death of the hero that lay
beside me; the son of the woman of the Wood of the Two Thickets, to be
with a bunch of grass under his head.

"Sore to me, O sore to me Cad to be a dead man beside me, the waves to
have gone over his white body; it is his pleasantness that has put my
wits astray.

"A woeful shout, O a woeful shout the waves are making on the strand;
they that took hold of comely CaeI, a pity it is he went to meet them.

"A woeful crash, O a woeful crash the waves are making on the strand to
the north, breaking against the smooth rock, crying after Cael now he is
gone.

"A sorrowful fight, O a sorrowful fight, the sea is making with the
strand to the north; my beauty is lessened; the end of my life is
measured.

"A song of grief, O a song of grief is made by the waves of Tulcha Leis;
all I had is gone since this story came to me. Since the son of
Crimthann is drowned I will love no one after him for ever; many a king
fell by his hand; his shield never cried out in the battle."

After she had made that complaint, Credhe laid herself down beside Cae
anld died for grief after him. And they were put in the one grave, and
it was Caoilte raised the stone over them.

 

 

And after that great battle of the White Strand, that lasted a year and
a day, there was many a sword and shield left broken, and many a dead
body lying on the ground, and many a fighting man left with a foolish
smile on his face.

And the great name that was on the armies of the World went from them to
the Fianna of Ireland; and they took the ships and the gold and the
silver and all the spoils of the armies of the World. And from that time
the Fianna had charge of the whole of Ireland, to keep it from the Fomor
and from any that might come against it.

And they never lost power from that time until the time of their last
battle, the sorrowful battle of Gabhra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book IV: King of Britains Son](gafm49.md)
