[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gafm73)  [Next](gafm75.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book VII: The Quarrel

AND as to Osgar and Diarmuid, they went on, and no cut or wound on them,
to where Angus and Grania were at Brugh na Boinne; and there was a good
welcome before them, and Diarmuid told them the whole story from
beginning to end, and it is much that Grania did not die then and there,
hearing all he had gone through.

And then she and Diarmuid set out again, and they went and stopped for a
while in a cave that was near the sea.

And one night while they were there a great storm came on, so that they
went into the far part of the cave. But bad as the night was, a man of
the Fomor, Ciach, the Fierce One, his name was, came over the western
ocean in a curragh, with two oars, and he drew it into the cave for
shelter. And Diarmuid bade him welcome, and they sat down to play chess
together. And he got the best of the game, and what he asked as his
winnings was Grania to be his wife, and he put his arms about her as if
to bring her away. And Grania said: "I am this long time going with the
third best man of the Fianna, and he never came as near as that to me."

And Diarmuid took his sword to kill Ciach, and there was anger on Grania
when she saw that, and she had a knife in her hand and she struck it
into Diarmuid's thigh. And Diarmuid made an end of the Fomor, and he
said no word to Grania, but ran out and away through the storm.

And Grania went following after him, and calling to him, but there was
great anger on him and be would not answer her. And at last at the break
of day she overtook him, and after a while they heard the cry of a
heron, and she asked him what was it made the heron cry out.

"Tell me that," she said, "Grandson of Duibhne, to whom I gave my love."
And Diarmuid said: "O Grania, daughter of the High King, woman who never
took a step aright, it is because she was frozen to the rocks she gave
that cry." And Grania was asking forgiveness of him, and he was
reproaching her, and it is what he said: "O Grania of the beautiful
hair, though you are more beautiful than the green tree under blossom,
your love passes away as quickly as the cold cloud at break of day. And
you are asking a hard thing of me now," he said, "and it is a pity what
you said to me, Grania, for it was you brought me away from the house of
my lord, that I am banished from it to this day; and now I am troubled
through the night, fretting after its delight in every place.

"I am like a wild deer, or a beast that is astray, going ever and always
through the long valleys; there is great longing on me to see one of my
kindred from the host.

"I left my own people that were brighter than lime or snow; their heart
was full of generosity to me, like the sun that is high above us; but
now they follow me angrily to every harbour and every strand.

"I lost my people by you, and my lord, and my large bright ships on
every sea; I lost my treasure and my gold; it is hunger you gave me
through your love.

"I lost my country and my kindred; my men that were used to serve me; I
lost quietness and affection; I lost the men of Ireland and the Fianna
entirely.

"I lost delight and music; I lost my own right doing and my honour; I
lost the Fianna of Ireland, my great kinsmen, for the sake of the love
you gave me.

"O Grania, white as snow, it would have been a better choice for you to
have given hatred to me, or gentleness to the Head of the Fianna."

And Grania said: "O Diarmuid of the face like snow or like the down of
the mountains, the sound of your voice was dearer to me than all the
riches of the leader of the Fianna.

"Your blue eye is dearer to me than his strength, and his gold and his
great hall; the love-spot on your forehead is better to me than honey in
streams; the time I first looked on it, it was more to me than the whole
host of the King of Ireland.

"My heart fell down there and then before your high beauty; when you
came beside me, it was like the whole of life in one day.

"O Diarmuid of the beautiful hands, take me now the same as before; it
was with me the fault was entirely; give me your promise not to leave
me."

But Diarmuid said: "How can I take you again, you are a woman too fond
of words; one day you give up the Head of the Fianna, and the next day
myself, and no lie in it.

"It is you parted me from Finn, the way I fell under sorrow and grief;
and you left me yourself, the time I was full of affection."

And Grania said: "Do not leave me now this way, and my love for you ever
growing like the fresh branches of the tree with the kind long heat of
the day."

But Diarmuid, would not give in to her, and he said: "You are a woman
full of words, and it is you have put me under sorrow. I took you with
myself, and you struck at me for the sake of the man of the Fomor."

They came then to a place where there was a cave, and water running by
it, and they stopped to rest; and Grania said: "Have you a mind to eat
bread and meat now, Diarmuid?"

"I would eat it indeed if I had it," said Diarmuid.

"Give me a knife, so," she said, "till I cut it." "Look for the knife in
the sheaf where you put it yourself," said Diarmuid.

She saw then that the knife was in his thigh where she had struck it,
for he would not draw it out himself. So she drew it out then; and that
was the greatest shame that ever came upon her.

They stopped then in the cave. And the next day when they went on again,
Diarmuid did not leave unbroken bread like he had left every other day
as a sign to Finn that he had kept his faith with him, but it was broken
bread he left after him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book VII: The Wanderers](gafm75.md)
