[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm85)  [Next](gafm87) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book X: The Last of the Great Men

AND indeed that was the last time Finn and Oisin and the rest of the
Fianna of Ireland were gathered together, for hunting, for battle, for
chess-playing, for drinking or for music; for they all wore away after
that, one after another.

As to Caoilte, that was old and had lost his sons, he used to be
fretting and lonesome after the old times. And one day that there was
very heavy snow on the ground, he made this complaint:--

"It is cold the winter is; the wind is risen; the fierce high couraged
stag rises up; it is cold the whole mountain is to-night, yet the fierce
stag is calling. The deer of Slievecarn of the gatherings does not lay
his side to the ground; he no less than the stag of the top of cold
Echtge hears the music of the wolves.

"I, Caoilte, and brown-haired Diarmuid and pleasant light-footed Osgar,
we used to be listening to the music of the wolves through the end of
the cold night. It is well the brown deer sleeps with its hide to the
hollow, hidden as if in the earth, through the end of the cold night.

"To-day I am in my age, and I know but a few men; I used to shake my
spear bravely in the ice-cold morning. It is often I put silence on a
great army that is very cold to-night."

And after a while he went into a hill of the Sidhe to be healed of his
old wounds. And whether he came back from there or not is not known; and
there are some that say he used to be talking with Patrick of the Bells
the same time Oisin was with him. But that is not likely, or Oisin would
not have made complaints about his loneliness the way he did.

But a long time after that again, there was a king of Ireland making a
journey. And he and his people missed their way, and when night-time
came on, they were in a dark wood, and no path before them.

And there came to them a very tall man, that was shining like a burning
flame, and he took hold of the bridle of the king's horse, and led him
through the wood till they came to the right road. And the King of
lreland asked him who was he, and first he said:

"I am your candlestick"; and then he said: "I was with Finn one time."
And the king knew it was Caoilte, son of Ronan, was in it.

And three times nine of the rest of the Fianna came out of the west one
time to Teamhair. And they took notice that now they were wanting their
full strength and their great name, no one took notice of them or came
to speak with them at all. And when they saw that, they lay down on the
side of the bill at Teamhair, and put their lips to the earth and died.

And for three days and a month and a year from the time of the
destruction of the Fianna of Ireland, Loch Dearg was under mists.

 

  
And as to Finn, there are some say he died by the hand of a fisherman;
but it is likely that is not true, for that would be no death for so
great a man as Finn, son of Cumhal And there are some say he never died,
but is alive in some place yet.

And one time a smith made his way into a cave he saw, that had a door to
it, and he made a key that opened it. And when he went in he saw a very
wide place, and very big men lying on the floor. And one that was bigger
than the rest was lying in the middle, and the Dord Fiann beside him;
and he knew it was Finn and the Fianna were in it.

And the smith took bold of the Dord Fiann, and it is hardly he could
lift it to his mouth, and he blew a very strong blast on it, and the
sound it made was so great, it is much the rocks did not come down on
him. And at the sound, the big men lying on the ground shook from head
to foot. He gave another blast then, and they all turned on their
elbows.

And great dread came on him when he saw that, and he threw down the Dord
Fiann and ran from the cave and locked the door after him, and threw the
key into the lake. And he heard them crying after him, "You left us
worse than you found us." And the cave was not found again since that
time.

But some say the day will come when the Dord Fiann will be sounded three
times, and that at the sound of it the Fianna will rise up as strong and
as well as ever they were. And there are some say Finn, son of Cumhal,
has been on the earth now and again since the old times, in the shape of
one of the heroes of Ireland.

And as to the great things he and his men did when they were together,
it is well they have been kept in mind through the poets of Ireland and
of Alban. And one night there were two men minding sheep in a valley,
and they were saying the poems of the Fianna while they were there. And
they saw two very tall shapes on the two hills on each side of the
valley, and one of the tall shapes said to the other: "Do you hear that
man down below? I was the second doorpost of battle at Gabhra, and that
man knows all about it better than myself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book XI: Oisin's Story](gafm87)
