[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gafm55)  [Next](gafm57.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book IV: The Cave of Cruachan

CAOILTE was one time at Cruachan of Connacht, and Cascorach was with
him, and there he saw sitting on a heap of stones a man with very rough
grey hair, having a dark brown cloak fastened with a pin of bronze, and
a long stick of white hazel in his hand; and there was a herd of cattle
before him in a fenced field.

Caoilte asked news of him. "I am steward to the King of Ireland," said
the old man, "and it is from him I hold this land. And we have great
troubles on us in this district," he said. "What troubles are those?"
said Caoilte. "I have many herds of cattle," he said, "and every year at
Samhain time, a woman comes out of the hill of the Sidhe of Cruachan and
brings away nine of the best out of every herd. And as to my name, I am
Bairnech, son of Carbh of Collamair of Bregia."

"Who was the best man that ever came out of Collamair?" said Caoilte. "I
know, and the men of Ireland and of Alban know," said he, "it was
Caoilte, son of Ronan. And do you know where is that man now?" he said.
"I myself am that man and your own kinsman," said Caoilte.

When Bairnech heard that, he gave him a great welcome, and Caoilte gave
him three kisses. "It seems to me that to-night is Samhain night," said
Caoilte. "If that is so, it is to-night the woman will come to rob us,"
said Bernech. "Let me go to-night to the door of the hill of the Sidhe,"
said Cascorach. "You may do that, and bring your arms with you," said
Caoilte.

So Cascorach went then, and it was not long till he saw the girl going
past him out of the hill of Cruachan, having a beautiful cloak of one
colour about her; a gown of yellow silk tied up with a knot between her
thighs, two spears in her hands, and she not in dread of anything before
her or after her.

Then Cascorach blew a blast against her, and put his finger into the
thong of his spear, and made a cast at the girl that went through her,
and that is the way she was made an end of by Cascorach of the Music.

And then Bernech said to Caoilte: "Caoilte," he said, "do you know the
other oppression that is on me in this place?" "What oppression is
that?" said Caoilte. "Three she-wolves that come out of the Cave of
Cruachan every year and destroy our sheep and our wethers, and we can do
nothing against them, and they go back mto the cave again. And it will
be a good friend that will rid us of them," he said. "Well, Cascorach,"
said Caoilte, "do you know what are the three wolves that are robbing
this man?" "I know well," said Cascorach, "they are the three daughters
of Airetach, of the last of the people of oppression of the Cave of
Cruachan, and it is easier for them to do their robbery as wolves than
as women." "And will they come near to any one?" said Caoilte. "They
will only come near to one sort," said Cascorach; "if they see the
world's men having harps for music, they will come near to them. And how
would it be for me," he said, "to go to-morrow to the cairn beyond, and
to bring my harp to me?"

So in the morning he rose up and went to the cairn and stopped on it,
playing his harp till the coming of the mists of the evening. And while
be was there he saw the three wolves coming towards him, and they lay
down before him, listening to the music. But Cascorach found no way to
make an attack on them, and they went back into the cave at the end of
the day.

Cascorach went back then to Caoilte and told him what had happened. "Go
up to-morrow to the same place," said Caoilte, "and say to them it would
be better for them to be in the shape of women for listening to music
than in the shape of wolves."

So on the morrow Cascorach went out to the same cairn, and set his
people about it, and the wolves came there and stretched themselves to
listen to the music. And Cascorach was saying to them: "If you were ever
women," he said, "it would be better for you to be listening to the
music as women than as wolves." And they heard that, and they threw off
the dark trailing coverings that were about them, for they liked well
the sweet music of the Sidhe.

And when Caoilte saw them there side by side, and elbow by elbow, he
made a cast of his spear, and it went through the three women, that they
were like a skein of thread drawn together on the spear. And that is the
way he made an end of the strange, unknown three. And that place got the
name of the Valley of the Shapes of the Wolves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book IV: The Wedding at Ceann Slieve](gafm57.md)
