[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gafm61)  [Next](gafm63.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book IV: The Pigs of Angus

ANGUS Og, son of the Dagda, made a feast one time at Brugh na Boinne for
Finn and the Fianna of the Gael. Ten hundred of them were in it, and
they wearing green clothing and crimson cloaks; and as to the people of
Angus' house, it is clothing of red silk they had.

And Finn was sitting besides Angus in the beautiful house, and it is
long since the like of those two were seen in Ireland. And any stranger
would wonder to see the way the golden cups were going from hand to
hand.

And Angus said out in a loud voice that every one could hear:

"It is a better life this is than to be hunting." There was anger on
Finn then, and he said: "It is a worse life than hunting to be here,
without hounds, without horses, without battalions, without the shouting
of armies." "Why are you talking like that, Finn?" said Angus, "for as
to the hounds you have," he said, "they would not kill so much as one
pig." "You have not yourself," said Finn, "and the whole host of the
Tuatha de Danaan have not a pig that ever went on dry land that Bran and
Sceolan would not kill." "I will send you a pig," said Angus, "that will
go from you and your hounds, and that will kill them in the end."

The steward of the house called out then in a loud voice: "Let every one
go now to his bed, before the lightness of drunkenness comes on you."
But Finn said to his people: "Let us make ready and leave this; for we
are but a few," he said, "among the Men of Dea." So they set out and
went westward till they came to Slieve Fuad where the Fianna were at
that time.

And through the whole length of a year after that, the Tuatha de Danaan
were boasting how they would get the better of the Fianna, and the
Fianna were thinking how they could do best in the hunt. And at the end
of that time Angus sent messengers to Finn, asking him with great
respect if he was ready to keep his word. And Finn said he was, and the
hounds were brought out, and he himself was holding Bran and Sceolan,
one in each hand, and Caoilte had Adhnuall, and Oisin had Ablach, and
merry Bran Beag had Lonn, and Diarmuid was holding Eachtach, and Osgar
was holding Mac an Truim, and Garraidh was held by Faolan, and Rith
Fada, of the Long Run, by hungry Conan.

And they were not long there with their hounds till they saw on the
plain to the east a terrible herd of great pigs, every one of them the
height of a deer. And there was one pig out in front of the rest was
blacker than a smith's coal, and the bristles on its head were like a
thicket of thorn-trees.

Then Caoilte let out Adhnuall, and she was the first to kill a pig of
the herd. And then Bran made away from the leash that Finn was holding,
and the pigs ran their best, but she came up with them, and took hold of
a pig of them. And at that Angus said: "O Bran, fosterling of
fair-haired Fergus, it is not a right thing you are doing, to kill my
own son." But when Bran heard that, her ways changed and it was like an
enemy she took hold of the pig, and did not let it go, and held her
breath back and kept it for the Fianna.

And it was over Slieve Cua the hunt went, and Slieve Crot, and from Magh
Cobha to Cruachan, and to Fionnabraic and to Finnias. And at evening
when the hunt was over, there was not one pig of the whole herd without
a hurt, and there were but a hundred and ten pigs left living. But if
the hunt brought destruction on Angus, it brought losses on the Fianna
as well, for there were ten hundred of their men missing besides
serving-lads and dogs.

"Let us go to Brugh na Boinne and get satisfaction for our people," said
Oisin then. "That is the advice of a man without sense," said Finn; "for
if we leave these pigs the way they are, they will come to life again.
And let us burn them," he said, "and throw their ashes in the sea."

Then the seven battalions of the Fianna made seven fires to every
battalion; but for all they could do, they could not set fire to one
pig. Then Bran, that had great sense and knowledge, went away, and she
came back bringing three logs along with her, but no one knows what wood
it was they came from. And when the logs were put on the fire they lit
up like a candle, and it is with them the pigs were burned; and after
that their ashes were thrown into the sea.

Then Oisin said again: "Let us go now to Brugh naBoinne and avenge the
death of our people." So the whole of the Fianna set out for Brugh na
Boinne, and every step they made could surely be heard through the whole
of the skies.

And Angus sent out messengers to where Finn was, offering any one thing
to him if he would spare his people. "I will take no gift at all from
you, Angus of the slender body," said Finn, "so long as there is a room
left in your house, north or east, without being burned." But Angus
said: "Although you think bad of the loss of your fine people that you
have the sway over, yet, O Finn, father of Oisin, it is sorrowful to me
the loss of my own good son is. For as to the black pig that came before
you on the plain," he said, "it was no common pig was in it, but my own
son. And there fell along with him," he said, "the son of the King of
the Narrow Sea, and the son of the King of the Sea of Gulls, and the son
of Ilbhrec, son of Manannan, and seven score of the comely sons of kings
and queens. And it is what destroyed my strength and my respect
entirely, they to have been burned away from me in a far place. And it
is a pity for you, sweet daring Bran," he said, "fosterling of Fergus of
the thirty woods and plains, that you did not do something worth praise
before killing your own foster-brother. And I will put a curse on you,
Bran," he said, "beyond every hound in Ireland, that you will never see
with your eyes any deer you may ever kill."

There was anger on Finn when he heard that, and be said: "If you put a
curse on Bran, Angus, there will not be a room left, east or west, in
the whole of your great house without being burned." "If you do that,"
said Angus, "I will put trees and stones in front of you in every
battle; and I will know what number of men you have in your armies," he
said, "looking at them through my ring."

Then Oisin, that was wise, said: 'It is best for you to agree between
yourselves now; and let us be helpful to one another," he said, "and pay
whatever fines are due."

So they agreed to that, and they made peace, and gave children to be
fostered by one another: a son of Finn's to Angus, and a son of Angus Og
to the Fianna.

But for all that, it is not very friendly to Finn Angus was afterwards,
at the time he was following after Diarmuid and Grania through the whole
length of Ireland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book IV: The Hunt of Slieve Cuilinn](gafm63.md)
