[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm32)  [Next](gafm34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book II: Black, Brown, and Grey

FINN was hunting one time near Teamhair of the Kings, and he saw three
strange men coming towards him, and he asked what were their names.
"Dubh and Dun and Glasan, Black, Brown, and Grey, are our names," they
said, "and we are come to find Finn, son of Cumhal, Head of the Fianna,
and to take service with him."

So Finn took them into his service, and when evening came he said: "Let
each one of you watch through a third part of the night." And there was
a trunk of a tree there, and he bade them make three equal parts of it,
and he gave a part to each of the three men, and he said: "When each one
of you begins his watch, let him set fire to his own log, and as long as
the wood burns let him watch."

Then they drew lots, and the lot fell to Dubh to go on the first watch.
So he set fire to his log, and he went out around the place, and Bran
with him. He went farther and farther till at last he saw a bright
light, and when he came to the place where it was, he saw a large house.
He went inside, and there was a great company of very strange-looking
men in it, and they drinking out of a single cup. One of the men, that
seemed to be the highest, gave the cup to the man nearest him; and after
he had drunk his fill he passed it on to the next, and so on to the
last. And while it was going round, he said: "This is the great cup that
was taken from Finn, son of Cumhal, a hundred years ago, and however
many men may be together, every man of them can drink his fill from it,
of whatever sort of drink he has a mind for."

Dubh was sitting near the door, on the edge of the crowd, and when the
cup came to him he took a drink from it, and then he slipped away in the
dark, bringing it with him. And when he came to the place where Finn
was, his log was burned out.

Then it was the turn of Dun to go out, for the second lot had fallen on
him, and he put a light to his log, and went out, and Bran with him.

He walked on through the night till he saw a fire that was shining from
a large house, and when he went in he saw a crowd of men, and they
fighting. And a very old man that was in a high place above the rest
called out: "Stop fighting now, for I have a better gift for you than
the one you lost to-night." And with that he drew a knife out of his
belt and held it up, and said: "This is the wonderful knife, the small
knife of division, that was stolen from Finn, son of Cumhal, a hundred
years ago; and you have but to cut on a bone with that knife and you
will get your fill of the best meat in the world." Then he gave the
knife to the man nearest him, and a bare bone with it, and the man began
to cut, and there came off the bone slices of the best meat in the
world.

The knife and the bone were sent round then from man to man till they
came to Dun, and as soon as he had the knife in his hand he slipped out
unknown and hurried back, and he had just got to the well where Finn
was, when his part of the log burned out.

Then Glasan lighted his log and went out on his watch till he came to
the house, the same way the others did. And he looked in and he saw the
floor full of dead bodies, and he thought to himself: "There must be
some great wonder here. And if I lie down on the floor and put some of
the bodies over me," he said, "I will be able to see all that happens."

So he lay down and pulled some of the bodies over him, and he was not
long there till he saw an old hag coming into the house, having one leg
and one arm and one upper tooth, that was long enough to serve her in
place of a crutch. And when she came inside the door she took up the
first dead body she met with, and threw it aside, for it was lean. And
as she went on, she took two bits out of every fat body she met with,
and threw away every lean one.

She had her fill of flesh and blood before she came to Glasan, and she
dropped down on the floor and fell asleep, and Glasan thought that every
breath she drew would bring down the roof on his head. He rose up then
and looked at her, and wondered at the bulk of her body. And at last he
drew his sword and hit her a slash that killed her; but if he did, three
young men leaped out of her body. And Glasan made a stroke that killed
the first of them, and Bran killed the second, but the third made his
escape.

Glasan made his way back then, and just when he got to where Finn was,
his log of wood was burned out, and the day was beginning to break.

And when Finn rose up in the morning he asked news of the three
watchers, and they gave him the cup and the knife and told him all they
had seen, and he gave great praise to Dubh and to Dun; but to Glasan he
said: "It might have been as well for you to have left that old hag
alone, for I am in dread the third young man may bring trouble on us
all."

It happened at the end of twenty-one years, Finn and the Fianna were at
their hunting in the hills, and they saw a Red-Haired Man coming towards
them, and he spoke to no one, but came and stood before Finn. "What is
it you are looking for?" said Finn. "I am looking for a master for the
next twenty-one years," he said. "What wages are you asking?" said Finn.
"No wages at all, but only if I die before the twenty-one years are up,
to bury me on this Caol, the Narrow Island." "I will do that for you,"
said Finn.

So the Red-Haired Man served Finn well through the length of twenty
years. But in the twenty-first year he began to waste and to wither
away, and he died.

And when he was dead, the Fianna were no way inclined to go to Inis Caol
to bury him. But Finn said he would break his word for no man, and that
he himself would bring his body there. And he took an old white horse
that had been turned loose on the hills, and that had got younger and
not older since it was put out, and he put the body of the Red-Haired
Man on its back, and let it take its own way, and he himself followed
it, and twelve men of the Fianna.

And when they came to Inis Caol they saw no trace of the horse or of the
body. And there was an open house on the island, and they went in. And
there were seats for every man of them inside, and they sat down to rest
for a while.

But when they tried to rise up it failed them to do it, for there was
enchantment on them. And they saw the Red-Haired Man standing before
them in that moment.

"The time is come now," he said, "for me to get satisfaction from you
for the death of my mother and my two brothers that were killed by
Glasan in the house of the dead bodies." He began to make an attack on
them then, and he would have made an end of them all, but Finn took hold
of the Dord Fiann, and blew a great blast on it.

And before the Red-Haired Man was able to kill more than three of them,
Diarmuid, grandson of Duibhne, that had heard the sound of the Dord
Fiann, came into the house and made an end of him, and put an end to the
enchantment. And Finn, with the nine that were left of the Fianna, came
back to Almhuin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book II: The Hound](gafm34)
