<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc223)  [Next](swc225) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Dan Dynas</span>.

Old folks held—and long tradition made it pass for true—that the outer
wall of Castle Treen was built by a deaf-and-dumb giant, called Dan
Dynas, or, as some say, Den-an-Dynas, assisted by his wife An’ (aunt)
Venna, who broke up the ditch, filled her leathern towser (large apron)
with the soil, and put it for *filling* behind the rocks, as her husband
rolled them into their places. When they had thus constructed a
stronghold, in which people with their tin and cattle were safe from
marauding pirates, the giantess and other women collected hundreds of
cartloads of stones into heaps, near the mound, ready and handy for
slinging at, or to hurl down on, the heads of besiegers. When an
incursion happened to be made An’ Venna, with the women and old men,
defended the fortress, whilst Dan and his fighting men slew the enemy or
drove them to sea. The ruins of this good couple's handiwork may still
be traced from Par Pry, the southern side, to the inlet of Gampar, or
Hal-dynas Cove, towards the east.

A descendant of old proprietors of Treen informed me that a great
quantity of stones remained, in piles, within and near the embankment,
until after wheel carriages came into use. Although this part of the
cliff was then common few persons cared to remove them, and none durst
take a stone from the castle walls for fear Bad Luck would pursue any
one who disturbed the giant's work. But of late years, great portions of
this ancient rampart have been demolished and its facing-stones carried
away for building.

It is also related—though the story seems somewhat fabulous—that this
deaf-and-dumb giant would stand on Carnole and thence sink invading
ships, entering Parcurno, by hurling rocks on them, or he wrecked them,
when at a distance, with huge stones discharged

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

from slings made of bulls’ hides. When the people couldn't charge his
instruments of war as quickly as he wanted them, he would roar like
thunder, make signs to stand clear, kick the rocks up out of the ground,
smash them to handy pieces, and fire away again.

Like all other West Country giants he was very fond of old-fashioned
games, and was delighted when youngsters came down to Kaer Keis of an
afternoon to play cook (quoits) or keals (ninepins) with him; but he
could never understand the weakness of ordinary mortals’ frames; for, in
caressing his playmates, he now and then broke their ribs or cracked
their sculls—to his great grief and greater surprise. We may remark
that, although some Cornish giants have been misrepresented as little
better than savage cannibals—Cormovan Of the Mount to wit—all
traditional giant stories, in this district, describe them as amiable
protectors of the common folks who lived near their castles. They were,
however, almost invariably, stupid and often did mischief unwittingly by
having more strength than sense; therefore, it is shameful to defame
those ancient heroes and ascribe to them such vile traits as are not
warranted by our popular stories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Small People (Fairies)](swc225)

</div>
