<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc215)  [Next](swc217) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">The Fairy Dwelling on Selena Moor</span>. <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2)

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

"Merry elves, their morrice pacing,  
   To aërial minstrelsy,  
Emerald rings on brown heath tracing,  
   Trip it deft and merrily."  
                                  <span class="smallcaps">Scott</span>.

</div>

<span id="img_09400"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/09400.jpg) |

WHEN the ancient family of Noy flourished in Buryan there was a large
tract of unenclosed common, belonging to the farms of Pendrea, Selena,
and Tresidder, which extended from Cotnewilly to Baranhual, and branched
off in other directions. Great part of this ground was swampy and
produced a rank growth of rushes, water-flags, and coarse herbage. Many
acres were gay in summer with cotton-grass, bog-beans, cucco-flowers,
and other plants usually found in such soil. In some places were dry
rocky banks overgrown with sloe-trees, moor-withey, furze, and brambles;
these patches being surrounded by a broad extent of quaking bog or muddy
soil appeared like islands in a marsh. There were also many springs,
rivulets, and pools, that seldom froze, much frequented by wildfowl in
winter. Great part of this moorland was then impassable; horse-tracks
leading to Baranhual, Selena, and other farms, passed over the dryest
places, and, were continued by rough causeways through swamps;—they were
very bad roads at all seasons.

Most of this wilderness has long been enclosed and drained; Pendrea
portion of it is now a separate tenement called Westmoor. Near
Cotnewilly were the scattered remains of an ancient grove which, in very
remote times, extended thence to Alsia-mill.

One afternoon in harvest, Mr. Noy, with some of his men, were over to
Baranhual helping his kinsfolks, the Pendars. As more hands were
required for the next day, which was to be the gulthise (harvest home),
soon after 'croust' time he rode up to

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Church-town to get
them, and to invite the parson, clerk, and sexton—the latter was
particularly welcome to the harvest folk as he was generally a good
fiddler and droll-teller. With these, according to old usage, were asked
the crafts-men and others who had lent hand about the harvest work, and
aged inmates of the poor house; one and all were welcome to the gulthise
supper.

Soon after 'day-down' Mr. Noy, followed by his dogs, left the
public-house intending to return to Baranhual, but he didn't arrive
there that night nor the next. The Pendars and their people thought he
might have enjoyed himself at the Ship Inn till late, and then have gone
home to Pendrea. Mr. Noy had no wife nor anybody else to be much alarmed
about him, as he was a middle-aged or rather elderly bachelor. But next
day when people from Church-town, Pendrea, and scores of neighbours from
other farms, came with their horses to help and to feast at the
gulthise, and nobody among them had seen or heard of Mr. Noy from the
time he left the inn, they got somewhat uneasy; yet they still supposed
he might have gone to some corn-carrying down the lower side of Buryan,
as was likely enow, for all the neighbours round about were just like
one family then.

As usual there was a great chase bringing home the corn in trusses;
leaders and other helpers took their flowery-milk (hasty pudding) for
breakfast, apple pies for dinner, just when and how they could, with
beer and eider whenever they felt inclined, so they might keep the
mowers always building, to have the corn under thatch before supper
time. All being secured in the mowhay scores of all ages enjoyed roast
and boiled beef, mutton, squab pies, rabbit and hare pies, pudding, and
other substantial fare, usually found at a bountiful gulthise supper;
then drinking, singing, dancing, and other pastimes, were kept up till
late. In the meantime Dame Pendar had sent messengers round to all
places where she thought Mr. Noy might have gone, and they returned,
just as the feast was breaking up, without any tidings of him.

Then everyone became anxious, and as it was near day-break they
volunteered to disperse and search in every place they could think of
before going to bed.

So away they went, some on horseback, others afoot, to examine
mill-pools, stream-works, cliffs, and other dangerous places, near and
far away. They returned at night, but nobody had seen or heard of the
missing gentleman. Next morning horsemen were despatched to other
parishes, and as Mr. Noy was well known and liked there was a general
turn out to hunt for him; but this day, too, was passed in a like
fruitless search miles away.

On the third day, however, in the grey of the morning, a horse

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

was heard to neigh, and dogs were heard barking among thickets on a
piece of dry ground almost surrounded with bogs and pools, on Pendrea
side of Selena moor.

Now it happened that no one had thought of looking for Mr. Noy in this
place so near home, but when with much ado, a score or so of men
discovered a passable road into this sort of island in the bogs, there
they saw Mr. Noy's horse and hounds; the horse had found plenty of
pasture there, but the dogs, poor things, were half-starved. Horse and
dogs showed their joy, and, led the way through thorns, furze, and
brambles—that might have grown there hundreds of years—till they came to
large 'skaw' trees and the ruins of an old bowjey or some such building
that no one knew of. Hunters never attempted in winter to cross the
boggy ground that nearly surrounded these two or three acres of dry
land, and in slimmer no one was curious enough to penetrate this
wilderness of thickets which, like all such places, was then swarming
with adders.

The horse stopped at what had been a door-way, pawed on the 'drussal,'
looked around and winneyd; the dogs, followed by several people, pushed
through the brambles that choked the entrance, and within they found Mr.
Noy lying on the ground fast asleep. It was a difficult matter to arouse
him; at last he awoke, stretched himself, rubbed his eyes, and said,
"Why you are Baranhual and Pendrea folks; however are ye all come here?
To-day is to be the gulthise, and I am miles and miles away from home.
What parish am I in? How could ’e have found me? Have my dogs been home
and brought ’e here." Mr. Noy seemed like one dazed as we say, and all
benumed as stiff as a stake, so without staying to answer his questions,
they gave him some brandy, lifted him on horseback, and left his steed
to pick its way out, which it did readily enow, and a shorter one than
they discovered.

Though told he was on his own ground, and less than half a mile from
Baranhual, he couldn't make out the country as he said, till he crossed
the running water that divides the farms. "But I am glad," said he
"however it came to pass, to have got back in time for the gulthise."
When they told him how the corn was all carried three days ago, he said
they were joking, and wouldn't believe it till he had seen all in the
mowhay under thatch and roped down; that the loose straw was raked up,
and all harvest implements put away till next season.

Then whilst breakfast was getting ready, seated on a chimney-stool by a
blazing fire, he told his neighbours that when he came to Cotnewilly,
the night being clear, he thought he might as well make a short cut
across the moor and save nearly a mile—as he had often done before in
summer time—instead of going round

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

by the stony bridle-path; but his horse, that was pretty much used to
finding his own way when his master was tipsy, wanted to keep the usual
road, and his rider, to baulk him, pulled farther off towards Pendrea
side of the common than he would otherwise have done, and went on till
he found himself in a part that was unknown to him; though he had been,
as he thought, over every inch of it that man or beast could tread on,
both in winter and summer. Getting alarmed at the strange appearance of
everything around him, he tried in vain to retrace his steps, then gave
the horse its head, and let it take its own course.

Yet instead of proceeding homeward, as was dobbin's wont, it bore Mr.
Noy to a land so crowded with trees that he had to alight and lead his
steed. After wandering miles and miles, sometimes riding but oftener
afoot, without seeing any habitation in this strange place, which he
believed must be out of Buryan but in what parish he couldn't tell, he
at last heard strains of lively music, and spied lights glimmering
through the trees and people moving about, which made him hope that he
had arrived at some farm where they had a gulthise, and the
harvest-folks were out, after supper, dancing in the town-place.

His dogs slunk back, and the horse wasn't willing to go on, so he tied
him to a tree, took his course through au orchard towards the lights,
and came to a meadow where he saw hundreds of people, some seated at
tables eating and drinking with great enjoyment apparently, and others
dancing reels to the music of a crowd or tambourine—they are much the
same thing—this was played by a damsel dressed in white, who stood on a
heaping-stock just beside the house, door, which was only a few paces
from him.

The revelers, farther off, were all very smartly decked out, bait they
seemed to him, at least most of them, to be a set of undersized mortals;
yet the forms and tables, with the drinking-vessels on them, were all in
proportion to the little people. The dancers moved so fast that he
couldn't count the number of those that footed jigs and reels together,
it almost made his head giddy only to look at their quick and intricate
whirling movements.

He noticed that the damsel who played the music was more like ordinary
folks for stature, and he took her to be the master's daughter, as, when
one dance was ended, she gave the crowd to a little old fellow that
stood near her, entered the house, fetched therefrom a black-jack, went
round the tables and filled the cups and tankards that those seated, and
others, handed to be replenished. Then, whilst she beat up a new tune
for another set of dancers, Mr. Noy thought she east a side-glance
towards him; the music, he said, was so charming and lively that to save
his soul he couldn't refrain from going to join the dancers in a
three-handed

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

reel, but the girl with a frown and look of alarm, made a motion with
her head for him to withdraw round a corner of the house out of sight.
He remained gazing, however, and still advancing till she beckoned to
the same little old man, to whom she spoke a few words, gave him the
crowd to play, and leaving the company, went towards the orchard
signaling to Mr. Noy to follow her, which he did. When out of the
candle-glare and in a clear spot where moonlight shone, she waited for
him. He approached and was surprised to see that the damsel was no other
than a farmer's daughter of Selena, one Grace Hutchens, who had been his
sweetheart for a long while, until she died, three or four years agone;
at least he had mourned her as dead, and she had been buried in Buryan
Churchyard as such.

When Mr. Noy came within a yard or so, turning towards him, she said,
"thank the stars, my dear William, that I was on the look-out to stop
ye, or you would this minute be changed into the small people's state
like I am,—woe is me."

Ho was about to kiss her, "Oh, beware!" she exclaimed, "embrace me not,
nor touch flower nor fruit; for eating a tempting plum in this enchanted
orchard was my undoing. You may think it strange, yet it was all through
my love for you that I am come to this."

"People believed, and so it seemed, that I was found on the moor dead;
it was also supposed that I must have dropped there in a trance, as I
was subject to it. What was buried for me, however, was only a
changeling, or sham body, never mine I should think, for it seems to me
that I feel much the same still as when I lived to be your sweetheart."

As she said this several little voices squeaked, "Grace, Grace, bring us
more beer and cider, be quick!"

"Follow me into the garden, and remain there behind the house; be sure
you keep out of sight, and don't for your life, touch fruit or flower,"
said she, in conducting out Mr. Noy, who desired her to bring him a
tankard of cider too. "No, my love, not for the world," she replied,
"await me here, I'll soon return. Sad is my lot to be stolen from the
living and made housekeeper to these sprites," murmured Grace, in
quitting the garden.

Over a few minutes she returned to Mr. Noy, led him into a bowery walk,
where the music and noise of merriment didn't overpower their voices,
and said, "you know, my dear Willy, that I loved you much, but you can
never know how dearly."

"Rest yourself," she continued pointing to a stone, "on that seat,
whilst I tell ye what you never dreamt of." Mr. Noy seated himself as
desired, and Grace related how one evening, about dusk, she was out on
Selena Moor in quest of strayed sheep, when hearing him, in Pondrea
ground, halloo and whistle to his

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

dogs, she crossed over towards the sound in hopes of falling in with
him, but missed her way among ferns higher than her head, and wandered
on for hours amidst pools and shaking bogs without knowing whither.

After rambling many miles, as it seemed to her, she waded a brook and
entered an orchard, then she heard music at a distance, and proceeding
towards it, passed into a beautiful garden with alleys all bordered by
roses and many sweet flowers, that she had never seen the like of.
Apples and other tempting fruit dropped in the walks and hung over head,
bursting ripe.

This garden was so surrounded with trees and water—coming in every here
and there among them—that, like one 'piskey-led,' all her endeavours to
find a way out of it were in vain. The music, too, seemed very near at
times, but she could see nobody. Feeling weary and athirst, she plucked
a plum, that looked like gold in the clear star-light; her lips no
sooner closed on the fruit than it dissolved to bitter water which made
her sick and faint. She then fell on the ground in a fit, and remained
insensible, she couldn't say how long, ere she awoke to find herself
surrounded by hundreds of small people, who made great rejoicing to get
her amongst them, as they very much wanted a tidy girl who knew how to
bake and brew, one that would keep their habitation decent, nurse the
changed-children, that wern’t so strongly made as they used to be, for
want of more beef and good malt liquor, so they said.

At first she felt like one entranced and hardly knew how to 'find
herself' in such strange company; even then, after many years’
experience, their mode of life seemed somewhat unnatural to her, for all
among them is mere illusion or acting and sham. They have no hearts, she
believed, and but little sense or feeling; what serves them, in a way,
as such, is merely the remembrance of whatever pleased them when they
lived as mortals,—may be thousands of years ago.

What appear like ruddy apples and other delicious fruit, are only sloes,
hoggans, (haws) and black-berries. The sweet scented and rare flowers
are no other than such as grow wild on every moor.

In answer to Mr. Noy's enquiries about small people's dietry, Grace told
him how she sickened, at first, on their washy food of honey-dew and
berries—their ordinary sustenance—and how her stomach felt so waterish
that she often longed for a bit of salt fish.

The only thing she relished was goat's milk, "for you must have often
heard," said she, "that these animals are frequently seen on moors, or
among carns and in other out-of-the-way places, miles from their homes.
They are enticed away by small people

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

to nourish their babes and changelings. There's a score or more of goats
here at times. Those cunning old he-ones that often come among a
flock—no one knows whence—and disappear with the best milkers, are the
decoys, being small people in such shapes. One may often notice in these
venerable long-beards, when seen reposing on a rock, chewing their cuds,
a look of more than human craftiness and a sly witch-like glance cast
from the corner of their eyes."

Looking at Mr. Noy for a moment with a melancholy expression, she sighed
and continued, "I am now getting used to this sort of life and find it
tolerable, the more so because the whole tribe behave to me with great
kindness, the elderly men above all; you observed that little fellow to
whom I spoke and who now plays the tambourine, I desired him to tell the
rest, in case they inquired for me, that I was gone to look after the
children, and he is so much attached to me as to do or say anything I
request." Seeing Mr. Noy look somewhat lowering, Grace exclaimed, "Oh!
my dear Willy, don't be such a noddy as to be jealous, for he's no other
than vapour, and what he is pleased to think love, is no more
substantial than fancy."

Mr. Noy asked if there were any children among them besides those they
stole and replaced with changelings?

"Very few indeed," she replied, "though they are fond of babies, and
make great rejoicing when one happens to be born amongst them; and then
every little man, however old, is proud to be thought the father. For
you must remember they are not of our religion," said she, in answer to
his surprised look, "but star-worshippers. They don't always live
together like Christians and turtle-doves; considering their long
existence such constancy would be tiresome for them, anyhow the small
tribe seem to think so. And the old withered 'kiskeys' of men that one
can almost see through, like puffs of smoke, are vainer than the young
ones. May the Powers deliver them from their weakly frames! And indeed
they often long for the time when they will be altogether dissolved in
air, and so end their wearisome state of existence without an object or
hope."

She also told him—but he didn't remember exactly the words she
spoke—that she was the more content with her condition since she was
enabled to take the form of any bird she pleased, and thus gratify her
desire to be near him, so that when he thought of her but little
suspected her presence; she was mostly hovering round and watching him
in the shape of some common small bird. Grace assured Mr. Noy of her
everlasting love, yet as long as nature would permit him to retain his
mortal form she would rather behold him in flesh and blood, than see him
changed to her state. She also told him, that when he died,

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

if he wished to join her, they would then be united and dwell in this
fairy-land of the moors.

Mr. Noy wanted to know much more about these strange beings, and was
about to enquire, when they again called, "Grace, Grace, where art thou
so long? Bring us some drink quickly." She hastily entered the house,
and that moment it came into his head that he, too, would have some
liquor, disperse the small tribe, and save Grace.

Knowing that any garment turned inside out and cast among such sprites
would make them flee, and happening to put his hand into his coat
pocket, he felt there the gloves that he had worn for binding in the
afternoon; quick as thought, he turned one inside out, put into it a
small stone, and threw it among them; in an instant they all vanished
with the house, Grace, and all the furniture. He just had time to glance
round, and saw nothing but thickets and the roofless house of an old
bowjey, when he received a blow on his forehead that knocked him down,
yet he soon fell asleep and dozed away an hour or two he thought.

Those to whom Mr. Noy related his story, said that he had learnt nothing
new from Grace, for old folks always believed of the fair people such
things as she told him, and they disliked to be seen, above all by
day-light, because they then looked aged and grim. It was said, too,
that those who take animal forms get smaller and smaller with every
change, till they are finally lost in the earth as muryans (ants), and
that they passed winter, for the most part, in underground habitations,
entered from cleves or earns. And it is held that many persons who
appear to have died entranced, are not really dead, but changed into the
fairy state.

The recovered gentleman farther informed them that he had remarked
amongst the small folks, many who bore a sort of family-likeness to
people he knew, and he had no doubt but some of them were changelings of
recent date, and others their forefathers who died in days of yore, when
they were not good enow to be admitted into heaven, nor so wicked as to
be doomed to the worst of all places. Over a while, it is supposed they
cease to exist as living beings, for which reason fewer of them are now
beheld than were seen in old times.

From the night that Mr. Noy strayed into the small people's habitation,
he seemed to be a changed man; he talked of little else but what he saw
and heard there, and fancied that every redbreast, yellow-hammer, tinner
(wag-tail), or other familiar small bird that came near him, might be
the fairy-form of his departed love.

Often at dusk of eve and moonlight nights, he wandered round the moors
in hopes to meet Grace, and when he found his search

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

was all in vain he became melancholy, neglected his farm, tired of
hunting, and departed this life before the next harvest. Whether he
truly died or passed into fairy-land, no one knows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A story, much like the foregoing, is related of a young farmer called
Richard Vingoe, who was 'piskey-led' in Treville Cliffs. After wandering
for hours over places which appeared strange to him, he followed a path
through a rocky 'bottom' or glen into an underground passage or cavern,
from which, on emerging, he found himself in a pleasant looking country.
Walking on he beard sounds of merry-making, and came to a place where
people appeared to be keeping feast. He noticed a great number of
persons hurling, and being fond of that game, he was about to run and
seize the silver ball, as it fell near him, when a female darted from
behind a rock—which screened her from view—and made eager signs for him
to desist and follow her, as she withdrew into an orchard near at hand.
He approached and saw that she was a damsel who had been dead a few
years. She told him how she was changed into the fairy-state by having
trespassed on the small people's domain, and that he had narrowly
escaped the same fate. She also informed him of their mode of life, and
that she was disposed to save him for the sake of their former
attachment, as in the above story.

When the hurlers and spectators of the game had all gone out of sight,
she conducted her former lover to the upper world by a shorter road than
that by which he entered; on the way she told him that as he had engaged
to be married within a few weeks, she had no desire to detain him. She
advised him, however, to defer his wedding three years, that he might be
sure he knew his own mind. When Vingoe promised to follow her advice,
they passed through an opening in a carn, and he saw Nanjizel; his
conductress then said good-bye, and vanished. Being fatigued with his
journey he lay on the grass, near the spot where he again saw the light
of day, and there he was found asleep nearly a week after. Vingoe was
never like the same man again, for he took to hard drinking and died
unmarried.

The details of both stories are so similar that they appear to be mere
versions of the same fairy-tale.

<span id="img_10200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/10200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10200.jpg)</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[94:\*](swc216.htm#fr_2) This story should have
preceded the "<span class="smallcaps">Queen's Visit</span>," but it was
not obtained in time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](swc217)

</div>
