<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc272)  [Next](swc274) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Midsummer Bonfires</span>.

Our bonfires, torches, and tar-barrels, with the peculiar hand-in-hand
dance around the blazing piles, remind us of ancient times when similar
customs were regarded as sacred rites by our forefathers; and it would
seem a s if some vestiges of these time-honoured religious notions were
still connected with Midsummer bonfires in the minds of old-fashioned
people, living in remote and primitive districts, where they still
believe that dancing in a ring over the embers, around a bonfire, or
leaping (singly) through its flames, is calculated to insure good luck
to the performers and to serve as a protection from witchcraft and other
malign influences during the ensuing year.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

Many years ago, on Midsummer's eve, when it became dusk, very old people
in the West Country would hobble away to some high ground, whence they
obtained a view of the most prominent hills, such as Bartinney, Chapel
Carn-brea, Sancras Bickan, Castle-an-Dinas, Carn Galver, St. Agnes
Bickan, and many other beacon hills far away to north and east, which
vied with each other in their Midsummer's blaze. They counted the fires
and drew a presage from the number of them. There are now but few
bonfires to be seen on the western heights; yet we have observed that
Tregonan, Godolphin, and Carn Marth hills, with others away towards
Redruth, still retain their Baal fires. We would gladly go many miles to
see the wierd-looking, yet picturesque, dancers around the flames on a
cam, or high hill top, as we have seen them some forty years ago.

We are sorry to find that another pleasing Midsummer's observance, which
also [appears](errata.htm#26) to be ancient, has almost died out. Yet
within the memory of many, who would not like to be called old or even
aged, on a Midsummer's eve long before sunset, groups of girls—both
gentle and simple—of from ten to twenty years of age, neatly dressed and
decked with garlands, wreaths, or chaplets of flowers, would be seen
dancing in the streets.

One favourite mode of adornment was to sew, or pin, on the skirt of a
white dress, rows of laurel-leaves, often spangled with gold leaf.
Before Midsummer small wooden hoops were in great demand to be wreathed
with green boughs and flowed for garlands, to be worn over one shoulder
and under the opposite arm. Towards sunset groups of graceful damsels,
joined by their brothers, friends, or lovers, would be seen
"threading-the-needle," playing at "kiss-in-the-ring," or simply dancing
along every here and there from Chyandour to Alverton, from the Quay to
Caunsehead, as the upper part of the town used then to be called,
perhaps with more propriety than Causewayhead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mermaid of Zennor](swc274)

</div>
