[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jat01)  [Next](jat03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

The Jicarilla Apache, at the time of the American occupation of New
Mexico and Arizona, were living in two bands. One of these, generally
called the Llanero, made their homes in the mountains between the Rio
Grande and the Plains. The second band, known as the Ollero, lived along
the Chama River, west of the Rio Grande. For several decades the
first-mentioned band was cared for by Indian agents at Cimarron and
Taos, while the Ollero received rations at Abiquiu. In 1880 both bands
were taken to Tierra Amarilla but in 1884 were removed to the Mescalero
Reservation. In 1887 they were finally placed where they are now living
on a reservation in northern New Mexico on the headwaters of the San
Juan River. They now number 776.

They have been politically associated with the Southern Ute to whom they
appear to be very closely related in matters of material culture. The
relation of the Jicarilla with the inhabitants of Taos seems not to have
been so intimate. They occupied the territory surrounding the pueblo of
Taos, either with or without the consent of its inhabitants, but were
not allowed to remain in the pueblo over night or to witness important
ceremonies. Their relations with the Indians of the Plains seem to have
been perpetually hostile. They grouped them under the name of Inda and
seemed not to have known them by their usual tribal names. At least in
recent times, they have looked upon the Navajo as their enemies. The
Navajo were obliged to pass through the territory of the Ute and
Jicarilla in order to reach the buffalo upon the Plains. Such journeys
were accomplished at night according to the usual custom in passing
through the territory of an enemy.

The method of life of the Jicarilla seems to have been very similar to
that of the Plains Indians. They used skin tipis and depended mostly
upon buffalo and smaller game for their food supply. They seem to have
planted corn only to a limited extent.

In language, they belong to the southern division of the Athapascan
stock. Taken as a whole, the languages of the southern division have a
definite unity as compared with the Athapascan languages on the Pacific
Coast and in the Far North. This unity is marked by a considerable
proportion of words, even of stems, peculiar to the southern division,
and also by certain phonetic shifts. While there is considerable
diversity

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

within the southern division, the speaker of any one dialect seems to be
understood by speakers of all the others. The greatest difficulty
probably would be in the case of a Navajo speaking with a Lipan. The
most definite sub-group in this division is occasioned by the regular
shift of the strongly aspirated t, to an equally aspirated k. This shift
has taken place in the Lipan, Jicarilla, and Kiowa-Apache. It is
expected that the material here presented in the form of texts will form
the basis for a grammatical study of the Jicarilla. When similar
material has been published for the Kiowa-Apache, Mescalero and San
Carlos Apache a comparative grammar of the southern division will be
possible.

The Southern Athapascan peoples, except the Kiowa-Apache, seem to share
in a common mythology. It is chiefly characterized by a divine woman who
becomes the mother or grandmother of one or two culture heroes. One of
these is thought to be the son of the sun and the other one, the
descendant of the water. They make a visit to the sun to secure
supernatural power and efficient weapons with which they rid the world
of most of its evils. The accounts from the different peoples of this
area agree rather closely in the incidents and details related and in
the names of the characters. Those of the Jicarilla alone, show any
definite, close connection with similar culture heroes believed in by
the Blackfoot, Shoshone, and other peoples of the north. The Southern
Athapascan also have a common belief in gods thought to inhabit the
numerous ruins or to live in the interior of mountains. With these gods
are connected many of their ceremonies. There is throughout the area
considerable agreement as to the personal names of these gods.

The narratives of the second group here presented are mostly coyote
stories many of which are not peculiar to the Southwest but are found to
the north among the Shoshone of the Plateaus and the Blackfoot of the
Plains. A considerable number of traditional narratives and personal
experiences has been presented because many of these illustrate customs
and methods prevailing in war and the chase. Descriptions of ceremonies
and of processes employed in preparing food, etc., have also been given
in the form of texts.

The larger number of texts was secured from Casa Maria, a Jicarilla now
about seventy years of age and nearly blind. He knows an unusual number
and variety of tales and myths, has an excellent memory, and unusual
patience. His enunciation was unusually distinct. A few texts, indicated
in footnotes, were obtained from Juan Pesita. These were the first
recorded and are much less perfect in form, due partly to the lack of
familiarity with the language on the part of the recorder. These texts,
however, were phonetically verified by means of the Rousselot phonetic

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

apparatus. This was of particular aid in distinguishing the three series
of stops and the occurrence of glottal stops and catches. Probably the
most serious phonetic defect in the texts is that of the nasalized
vowels. To the natural difficulty in hearing by one whose attention has
not been trained by the use of a language where nasalization is
associated with a difference in meaning is to be added the effect of
habit, soon acquired, of writing each syllable or word in one manner,
regardless of minor variations.

Reuben Springer, a Jicarilla, served as interpreter it the time the
texts were recorded. Thanks are due Edward Ladd for assistance both with
the text of the Jicarilla and the interlinear translations while the
paper was in proof.

The Jicarilla first received the attention of Mr. James Mooney in 1897
resulting in a publication, The Jicarilla Genesis, in the 11th volume of
the American Anthropologist old series. Dr. Frank Russell collected a
number of myths and tales published under the title of "Myths of the
Jicarilla Apache," in the 11th volume of the Journal of American
Folk-Lore. The material here presented was obtained during the months of
August, September, and October, 1909, under the direction of the
Appointive Committee on the Southwest of which Mr. Archer M. Huntington
is the chairman.

      August, 1911.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. The Emergence](jat03.md)
