[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jat03)  [Next](jat05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 2. THE FIRST WAR.

Raven divined to see whether people would die. First, he threw in the
stick over which the skins are stretched in dressing. When this came to
the top of the water he tried again by throwing the stone muller. It did
not come to the surface and the people began to die. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md)

The people moved away in four directions but they could not sleep.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The old couple of the lower world to whom they
came back gave them four lice, two of which were placed in their hair,
and two in their clothes., When they lay down they were all very sleepy.
It was the biting of the lice that made them sleep. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)

Some of the people occupied the country near the head of the Arkansas
River; others, were living along the Sangro de Cristo Range; and the
remainder on the west side of the Rio Grande. There were two chiefs of
those on the east side of the river named, Indayedittsitdn, and
IndakadigaLn. The first named chief made a corral and gave a feast to
which he invited all the people. IndakadigaLn, alone, of all the people,
refused to attend. After being repeatedly called by name, he finally
came, holding an arrow in place on his stretched bow, saying, "Why did
you call my name?" "I did not call it for any particular purpose," the
other replied. "I thought you called it for some reason," said the
first, from whom the people were going away, because he was making
motions as if to shoot. He shot an arrow to the feathers through
Indayedittsitdn's arm and then went home.

The wounded chief sent word to the one who had shot him asking him to
come quickly and take the arrow out. When he refused, he sent to him
again, saving "Hurry, come and take the arrow out." Neither this, nor a
third message to the same effect, had any result. The fourth time he
instructed the messenger to say, "Do not be afraid, come to me, and
bring some medicine." Then IndakadigaLn quickly took up his medicine
bag, looked inside, and selected the required herb. When he came to the
wounded man he found the arm badly swollen. "My grandchild, I did not
intend to shoot you." He then cut into the outside of the arm, took out
the arrow, and applied the medicine. "The swelling will be gone in four
days," he told him. He was well in four days and became the grandson of
the chief who had shot him.

Having moved the camp to the east side of the river, IndakadigaLdn,
brought together five hundred men and started away to fight with the
enemy. He took along ten horses for his own use in battle. When they
came to the enemy and were surrounded by them, the chief said, "Wait
until to-morrow and you will have some fun. Keep away from me." The next
morning, the chief said, "Now, we are ready." There were many arrows
ready for his use. He selected four men, who, remaining out of the
battle, should carry home the report of the outcome.

"Who is chief?" asked one of the enemy. "I am the only chief," replied
IndakadigaLdn. "Who is your chief?" he asked of the enemy.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

\[paragraph continues\] There were four chiefs of the enemy.
IndakadigaLdn rode his horse toward the enemy and commenced the
fighting. A number of men were killed on both sides. When the chief's
horse was killed under him, he jumped on another and continued fighting.
He continued to do this as his people decreased in numbers until five
horses had been killed under him. When he had mounted the sixth horse
and his people had all been killed the enemy pulled him to the ground
and killed him with a knife.

The four men who had been selected for the purpose went back to their
country and reported, "Our people are all dead." When Indayedittsitdn
had received the message he cut off his hair saying, "My grandson has
been killed, I will mourn for him properly."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[194:2](jat04.htm#fr_5.md) Russell has this incident
as a variant, (a), p. 255. The Navajo account has Coyote instead of
Raven as the diviner, Matthews, p. 77. Compare also, Wissler and Duvall,
p. 20; Dorsey and Kroeber, p. 17.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[195:1](jat04.htm#fr_6) Russell, (a.md), p. 255.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Culture Heroes and Owl](jat05.md)
