[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat18)  [Next](jat20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

17\. THE SWALLOWING MONSTER.

At another time the people were camping near a spring, hunting deer.
When one of the girls went to the spring for water she found a dead deer
lying there. She ran back and told the others what she had found and

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

some one went out and brought in the deer. This happened four times; the
girl found a dead deer as she was going for water and it was brought in
and eaten. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)

After dark someone looked out through a hole in the tipi and saw the
monster. They built a big fire on that account for it was very dark.
They told the fire poker, "You must cry like a little baby." "You," they
told the pole over which hides are dressed, "must shout like a boy."
"You must laugh like a girl," they told the muller. "When he runs after
its, you must shout like a grown person," they told the pestle.

While it was still very dark they ran off. The monster, after hunting
for them in vain at the camp site, ran after them. The fire poker cried
like a baby and the monster ran back. The crying ceased and he ran after
them again. He heard a boy shouting at the old camp and returned. Not
finding anyone, be ran after them again. Back at the camp a girl was
laughing. Having looked for her in vain he ran after them again. A man
was shouting at the old camp. The monster ran back and searched for him
in vain. He then swallowed the fire poker, the tanning pole, the muller,
and the pestle. He ran after them again but by this time the, v were far
away. He overtook them and swallowed all of them but the little girl.
She came to Spider, who was chopping a tree near his home, and he hid
her under the knot of his hair braid. When the monster came there be
said, "Where did you put the girl?" "I did not see anyone, "he replied.
"Her tracks are here," the monster replied. "Nobody came to me," old man
Spider said. "I am going to swallow you," Said the monster. Then Spider
was angry. He tore the monster to pieces and took the girl home with
him. <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30)

Spider's wife was jealous of the girl. A tree stood by the shore of a
lake. Spider's wife made a swing by fastening a poor rope to a limb of
the tree. She induced the girl to swing on it. When she swung the second
time the rope broke and she fell into the water and became a frog. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[3](#fn_31)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[210:1](jat19.htm#fr_29) It was explained that
the deer were left there that the people might get fat and be in good
condition for eating.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[210:2](jat19.htm#fr_30) The Kiowa-Apache tell
that Thunder killed the monster with a thunderbolt which explains the
manner of killing mentioned here.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[210:3](jat19.htm#fr_31) This swing incident is
found among the Assiniboine, Lowie, (c), p. 157.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. The Man Who Helped the Eagles](jat20)
