[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jat19)  [Next](jat21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 18. THE MAN WHO HELPED THE EAGLES. <span id="fr_32"></span>[4](#fn_32.md)

An Apache was very poor and went about among the Pueblo Indians picking
up the food they threw away. That was all he had to eat.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

Over by the river there was an eagle nest on top of a sheer cliff. The
Pueblo Indians treated the Apache well giving him plenty of food. He
went with them to the eagle's nest. They tied a rope to him and lowered
him down where the two little eagles were sitting. He took off the rope
and stayed there with the eagles. Those above pulled up the rope just by
itself. In vain, they let down the rope to him. He remained with the
eagles. The others left him and went away. They came back again and let
down the rope in vain. Again they left him.

He was very thirsty. He heard someone laugh here below. He jumped up to
him. The person said to him, "You have been taking care of the children.
Drink this," and gave him a piece of ice about so large (forefinger).
"This will not be enough to satisfy me," he thought. He drank it and was
satisfied. He lay down beside the little eagles.

The father of the eagles came home. "DagônadeL, you are staying with my
children. I thank you," he said. Then he opened the house and they went
in. (His house was behind the solid rock.) He gave him some food in a
very small clay dish. "That is not enough for me," he thought. The man
took off his coat and hung it on the wall. Then he was like any other
man. He gave his coat to the man. "Run around with my children for me,"
he said. He flew across to a stone standing on the other side and back
again. He flew way off and came back. He was strong.

The man who lived there called and from the center of the sky a large
number of them came down. Some of them wished to carry him on their
interwoven wings while some of them wished him to fly and others did not
want him to. They put wings on him that were stretched out long and
started out with him, up into the sky. The eagles flew under him
carrying him up. When he was near the sky hole he began to fall he was
so tired. The others got under him carrying him up. Then Panther let
down his tail through the sky hole. The man seized it and he was pulled
up. Panther had his home there.

They had enemies there with whom they fought. The hornets were their
enemies. Some of them were black, some of them were yellow. The yellow
ones had yellow houses, the black ones had black houses. Panther had
much buckskin from which he made him shirts of many thicknesses. There
were holes just for the eyes. The man went with the eagles to find the
enemy. They camped close by them. He was carrying a quirt in his hand.
Early the next morning when they went after wood they met the enemy and
began to fight with them. The hornets were killing them. The man put on
the shirt Panther had made for him and began whipping around with the
quirt. He strung the bodies of those he had killed on a stick. He had
two sticks of them. The eagles came back to their home. One of

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

them said, "DagônadeL was killed first of all." Panther said, "My
grandchild is very brave. Watch for the men he has killed." When he came
back there from fighting the enemy, they commenced dancing around in a
circle. Meadowlark danced around sunwise. "You had better go down, you
say bad words against the people," they told him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[210:4](jat20.htm#fr_32.md) Under the title, The
Great Shell of Kintyel, Matthews gives this story in a different
locality and with additional details. It is the myth explaining the
origin of the Bead Chant, pp. 195-208. The San Carlos have a ceremony
for babies of which this is the myth. According to Edward Ladd, this man
was Naiyenesgani.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. The Bear-Man](jat21.md)
