[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jat25)  [Next](jat27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 24. THE SUPERNATURAL PERSON IN THE LAKE. <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43.md)

Long ago, an old woman gave her boy a present that he might become a
medicineman. <span id="fr_44"></span>[3](#fn_44.md) They were camping
through the plains with nothing to eat, but roots and wild seeds. They
were all hungry. The woman came to her son and said, "My boy, I am
hungry. Have not you anything?" Go home, and to-morrow you will have
plenty to eat," her boy replied.

The next day her son began to make a corral close by the river. He
gathered the men together and told them to drive in the antelope. They
drove them in and killed them. After butchering, they carried the meat
home with them. The next day he gathered the people again. They drove
antelope into the corral and killed great numbers of them. They brought
home the meat with them. The next day he gathered the men again. They
drove in antelope and killed very many. They carried the meat home. The
antelope ran in by themselves. If they whistled, they came running in as
far as one could see. They killed a great many and carried home much
meat which lay in a great pile. That evening, the old woman came to her
boy and said, "That is enough, my wrists ache." Then the boy quit. They
cut the meat into slices to dry and tanned the hides.

The old woman came to her son and asked that he return her gift. "I

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

have already given it to the supernatural one," he told her. Then she
cursed him. He left her and came to his own country. He came to a place
called "sticks swim around". There are tent poles sticking out of the
water there. He lives on the bottom of the lake. The people all came
after him but when they came back to their own country they could not
find him. Then they commenced to follow his tracks. They saw where the
tipi poles had been dragged into the water. They looked all around but
could not find him.

Two years after, a large band of them went out on the plains to war.
They traveled all night and all the next day. When it was evening they
built a fire and smoked the pipe. They heard someone talking to them.
"You must be my own people," the voice said. "Yes, we are your own
people," they replied. Then he dropped nearby them a big buffalo with
its head just turned back and tied. "I started to carry this, but my
breath gave out. For that reason, my people, make smoke for me. I will
smoke with you," he said. Then they filled the pipe for him and smoked
with him. "Where are you going?" he asked. "Here, after the enemy that
we may bring back horses," they replied. "Their camp is very close, but
they are not aware of your approach," he said, "you can go to them in
the day time. About noon, you will surround the horses. I want you to
bring me the horse that is all black without a white spot." Then he gave
them a fore quarter of the buffalo he was carrying and they commenced to
eat it. "If at any time you are in need, make a smoke for me. My home is
at TcîcnaLeLîe, by Sheep Horn Mountain. If you want anything at any
time, blow smoke towards that place." The next day, in broad daylight,
they came to the enemy, and about noon, they found the horses and
surrounded them. When they started to drive them away they saw the black
one with no white spots for which the supernatural one had asked. When
they drove the horses this one kept along with the others. When they
came by his home they stopped the horses and the black one ran
immediately to the lake. They came back to their own country with the
remainder of the band.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[220:2](jat26.htm#fr_43.md) This lake, probably
situated somewhere at the western edge of the plains, was a regular
place of offering. The Jicarilla used to throw beads and other property
into this lake as they passed it on their way to the buffalo hunting
grounds.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[220:3](jat26.htm#fr_44.md) When the services of a
medicineman are required, eagle feathers and turquoise are placed on his
right foot. If he takes them up he accepts the engagement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. The Man Who Traveled With the Buffalo](jat27.md)
