[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat38)  [Next](jat40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 37. COYOTE APES HIS HOSTS. <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56)

Coyote while traveling, came to a rock standing close to the water's
edge where Kingfisher had his home. Kingfisher in greeting him said,
"You have come to me when there is nothing to eat." Right below him
there was smooth ice over the water into which Kingfisher nevertheless
jumped and brought out a fish for his guest. Coyote ate it and when he
took his leave said, "Come and see me."

Coyote camped in a place where a rock was standing. When Kingfisher came
to see him, Coyote greeted him, saying, "You have come to see me when
there is nothing to eat." There was smooth ice right below into which
Coyote jumped, striking his nose so hard that he died. His guest took a
fish out of the water for him and brought him to life. Giving the fish
to Coyote he said, "I have magic power for this sort of thing." When
Coyote had eaten it, Kingfisher went home.

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

As he was traveling Coyote came where Buffalo's wife was fleshing a
hide. Buffalo greeting him said, "You have come to us when there is
nothing to eat." After a time, putting his hand behind him, he brought
it back with some meat. Having pounded it up fine, he pushed a stick up
each of his nostrils from which fat ran down on the meat. Having mixed
the food, be gave it to Coyote on a dish to eat. As Buffalo was eating
he kept saying, "Whu u," Coyote was afraid and jumped up. "O, I always
make that sort of noise," said Buffalo. This happened four times, Coyote
being afraid each time. "Come to see me," said Coyote as he took his
leave.

When Buffalo came to see Coyote he found him at his home wrapped in a
buffalo robe and wearing horns which he had made for himself. Ills wife
was fleshing a hide. "You come to us when there is nothing to eat,"
Coyote said to Buffalo. He took some bark from under his blanket and
pounded it up. When he pushed a stick up his nostrils only blood dropped
on the meat. "What was it I did wrong?" he said. Buffalo put his hand
behind himself, took out some dried meat, and pounded it up for him. He
pushed a stick into his nostrils and fat flowed out which he mixed with
the meat. Passing it to Coyote he said, "Eat it, I have magical power
for this sort of thing."

Coyote traveled along and cattle where Elk was lying. He was a large elk
with many branched horns. Elk greeting him said, "You have come to us
when there is nothing to eat." When Elk turned his head sideways, Coyote
was afraid and jumped. "O, I am always this way. Do not be afraid," said
Elk. Reaching to his hip he took off a piece of meat and gave it to
Coyote who ate it. Coyote as he left said, "Come and see me."

When he came to Coyote's home, he was lying there with sticks pointing
in different directions, tied to his head. His face was all swollen.
"You come to us when there is nothing to eat," he said. After a time,
Coyote put his hand under his blanket and took out some pine bark which
he gave him. "What did I do wrong?" he said. Then Elk, taking out some
meat, gave it to him. "I do this by magical power," he said, "eat it."
Coyote, ate it.

Coyote traveling this way, came where a bird <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) had its home. This bird had red feathers
which he spread out. Coyote being afraid, said, "Your house is on fire."
"O, I am always this way," said the bird. "Come and see me," said
Coyote, as he left.

When he cattle to Coyote's house it was burning. Coyote had set fire to
it. "Your house is on fire," said the guest. "O, I am always that way"'

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

said Coyote. The fire had burned close around him but Coyote giving his
tail a flap jumped over it. <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[231:2](jat39.htm#fr_56) Russell has an
additional incident with Prairie Dog as host, (a), p. 265. Matthews has
given a similar story in which Wolf was host, p. 87. Compare similar
stories, Lowie, (a), p. 265; Dorsey and Kroeber, 113-120; Kroeber, (c),
p. 264.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[232:1](jat39.htm#fr_57) One of the woodpeckers.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[233:1](jat39.htm#fr_58) Among the Caddo, Coyote
puts fire on his head to imitate woodpecker, Dorsey, (d), p. 94.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 38. Coyote is Disobeyed by Turkey](jat40)
