[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat30)  [Next](jat32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 29. ANTELOPES TAKE ARROWS FROM COYOTE. (Second Version.)

Coyote having come to Owl who alone possessed arrows, took them away
from him and killed him. After that, Coyote was the only one who had
arrows and everyone was afraid of him. Since the arrows belonged to bad
people, the others came together and discussed how they might take them
away. The chief said to them, "That crazy fellow has the arrows. How
shall we take them from him?" Black tail and white tail deer were first
consulted. When it was Antelope's turn to be heard he said, "You need
someone who is smart, I will take the arrow away from him for you."

Antelope's two small children went to Coyote who challenged them to a
footrace. "You are too small to run a race," he replied. Beginning to
run about them Coyote put the quiver on one of them and the bow on the
other. When they were some distance from Coyote, they became large
antelope. When Coyote realized what had happened, they were already a
considerable distance away. He ran after them, but they were running
very fast.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

"Wait, my nephews," he called after them, "I will tell you something."
The antelope paying no attention to him, ran on. Coyote became very
tired. "Wait," he said, "it is my turn, give the arrows to me." "When
you overtake us, we will give them to you," they replied.

Coyote having stopped, the two antelope stopped also but would not let
him come near them. Coyote said, "Now, my nephews, your horns will be
like bows and your manure will be like arrows."

Then Antelope said to the others, "I have taken away for you the things
you were wishing, the arrows Coyote had in his hand. That is why it is
good now. It Would have happened that people who were not good would
have possessed arrows, and would have shot and killed human beings."
Those who could run fast took away the arrows and all the other people
were afraid. "You did well," the others said to them. "Now we need not
be afraid." In this manner the arrows were taken from Coyote.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. Coyote Tries to Make His Children Spotted](jat32)
