[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jat33)  [Next](jat35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 32. COYOTE AND PORCUPINE CONTEND FOR A BUFFALO. <span id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50.md)

Porcupine was sitting where the buffalo trail crossed a stream. "Take me
across," he said to Buffalo. "All right, sit between my horns," said
Buffalo. "When you shake your head I shall fall into the water," said
Porcupine. "Well, sit in the middle of in my back," said Buffalo. "When
you shake yourself I shall fall into the water," said Porcupine. "Sit by
the root of my tail, then," Buffalo said. "When you shake your tall, I
shall fall," he said. "Well then, crawl inside of me," said Buffalo.
Porcupine crawled inside and crossed the river. He gnawed off a large
blood vessel and Buffalo fell with him at the edge of the water.
Porcupine crawled out.

"I will look for a flint to butcher it with," Porcupine was saying to
himself when Coyote came by and heard him. "What did you say?" asked
Coyote. "I will look for a small flint with which I can make an arrow I
was saying." "You said something good," Coyote replied, "'I will look
for a flint to butcher it with' you were saying. Let us go where it is."
They went there. "Let the one who jumps over it butcher all of it,"
Coyote suggested. When Porcupine tried to jump over it he fell against
its belly. Coyote jumped over its tail and commenced to butcher it,
while Porcupine watched him. When Coyote had finished he gave the
intestines to Porcupine saying, "Wash them for me." Porcupine ate some
of them after he had washed them. When he returned with them, Coyote

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

being suspicious, looked into his mouth and saw remnants of the food. He
killed Porcupine with a club. He lay there dead.

Coyote, having defecated by the Buffalo, started home for his children.
When he had gone a little way Porcupine jumped up. Coyote's faeces
called out, "He has jumped up." Coyote came back and killed Porcupine
with his club. When Coyote had gone some distance again, Porcupine
jumping up, threw dirt into the mouth of the faeces as they were about
to shout the warning. They did not shout again.

Porcupine carried the meat to the top of a pine tree, and sat down there
to eat it. When Coyote came back with his children there was no meat
there. They just licked up the blood. Porcupine, sitting up in the tree,
spoke to them, "Lie down under the tree, cover yourselves with a blanket
and I will throw down some meat." They all lay down but the youngest one
watched Porcupine through a hole in the blanket. "He is throwing the
backbone at us," he cried and jumped up. The backbone fell on them and
killed them, all except the smallest one.

"Climb up Porcupine. called to the remaining one. He climbed the tree
and Porcupine gave him the neck glands of the buffalo. When he had eaten
them he asked Porcupine where one might ease himself. "Where the slender
limb projects one sits," he replied. When the little Coyote had gone
there Porcupine kicked the branch so that he fell into the canyon and
burst.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[228:2](jat34.htm#fr_50) Russell, (a.md), p. 263;
Lowie, (a), p. 267; Mason, P. 316; Kroeber, (c), p. 270; Spinden, p. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33. Coyote Loses His Eyes](jat35.md)
