[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jat54)  [Next](jat56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 53. THE GOVERNOR, OLD WOMAN WHITE HANDS.

Long ago, four men lived at Taos lying on a shade. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67.md) They went about with their minds but their
bodies remained at Taos. One of them went east looking for the enemy and
found their camp. The four men came

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

there and took their stand facing inward from the four directions. They
killed the enemy, driving them in toward the center. They killed the
enemy but burned up their property. After this they would come back to
Taos and lie on the shade.

One went east again and found the enemy camped on this side of the
Arkansas at Tsekûî?aye, "rock stands up". He came back and reported.
They sent him to Santa Fé, saying, "Go to Old-woman-her-hand-white and
tell him to kill the enemy for us. Tell him to come at once."

The messenger came to the governor and told him. The governor did not
believe the man but put a ball and chain on his ankle to roll along as
he walked.

He did not return at the end of the first day or the second. "May you
die! Old-woman-white-hands you have done something to him. That is why
be does not come back," they said. The next day he did not come although
they expected him. "May you die! You must have done something to Okadî.
Now, we had better go after him," they said. When they came there they
asked, "Where is the man we sent to you asking that you kill the enemy
for us?" Then Okadî came there from the jail walking very slowly, the
ball tied to him rolling along. They looked at him and said, "His father
was good to him and made a rattle for him." "You had better unfasten the
chain. This is the man who came to tell you to kill the enemy for us,"
one of them said to the governor.

After two days they said, "Hurry and get ready. We will go back to Taos
and wait there for you."

They gave them horses fitted out with bells. They started back, thc
bells sounding sîs.

They said again, "Oh, his father was good to him. He travels with the
bells jingling." They carne there and gave the horses and bells to the
Pueblo Indians and then went upon their shade.

They remained there one day and then the next saying, "May you die! What
is Old-woman-white-hands doing while another day passes?" And then over
there the dust was rising from the horses as they came. They came to
Taos with their horses all sweaty and camped by the sinking place.

At evening, they came to see them saying, "Old-woman-white-hands, where
shall we camp to-morrow?" "Close by," he told them. "Oh, you must be
with child," they told him. "We will start early to-morrow and get there
before you," one of them said.

They were already there eating in the evening when the others rode up
with sweaty horses. After dark, they came to the governor's camp and
said, "Now, Old-woman-white-hands, where shall we camp to-morrow?" "Not

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

far," he replied. "You must be with child if you can't go farther than
that, Old-woman-white-hands," they said. "We will start early to-morrow
ahead of you."

They were sitting there, eating, about sunset when the others rode up
with sweating horses. They went to him in the evening, saying,
"Old-woman-white-hands, where shall we camp to-morrow?" "Not far," he
replied. "Oh, Old-woman-white-hands, you must be with child. A little
farther than that," they told him. "We will start early to-morrow ahead
of you."

They were sitting there eating already. "You had better go and look at
the enemy again," they told Okadî who was their servant. He went and
looked. "Their camp is all quiet yet," he reported. They moved toward
them. When they were near they told him again, "You had better go and
look again. We will wait until evening." When they were near the enemy's
camp they built a fire. "Now, Okadî, go to the enemy and get something
to eat."

He went there where they were eating and they gave him some meat. The
four men were sitting eating. "Go again and get water," they told him.
He went there again and borrowed a water basket with which he brought
them water. When they had drunk they said, "Carry the water basket back
to your enemy." He carried it back.

The four men lay down. The others came about daybreak the next morning.
They moved toward the enemy who had their camp on either side of an
arroyo. The next day the men stood facing from the four directions. The
enemy discovered them. They began to kill the enemy with their war
clubs. They had no arrows but just clubs for weapons. On the other side
of the arroyo they were not fighting. They fought with those on the one
side until they were all killed. They went among those who had not
fought, saying, "These are my folks," and stroked their hair as a sign
of friendship. They gathered up all the personal property and the
horses. "Now, Old-woman-white-hands, tell your people to stand in line
on the other side," one of them told the governor. They distributed the
goods among them.

Then he said to those of the enemy with whom he had made friends, "Pick
out your horses." They picked them out.

"Now, Old-woman-white-hands, give the other horses to your people," he
told the governor. When the horses had been given out be said to the
governor, "Now, Old-woman-white-hands, you may camp after us as short
marches as you wish. You have become a rich man. Go back as slowly as
you wish." The four men went back from there in one day and climbed up
to the top of their shade.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[239:1](jat55.htm#fr_67.md) The common four-posted
raised platform on which food is stored and under which the family often
sits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 54. The War with the Americans](jat56.md)
