[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat57)  [Next](jat59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 56. A FIGHT WITH THE ENEMY ON THE ARKANSAS RIVER.

The Apache and Ute were camping together near Cimarron. After they had
held the bear dance, they moved away to the Canadian River and continued
camping at "small hills", "saddle-washed-away", Carriso, "Cimarron dry",
and "five peaks" until they came to a plain where there were many ponds
of water. From here, they moved toward the east to the plain where many
buffalo had been killed. They could not tell who had killed them. They
next moved to a place on the Arkansas River called "white sands." From
this camp they rode eastward looking in vain

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

for buffalo. They found only bulls going about by themselves, one of
which they killed and brought back with them.

About half the hand turned back west from this point While the others
went on eastward. Another buffalo bull was found by itself and killed.
East of the Arkansas River they found the track of a mule and a horse
led behind, evidences of the enemy They moved their camp back toward the
west to a mountain called, Tseintcincyihi.

Three men turned back to hunt deer. The enemy who had been following,
discovered these hunters and riding up, took away their horses. One man
hid himself successfully, another escaped through the thick brush, and
the third was followed by the enemy. On this side, where a small arroyo
passing through a little flat enters the larger arroyo, the enemy began
shooting at him. An arrow which the Apache was holding in his hand was
hit in the middle. The Apache, having dismounted, waited close by in the
arroyo. He shot one of the enemy who came up close to him causing him to
fall from his horse. The others, coming to the same place continued the
fight, shooting the Apache in the back. He pulled out the arrow but the
small flint arrow-head remained in his body. He shot again and another
enemy fell from his horse. The enemy were now afraid and withdrew. The
Apache went into the brush. One of the men came to the Apache camp and
brought them word of what had happened. That evening, several of them
rode to the place on horseback. Having spent the night in the thick
brush close to the enemy, they came early the next morning to the place
where the two men were still staying. They found that the stones on
which the blood had dropped where the enemy had been shot from his
horse, had been all turned over and the bloody grass had been pulled up
and thrown into the brush.

On the top of a small hill near by, a platform had been built on which
the body had been placed together with all of his personal belongings.
The Apache rode close by this place. They found where the enemy had been
encamped in large numbers near the creek and had killed sheep and eaten
them. The enemy had gone to the mountains on the other side of the
river. The Apache turned about and started toward home.

Some of the Apache, two men, two women, and three children; seven in
all, had started on in advance. They noticed some people traveling
behind them and sent one of the men back to see if they were their own
people. When he had ridden close enough to them he saw they were not his
people. When he turned to ride away the enemy rode after him, calling to
him to wait. Then he stopped his horse, took off his clothes, put on his
war-bonnet and shouted to them, "Now." A chief of the enemy rode toward
him. The two men, drawing their knives, and stopping their horses close

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

together, tried to pull each other from their horses. Each stabbed the
other with a knife and both were killed.

The enemy then rode up and surrounded the remaining Apache. The man kept
shooting at the enemy. Although the arrows fell all about none of them
hit him nor was he wounded by the bullets. After a while, he was shot in
the sole of his foot. He killed many of the enemy. The enemy killed two
white horses near one of which the wounded man was lying. He took off
the bridle and then put it down again on top of the horse. While
standing there he was killed. They were all killed except one small
child whose body was not found. The enemy had taken it captive. The arms
and legs of two of the children had been cut off.

When the remainder of the Apache came back to Cimarron they inquired for
their relatives. Finding they had not returned, a party of eight went
out on horseback and found their bodies where they had been killed. They
gathered up and brought home four large bundles of arrows some of which
they distributed among the Ute. The Ute said that even when several had
been engaged in the fight they had never found so many arrows. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[247:1](jat58.htm#fr_73) When asked how the
information was obtained concerning this encounter Casa Maria explained
that a Mescalero Indian who was with the enemy at the time, afterward
told of the occurrence on a ration day. The Ute immediately killed him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 57. A Duel Between Scouts](jat59)
