[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat64)  [Next](jat66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

### 63. A UTE IS SAVED BY HIS WAR-MEDICINE.

Long ago, over east of Picuris, where the houses were by the river there
was a medicine ceremony. There were many people there and they danced.
When it was over the Apache moved their camp to the top of the mountain.
Their camp was at DziLdzenadzisgaye for some time, after which they
moved to Cimarron. From there they camped in succession at Mik'egojîye,
"black dried lake", at Tcôncjadzôye, "small pines", at DeLdîLnîye,
"cranes make a noise," at K'ekôntsôye bîjaye, "small yellow spot", and
at TseLgaiye, (white rock). From there one of the Ute who had their camp
at Cimarron went to the town to buy whisky in canteens.

The enemy, coming from the east, met him and he commenced to fight with
them although he was alone. The Apache and the Ute knew it although they
were drinking whisky. His people came to him where they were fighting on
the Canadian River. Just as they came there, he was shot through the
chest. He caught hold of the horse's neck and fell. Someone untied his
medicine which he was wearing across his chest. The Ute spit blood and
sat up. They put the medicine in his mouth four times with a spear of
grama grass.

"Now fill a pipe for me," he said. They filled the pipe for him and he
smoked. The blood stopped flowing. They tied a cloth around his chest.
He sat there.

They went after the enemy. One was killed on the banks of the Canadian
River. They continued fighting as the enemy withdrew eastward. They
threw away their weapons and clothing, even their breech cloths. The
Apache took much of their property including many horses and brought
them back with them. They danced with the scalp.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 64. Pesita Is Shot](jat66)
