[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jat67)  [Next](jat69.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 66. A SUCCESSFUL HUNT.

Long ago our camp was in the mountains beyond Taos. They moved away east
after buffalo. They camped at TsedaLîjînye, "stone black", at
ILedzîtsôye, at Tsaiskaye, "stone cup", at Ts'ist'aye, at Tcîcnadenlaye,
trees in a line", at TcîcgôdîLaneye, "stumps many", at Tsets'ôsgaiye,
"stones fall down", at Xanadlîneye, "many springs", at
Tsetcîtcîyadn?aye, "rough stones stick up", at Nabî?anye "a river", and
at Dlestsôye, "yellow paint ".

They brought meat in there; deer, white-tail deer, and elk. They saw
buffalo there also and rode to them killing them. After a while they
moved east to Dîgôjye, and still farther east to K'aisîkaye, "willows
stand". There they brought in deer, white-tail deer, and elk. They moved
to CaLgîjîhî, camping on the side of the mountain. From there they moved
to Tseîtcîcî and ÎLkînacnkaye, "gun was found", and TseLtsôdas?ãye,
"stone yellow stands". Turning sunwise they came back, carrying much
antelope and white-tail deer meat. They were not hungry as they came
back to Tsentcîncîhî ain?ahî. We went up the canyon to TsedagôLtcîye,
"stones top red", to Tsedahînltcîyeye, to TseîgaLîye, "stone rattle", to
Tsejîkahî?aye "stones run into the water", to Nabî?anye, to Xagagaiye,
to Xanadlîneye. "springs", to Tsenasdzôdeye, "stones parallel", to
Dîbenadjîlôye, "sheep lowered down", to a place down stream from
TcanLãhi, "much manure". They came with the meat to Idîcl'îcîye, then to
Tcîcîye, "red paint", then to Baitdzesîkaye, then to Dlecnt'ûeye, "poor
paint", then to Mai?kôdjîcdjîdeye, and then they all camped by Taos at
TseLãye, "stones many".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 67. Hunting Elk](jat69.md)
