[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jat62)  [Next](jat64.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 61. AN UNSUCCESSFUL EXPEDITION LED BY MAXWELL. <span id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77.md)

Fourteen men, Apache, went from there on horseback to a place called,
Tcîcgedjinye, where they slept. The next morning they started off on

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

horseback and rode to Tcîc<u>a</u>nye, "tree stands" where they slept.
The next day they rode on to K'aiLbayeye, "brown willows" where they
slept. This was on KûLtsôyeye, "yellow river". The next day they rode to
Djanamîîlãye, where they slept. The next day they rode to Bosque where
Maxwell lived. A great many Mexicans came there in wagons, about three
hundred in all. Maxwell made war-bonnets for us of white turkey tail
feathers. He also made black leggings and white shirts which he gave us.

Then they started out on the plains toward the enemy. They camped at a
place called in Mexican, Alamo Mucho. At Tierra Blanca they spent the
next night. The next camp was at Portales. The next night was spent at
Salada. From there they went on to a lake about five miles across where
they camped again. They moved from there to Dakûedîye, "no water", where
they saw signs of the enemy's camp. There were many bones which had been
chopped up and thrown in a pile. They moved their camp to a place where
there was another lake. There too, a good many of the enemy had been
camping. They found where the enemy had killed a horse by the edge of
the water. A woman had died here and they had placed her below a ridge
of rocks and piled up stones above her. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78.md) A Mexican who climbed up there took the
body from the grave and then began to shout. The other Mexicans ran to
the place. They took away all the clothes and began to shout. They also
took many bracelets which were on her.

Then it began to snow on them so that they could not see any distance.
The wind also blew and it was very cold. There was no wood and the
provisions were exhausted. For two days they did not eat. We turned back
from there. It was close to the country of the Texans and they were
afraid of them. We came back hungry to Bosque where Maxwell lived. He
killed a steer for us and gave us four sacks of flour and one of coffee.
He gave a horse to one man. We ate up all of the steer. Maxwell gave us
a letter to his herders directing them to kill a fat steer for us. It
was very cold. We started from there and in six days came back to
Cimarron not having seen the enemy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[250:2](jat63.htm#fr_77.md) Lucien B. Maxwell who
controlled about 2,000,000 acres of land in northern New Mexico on which
many Ute and Jicarilla Apache lived. Cf. Inman, Col. Henry, "The Old
Santa Fé Trail," pp. 373-388.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[251:1](jat63.htm#fr_78.md) There was no timber
with which a platform could be built on which the body might be placed,
as was usual with the enemy. The horse had been killed because of the
woman's death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 62. The Apache Meet a Texan](jat64.md)
