[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](jat78)  [Next](jat80.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 77. THE TCACTCINI.

Long ago they lived at Tseyakînehî where everything grew. Then they
started to war eastward on the plains. From there, they brought home an
enemy's scalp. They danced the victory dance. They dug a hole for
cooking corn. They built a big fire in the pit and placed corn in it to
cook. They danced in the evening and made tc'actcînî, who drove all the
girls to the dancing place. After they had danced, one girl was still
found at the fireplace. They tried in vain to drive her to the dance.
One of the tc'actcînî jumped into the pit and was burned. The other
tc'actcînî looked everywhere for him in vain.

A man ran off toward the east looking for him, others to the south,
west, and north. They all came back to the dancing place without having
found him. They called on all the supernatural ones on the earth to help
them. The man went again to the east. They dug a hole for the girl, put
her in it, and put a flat stone on top, covering it with ashes. The
messenger came back from under the sunrise accompanied by
XastcînyaLkîdn, the talking god. From the south came back
XastcînyaLgayî, the white god. The messenger went again and came back
from under the sunset with XastcînîLtsôyî, the yellow god. The messenger
went to the north and came back with Xastcîndîsôsî, the variegated god.

They commenced to look for the lost brother. Eagle down was placed on
the top of a stick. With this they went around looking everywhere. When
they came above the fire pit all the feathers pointed toward it. "Your
brother-in-law is right here," said one of the gods. They all turned
their ears to the ground. "Here is our brother-in-law," they said. They
could hear the one who had been burned laughing.

Then they commenced to look for the girl. They looked in vain until they
came near her and then the feathers all pointed toward her. "There she
is," said the leader. Then XastcînyaLkîdn stood with his flint sword
facing in four directions in turn. When he faced the direction in which
the girl was, he made motions as if to strike her four times. Then when
he drew back his sword from the top of her head, he pulled her out from
the ground also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 78. The Medicine Ceremony](jat80.md)
