                           ENOCHIAN TEMPLES:
                                   
          GENERATING THE "ABYSS" EXPERIENCE WITH THE TEMPLE 
                                   
                           BY BENJAMIN ROWE
                                   
                 Copyright 1987, 1992 by Benjamin Rowe


WARNING: The technique described herein can be VERY DANGEROUS to the
emotional, mental, and spiritual well-being of the magician who makes
use of it. I am releasing it solely because full disclosure was one of
the requirements under which the Enochian Temple system was originally
given to me. The entities who provided the basic information feel that
people can not grow to spiritual adulthood without being exposed to
adult hazards. My experience of the results prevents me from being
quite so cold-blooded. The same goals can be accomplished by more
gradual means, as those entities have stated themselves. The magician
who choses to use this technique must take full personal responsi-
bility for both the decision to do so, and for any events resulting
from its use.

Should a magician want use it despite this warning, he or she should
do so only after constructing a strong, fully charged Temple which
includes the altars of the sub-elements. And any invocations using
this technique should be immediately preceded by the erection of the
strongest wards the magician is capable of constructing. 

The names of a Tablet's Seniors can be formed into a table on their
own by placing their names one above the other, going clockwise from
the Senior of Jupiter. For the Earth Tablet, the table of the Seniors
would be:

          A C Z I N O R
          L Z I N O P O
          A L H C T G A
          L I I A N S A
          A H M L I C V
          L A I D R O M

Similar pseudo-tablets can be formed from the other elemental tablets.
Names of six letters are formed by reading down the columns. These
names already exist in the Temple, where they are formed by drawing a
circle clockwise from any square of the Senior of Jupiter, connecting
the corresponding squares in the other Seniors' names. In their
natural place, they express the radiatory effect of the Elemental King
as his force passes out along the paths provided by the Seniors. But
the names can also be used in another way. 

First, hollow hexagons are formed, as in figure ( ) , one-half unit
thick with outer faces one unit wide. Each letter of a name is as-
signed to one of the wedge-like segments of this structure in clock-
wise succession. Each name's hexagon is placed immediately below the
corresponding arm in the wheel of the Seniors, about two-thirds of the
way from the center of the Temple to the end of the arm, with the base
side at the same level as the tops of the pillars. The hexagon at-
tributed to the Sun is in the center of the upper Temple, with the
Elemental King's beam passing through the hole.

In the chart as given above, the columns are attributed (from left to
right) to Venus, Sun, Saturn, Earth/Luna, Jupiter, Mercury, and Mars.
When used in invocations, the name should be vibrated immediately
after that of the King or corresponding Senior, and at no other time.
Also, the first enochian key should always precede the invocation of
the element when these names are used. When they are visualized in the
upper Temple, an appropriate telesmatic image for the Senior (or the
god-form of the related planet) should be visualized standing upright
above (not in) the hollow center.  The magician himself should stand
in the beam of the King while invoking them, and attempt to identify
himself with it to the greatest extent possible. 

As the Elemental King and each Senior is invoked with the correspond-
ing name from the table, the hexagon should be visualized as project-
ing itself downwards into the lower temple, forming a hollow crystal
column. The force of the King or Senior is channeled down through the
column and then radiates outward through the faces. (This is in
contrast to the normal Temple formulation, where the Seniors' force
spreads out to form a curtain around the lower Temple.) 

In the Enochian system, six of the planets are attributed to the first
six sephiroth of the Tree of Life. The seventh, Saturn, takes in the
last four sephiroth as a group. In the formulation here, the Senior of
Saturn takes Sol's place in Tiphereth as the governor of the elements,
and the Elemental King abandons his solar attributes, taking on his
secondary attribution to the path of Shin, which connects Tiphereth
and Kether in Achad's version of the Tree of Life. 

In the Tree of Life, the centralizing effect of Sol normally causes
the forces of the upper Tree to be focused in Tiphereth. But when
Sol's force is repressed or removed, the balance of these sephiroth
moves to the empty area in the center of the upper Tree. The path of
Shin passes through this area, but it does not provide any focus for
the forces of the six sephiroth.  Each of the sephiroth becomes
focused in itself, and the attractive force of each draws equally on
the empty center area. That area experiences a uniform pull outwards
in all directions, resulting in the rending and dispersal of anything
placed there. A conscious being passing up the path of Shin perceives
this effect as the experience of the Abyss.

Normally, the Enochian Temple expresses the essential unity of the
Tablets with the whole Tree of Life as a balanced, integrated struc-
ture. Using the technique presented here suppresses that integrity and
replaces it with a strong force towards dispersion. The magician,
identified with the Elemental King's beam of light, places himself to
experience the full strength of that dispersion.

Depending on the degree of success, the magician may experience a
variety of perceptions. At the least intense level, he may experience
sensations of inexplicable "wrongness" and non-specific paranoia, or a
sense of jittery energy like an overdose of methedrine. At a somewhat
more intense level, he will experience a sense of his soul being
ripped into extremely small pieces, while each piece is simultaneously
being crushed to a point.

At full force, the experience then evolves into what can only be
called the perception of voidness; the negation, the removal of any
being or value from absolutely everything perceptible, both internal
and external. The intensity of this voidness can not be adequately
described. At this stage the paranoia sometimes returns, causing the
magician to perceive the voidness as an all-consuming malevolent
entity. Giving in to this paranoia, struggling to avoid being devour-
ed, brings one on to the path of those whom Crowley calls the Black
Brothers. If one does not struggle, that which perceives is itself
absorbed into the void and another condition supervenes for which
description is futile.

                                 -oOo-