               EXPERIMENTS WITH THE SECOND ENOCHIAN KEY

                           BY BENJAMIN ROWE

                 Copyright 1987, 1992 by Benjamin Rowe


The proper use of the Second Enochian Key or Call has apparently not
yet been established. The Golden Dawn and Aurum Solis methods of using
the Enochian system give entirely different uses for the Second Key,
and neither has a substantive rationale for their particular use. This
paper summarizes my attempts to determine the proper use of the Second
Key through experiment, and the conclusions reached as the result of
those experiments.

In the Golden Dawn system, the Second Key is used solely to invoke the
spirits of the column attributed to the element of spirit in the
Tablet of Union. Gerald Schueler repeats this, and adds "as well as
for all other angels". It is unclear whether he intends this to mean
just the other squares of the Tablet of Union, or all the other angels
of the Enochian system. At another point in his book, Schueler implies
that the names in the Tablet of Union can be rotated in a manner
similar to the Kerubic Angels of the Lesser Angles to produce names of
subsidiary angels. This tends to support the former view.

The Aurum Solis system uses the Second Key as a preliminary to the
Call of the Thirty Aethyrs. Alternately, it can be used alone with the
invoking name PARAOAN, made up of the "free letters" not used in
forming the names of the Angels of the Aethyrs. The A.S. considers the
Second Key as invoking an aspect of the "Lower Mother", presumably
meaning Malkuth. 

All of these uses seem to have been arrived at by process of elimina-
tion. I found none of them to be entirely satisfying or productive of
results in my own workings. 

Examination of the Second Key shows it to have a strong elemental
aspect. These lines obviously relate to fire, water, earth, and air:

"...whom the burning flames have framed within the depth of my jaws; 

"Whom I have prepared as cups for a wedding, or flowers in their
beauty for the chamber of righteousness;

"Stronger are your feet than the barren stone,

"And mightier are your voices than the manifold winds!"

Unfortunately, this elemental aspect applies equally well to both the
G.D. and A.S. interpretations, as well as any number of other inter-
pretations. Both systems appear to rely on parts of the preceding line
of the call to support their choice of use.

"Can the wings of the winds understand your voices of wonder, ye
Second of the First..."

The G.D. founders apparently took the phrase "Second of the First" to
mean "coming immediately after the First", or immediately after God.
The column of spirit in the Tablet of Union being the most "spiritual"
of the forces in the Tablets in their system, they applied the Second
Key to this column. But if the Second Key is invoking the highest
aspect of the Tablet of Union, then what is the First Key, with its
precedence over the Second, meant to invoke? Not God; the Angels told
Dee specifically that the First itself is only invoked by an unspoken
key. 

The A.S. system apparently takes the phrase "wings of the winds" and
interprets this to refer to the Angels (i.e. winged ones) of the
Aethyrs. This is plausible on the surface, since the names of the
angels of the Aethyrs are formed by overlaying sigils on the Elemental
Tablets. However, the description of these angels that was given to
Dee implies that they are of a high character that would contradict
the elemental aspect of the second key:

"They are governed by the 12 angels of the 12 Tribes, which are, in
turn, governed by the 7 that stand before the presence of God." This
quote would indicate an astrological character, not elemental.

"They are all spirits of the Air, not rejected, but dignified."

"Unto them, the province of eternal judgement is already opened."

Add to this the fact that all of the Aethyrs except the lowest are
divided into three parts, not four, and the prima facie case for the
A.S. method is destroyed, though the quotes suggest no alternative.
Examination of the Key of the Aethyrs shows that Key precisely re-
flects the nature of the Aethyric Ministers as it is described el-
sewhere in Dee's records. Use of another key as part of their invoca-
tion seems superfluous.

The G.D. method fits with the elemental character of the Second Key,
but I find it objectionable for what amount to aesthetic reasons. Why
should an whole Key be devoted to the invocation of only four letters,
which are not specially distinguished from the other twenty letters of
the Tablet of Union? Elsewhere in the Tablets separate parts, the
names of angels and gods with specific, distinctive characters, are
carefully and regularly delineated. There seems to be nothing in Dee's
records that would indicate that the first letters of the four names
are in any way "higher" or otherwise special with respect to the other
letters. 

It seemed that it would be possible to determine the correct use of
the Second Key by experiment. Examination of my previous experiments
with the Keys and Tablets might point up a useful approach. 

One of my prior experiments had involved invocations of all the
Kerubic angels of the Tablet of Earth, which are clearly of an elemen-
tal nature. In that work, I had followed a consistent pattern in my
invocations. First, I performed a banishing using the Greater Ritual
of the Pentagram. This was followed by an invocation of the element of
the Tablet using the Greater Ritual, and then Crowley's elemental
invocation from Liber LXXXIX vel Chanokh. The invocation was completed
by reciting the First Key, the Key of the Element, and the Key of the
Lesser Angle in order. Then the God-names of 3, 4, and 5 letters were
invoked, followed by the Elemental King (name of 8 letters), the god-
names of six and five letters for that Lesser Angle, and the name of
the Kerubic angel.

One would expect that this procedure would produce purely elemental
results. Examination of the record showed that the results were always
consistent with an elemental framework. But within this frame, there
was a consistent intrusion of astrological symbolism. That is, the
element of earth was frequently represented in terms of the three
earthly zodiacal signs. Similarly for air, water, and fire in their
respective Lesser Angles of the Earth Tablet.

The last square of the Watery Lesser Angle depicted Water of Earth
almost entirely in terms of the planets Mars (ruler of Scorpio),
Uranus (exalted in Scorpio), and Pluto (similar in action to Scorpio).
The Airy Lesser Angle contained a hidden initiation ritual, which
started out presenting Man as the Pentagram, but then went into a
detailed examination of Air as ether, elemental spirit. Finally, the
man was taken on a complete circle of the zodiac, backwards from
Pisces to Aries. There were also significant intrusions of planetary
symbolism in this Lesser Angle.

In the Lesser Angle Earth of Earth, where one would normally expect
the elemental aspect of the symbolism to be at its peak, instead the
visions took place almost entirely in planetary terms, with "Earth"
being interpreted by the angels as the planet Earth, rather than
strictly as the element.

It then occurred to me that another part of the Earth Tablet experi-
ments had substantially duplicated the symbolism of the Airy Lesser
Angle. That time I had invoked each of the Seniors of the Earth Tablet
in turn, and recorded the results verbatim in The Book of the Seniors.
That record also showed the symbolism of the man as pentagram passing
backwards through the signs of the zodiac. The only difference between
the Lesser Angle and the Seniors was that the former interpreted "man"
in terms of the individual while the latter interpreted "man" in terms
of the human race as a unit. 

The only factor common to both sets of invocations was the use of the
First Key. I noted that the results for the Seniors were substantially
clearer in exposition than the Kerubic visions, and that there were no
intrusions of purely elemental symbolism into the visions of the
Seniors. Assuming that no higher power had been overriding the normal
action of the Enochian intelligences, this led me to the conclusion
that the First Key is intended to be used only in invocations of the
parts of the Tablets embodying astrological forces; that is, the three
Names of God, the Elemental King, and the Seniors. The use of that Key
with the Lesser Angles resulted in an overlay of the symbolism normal
to the Seniors on the elemental symbolism of the Angles.

So, if the First Key is to be used with the King and Seniors, it
follows that the Second Key is not to be used with those intelligen-
ces. A large portion of the Tablets was thereby removed from con-
sideration. The next step was to determine which of the remaining
possibilities is the correct one.

To start, I decided to see what effects would be produced by invoking
the Second Key in the presence of charged talismans of the Tablet of
Union and the Great Table composed of the four elemental Tablets and
the Tablet of Union names.

The Tablet of Union talisman was charged by invoking each of the names
in turn using the pentagram ritual and the pentagrams of Spirit. Each
name was invoked on a successive day, and all four were invoked and
the accumulated charge directed into the talisman on the fifth day.

On the sixth day, I meditated on the charged Tablet until I could
clearly see the energies in its astral double. I then invoked the
Second Key, and directed the generated force so that it lay over the
talisman. The result was a slight brightening and clarification of the
twenty squares corresponding to the sub-elements. No particular effect
was seen on the leftmost column attributed to spirit. It appeared to
get slightly weaker, but that could be accounted for by the contrast
with the other squares. The energies were maintained in contact with
the talisman for a period of ten minutes with no other effect being
observed. 

I then invoked the four names of the Tablet of Union again and ob-
served the effect. In this instance, there was a definite dispersal of
force from the leftmost column of the talisman, and the intensity of
the forces in the other squares increased substantially. I also noted
that the interaction of the Key with the talisman produced a sense of
twisting or distortion, as if the Key's energies were trying to
reshape the talisman energies to another form, to break them up into
individual squares and set those squares in a different order.

Conclusion: The results invalidate the use of the Second Key proposed
by the Golden Dawn system. There does appear to be some sympathy
between the Tablet of Union equivalents of the sub-elements and the
Second Key, but not in the order they take in that Tablet.

The Great Table talisman was charged by invoking the Third through
Eighteenth Keys in order on successive days. The Third through Sixth
Keys were invoked twice, once with the First Key, and using only the
Three Names of God, the Elemental King, and the Seniors. The charges
from these invocations were directed into the Great Cross of each
Tablet. 

Following this, these keys were invoked again, without the First Key,
using the Three Names of God, the Elemental King, and all the names
from the Lesser Angle of the pure element in each Tablet. The Kerubic
names were rotated through their four phases, while the Servient names
were not, following Dee's system. Each name's force was directed to
the appropriate section of the Lesser Angle as it was invoked. This
second procedure was also used for the Seventh through Eighteenth
Keys, and the corresponding Lesser Angles. Finally, the Tablet of
Union names were invoked and directed into the Black Cross on the
Great Table.

I meditated on the Great Table until the energies with which it was
charged were visible to astral sight. Then I recited the Second Key
and directed the generated forces to surround the talisman.

There was an immediate enhancement of the forces in the Lesser Angles,
which developed an intense radiatory quality that could be felt as
well as seen with the astral sight. The Great Cross of each Tablet
seemed to recede into the background. Within each Tablet, I could see
energy flows passing from one Cross of ten letters to the next, from
one group of Kerubic squares to the next, and from one group of
Servient squares to the next. Each of these groups as a category
became distinctive in some way that superseded their attribution to
the Lesser Angles. The precedence of each group over the next also
became quite clearly observable, though I can not describe how this
was so.

I recited the Second Key again to increase its force, and observed a
highly complex flow of force within the talisman. While the previous-
ly-described energy flows continued, there also appeared to be a flow
in both directions along each rank and column of the Great Table.
These flows of force, while strictly linear, interacted to produce a
sense of a circular flow around the Great Table which ignored the
boundaries of the Tablets and Lesser Angles. Where the flows inter-
sected at each square, there was a flashing of light. Simultaneously
there was a sense of strengthening of the bonds holding the various
parts of the Great Table in their square formation.

These observations led me to believe that the Second Key was intended
to be used with those parts of the tablets that relate strictly to the
four elements; that is, those angels that are part of the Lesser
Angles. Note that in Dee's system for using the Tablets, the Lesser
Angles are invoked as if they were separate from the rest of the
Tablet. The three God-names of 3, 4, and 5 letters are not used, nor
are the elemental King or the Seniors. Instead the angels are invoked
using only the god-names of the Cross of ten letters. 

Further consideration brought the hypothesis that if a particular
Lesser Angle is to be considered apart from the Tablet it is in, then
the G.D. procedure of using the Key governing the Tablet, then the Key
governing the Lesser Angle when invoking a Lesser Angle would be
invalid. Instead, the Third through Sixth Keys would be treated as if
they were co-equal with the Seventh through Eighteenth, and governed
only the Lesser Angles they related to.

Since I already had explored the Kerubic squares using the First Key,
it seemed reasonable to test this hypothesis by invoking Kerubic
squares using the second key. In order to keep the variables of the
experiment to a minimum, a simple procedure was used. First, no
preliminary banishing or invocation using the Pentagram ritual would
be done. A simple circle would be visualized enclosing the astral area
of work to restrict the forces. The Second Key would then be invoked,
followed by the Key governing the chosen Lesser Angle. Finally, the
Kerubic angels of the squares would be invoked by the power of the
god-names from the Cross of ten letters. After the first series of
four invocations was done, a second set would be done in which the
Cross names would not be used, but instead "archangelic" names would
be formed by adding a letter from the Tablet of Union to the angel's
name, and the angels would be invoked by the power of their archan-
gels. This latter method follows Dee's usage for the Kerubs.

The visions themselves would be started using the G.D. pyramid system,
in which the seer visualizes himself standing on a truncated pyramid
whose sides are colored according to the attributes of the square in
question. However, in this case only the sides showing the attributes
of the Lesser Angle would be colored. The other two sides would be
left blank, and would be colored by the angel of the square to show
the correct attributes. The top of the pyramid would be the color of
the Tablet's element, with the letter of the square shown in the color
of the element of the Lesser Angle. The Lesser Angle of Water of Fire
was chosen by lot to be the object of the test. The Kerubic squares of
the Angle were invoked in order from the rightmost to the leftmost.

Results: I noted in every case that the intensity of the invoked force
was significantly stronger than it had been in the previous series
using the First Key. And during the weeks the invocations took place,
my dreams during the night showed a consistent symbolism based on the
number 4. 

However, analysis of the visions themselves shows few differences that
could not be accounted for by the fact that a different Tablet was
used for the test. The elemental aspect of the symbolism was much
clearer and alchemical symbolism appeared where it had not done so
before. Zodiacal symbolism continued to appear as it had done so in
the previous series. 

Planetary symbolism was almost completely absent. In the few instances
where it did appear, it referred solely to the planets as alchemical
metals, and only to those planets that relate to the five lowest
sephiroth of the Tree of Life, which are attributed to the elements in
the G.D. system. The other planets, including the outer planets
Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto, did not appear in any form. This is in
distinct contrast to the previous series, which had several repeating
themes based on the outer planets. The tendency of the previous series
to become increasingly focused on cosmic aspects of existence was
entirely absent. The test visions had no elements that referred to
events occurring outside the planet Earth.

Allowing the angels of the squares to define their own attributes did
have one unexpected result: The symbolism that did appear, while
completely consistent for each square, did not match the attributes
given in the G.D. system. The G.D. method attributes the Kerubic
squares, in order from left to right, to Air, Earth, Fire and Water.
In the two test series, the visions showed the squares to be attribut-
ed to Fire, Earth, Air, and Water. These latter attributes were not
only consistent within each vision, but the last vision of the series
contained scenes which confirmed the attributes of all four squares.

Conclusions: The weakening of the squares of the Great Crosses when
the forces of the Second Key were applied to the Great Table tends to
confirm the idea that the Second Key has more to do with the elemental
pole of existence than with the cosmic, as does the concurrent stren-
gthening of the rank/file aspects of the Table's formation. The near-
absence of planetary symbolism in the test visions also supports this
idea. However, the results are not sufficiently explicit to say that
the Second Key should only be used with the purely elemental squares
of the Tablets. But it appears more likely that the First and Second
Keys represent the positive and negative poles of the continuum within
which the Enochian forces are contained. Use of one or the other would
tend to skew the results of any Enochian invocation towards the pole
represented by the particular Key. 

This hypothesis is supported not only by the results of the tests
described here, but by the results gained by the Aurum Solis system in
using the Second Key with the Key of the Aethyrs. In the A.S. system,
the activity of the ministers of the Aethyrs is primarily with respect
to events occurring in the material world. Contrast this with Crow-
ley's results using the Key of the Aethyrs without the Second Key. In
that case, the results were almost entirely spiritual in nature, with
little or no indication that the ministers dealt with material events.

The appearance of attributes for the squares at odds with the G.D.
system should not be considered to be an indication of invalidity of
the tests. The G.D. attributes of the squares are entirely the work of
MacGregor Mathers, and are themselves in disagreement with the few
attributes the angels gave to Dee. Further exploration of the squares
will be done using this same experimental technique in order to
determine whether this pattern shown in the test visions extends to
other Lesser Angles.

                                 -oOo-