Greetings! Some of you here are familiar with the "Enochian Temples" 
system, and I thought you might like to read an account of a working 
with the Temples. 

An interesting phenomena associated with the Temples is that a lotus 
of power forms itself around the base of a fully charged temple. Each 
petal of this lotus shows a unique sigil, and each of these sigils is 
in turn the key to some celestial "zone", usually a star-system. I 
have been working with these sigils recently, and the vision that 
follows is fairly representative of those I have gotten so far in my 
explorations. Sorry you can't see the diagrams -- hope the 
descriptions are sufficiently clear that you don't need them. Enjoy!

1/30/93

Even before I called up the temple, I got a vision of the sigil. What 
I saw was a tree with a thick trunk, and from the top of this trunk 
rose three fan-shaped groups of leaves. Each group had tips of green, 
centers of white, and bottom portions of black or very dark brown. 
They looked somewhat like feathers. The trunk itself radiated an aura 
of immense solidity and connectedness; one could feel the flow of 
life-force going unobstructed and without effort from its roots to its 
top.

Within the trunk of the tree was the image of some spheres connected 
together in a way unlike those of our own Tree of Life. These 
connections are as shown in the diagram. [The spheres are arranged as 
the first six sephiroth of the standard Tree of Life diagram. The 
paths between these spheres are the same, except that the paths that 
would normally connect Binah with Tiphereth and Chokmah with Tiphereth 
instead connect Binah with Chesed, and Chokmah with Geburah. Also, a 
path ascends from each of the upper three spheres, passing out of 
sight. The path from Binah extends up and to the left, from Chokmah up 
and to the right, from Kether going straight upwards. Each follows the 
centerline of one of the three fan-shaped groups of leaves.]

I called up the Temple and created the Lotus. Then stood on the petal 
with the sigil and invoked it again. The sigil also showed itself at 
the same time in the King's beam. After a few moments I was again at 
the place where the Tree stood, without any passage or transition 
between; the change from one place to the other was instantaneous.

Now I looked at this Tree for a time. While I was doing so, an angel 
appeared to my right, and made the LVX signs without waiting to be 
asked. I tested him with the pentagrams of Earth and of Spirit, and he 
grew larger and engulfed both of them before returning to his original 
size.

The angel said: "This is a Tree of the place of the sigil you have 
invoked. It is a star-system of three stars, each of them of a higher 
order of evolution than Sol, each of them well on the path that will 
take them into the yet higher orders that stand beyond incarnation in 
the stellar realm. About that higher place we can not say a great 
deal; little enough of even that would be comprehensible to men."

"As you know, as the ages pass and the worlds within a solar system 
develop and evolve, certain "planes" of existence fall below the level 
of significance, each in turn becoming irrelevant to the work 
currently being done there. These planes embody principles so well 
built into the substance of the solar systems that it need not be 
developed or evolved further. These constitute the invisible "roots" 
of the Tree of Life being expressed in that system.

"Similarly, as this evolution goes on, certain other "planes" suddenly 
come into manifestation, so that there are always a certain number 
being worked at a given time. This number is not always the same; for 
your own system, there are always seven planes, for this one at which 
we look there are four or five, depending on how you choose to 
interpret the topmost paths, which pass out into another realm all 
together. The influences or spheres at the top ends of these paths are 
outside the work being done here, yet they continue to have some 
influence on events there, notably through the energy and stimulation 
they provide.

"Each of those top three paths leads to one of the stars, one of the 
circles within the sigil. And each of those by itself contains its own 
modes of working and defined area of creation. But together these 
stars have created an area of joint creation, wherein certain parts of 
their mutual schemes may be developed and manifested in concert. That 
area is what is expressed by this sigil and this Tree of Life before 
you.

"You will see, as you look closely, that the "planetary" natures of 
the spheres in this Tree, its stable emanations, are of an order 
higher than those of your own. They are all of a kind that is 
manifested in your system in Uranus, Saturn, and Neptune, those three 
planets whose relationship is greater towards the outer universe than 
it is towards the inwardness of the system. There is no personality in 
these spheres, no mundane realm, no ego or soul as you would know it. 
There is only cosmic substance and energy, passed beyond the need for 
focused, personal, expression."

"Now look closely at the Tree, beginning with the lowest sphere."

At first I saw nothing there. But after a while the sphere took on a 
shimmering almost-green color. Then out of it burst a bird-like being, 
which rose up over my head, came down and around behind me, and up 
beneath me so that I ended up sitting atop it. This bird reminded me 
in some way of Quetzalcoatl, the winged serpent of Aztec myth, though 
there was no physical resemblance between them. The bird's tail raised 
up and fanned out like a turkey's, so that I felt as if I were seated 
on a throne. The plumage changed color very rapidly, running through a 
great number of hues and shades from the blue-green-violet end of the 
spectrum.

Then it was as if I split from the being seated on the bird, as if I 
moved away leaving behind an image of a man. Turning back to look, I 
saw the man seated cross-legged on the back of the bird, naked save 
for a loincloth decorated with bird-like designs, and a headpiece of 
fanned-out feathers, which mimicked both the bird's tail and the fan- 
shaped leaves of the Tree. His posture was regal, and he held in his 
left hand something like the Tree itself, reduced to the size of a 
scepter. His hand was at shoulder height and slightly forward, as if 
in the act of wielding the scepter.

The angel said: "Unlike the Solar system, here the man-like beings are 
the lowest expression directly connected to the divine; that is, to 
the three stellar gods creating this area of work. And even though the 
image shows a man, they are not really man-like in the way the spirits 
of men are in your system. For where your Tiphereth is a central 
passage point between higher and lower, here this sphere, its nearest 
equivalent in the local system, is itself the lowest point. These 
kings never touch the elemental worlds; the powers coming down from 
above stop here, showing a perfect reflection of that from whence they 
came."1

The rest of the angel's words were lost, but I got an impression from 
him that filled it in. It is important to recognize that all the 
elements of this image must be taken together as an expression of the 
nature of the sphere. The bird is the sphere as basic energy, a 
reflection of its divine sources; because it flies, it never touches 
the elemental worlds, but is itself the endpoint of creation. The man 
shows that there is within this sphere an expression that appears to 
show individuality, but these "individuals" are all directly connected 
to the divine and are part of it, as shown by the headdress. And these 
individuals wield the power of the divine, as shown by the scepter. 
Here the Will of the divine (scepter) acts upon the substance of the 
divine (bird) through the divine Son, all of them within a single 
sphere, all of them separate and unified at the same time.

I felt the energy of the vision weakening, and so I returned to the 
Temple. The angel followed after, saying: "I know that you are weary, 
but I would like to encourage you to look at least a couple more of 
these spheres before you quit for the day." I took a few moments to 
absorb some more energy from the Temple. Invoking the Names of God and 
the King, I returned to the lotus petal and got back in tune with it.

Returning to the place of the Tree, I willed the power of the bird- 
image to return to its sphere, and it did so. Next I concentrated on 
the sphere to the left in the row above. The circle of this sphere 
expanded into a window, through which I saw an old man, bearded and 
muscular like Odin, wearing a dark blue, almost violet, robe. The robe 
had no hood or collar. In his right hand he held upright a spear with 
a leaf-shaped blade bound to the shaft with silver wire. In his left 
hand, held down at his side, he held a square cap or hat, somewhat 
like those some Roman Catholic clergy wear. 

The angel said, "Action in righteousness is the key to this sphere, 
for here are the Mercy and Severity one; action or will is combined, 
merged with the manifest pattern upon which action must be based, so 
that there is no question of morality or ethics, no separation between 
Thought and Deed. This sphere is easy to understand, as it is close to 
the two natures of your Chesed and Geburah. But always remember that 
this is a single sphere with a single nature, not a duality. If one 
should seek to understand it by holding those two in mind at the same 
time, then one will go amiss. See it in its own way, take its nature 
as it presents itself, and seek to merge with that nature to attain to 
true understanding of it. Now go on to the next sphere, which is not 
so simple."

I relaxed my attention to this sphere, and it returned to its original 
size in the image of the Tree, with its own image still shown inside 
it. I turned to the next sphere in the same level.

I concentrated on this sphere for a time, and saw little except a 
roiling of colors, as if it could not manifest itself within the 
limits of my perception. Then suddenly, exploding outwards from a 
point in the center of the sphere, a great mandala unfolded. This 
mandala had five great spokes or sections, and within each section 
were twenty lesser spokes. And each of these spokes was itself an 
entire world, seen edge-wise in some higher dimension. The center of 
the mandala was a black-filled circle, surrounded by a ring of lighter 
color, a powdery gray-blue.

"This is the focus of nature in this world," said the angel, "for 
herein are all things in touch with the center, and all patterns of 
activity derive directly therefrom. And the worlds within this mandala 
are the potential manifestations that are to be made real, in 
something resembling sequentiality, in that lowest sphere at which we 
first looked. Here they are arrayed in their relationships to each 
other, as they are in the minds of those who created this place. And 
the plan of their unfolding is held here as well. Each unfolds at the 
"same" time as the others, but each unfolds within its own, internal, 
sense of linearity and sequentiality and is separate in some sense 
from those that come "before" and "after" it in the rounds of the 
mandala." 

Again I relaxed my attention, and the mandala retreated into the 
limits of its sphere. Looking to the next, to the left in the next row 
above, I concentrated again.

"This sphere" the angel said, "is the expression of one of the three 
stars that created this place. His expression within his own great 
sphere of working is here concentrated, summed up, sketched in 
miniature. Look ye to the west."

I turned around, assuming the Tree was in the East, and saw the star 
in question. It had sort of a maroon cast to its light. The color 
deepened, and there burst out of the star images of three armored 
kings, one coming directly towards me, the others moving out at angles 
to either side. And each of these kings stood astride three animals. 
The one coming towards me was astride three lions; the one on my left 
had three jaguars; the one on the right had three taurines of some 
sort, whose exact image changed from one species to another as I 
watched. And each of these animals was three-legged, having only a 
single leg centered at the back of their body, so they each stood upon 
three points.

Spoke the angel, "This great star is represented by three ministers 
within this area of mutual creation. And they, with their ministers, 
and their ministers' ministers, number thirty-nine, who are unity 
expressed in triplicity. And these act upon the five and twenty in 
such a way as to define their center, their point of contact with the 
divine."2

I felt there was more to be said, and waited. The angel continued:

"All of these are in their own way an expression of the original plan 
of this Tree of Life, as was shown in the way of their bursting forth 
from the center." [That is, the pattern in which they came forth 
resembled the three fans of leaves at the top of the Tree.] "And each 
of these three legs of the animals, these minister's ministers, 
controls in his turn the manifestation and organization of thirteen 
forces, so that within the worlds below there are three hundred and 
fifty-one major forces to be dealt with, each with its own expression, 
each with its own place within the pattern of the creation, each of 
which is the embodiment of a divine principle in activity. Add to 
these the original 39 and they become 390, giving a full manifestation 
of the original potential. Thus is the divine made manifest in this 
place."3

"Now look ye back to the next sphere."

The images of the kings returned to their place. I turned back to the 
Tree and looked at the next sphere in turn, on the right in the same 
level. I looked for a while and there gradually appeared a shadowy 
image, seeming to be in some way connected with the rightmost circle 
in the original sigil, as if that portion of the sigil had been 
clothed in an image. And the image was of a hooded monk, kneeling and 
hidden within his robes, contemplating an image in a sphere. He 
appeared to be facing a point about 45 degrees to my left. I could not 
see the image within the sphere he held, and moved closer. 

In the process I entered into and merged with the monk in the image. 
Within the robes there seemed to be nothing but the barest outline of 
a body, a simple sketch, sufficient to hold the robes in their form, 
but little more. Looking at the sphere he held, the image within was 
of the old priest-warrior within the earlier sphere.

The angel said, "This one gives of himself directly into the lower 
world previously seen, and leaves little of himself in this level save 
a shadow. His manifestation in this place is of the nature of a 
channel for his original force, his true nature, which is reflected in 
miniature down into that lower sphere. But even in this there are 
secrets to be known, if one wishes to extend one's stay and 
concentrate on this one part of the Tree of this place. Now to the 
highest sphere."

I removed myself back to my "outside" viewpoint, and let the residual 
force from the last sphere dissipate from my body. Then I looked at 
the highest of the spheres in this Tree, and saw therein a little 
child, scarcely born, like Hoor-pa-krati without the forelock. He sat 
in a lotus position and held the thumb of his right hand to his lips. 
I saw him as from his left side.

Looking closer, I saw that held within the curled fingers of his right 
hand was a small talisman or coin, upon which was graven a figure that 
at one moment seemed much like the Sanskrit figure for the OM, and the 
next moment appeared to be an abstract glyph of a bird in flight.4 

"This one, in his miniaturization into this area of creation, has 
taken on an image much like that of your Thelema, in that he is like a 
babe, silent in the womb, and yet forth from him comes all the power 
and activity manifested in the lower spheres. That king of the lowest 
sphere is to him much as Ra-Hoor-Khuit is to Hoor-Pa-Kraat. But in 
this case, they are not a dual manifestation of something greater, as 
those two are of Heru-Ra-Ha, but instead is the lower a direct 
reflection of the power of this sphere, only extended and also 
indirectly accessing some of the power of the other two stars, through 
their control on the lower worlds."

"He is the silence at the end of the OM, but in his silence is the 
bird brought forth into flight."

"Now I think we have seen enough for this time, and you should return 
again to your temple, waiting a moment for me."

I did so, and stood just outside the limits of the Temple's lotus 
while I waited for him. After a moment he also appeared, and said "My 
name is Kaph, Yod, Nun, Daleth, Teth, and in my nature I am a 
reflection of those thirty-nine whom ye saw in the fourth sphere of 
your vision.5 Thus I have a nature of sufficient generality to speak 
to you of the things shown and yet to be found within the compass of 
the Tree with which we have been dealing. I am in myself a symbol of 
that work, and am the link between that world, and this solar system 
of yours, which link was created by the resonance between the schemes 
of our two areas of creation. Now take ye this."

He handed me a talisman, as had the angels in the previous visions. 
This one showed the original sigil upon one face, with a couple of 
minor modifications (short "tails" sticking up from the rightmost 
curve). On the opposite side was the usual table, this one showing the 
words GEL, DALPA, FORTN, DES, with the word "boni" at the bottom.

[Each talisman given by angels in these visions of the lotus sigils 
had such a table on the back, showing lines of 3,5,5, and 3 
characters, arranged so that the centers of each line are aligned. The 
names of power to be derived from these tables are found by reading 
the downwards, taking the two two-letter columns to be the halves of 
the fourth name. Thus in the present case, the names of power are 
GAOD, ELRE, LPTS, DFAN. Underneath each table, following the lower 
edge of the talisman, is shown either "bona" or "boni", which I assume 
have something to do with the Latin word for "good".]

"This one ye shall keep" he said, "and let it remain as a reminder and 
link into the place where we have been, for this contact is an 
important one within the many that can be exercised with the Temple 
you have built. It is through the paths from this place to that, and 
from that place to the places of the Three who created it, that one 
set of persons from your Earth would easily find their way into the 
larger universe, free forever of their ties to your world. This is one 
of the purposes for which this Temple was given, and it is one that 
shall be accomplished, without doubt or uncertainty."

I asked if I should place it in the beam of the King, as the others 
had bid me do. He said, "Do so."

I entered the Temple and put the talisman in its place, stepping back 
out afterwards. In a moment an image like the first I saw of the other 
Tree formed within the beam. And a sound like a wordless choir came 
forth, swelled, and diminished again. I saw that the image of the 
sigil in the beam was no longer there, and the sigil on the petal soon 
faded back to an inactive level. As it did so, the image of the Tree 
also gradually faded, or rather collapsed back into the talisman.

"And in this is the work done," said the angel, "and another link made 
in the Great Scheme of the Cosmos. Take ye the talisman, and save it 
in your storage place. And I am done."

The angel bowed his head for a moment, and then disappeared. I 
retrieved the talisman, stored it away, and closed the Temple for the 
day.

Footnotes

1    The equivalent of Tiphereth is the lowest emanation in this 
scheme. The "man-like" beings are perhaps closer to what we would call 
"avatars", individualized manifestations of divine force, rather than 
ordinary human souls.

2    3 Kings + 9 animals + 27 legs on animals = 39. 39 = 3 times 13, 
and 13 = AChD, unity. The "five and twenty" are the five sections of 
the mandala seen earlier, with their twenty divisions each.

3    27 times 13 = 351. 351 + 39 = 390. 390 = 39 times 10, number of 
full manifestation.

4    The OM is of course the Swan in Hindu symbolism.

5    K + I + N + D + T = 20 + 10 + 50 + 4 + 9 = 93. 93 is the reversal 
of the digits of 39, so the angel is numerically a "reflection" of the 
forces of that sphere. None of the Hebrew words in my database seem to 
relate, but among Enochian words we have VPAAH, "wings", perhaps 
relating to the bird and feather symbolism, and BALTAN, "His justice."

     - Josh Norton
