[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt03)  [Next](blt05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# STORIES OF ADVENTURE

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### THE PEACE WITH THE SNAKES

#### I

In those days there was a Piegan chief named Owl Bear. He was a great
chief, very brave and generous. One night he had a dream: he saw many
dead bodies of the enemy lying about, scalped, and he knew that he must
go to war. So he called out for a feast, and after the people had eaten,
he said:—

"I had a strong dream last night. I went to war against the Snakes, and
killed many of their warriors. So the signs are good, and I feel that I
must go. Let us have a big party now, and I will be the leader. We will
start to-morrow night."

Then he told two old men to go out in the camp and shout the news, so
that all might know. A big party was made up. Two hundred men, they say,
went with this chief to war. The first night they travelled only a
little way, for they were not used to walking, and soon got tired.

In the morning the chief got up early and went and made a sacrifice, and
when he came back to the others, some said, "Come now, tell us your
dream of this night."

"I dreamed good," said Owl Bear. "I had a good dream. We will have good
luck."

But many others said they had bad dreams. They saw blood running from
their bodies.

Night came, and the party started on, travelling south, and keeping near
the foot-hills; and when daylight came, they stopped in thick pine woods
and built war lodges.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They put up poles
as for a lodge, and covered them very thick with pine boughs, so they
could build fires and cook, and no one would see the light and smoke;
and they all ate some of the food they carried, and then went to sleep.

Again the chief had a good dream, but the others all had bad dreams, and
some talked about turning back; but Owl Bear laughed at them, and when
night came, all started on. So they travelled for some nights, and all
kept dreaming bad except the chief. He always had good dreams. One day
after a sleep, a person again asked Owl Bear if he dreamed good. "Yes,"
he replied. "I have again dreamed of good luck."

"We still dream bad," the person said, "and now some of us are going to
turn back. We will go no further, for bad luck is surely ahead." "Go
back! go back!" said Owl Bear. "I think you are cowards; I want no
cowards with me." They did not speak again. Many of them turned around,
and started north, toward home.

Two more days’ travel. Owl Bear and his warriors went on, and then
another party turned back, for they still had bad dreams. All the men
now left with him were his relations. All the others had turned back.

They travelled on, and travelled on, always having bad dreams, until
they came close to the Elk River. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) Then
the oldest relation said, "Come, my chief, let us all turn back. We
still have bad dreams. We cannot have good luck."

"No," replied Owl Bear, "I will not turn back."

Then they were going to seize him and tie his hands, for they had talked
of this before. They thought to tie him and make him go back with them.
Then the chief got very angry. He put an arrow on his bow, and said: "Do
not touch me. You are my relations; but if any of you try to tie me, I
will kill you. Now I am ashamed. My relations are cowards and will turn
back. I have told you I have

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

always dreamed good, and that we would have good luck. Now I don't care;
I am covered with shame. I am going now to the Snake camp and will give
them my body. I am ashamed. Go! go! and when you get home put on women's
dresses. You are no longer men."

They said no more. They turned back homeward, and the chief was all
alone. His heart was very sad as he travelled on, and he was much
ashamed, for his relations had left him.

#### II

Night was coming on. The sun had set and rain was beginning to fall. Owl
Bear looked around for some place where he could sleep dry. Close by he
saw a hole in the rocks. He got down on his hands and knees and crept
in. Here it was very dark. He could see nothing, so he crept very
slowly, feeling as he went. All at once his hand touched something
strange. He felt of it. It was a person's foot, and there was a moccasin
on it. He stopped, and sat still. Then he felt a little further. Yes, it
was a person's leg. He could feel the cowskin legging. Now he did not
know what to do. He thought perhaps it was a dead person; and again, he
thought it might be one of his relations, who had become ashamed and
turned back after him.

Pretty soon he put his hand on the leg again and felt along up. He
touched the person's belly. It was warm. He felt of the breast, and
could feel it rise and fall as the breath came and went; and the heart
was beating fast. Still the person did not move. Maybe he was afraid.
Perhaps he thought that was a ghost feeling of him.

Owl Bear now knew this person was not dead. He thought he would try if
he could learn who the man was, for he was not afraid. His heart was
sad. His people and his relations had left him, and he had made up his
mind to give his body to the Snakes. So he began and felt all over

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the man,—of his face, hair, robe, leggings, belt, weapons; and by and by
he stopped feeling of him. He could not tell whether it was one of his
people or not.

Pretty soon the strange person sat up and felt all over Owl Bear; and
when he had finished, he took the Piegan's hand and opened it and held
it up, waving it from side to side, saying by signs, "Who are you?"

Owl Bear put his closed hand against the person's cheek and rubbed it;
he said in signs, "Piegan!" and then he asked the person who he was. A
finger was placed against his breast and moved across it *zigzag*. It
was the sign for "Snake."

"*Hai yah*!" thought Owl Bear, "a Snake, my enemy." For a long time he
sat still, thinking. By and by he drew his knife from his belt and
placed it in the Snake's hand, and signed, "Kill me!" He waited. He
thought soon his heart would be cut. He wanted to die. Why live? His
people had left him.

Then the Snake took Owl Bear's hand and put a knife in it and motioned
that Owl Bear should cut his heart, but the Piegan would not do it. He
lay down, and the Snake lay down beside him. Maybe they slept. Likely
not.

So the night went and morning came. It was light, and they crawled out
of the cave, and talked a long time together by signs. Owl Bear told the
Snake where he had come from, how his party had dreamed bad and left
him, and that he was going alone to give his body to the Snakes.

Then the Snake said: "*I* was going to war, too. I was going against the
Piegans. Now I am done. Are you a chief?"

"I am the head chief," replied Owl Bear. "I lead. All the others
follow."

"I am the same as you," said the Snake. "I am the chief. I like you. You
are brave. You gave me your knife

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

to kill you with. How is your heart? Shall the Snakes and the Piegans
make peace?"

"Your words are good," replied Owl Bear. "I am glad."

"How many nights will it take you to go home and come back here with
your people?" asked the Snake.

Owl Bear thought and counted. "In twenty-five nights," he replied, "the
Piegans will camp down by that creek."

"My trail," said the Snake, "goes across the mountains. I will try to be
here in twenty-five nights, but I will camp with my people just behind
that first mountain. When you get here with the Piegans, come with one
of your wives and stay all night with me. In the morning the Snakes will
move and put up their lodges beside the Piegans."

"As you say," replied the chief, "so it shall be done." Then they built
a fire and cooked some meat and ate together.

"I am ashamed to go home," said Owl Bear. "I have taken no horses, no
scalps. Let me cut off your side locks?"

"Take them," said the Snake.

Owl Bear cut off the chiefs braids close to his head, and then the Snake
cut off the Piegan's braids. Then they exchanged clothes and weapons and
started out, the Piegan north, the Snake south.

#### III

"Owl Bear has come! Owl Bear has come!" the people were shouting.

The warriors rushed to his lodge. *Whish*! how quickly it was filled!
Hundreds stood outside, waiting to hear the news.

For a long time the chief did not speak. He was still angry with his
people. An old man was talking, telling the news of the camp. Owl Bear
did not look at him. He ate

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

some food and rested. Many were in the lodge who had started to war with
him. They were now ashamed. They did not speak, either, but kept looking
at the fire. After a long time the chief said: "I travelled on alone. I
met a Snake. I took his scalp and clothes, and his weapons. See, here is
his scalp!" And he held up the two braids of hair.

No one spoke, but the chief saw them nudge each other and smile a
little; and soon they went out and said to one another: "What a lie!
That is not an enemy's scalp; there is no flesh on it He has robbed some
dead person."

Some one told the chief what they said, but he only laughed and
replied:—

"*I* do not care. They were too much afraid even to go on and rob a dead
person. They should wear women's dresses."

Near sunset, Owl Bear called for a horse, and rode all through camp so
every one could hear, shouting out: "Listen! listen! To-morrow we move
camp. We travel south. The Piegans and Snakes are going to make peace.
If any one refuses to go, I will kill him. All must go."

Then an old medicine man came up to him and said: "*Kyi*, Owl Bear!
listen to me. Why talk like this? You know we are not afraid of the
Snakes. Have we not fought them and driven them out of this country? Do
you think we are afraid to go and meet them? No. We will go and make
peace with them as you say, and if they want to fight, we will fight.
Now you are angry with those who started to war with you. Don't be
angry. Dreams belong to the Sun. He gave them to us, so that we can see
ahead and know what will happen. The Piegans are not cowards. Their
dreams told them to turn back. So do not be angry with them any more."

"There is truth in what you say, old man," replied Owl Bear; "I will
take your words."

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

#### IV

In those days the Piegans were a great tribe. When they travelled, if
you were with the head ones, you could not see the last ones, they were
so far back. They had more horses than they could count, so they used
fresh horses every day and travelled very fast. On the twenty-fourth day
they reached the place where Owl Bear had told the Snake they would
camp, and put up their lodges along the creek. Soon some young men came
in, and said they had seen some fresh horse trails up toward the
mountain.

"It must be the Snakes," said the chief; "they have already arrived,
although there is yet one night." So he called one of his wives, and
getting on their horses they set out to find the Snake camp. They took
the trail up over the mountain, and soon came in sight of the lodges. It
was a big camp. Every open place in the valley was covered with lodges,
and the hills were dotted with horses; for the Snakes had a great many
more horses than the Piegans.

Some of the Snakes saw the Piegans coming, and they ran to the chief,
saying: "Two strangers are in sight, coming this way. What shall be
done?"

"Do not harm them," replied the chief. "They are friends of mine. I have
been expecting them." Then the Snakes wondered, for the chief had told
them nothing about his war trip.

Now when Owl Bear had come to the camp, he asked in signs for the chiefs
lodge, and they pointed him to one in the middle. It was small and old.
The Piegan got off his horse, and the Snake chief came out and hugged
him and kissed him, and said: "I am glad you have come to-day to my
lodge. So are my people. You are tired. Enter my lodge and we will eat."
So they went inside and many of the Snakes came in, and they had a great
feast.

Then the Snake chief told his people how he had met

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the Piegan, and how brave he was, and that now they were going to make a
great peace; and he sent some men to tell the people, so that they would
be ready to move camp in the morning. Evening came. Everywhere people
were shouting out for feasts, and the chief took Owl Bear to them. It
was very late when they returned. Then the Snake had one of his wives
make a bed at the back of the lodge; and when it was ready he said:
"Now, my friend, there is your bed. This is now your lodge; also the
woman who made the bed, she is now your wife; also everything in this
lodge is yours. The parfleches, saddles, food, robes, bowls, everything
is yours. I give them to you because you are my friend and a brave man."

"You give me too much," replied Owl Bear. "I am ashamed, but I take your
words. I have nothing with me but one wife. She is yours."

Next morning camp was broken early. The horses were driven in, and the
Snake chief gave Owl Bear his whole band,—two hundred head, all large,
powerful horses.

All were now ready, and the chiefs started ahead. Close behind them were
all the warriors, hundreds and hundreds, and last came the women and
children, and the young men driving the loose horses. As they came in
sight of the Piegan camp, all the warriors started out to meet them,
dressed in their war costumes and singing the great war song. There was
no wind, and the sound came across the valley and up the hill like the
noise of thunder. Then the Snakes began to sing, and thus the two
parties advanced. At last they met. The Piegans turned and rode beside
them, and so they came to the camp. Then they got off their horses and
kissed each other. Every Piegan asked a Snake into his lodge to eat and
rest, and the Snake women put up their lodges beside the Piegan lodges.
So the great peace was made.

In Owl Bear's lodge there was a great feast, and when

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

they had finished he said to his people: "Here is the man whose scalp I
took. Did I say I killed him? No. I gave him my knife and told him to
kill me. He would not do it; and he gave me his knife, but I would not
kill him. So we talked together what we should do, and now we have made
peace. And now (turning to the Snake) this is your lodge, also all the
things in it. My horses, too, I give you. All are yours."

So it was. The Piegan took the Snake's wife, lodge, and horses, and the
Snake took the Piegan's, and they camped side by side. All the people
camped together, and feasted each other and made presents. So the peace
was made.

#### V

For many days they camped side by side. The young men kept hunting, and
the women were always busy drying meat and tanning robes and cowskins.
Buffalo were always close, and after a while the people had all the meat
and robes they could carry. Then, one day, the Snake chief said to Owl
Bear: "Now, my friend, we have camped a long time together, and I am
glad we have made peace. We have dug a hole in the ground, and in it we
have put our anger and covered it up, so there is no more war between
us. And now I think it time to go. To-morrow morning the Snakes break
camp and go back south."

"Your words are good," replied Owl Bear. "I too am glad we have made
this peace. You say you must go south, and I feel lonesome. I would like
you to go with us so we could camp together a long time, but as you say,
so it shall be done. To-morrow you will start south. I too shall break
camp, for I would be lonesome here without you; and the Piegans will
start in the home direction."

The lodges were being taken down and packed. The men sat about the
fireplaces, taking a last smoke together.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They were now
great friends. Many Snakes had married Piegan women, and many Piegans
had married Snake women. At last all was ready. The great chiefs mounted
their horses and started out, and soon both parties were strung out on
the trail.

Some young men, however, stayed behind to gamble a while. It was yet
early in the morning, and by riding fast it would not take them long to
catch up with their camps. All day they kept playing; and sometimes the
Piegans would win, and sometimes the Snakes.

It was now almost sunset. "Let us have one horse race," they said, "and
we will stop." Each side had a good horse, and they ran their best; but
they came in so close together it could not be told who won. The Snakes
claimed that their horse won, and the Piegans would not allow it. So
they got angry and began to quarrel, and pretty soon they began to fight
and to shoot at each other, and some were killed.

Since that time the Snakes and Piegans have never been at peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:1](blt04.htm#fr_1) Yellowstone River.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lost Woman](blt05)
