[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt05)  [Next](blt07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

### ADVENTURES OF BULL TURNS ROUND

#### I

Once the camp moved, but one lodge stayed. It belonged to Wolf Tail; and
Wolf Tail's younger brother, Bull Turns Round, lived with him. Now their
father loved both his sons, but he loved the younger one most, and when
he went away with the big camp, he said to Wolf Tail: "Take care of your
young brother; he is not yet a strong person. Watch him that nothing
befall him."

One day Wolf Tail was out hunting, and Bull Turns Round sat in front of
the lodge making arrows, and a beautiful strange bird lit on the ground
before him. Then cried one of Wolf Tail's wives, "Oh, brother, shoot
that little bird." "Don't bother me, sister," he replied, "I am making
arrows." Again the woman said, "Oh, brother, shoot that bird for me."
Then Bull Turns Round fitted an arrow to his bow and shot the bird, and
the woman went and picked it up and stroked her face with it, and her
face swelled up so big that her eyes and nose could not be seen. But
when Bull Turns Round had shot the bird, he went off hunting and did not
know what had happened to the woman's face.

Now when Wolf Tail came home and saw his wife's face, he said, "What is
the matter?" and his wife replied: "Your brother has pounded me so that
I cannot see. Go now and kill him." But Wolf Tail said, "No, I love my
brother; I cannot kill him." Then his wife cried and said: "I know you
do not love me; you are glad your brother has beaten me. If you loved
me, you would go and kill him."

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

Then Wolf Tail went out and looked for his brother, and when he had
found him, he said: "Come, let us get some feathers. I know where there
is an eagle's nest;" and he took him to a high cliff, which overhung the
river, and on the edge of this cliff was a dead tree, in the top of
which the eagles had built their nest. Then said Wolf Tail, "Climb up,
brother, and kill the eagles;" and when Bull Turns Round had climbed
nearly to the top, Wolf Tail called out, "I am going to push the tree
over the cliff, and you will be killed."

"Oh, brother! oh, brother! pity me; do not kill me," said Bull Turns
Round.

"Why did you beat my wife's face so?" said Wolf Tail.

"I didn't," cried the boy; "I don't know what you are talking about."

"You lie," said Wolf Tail, and he pushed the tree over the cliff. He
looked over and saw his brother fall into the water, and he did not come
up again. Then Wolf Tail went home and took down his lodge, and went to
the main camp. When his father saw him coming with only his wives, he
said to him, "Where is your young brother?" And Wolf Tail replied: "He
went hunting and did not come back. We waited four days for him. I think
the bears must have killed him."

#### II

Now when Bull Turns Round fell into the river, he was stunned, and the
water carried him a long way down the stream and finally lodged him on a
sand shoal. Near this shoal was a lodge of Under Water People
(*Sū'-yē-tŭp'-pi*), an old man, his wife, and two daughters. This old
man was very rich: he had great flocks of geese, swans, ducks, and other
water-fowl, and a big herd of buffalo which were tame. These buffalo
always fed near by, and the old man called them every evening to come
and drink. But he and his

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

family ate none of these. Their only food was the bloodsucker. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

Now the old man's daughters were swimming about in the evening, and they
found Bull Turns Round lying on the shoal, dead, and they went home and
told their father, and begged him to bring the person to life, and give
him to them for a husband. "Go, my daughters," he said, "and make four
sweat lodges, and I will bring the person." He went and got Bull Turns
Round, and when the sweat lodges were finished, the old man took him
into one of them, and when he had sprinkled water on the hot rocks, he
scraped a great quantity of sand off Bull Turns Round. Then he took him
into another lodge and did the same thing, and when he had taken him
into the fourth sweat lodge and scraped all the sand off him, Bull Turns
Round came to life, and the old man led him out and gave him to his
daughters. And the old man gave his son-in-law a new lodge and bows and
arrows, and many good presents.

Then the women cooked some bloodsuckers, and gave them to their husband,
but when he smelled of them he could not eat, and he threw them in the
fire. Then his wives asked him what he would eat. "Buffalo," he replied,
"is the only meat for men."

"Oh, father!" cried the girls, running to the old man's lodge, "our
husband will not eat our food. He says buffalo is the only meat for
men."

"Go then, my daughters," said the old man, "and tell your husband to
kill a buffalo, but do not take nor break any bones, for I will make it
alive again." Then the old man called the buffalo to come and drink, and
Bull Turns Round shot a fat cow and took all the meat. And when he had
roasted the tongue, he gave each of his wives a small piece of it, and
they liked it, and they roasted and ate plenty of the meat.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

#### III

One day Bull Turns Round went to the old man and said, "I mourn for my
father."

"How did you come to be dead on the sand shoal?" asked the old man. Then
Bull Turns Round told what his brother had done to him.

"Take this piece of sinew," said the old man. "Go and see your father.
When you throw this sinew on the fire, your brother and his wife will
roll, and twist up and die." Then the old man gave him a herd of
buffalo, and many dogs to pack the lodge, and other things; and Bull
Turns Round took his wives, and went to find his father.

One day, just after sunset, they came in sight of the big camp, and they
went and pitched the lodge on the top of a very high butte; and the
buffalo fed close by, and there were so many of them that they covered
the whole hill.

Now the people were starving, and some had died, for they had no
buffalo. In the morning, early, a man arose whose son had starved to
death, and when he went out and saw this lodge on the top of the hill,
and all the buffalo feeding by it, he cried out in a loud voice; and the
people all came out and looked at it, and they were afraid, for they
thought it was *Stōn'-i-tăp-i*. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) Then
said the man whose son had died: "I am no longer glad to live. I will go
up to this lodge, and find out what this is." Now when he said this, all
the men grasped their bows and arrows and followed him, and when they
went up the hill, the buffalo just moved out of their path and kept on
feeding; and just as they came to the lodge, Bull Turns Round came out,
and all the people said, "Here is the one whom we thought the bears had
killed." Wolf Tail ran up, and said, "Oh, brother, you are not dead. You
went to get feathers, but we thought you had

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

been killed." Then Bull Turns Round called his brother into the lodge,
and he threw the sinew on the fire; and Wolf Tail, and his wife, who was
standing outside, twisted up and died.

Then Bull Turns Round told his father all that had happened to him; and
when he learned that the people were starving, he filled his mouth with
feathers and blew them out, and the buffalo ran off in every direction,
and he said to the people, "There is food, go chase it." Then the people
were very glad, and they came each one and gave him a present. They gave
him war shirts, bows and arrows, shields, spears, white robes, and many
curious things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[26:1](blt06.htm#fr_2) Blackfoot—*Est'-stŭk-ki*,
suck-bite; from *Est-ah-tope*, suck, and *I-sik-stŭk-ki*, bite.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[27:1](blt06.htm#fr_3) There is no word in
English which corresponds to this. It is used when speaking of things
wonderful or supernatural.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kŭt-o´-yis](blt07)
