[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt14)  [Next](blt16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# STORIES OF ANCIENT TIMES

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### SCARFACE

#### ORIGIN OF THE MEDICINE LODGE

#### I

In the earliest times there was no war. All the tribes were at peace. In
those days there was a man who had a daughter, a very beautiful girl.
Many young men wanted to marry her, but every time she was asked, she
only shook her head and said she did not want a husband.

"How is this?" asked her father. "Some of these young men are rich,
handsome, and brave."

"Why should I marry?" replied the girl. "I have a rich father and
mother. Our lodge is good. The parfleches are never empty. There are
plenty of tanned robes and soft furs for winter. Why worry me, then?"

The Raven Bearers held a dance; they all dressed carefully and wore
their ornaments, and each one tried to dance the best. Afterwards some
of them asked for this girl, but still she said no. Then the Bulls, the
Kit-foxes, and others of the *I-kun-uh´-kah-tsi* held their dances, and
all those who were rich, many great warriors, asked this man for his
daughter, but to every one of them she said no. Then her father was
angry, and said: "Why, now, this way? All the best men have asked for
you, and still you say no. I believe you have a secret lover."

"Ah!" said her mother. "What shame for us should a child be born and our
daughter still unmarried!" "Father! mother!" replied the girl, "pity me.
I have no secret lover,

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

but now hear the truth. That Above Person, the Sun, told me, 'Do not
marry any of those men, for you are mine; thus you shall be happy, and
live to great age'; and again he said, 'Take heed. You must not marry.
You are mine.'"

"Ah!" replied her father. "It must always be as he says." And they
talked no more about it.

There was a poor young man, very poor. His father, mother, all his
relations, had gone to the Sand Hills. He had no lodge, no wife to tan
his robes or sew his moccasins. He stopped in one lodge to-day, and
to-morrow he ate and slept in another; thus he lived. He was a
good-looking young man, except that on his cheek he had a scar, and his
clothes were always old and poor.

After those dances some of the young men met this poor Scarface, and
they laughed at him, and said: "Why don't you ask that girl to marry
you? You are so rich and handsome!" Scarface did not laugh; he replied:
"Ah! I will do as you say. I will go and ask her." All the young men
thought this was funny. They laughed a great deal. But Scarface went
down by the river. He waited by the river, where the women came to get
water, and by and by the girl came along. "Girl," he said, "wait. I want
to speak with you. Not as a designing person do I ask you, but openly
where the Sun looks down, and all may see."

"Speak then," said the girl.

"I have seen the days," continued the young man "You have refused those
who are young, and rich, and brave. Now, to-day, they laughed and said
to me, 'Why do you not ask her?' I am poor, very poor. I have no lodge,
no food, no clothes, no robes and warm furs. I have no relations; all
have gone to the Sand Hills; yet, now, to-day, I ask you, take pity, be
my wife."

The girl hid her face in her robe and brushed the ground with the point
of her moccasin, back and forth, back and forth; for she was thinking.
After a time she said: "True.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have refused all
those rich young men, yet now the poor one asks me, and I am glad. I
will be your wife, and my people will be happy. You are poor, but it
does not matter. My father will give you dogs. My mother will make us a
lodge. My people will give us robes and furs. You will be poor no
longer."

Then the young man was happy, and he started to kiss her, but she held
him back, and said: "Wait! The Sun has spoken to me. He says I may not
marry; that I belong to him. He says if I listen to him, I shall live to
great age. But now I say: Go to the Sun. Tell him, 'She whom you spoke
with heeds your words. She has never done wrong, but now she wants to
marry. I want her for my wife.' Ask him to take that scar from your
face. That will be his sign. I will know he is pleased. But if he
refuses, or if you fail to find his lodge, then do not return to me."

"Oh!" cried the young man, "at first your words were good. I was glad.
But now it is dark. My heart is dead. Where is that far-off lodge? where
the trail, which no one yet has travelled?"

"Take courage, take courage!" said the girl; and she went to her lodge.

#### II

Scarface was very sad. He sat down and covered his head with his robe
and tried to think what to do. After a while he got up, and went to an
old woman who had been kind to him. "Pity me," he said. "I am very poor.
I am going away now on a long journey. Make me some moccasins."

"Where are you going?" asked the old woman. "There is no war; we are
very peaceful here."

"I do not know where I shall go," replied Scarface. "I am in trouble,
but I cannot tell you now what it is."

So the old woman made him some moccasins, seven pairs,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

with parfleche soles, and also she gave him a sack of food,—pemmican of
berries, pounded meat, and dried back fat; for this old woman had a good
heart. She liked the young man.

All alone, and with a sad heart, he climbed the bluffs and stopped to
take a last look at the camp. He wondered if he would ever see his
sweetheart and the people again. " *Hai´-yu!* Pity me, O Sun," he
prayed, and turning, he started to find the trail.

For many days he travelled on, over great prairies, along timbered
rivers and among the mountains, and every day his sack of food grew
lighter; but he saved it as much as he could, and ate berries, and
roots, and sometimes he killed an animal of some kind. One night he
stopped by the home of a wolf. "*Hai-yah!*" said that one; "what is my
brother doing so far from home?"

"Ah!" replied Scarface, "I seek the place where the Sun lives; I am sent
to speak with him."

"I have travelled far," said the wolf. "I know all the prairies, the
valleys, and the mountains, but I have never seen the Sun's home. Wait;
I know one who is very wise. Ask the bear. He may tell you."

The next day the man travelled on again, stopping now and then to pick a
few berries, and when night came he arrived at the bear's lodge.

"Where is your home?" asked the bear. "Why are you travelling alone, my
brother?"

"Help me! Pity me!" replied the young man; "because of her words <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) I seek the Sun. I go to ask him for her."

"I know not where he stops," replied the bear. "I have travelled by many
rivers, and I know the mountains, yet I have never seen his lodge. There
is some one beyond, that striped-face, who is very smart. Go and ask
him."

The badger was in his hole. Stooping over, the young

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

man shouted: "Oh, cunning striped-face! Oh, generous animal! I wish to
speak with you."

"What do you want?" said the badger, poking his head out of the hole.

"I want to find the Sun's home," replied Scarface. "I want to speak with
him."

"I do not know where he lives," replied the badger. "I never travel very
far. Over there in the timber is a wolverine. He is always travelling
around, and is of much knowledge. Maybe he can tell you."

Then Scarface went to the woods and looked all around for the wolverine,
but could not find him. So he sat down to rest "*Hai´-yu! Hai´-yu!*" he
cried. "Wolverine, take pity on me. My food is gone, my moccasins worn
out. Now I must die."

"What is it, my brother?" he heard, and looking around, he saw the
animal sitting near.

"She whom I would marry," said Scarface, "belongs to the Sun; I am
trying to find where he lives, to ask him for her."

"Ah!" said the wolverine. "I know where he lives. Wait; it is nearly
night. To-morrow I will show you the trail to the big water. He lives on
the other side of it."

Early in the morning, the wolverine showed him the trail, and Scarface
followed it until he came to the water's edge. He looked out over it,
and his heart almost stopped. Never before had any one seen such a big
water. The other side could not be seen, and there was no end to it.
Scarface sat down on the shore. His food was all gone, his moccasins
worn out. His heart was sick. "I cannot cross this big water," he said.
"I cannot return to the people. Here, by this water, I shall die."

Not so. His Helpers were there. Two swans came swimming up to the shore.
"Why have you come here?" they asked him. "What are you doing? It is
very far to the place where your people live."

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

"I am here," replied Scarface, "to die. Far away, in my country, is a
beautiful girl. I want to marry her, but she belongs to the Sun. So I
started to find him and ask for her. I have travelled many days. My food
is gone. I cannot go back. I cannot cross this big water, so I am going
to die."

"No," said the swans; "it shall not be so. Across this water is the home
of that Above Person. Get on our backs, and we will take you there."

Scarface quickly arose. He felt strong again. He waded out into the
water and lay down on the swans' backs, and they started off. Very deep
and black is that fearful water. Strange people live there, mighty
animals which often seize and drown a person. The swans carried him
safely, and took him to the other side. Here was a broad hard trail
leading back from the water's edge.

"*Kyi*" said the swans. "You are now close to the Sun's lodge. Follow
that trail, and you will soon see it."

#### III

Scarface started up the trail, and pretty soon he came to some beautiful
things, lying in it. There was a war shirt, a shield, and a bow and
arrows. He had never seen such pretty weapons; but he did not touch
them. He walked carefully around them, and travelled on. A little way
further on, he met a young man, the handsomest person he had ever seen.
His hair was very long, and he wore clothing made of strange skins. His
moccasins were sewn with bright colored feathers. The young man said to
him, "Did you see some weapons lying on the trail?"

"Yes," replied Scarface; "I saw them."

"But did you not touch them?" asked the young man.

"No; I thought some one had left them there, so I did not take them."

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

"You are not a thief," said the young man. "What is your name?"

"Scarface."

"Where are you going?"

"To the Sun."

"My name," said the young man, "is A-pi-su´-ahts <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15). The Sun is my father; come, I will take
you to our lodge. My father is not now at home, but he will come in at
night."

Soon they came to the lodge. It was very large and handsome; strange
medicine animals were painted on it. Behind, on a tripod, were strange
weapons and beautiful clothes—the Sun's. Scarface was ashamed to go in,
but Morning Star said, "Do not be afraid, my friend; we are glad you
have come."

They entered. One person was sitting there, Ko-ko-mik´-e-is <span
id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16), the Sun's wife, Morning Star's mother.
She spoke to Scarface kindly, and gave him something to eat. "Why have
you come so far from your people?" she asked.

Then Scarface told her about the beautiful girl he wanted to marry. "She
belongs to the Sun," he said. "I have come to ask him for her."

When it was time for the Sun to come home, the Moon hid Scarface under a
pile of robes. As soon as the Sun got to the doorway, he stopped, and
said, "I smell a person."

"Yes, father," said Morning Star; "a good young man has come to see you.
I know he is good, for he found some of my things on the trail and did
not touch them."

Then Scarface came out from under the robes, and the Sun entered and sat
down. "I am glad you have come to our lodge," he said. "Stay with us as
long as you think best. My son is lonesome sometimes; be his friend."

The next day the Moon called Scarface out of the lodge, and said to him:
"Go with Morning Star where you please, but never hunt near that big
water; do not let him go there.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is the home of
great birds which have long sharp bills; they kill people. I have had
many sons, but these birds have killed them all. Morning Star is the
only one left."

So Scarface stayed there a long time and hunted with Morning Star. One
day they came near the water, and saw the big birds.

"Come," said Morning Star; "let us go and kill those birds."

"No, no!" replied Scarface; "we must not go there. Those are very
terrible birds; they will kill us."

Morning Star would not listen. He ran towards the water, and Scarface
followed. He knew that he must kill the birds and save the boy. If not,
the Sun would be angry and might kill him. He ran ahead and met the
birds, which were coming towards him to fight, and killed every one of
them with his spear: not one was left. Then the young men cut off their
heads, and carried them home. Morning Star's mother was glad when they
told her what they had done, and showed her the birds' heads. She cried,
and called Scarface "my son." When the Sun came home at night, she told
him about it, and he too was glad. "My son," he said to Scarface, "I
will not forget what you have this day done for me. Tell me now, what
can I do for you?"

"*Hai´-yu*" replied Scarface. "*Hai´-yu*, pity me. I am here to ask you
for that girl. I want to marry her. I asked her, and she was glad; but
she says you own her, that you told her not to marry."

"What you say is true," said the Sun. "I have watched the days, so I
know it. Now, then, I give her to you; she is yours. I am glad she has
been wise. I know she has never done wrong. The Sun pities good women.
They shall live a long time. So shall their husbands and children. Now
you will soon go home. Let me tell you something. Be wise and listen: I
am the only chief. Everything is

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

mine. I made the earth, the mountains, prairies, rivers, and forests. I
made the people and all the animals. This is why I say I alone am the
chief. I can never die. True, the winter makes me old and weak, but
every summer I grow young again."

Then said the Sun: "What one of all animals is smartest? The raven is,
for he always finds food. He is never hungry. Which one of all the
animals is most *Nat-o'-ye* <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)? The
buffalo is. Of all animals, I like him best. He is for the people. He is
your food and your shelter. What part of his body is sacred? The tongue
is. That is mine. What else is sacred? Berries are. They are mine too.
Come with me and see the world." He took Scarface to the edge of the
sky, and they looked down and saw it. It is round and flat, and all
around the edge is the jumping-off place \[or walls straight down\].
Then said the Sun: "When any man is sick or in danger, his wife may
promise to build me a lodge, if he recovers. If the woman is pure and
true, then I will be pleased and help the man. But if she is bad, if she
lies, then I will be angry. You shall build the lodge like the world,
round, with walls, but first you must build a sweat house of a hundred
sticks. It shall be like the sky \[a hemisphere\], and half of it shall
be painted red. That is me. The other half you will paint black. That is
the night."

Further said the Sun: "Which is the best, the heart or the brain? The
brain is. The heart often lies, the brain never." Then he told Scarface
everything about making the Medicine Lodge, and when he had finished, he
rubbed a powerful medicine on his face, and the scar disappeared. Then
he gave him two raven feathers, saying: "These are the sign for the
girl, that I give her to you. They must always be worn by the husband of
the woman who builds a Medicine Lodge."

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

The young man was now ready to return home. Morning Star and the Sun
gave him many beautiful presents. The Moon cried and kissed him, and
called him "my son." Then the Sun showed him the short trail. It was the
Wolf Road (Milky Way). He followed it, and soon reached the ground.

#### IV

It was a very hot day. All the lodge skins were raised, and the people
sat in the shade. There was a chief, a very generous man, and all day
long people kept coming to his lodge to feast and smoke with him. Early
in the morning this chief saw a person sitting out on a butte near by,
close wrapped in his robe. The chief's friends came and went, the sun
reached the middle, and passed on, down towards the mountains. Still
this person did not move. When it was almost night, the chief said: "Why
does that person sit there so long? The heat has been strong, but he has
never eaten nor drunk. He may be a stranger; go and ask him in."

So some young men went up to him, and said: "Why do you sit here in the
great heat all day? Come to the shade of the lodges. The chief asks you
to feast with him."

Then the person arose and threw off his robe, and they were surprised.
He wore beautiful clothes. His bow, shield, and other weapons were of
strange make. But they knew his face, although the scar was gone, and
they ran ahead, shouting, "The scarface poor young man has come. He is
poor no longer. The scar on his face is gone."

All the people rushed out to see him. "Where have you been?" they asked.
"Where did you get all these pretty things?" He did not answer. There in
the crowd stood that young woman; and taking the two raven feathers from
his head, he gave them to her, and said: "The trail was very long, and I
nearly died, but by those Helpers, I found

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

his lodge. He is glad. He sends these feathers to you. They are the
sign."

Great was her gladness then. They were married, and made the first
Medicine Lodge, as the Sun had said. The Sun was glad. He gave them
great age. They were never sick. When they were very old, one morning,
their children said: "Awake! Rise and eat." They did not move. In the
night, in sleep, without pain, their shadows had departed for the Sand
Hills.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[96:1](blt15.htm#fr_14) A Blackfoot often talks
of what this or that person said, without mentioning names.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[99:1](blt15.htm#fr_15) Early Riser, *i.e.* The
Morning Star.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[99:2](blt15.htm#fr_16) Night red light, the
Moon.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[101:1](blt15.htm#fr_17) This word may be
translated as "of the Sun," "having Sun power," or more properly,
something sacred.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin of the I-kun-uh´-kah-tsi](blt16)
