[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt16)  [Next](blt18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### ORIGIN OF THE MEDICINE PIPE

Thunder—you have heard him, he is everywhere. He roars in the mountains,
he shouts far out on the prairie. He strikes the high rocks, and they
fall to pieces. He hits a tree, and it is broken in slivers. He strikes
the people, and they die. He is bad. He does not like the towering
cliff, the standing tree, or living man. He likes to strike and crush
them to the ground. Yes! yes! Of all he is most powerful; he is the one
most strong. But I have not told you the worst: he sometimes steals
women.

Long ago, almost in the beginning, a man and his wife were sitting in
their lodge, when Thunder came and struck them. The man was not killed.
At first he was as if dead, but after a while he lived again, and rising
looked about him. His wife was not there. "Oh, well," he thought, "she
has gone to get some water or wood," and he sat a while; but when the
sun had under-disappeared, he went out and inquired about her of the
people. No one had seen her. He searched throughout the camp, but did
not find her. Then he knew that Thunder had stolen her, and he went out
on the hills alone and mourned.

When morning came, he rose and wandered far away, and he asked all the
animals he met if they knew where Thunder lived. They laughed, and would
not answer. The Wolf said: "Do you think we would seek the home of the
only one we fear? He is our only danger. From all others we can run
away; but from him there is no running. He strikes, and there we lie.
Turn back! go home! Do not look for

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the dwelling-place of that dreadful one." But the man kept on, and
travelled far away. Now he came to a lodge,—a queer lodge, for it was
made of stone; just like any other lodge, only it was made of stone.
Here lived the Raven chief. The man entered.

"Welcome, my friend," said the chief of Ravens. "Sit down, sit down."
And food was placed before him.

Then, when he had finished eating, the Raven said, "Why have you come?"

"Thunder has stolen my wife," replied the man. "I seek his
dwelling-place that I may find her."

"Would you dare enter the lodge of that dreadful person?" asked the
Raven. "He lives close by here. His lodge is of stone, like this; and
hanging there, within, are eyes,—the eyes of those he has killed or
stolen. He has taken out their eyes and hung them in his lodge. Now,
then, dare you enter there?"

"No," replied the man. "I am afraid. What man could look at such
dreadful things and live?"

"No person can," said the Raven. "There is but one old Thunder fears.
There is but one he cannot kill. It is I, it is the Ravens. Now I will
give you medicine, and he shall not harm you. You shall enter there, and
seek among those eyes your wife's; and if you find them, tell that
Thunder why you came, and make him give them to you. Here, now, is a
raven's wing. Just point it at him, and he will start back quick; but if
that fail, take this. It is an arrow, and the shaft is made of elk-horn.
Take this, I say, and shoot it through the lodge."

"Why make a fool of me?" the poor man asked. "My heart is sad. I am
crying." And he covered his head with his robe, and wept.

"Oh," said the Raven, "you do not believe me. Come out, come out, and I
will make you believe." When they

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

stood outside, the Raven asked, "Is the home of your people far?"

"A great distance," said the man.

"Can you tell how many days you have travelled?"

"No," he replied, "my heart is sad. I did not count the days. The
berries have grown and ripened since I left."

"Can you see your camp from here?" asked the Raven.

The man did not speak. Then the Raven rubbed some medicine on his eyes
and said, "Look!" The man looked, and saw the camp. It was close. He saw
the people. He saw the smoke rising from the lodges.

"Now you will believe," said the Raven. "Take now the arrow and the
wing, and go and get your wife."

So the man took these things, and went to the Thunder's lodge. He
entered and sat down by the door-way. The Thunder sat within and looked
at him with awful eyes. But the man looked above, and saw those many
pairs of eyes. Among them were those of his wife.

"Why have you come?" said the Thunder in a fearful voice.

"I seek my wife," the man replied, "whom you have stolen. There hang her
eyes."

"No man can enter my lodge and live," said the Thunder; and he rose to
strike him. Then the man pointed the raven wing at the Thunder, and he
fell back on his couch and shivered. But he soon recovered, and rose
again. Then the man fitted the elk-horn arrow to his bow, and shot it
through the lodge of rock; right through that lodge of rock it pierced a
jagged hole, and let the sunlight in.

"Hold," said the Thunder. "Stop; you are the stronger. Yours the great
medicine. You shall have your wife. Take down her eyes." Then the man
cut the string that held them, and immediately his wife stood beside
him.

"Now," said the Thunder, "you know me. I am of great power. I live here
in summer, but when winter comes, I go

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

far south. I go south with the birds. Here is my pipe. It is medicine.
Take it, and keep it. Now, when I first come in the spring, you shall
fill and light this pipe, and you shall pray to me, you and the people.
For I bring the rain which makes the berries large and ripe. I bring the
rain which makes all things grow, and for this you shall pray to me, you
and all the people."

Thus the people got the first medicine pipe. It was long ago.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Beaver Medicine](blt18)
