[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt23)  [Next](blt25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

### THE BEARS

Now Old Man was walking along, and far off he saw many wolves; and when
he came closer, he saw there the chief of the wolves, a very old one,
and sitting around him were all his children.

Old Man said, "Pity me, Wolf Chief; make me into a wolf, that I may live
your way and catch deer and everything that runs fast."

"Come near then," said the Wolf Chief, "that I may rub your body with my
hands, so that hair will cover you."

"Hold," said Old Man; "do not cover my body with hair. On my head, arms,
and legs only, put hair."

When the Chief Wolf had done so, he said to Old Man: "You shall have
three companions to help you, one is a very swift runner, another a good
runner, and the last is not very fast. Take them with you now, and
others of my younger children who are learning to hunt, but do not go
where the wind blows; keep in the shelter, or the young ones will freeze
to death." Then they went hunting, and Old Man led them on the high
buttes, where it was very cold.

At night, they lay down to sleep, and Old Man nearly froze; and he said
to the wolves, "Cover me with your tails." So all the wolves lay down
around him, and covered his body with their tails, and he soon got warm
and slept. Before long he awoke and said angrily, "Take off those
tails," and the wolves moved away; but after a little time he again
became cold, and cried out, "Oh my young brothers, cover me with your
tails or I shall freeze." So

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

they lay down by him again and covered his body with their tails.

When it was daylight, they all rose and hunted. They saw some moose,
and, chasing them, killed three. Now, when they were about to eat, the
Chief Wolf came along with many of his children, and one wolf said, "Let
us make pemmican of those moose"; and every one was glad. Then said the
one who made pemmican, "No one must look, everybody shut his eyes, while
I make the pemmican"; but Old Man looked, and the pemmican-maker threw a
round bone and hit him on the nose, and it hurt. Then Old Man said, "Let
me make the pemmican." So all the wolves shut their eyes, and Old Man
took the round bone and killed the wolf who had hit him. Then the Chief
Wolf was angry, and he said, "Why did you kill your brother?" "I didn't
mean to," replied Old Man. "He looked and I threw the round bone at him,
but I only meant to hurt him a little." Then said the Chief Wolf: "You
cannot live with us any longer. Take one of your companions, and go off
by yourselves and hunt." So Old Man took the swift runner, and they went
and lived by themselves a long time; and they killed all the elk, and
deer, and antelope, and moose they wanted.

One morning they awoke, and Old Man said: "Oh my young brother, I have
had a bad dream. Hereafter, when you chase anything, if it jumps a
stream, you must not follow it. Even a little spring you must not jump."
And the wolf promised not to jump over water.

Now one day the wolf was chasing a moose, and it ran on to an island.
The stream about it was very small; so the wolf thought: "This is such a
little stream that I must jump it. That moose is very tired, and I don't
think it will leave the island." So he jumped on to the island, and as
soon as he entered the brush, a bear caught him, for the island was the
home of the Chief Bear and his two brothers.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

Old Man waited a long time for the wolf to come back, and then went to
look for him. He asked all the birds he met if they had seen him, but
they all said they had not.

At last he saw a kingfisher, who was sitting on a limb overhanging the
water. "Why do you sit there, my young brother?" said Old Man.
"Because," replied the kingfisher, "the Chief Bear and his brothers have
killed your wolf; they have eaten the meat and thrown the fat into the
river, and whenever I see a piece come floating along, I fly down and
get it." Then said Old Man, "Do the Bear Chief and his brothers often
come out? and where do they live?" "They come out every morning to
play," said the kingfisher; "and they live upon that island."

Old Man went up there and saw their tracks on the sand, where they had
been playing, and he turned himself into a rotten tree. By and by the
bears came out, and when they saw the tree, the Chief Bear said: "Look
at that rotten tree. It is Old Man. Go, brothers, and see if it is not."
So the two brothers went over to the tree, and clawed it; and they said,
"No, brother, it is only a tree." Then the Chief Bear went over and
clawed and bit the tree, and although it hurt Old Man, he never moved.
Then the Bear Chief was sure it was only a tree, and he began to play
with his brothers. Now while they were playing, and all were on their
backs, Old Man leaned over and shot an arrow into each one of them; and
they cried out loudly and ran back on the island. Then Old Man changed
into himself, and walked down along the river. Pretty soon he saw a frog
jumping along, and every time it jumped it would say, "*Ni'-nah
O-kyai'-yu*!" And sometimes it would stop and sing:—

|             |                |            |               |
|-------------|----------------|------------|---------------|
| "*Ni´-nah * | *O-kyai´-yu! * | *Ni´-nah * | *O-kyai´-yu!* |
| Chief       | Bear!          | Chief      | Bear!         |

 

|           |                  |            |                |
|-----------|------------------|------------|----------------|
| *Nap´-i * | *I-nit´-si-wah * | *Ni´-nah * | *O-kyai´-yu!"* |
| Old Man   | kill him         | Chief      | Bear!          |

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

"What do you say?" cried Old Man. The frog repeated what he had said.

"Ah!" exclaimed Old Man, "tell me all about it."

"The Chief Bear and his brothers," replied the frog, "were playing on
the sand, when Old Man shot arrows into them. They are not dead, but the
arrows are very near their hearts; if you should shove ever so little on
them, the points would cut their hearts. I am going after medicine now
to cure them."

Then Old Man killed the frog and skinned her, and put the hide on
himself and swam back to the island, and hopped up toward the bears,
crying at every step, "*Ni'-nah O-kyai'-yu!*" just as the frog had done.

"Hurry," cried the Chief Bear.

"Yes," replied Old Man, and he went up and shoved the arrow into his
heart.

"I cured him; he is asleep now," he cried, and he went up and shoved the
arrow into the biggest brother's heart. "I cured them; they are asleep
now"; and he went up and shoved the arrow into the other bear's heart.
Then he built a big fire and skinned the bears, and tried out the fat
and poured it into a hollow in the ground; and he called all the animals
to come and roll in it, that they might be fat. And all the animals came
and rolled in it. The bears came first and rolled in it, that is the
reason they get so fat. Last of all came the rabbits, and the grease was
almost all gone; but they filled their paws with it and rubbed it on
their backs and between their hind legs. That is the reason why rabbits
have two such large layers of fat on their backs, and that is what makes
them so fat between the hind legs.

\[NOTE.—The four preceding stories show the serious side of Old Man's
character. Those which follow represent him as malicious, foolish, and
impotent.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wonderful Bird](blt25)
