[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt38)  [Next](blt40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

### THE BLACKFOOT IN WAR

The Blackfeet were a warlike people. How it may have been in the old
days, before the coming of the white men, we do not know. Very likely,
in early times, they were usually at peace with neighboring tribes, or,
if quarrels took place, battles were fought, and men killed, this was
only in angry dispute over what each party considered its rights. Their
wars were probably not general, nor could they have been very bloody.
When, however, horses came into the possession of the Indians, all this
must have soon become changed. Hitherto there had really been no
incentive to war. From time to time expeditions may have gone out to
kill enemies,—for glory, or to take revenge for some injury,—but war had
not yet been made desirable by the hope of plunder, for none of their
neighbors—any more than themselves—had property which was worth
capturing and taking away. Primitive arms, dogs, clothing, and dried
meat were common to all the tribes, and were their only possessions, and
usually each tribe had an abundance of all these. It was not worth any
man's while to make long journeys and to run into danger merely to
increase his store of such property, when his present possessions were
more than sufficient to meet all his wants. Even if such things had
seemed desirable plunder, the amount of it which could be carried away
was limited, since—for a war party—the only means of transporting
captured articles from place to place was on men's backs, nor could men
burdened with loads either run or fight. But when horses became known,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

and the Indians began to realize what a change the possession of these
animals was working in their mode of life, when they saw that, by
enormously increasing the transporting power of each family, horses made
far greater possessions practicable, that they insured the food supply,
rendered the moving of the camp easier and more rapid, made possible
long journeys with a minimum of effort, and that they had a value for
trading, the Blackfoot mind received a new idea, the idea that it was
desirable to accumulate property. The Blackfoot saw that, since horses
could be exchanged for everything that was worth having, no one had as
many horses as he needed. A pretty wife, a handsome war bonnet, a strong
bow, a finely ornamented woman's dress,—any or all of these things a man
might obtain, if he had horses to trade for them. The gambler at
"hands," or at the ring game, could bet horses. The man who was devoted
to his last married wife could give her a horse as an evidence of his
affection.

We can readily understand what a change the advent of the horse must
have worked in the minds of a people like the Blackfeet, and how this
changed mental attitude would react on the Blackfoot way of living. At
first, there were but few horses among them, but they knew that their
neighbors to the west and south—across the mountains and on the great
plains beyond the Missouri and the Yellowstone—had plenty of them; that
the Kūtenais, the Kalispels, the Snakes, the Crows, and the Sioux were
well provided. They soon learned that horses were easily driven off, and
that, even if followed by those whose property they had taken, the
pursued had a great advantage over the pursuers; and we may feel sure
that it was not long before the idea of capturing horses from the enemy
entered some Blackfoot head and was put into practice.

Now began a systematic sending forth of war parties against neighboring
tribes for the purpose of capturing horses, which

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

continued for about seventy-five or eighty years, and has only been
abandoned within the last six or seven, and since the settlement of the
country by the whites made it impossible for the Blackfeet longer to
pass backward and forward through it on their raiding expeditions.
Horse-taking at once became what might be called an established industry
among the Blackfeet. Success brought wealth and fame, and there was a
pleasing excitement about the war journey. Except during the bitterest
weather of the winter, war parties of Blackfeet were constantly out,
searching for camps of their enemies, from whom they might capture
horses. Usually the only object of such an expedition was to secure
plunder, but often enemies were killed, and sometimes the party set out
with the distinct intention of taking both scalps and horses.

Until some time after they had obtained guns, the Blackfeet were on
excellent terms with the northern Crees, but later the Chippeways from
the east made war on the Blackfeet, and this brought about general
hostilities against all Crees, which have continued up to within a few
years. If I recollect aright, the last fight which occurred between the
Pi-kun'-i and the Crees took place in 1886. In this skirmish, which
followed an attempt by the Crees to capture some Piegan horses, my
friend, Tail-feathers-coming-in-sight-over-the-Hill, killed and counted
*coup* on a Cree whose scalp he afterward sent me, as an evidence of his
prowess.

The Gros Ventres of the prairie, of Arapaho stock, known to the
Blackfeet as *At-séna,* or Gut People, had been friends and allies of
the Blackfeet from the time they first came into the country, early in
this century, up to about the year 1862, when, according to Clark, peace
was broken through a mistake. <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) A war
party of Snakes had gone to a Gros Ventres camp near the Bear Paw
Mountains and there killed two Gros Ventres and taken a white pony,
which they subsequently

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

gave to a party of Piegans whom they met, and with whom they made peace.
The Gros Ventres afterward saw this horse in the Piegan camp and
supposed that the latter had killed their tribesman, and this led to a
long war. In the year 1867, the Piegans defeated the allied Crows and
Gros Ventres in a great battle near the Cypress Mountains, in which
about 450 of the enemy are said to have been killed.

An expression often used in these pages, and which is so familiar to one
who has lived much with Indians as to need no explanation, is the phrase
to count *coup*. Like many of the terms common in the Northwest, this
one comes down to us from the old French trappers and traders, and a
*coup* is, of course, a blow. As commonly used, the expression is almost
a direct translation of the Indian phrase to strike the enemy, which is
in ordinary use among all tribes. This striking is the literal
inflicting a blow on an individual, and does not mean merely the attack
on a body of enemies.

The most creditable act that an Indian can perform is to show that he is
brave, to prove, by some daring deed, his physical courage, his lack of
fear. In practice, this courage is shown by approaching near enough to
an enemy to strike or touch him with something that is held in the
hand—to come up within arm's length of him. To kill an enemy is
praiseworthy, and the act of scalping him may be so under certain
circumstances, but neither of these approaches in bravery the hitting or
touching him with something held in the hand. This is counting *coup*.

The man who does this shows himself without fear and is respected
accordingly. With certain tribes, as the Pawnees, Cheyennes, and others,
it was not very uncommon for a warrior to dash up to an enemy and strike
him before making any attempt to injure him, the effort to kill being
secondary to the *coup*. The blow might be struck with anything held in
the hand,—a whip, coupstick, club, lance,

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

the muzzle of a gun, a bow, or what not. It did not necessarily follow
that the person on whom the *coup* had been counted would be injured.
The act was performed in the case of a woman, who might be captured, or
even on a child, who was being made prisoner.

Often the dealing the *coup* showed a very high degree of courage. As
already implied, it might be counted on a man who was defending himself
most desperately, and was trying his best to kill the approaching enemy,
or, even if the attempt was being made on a foe who had fallen, it was
never certain that he was beyond the power of inflicting injury. He
might be only wounded, and, just when the enemy had come close to him,
and was about to strike, he might have strength enough left to raise
himself up and shoot him dead. In their old wars, the Indians rarely
took men captive. The warrior never expected quarter nor gave it, and
usually men fought to the death, and died mute, defending themselves to
the last—to the last, striving to inflict some injury on the enemy.

The striking the blow was an important event in a man's life, and he who
performed this feat remembered it. He counted it. It was a proud day for
the young warrior when he counted his first *coup*, and each subsequent
one was remembered and numbered in the warrior's mind, just as an
American of to-day remembers the number of times he has been elected to
Congress. At certain dances and religious ceremonies, like that of the
Medicine Lodge, the warriors counted—or rather re-counted—their *coups*.

While the *coup* was primarily, and usually, a blow with something held
in the hand, other acts in warfare which involved great danger to him
who performed them were also reckoned *coups* by some tribes. Thus, for
a horseman to ride over and knock down an enemy, who was on foot, was
regarded among the Blackfeet as a *coup*, for the horseman might be shot
at close quarters, or might receive a lance

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

thrust. It was the same to ride one's horse violently against a mounted
foe. An old Pawnee told me of a *coup* that he had counted by running up
to a fallen enemy and jumping on him with both feet. Sometimes the
taking of horses counted a *coup*, but this was not always the case.

As suggested by what has been already stated, each tribe of the Plains
Indians held its own view as to what constituted a *coup*. The Pawnees
were very strict in their interpretation of the term, and with them an
act of daring was not in itself deemed a *coup*. This was counted only
when the person of an enemy was actually touched. One or two incidents
which have occurred among the Pawnees will serve to illustrate their
notions on this point.

In the year 1867, the Pawnee scouts had been sent up to Ogallalla,
Nebraska, to guard the graders who were working on the Union Pacific
railroad. While they were there, some Sioux came down from the hills and
ran off a few mules, taking them across the North Platte. Major North
took twenty men and started after them. Crossing the river, and
following it up on the north bank, he headed them off, and before long
came in sight of them.

The six Sioux, when they found that they were pursued, left the mules
that they had taken, and ran; and the Pawnees, after chasing them eight
or ten miles, caught up with one of them, a brother of the well-known
chief Spotted Tail. Baptiste Bahele, a half-breed Skidi, had a very fast
horse, and was riding ahead of the other Pawnees, and shooting arrows at
the Sioux, who was shooting back at him. At length Baptiste shot the
enemy's horse in the hip, and the Indian dismounted and ran on foot
toward a ravine. Baptiste shot at him again, and this time sent an arrow
nearly through his body, so that the point projected in front. The Sioux
caught the arrow by the point, pulled it through his body, and shot it
back at his pursuer, and came very near hitting

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

him. About that time, a ball from a carbine hit the Sioux and knocked
him down.

Then there was a race between Baptiste and the Pawnee next behind him,
to see which should count *coup* on the fallen man. Baptiste was nearest
to him and reached him first, but just as he got to him, and was leaning
over from his horse, to strike the dead man, the animal shied at the
body, swerving to one side, and he failed to touch it. The horse ridden
by the other Pawnee ran right over the Sioux, and his rider leaned down
and touched him.

Baptiste claimed the *coup*—although acknowledging that he had not
actually touched the man—on the ground that he had exposed himself to
all the danger, and would have hit the man if his horse had not swerved
as it did from the body; but the Pawnees would not allow it, and all
gave the credit of the *coup* to the other boy, because he had actually
touched the enemy.

On another occasion three or four young men started on the warpath from
the Pawnee village. When they came near to Spotted Tail's camp on the
Platte River, they crossed the stream, took some horses, and got them
safely across the river. Then one of the boys recrossed, went back to
the camp, and cut loose another horse. He had almost got this one out of
the camp, when an Indian came out of a lodge near by, and sat down. The
Pawnee shot the Sioux, counted *coup* on him, scalped him, and then
hurried across the river with the whole Sioux camp in pursuit. When the
party returned to the Pawnee village, this boy was the only one who
received credit for a *coup*.

Among the Blackfeet the capture of a shield, bow, gun, war bonnet, war
shirt, or medicine pipe was deemed a *coup*.

Nothing gave a man a higher place in the estimation of the people than
the counting of *coups*, for, I repeat, personal bravery is of all
qualities the most highly respected by

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indians. On
special occasions, as has been said, men counted over again in public
their *coups*. This served to gratify personal vanity, and also to
incite the young men to the performance of similar brave deeds. Besides
this, they often made a more enduring record of these acts, by
reproducing them pictographically on robes, cowskins, and other hides.
There is now in my possession an illuminated cowskin, presented to me by
Mr. J. Kipp, which contains the record of the *coups* and the most
striking events in the life of Red Crane, a Blackfoot warrior, painted
by himself. These pictographs are very rude and are drawn after the
style common among Plains Indians, but no doubt they were sufficiently
lifelike to call up to the mind of the artist each detail of the
stirring events which they record.

The Indian warrior who stood up to relate some brave deed which he had
performed was almost always in a position to prove the truth of his
statements. Either he had the enemy's scalp, or some trophy captured
from him, to produce as evidence, or else he had a witness of his feat
in some companion. A man seldom boasted of any deed unless he was able
to prove his story, and false statements about exploits against the
enemy were most unusual. Temporary peace was often made between tribes
usually at war, and, at the friendly meetings which took place during
such times of peace, former battles were talked over, the performances
of various individuals discussed, and the acts of particular men in the
different rights commented on. In this way, if any man had falsely
claimed to have done brave deeds, he would be detected.

An example of this occurred many years ago among the Cheyennes. At that
time, there was a celebrated chief of the Skidi tribe of the Pawnee
Nation whose name was Big Eagle. He was very brave, and the Cheyennes
greatly feared him, and it was agreed among them that the man who could
count *coup* on Big Eagle should be made war

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

chief of the Cheyennes. After a fight on the Loup River, a Cheyenne
warrior claimed to have counted *coup* on Big Eagle by thrusting a lance
through his buttocks. On the strength of the claim, this man was made
war chief of the Cheyennes. Some years later, during a friendly visit
made by the Pawnees to the Cheyennes, this incident was mentioned. Big
Eagle was present at the time, and, after inquiring into the matter, he
rose in council, denied that he had ever been struck as claimed, and,
throwing aside his robe, called on the Cheyennes present to examine his
body and to point out the scars left by the lance. None were found. It
was seen that Big Eagle spoke the truth; and the lying Cheyenne, from
the proud position of war chief, sank to a point where he was an object
of contempt to the meanest Indian in his tribe.

Among the Blackfeet a war party usually, or often, had its origin in a
dream. Some man who has a dream, after he awakes tells of it. Perhaps he
may say: "I dreamed that on a certain stream is a herd of horses that
have been given to me, and that I am going away to get. I am going to
war. I shall go to that place and get my band of horses." Then the men
who know him, who believe that his medicine is strong and that he will
have good luck, make up their minds to follow him. As soon as he has
stated what he intends to do, his women and his female relations begin
to make moccasins for him, and the old men among his relations begin to
give him arrows and powder and ball to fit him out for war. The
relations of those who are going with him do the same for them.

The leader notifies the young men who are going with him on what day and
at what hour he intends to start. He determines the time for himself,
but does not let the whole camp know it in advance. Of late years, large
war parties have not been desirable. They have preferred to go out in
small bodies.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

Just before a war party sets out, its members get together and sing the
"peeling a stick song," which is a wolf song. Then they build a sweat
lodge and go into it, and with them goes in an old man, a medicine-pipe
man, who has been a good warrior. They fill the pipe and ask him to pray
for them, that they may have good luck, and may accomplish what they
desire. The medicine-pipe man prays and sings and pours water on the hot
stones, and the warriors with their knives slice bits of skin and flesh
from their bodies,—their arms and breasts and sometimes from the tip of
the tongue,—which they offer to the Sun. Then, after the ceremony is
over, all dripping with perspiration from their vapor bath, the men go
down to the river and plunge in.

In starting out, a war party often marches in the daytime, but sometimes
they travel at night from the beginning. Often they may make an all
night march across a wide prairie, in passing over which they might be
seen if they travelled in the day. They journey on foot, always. The
older men carry their arms, while the boys bear the moccasins, the
ropes, and the food, which usually consists of dried meat or pemmican.
They carry also coats and blankets and their war bonnets and otter skin
medicine. The leader has but little physical labor to perform. His mind
is occupied in planning the movements of his party. He is treated with
the greatest respect. The others mend his moccasins, and give him the
best of the food which they carry.

After they get away from the main camp, the leader selects the strongest
of the young men, and sends him ahead to some designated butte, saying,
"Go to that place, and look carefully over the country, and if you see
nothing, make signals to us to come on." This scout goes on ahead,
travelling in the ravines and coulées, and keeps himself well hidden.
After he has reconnoitred and made signs that he sees nothing, the party
proceeds straight toward him.

The party usually starts early in the morning and travels

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

all day, making camp at sundown. During the day, if they happen to come
upon an antelope or a buffalo, they kill it, if possible, and take some
of the meat with them. They try in every way to economize their
pemmican. They always endeavor to make camp in the thick timber, where
they cannot be seen; and here, when it is necessary, on account of bad
weather or for other reasons, they build a war lodge. Taking four young
cotton-woods or aspens, on which the leaves are left, and lashing them
together like lodge poles, but with the butts up, about these they place
other similar trees, also butts up and untrimmed. The leaves keep the
rain off, and prevent the light of the fire which is built in the lodge
from showing through. Sometimes, when on the prairie, where there is no
wood, in stormy weather they will build a shelter of rocks. When the
party has come close to the enemy, or into a country where the enemy are
likely to be found, they build no more fires, but eat their food
uncooked.

When they see fresh tracks of people, or signs that enemies are in the
country, they stop travelling in the daytime and move altogether by
night, until they come to some good place for hiding, and here they stop
and sleep. When day comes, the leader sends out young men to the
different buttes, to look over the country and see if they can discover
the enemy. If some one of the scouts reports that he has seen a camp,
and that the enemy have been found, the leader directs his men to paint
themselves and put on their war bonnets. This last is a figure of
speech, since the war bonnets, having of late years been usually
ornamented with brass bells, could not be worn in a secret attack, on
account of the noise they would make. Before painting themselves,
therefore, they untie their war bonnets, and spread them out on the
ground, as if they were about to be worn, and then when they have
finished painting themselves, tie them up again. When it begins to get
dark, they start on

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

the run for the enemy's camp. They leave their food in camp, but carry
their ropes slung over the shoulder and under the arm, whips stuck in
belts, guns and blankets.

After they have crept up close to the lodges, the leader chooses certain
men that have strong hearts, and takes them with him into the camp to
cut loose the horses. The rest of the party remain outside the camp, and
look about its outskirts, driving in any horses that may be feeding
about, not tied up. Of those who have gone into the camp, some cut loose
one horse, while others cut all that may be tied about a lodge. Some go
only once into the camp, and some go twice to get the horses. When they
have secured the horses, they drive them off a little way from the camp,
at first going slowly, and then mount and ride off fast. Generally, they
travel two nights and one day before sleeping.

This is the usual method of procedure of an ordinary expedition to
capture horses, and I have given it very nearly in the language of the
men who explained it to me.

In their hostile encounters, the Blackfeet have much that is common to
many Plains tribes, and also some customs that are peculiar to
themselves. Like most Indians, they are subject to sudden, apparently
causeless, panics, while at other times they display a courage that is
heroic. They are firm believers in luck, and will follow a leader who is
fortunate in his expeditions into almost any danger. On the other hand,
if the leader of a war party loses his young men, or any of them, the
people in the camp think that he is unlucky, and does not know how to
lead a war party. Young men will not follow him as a leader, and he is
obliged to go as a servant or scout under another leader. He is likely
never again to lead a war party, having learned to distrust his luck.

If a war party meets the enemy, and kills several of them, losing in the
battle one of its own number, it is likely, as the phrase is, to "cover"
the slain Blackfoot with all the

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

dead enemies save one, and to have a scalp dance over that remaining
one. If a party had killed six of the enemy and lost a man, it might
"cover" the slain Blackfoot with five of the enemy. In other words, the
five dead enemies would pay for the one which the war party had lost. So
far, matters would be even, and they would feel at liberty to rejoice
over the victory gained over the one that is left.

The Blackfeet sometimes cut to pieces an enemy killed in battle. If a
Blackfoot had a relation killed by a member of another tribe, and
afterward killed one of this tribe, he was likely to cut him all to
pieces "to get even," that is, to gratify his spite—to obtain revenge.
Sometimes, after they had killed an enemy, they dragged his body into
camp, so as to give the children an opportunity to count *coup* on it.
Often they cut the feet and hands off the dead, and took them away and
danced over them for a long time. Sometimes they cut off an arm or a
leg, and often the head, and danced and rejoiced over this trophy.

Women and children of hostile tribes were often captured, and adopted
into the Blackfoot tribes with all the rights and privileges of
indigenous members. Men were rarely captured. When they were taken, they
were sometimes killed in cold blood, especially if they had made a
desperate resistance before being captured. At other times, the captive
would be kept for a time, and then the chief would take him off away
from the camp, and give him provisions, clothing, arms, and a horse, and
let him go. The captive man always had a hard time at first. When he was
brought into the camp, the women and children threw dirt on him and
counted *coups* on him, pounding him with sticks and clubs. He was
rarely tied, but was always watched. Often the man who had taken him
prisoner had great trouble to keep his tribesmen from killing him.

In the very early days of this century, war parties used commonly to
start out in the spring, going south to the land

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

where horses were abundant, being absent all summer and the next winter,
and returning the following summer or autumn, with great bands of
horses. Sometimes they were gone two years. They say that on such
journeys they used to go to *Spai'yu ksah'ku*, which means the Spanish
lands—*Spai'yu* being a recently made word, no doubt from the French
*espagnol.* That they did get as far as Mexico, or at least New Mexico,
is indicated by the fact that they brought back branded horses and a few
branded mules; for in these early days there was no stock upon the
Plains, and animals bearing brands were found only in the Spanish
American settlements. The Blackfeet did not know what these marks meant.
From their raids into these distant lands, they sometimes brought back
arms of strange make, lances, axes, and swords, of a form unlike any
that they had seen. The lances had broad heads; some of the axes, as
described, were evidently the old "T. Gray" trade axes of the southwest.
A sword, described as having a long, slender, straight blade, inlaid
with a flower pattern of yellow metal along the back, was probably an
old Spanish rapier.

In telling of these journeys to Spanish lands, they say of the very long
reeds which grow there, that they are very large at the butt, are
jointed, very hard, and very tall; they grow in marshy places; and the
water there has a strange, mouldy smell.

It is said, too, that there have been war parties who have crossed the
mountains and gone so far to the west that they have seen the big salt
water which lies beyond, or west of, the Great Salt Lake. Journeys as
far south as Salt Lake were not uncommon, and Hugh Monroe has told me of
a war party he accompanied which went as far as this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[244:1](blt39.htm#fr_33) Indian Sign Language,
p. 70.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Religion](blt40)
