[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt33)  [Next](blt35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

# THE STORY OF THE THREE TRIBES

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

### THE PAST AND THE PRESENT

Fifty years ago the name Blackfoot was one of terrible meaning to the
white traveller who passed across that desolate buffalo-trodden waste
which lay to the north of the Yellowstone River and east of the Rocky
Mountains. This was the Blackfoot land, the undisputed home of a people
which is said to have numbered in one of its tribes—the Pi-kŭn´-i—8000
lodges, or 40,000 persons. Besides these, there were the Blackfeet and
the Bloods, three tribes of one nation, speaking the same language,
having the same customs, and holding the same religious faith.

But this land had not always been the home of the Blackfeet. Long ago,
before the coming of the white men, they had lived in another country
far to the north and east, about Lesser Slave Lake, ranging between
Peace River and the Saskatchewan, and having for their neighbors on the
north the Beaver Indians. Then the Blackfeet were a timber people. It is
said that about two hundred years ago the Chippeweyans from the east
invaded this country and drove them south and west. Whether or no this
is true, it is quite certain that not many generations back the
Blackfeet lived on the North Saskatchewan River and to the north of that
stream. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) Gradually working their way
westward, they at length reached the Rocky Mountains, and, finding game
abundant, remained there until they obtained horses, in the very
earliest years of the present century. When they

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

secured horses and guns, they took courage and began to venture out on
to the plains and to go to war. From this time on, the Blackfeet made
constant war on their neighbors to the south, and in a few years
controlled the whole country between the Saskatchewan on the north and
the Yellowstone on the south.

It was, indeed, a glorious country which the Blackfeet had wrested from
their southern enemies. Here nature has reared great mountains and
spread out broad prairies. Along the western border of this region, the
Rocky Mountains lift their snow-clad peaks above the clouds. Here and
there, from north to south, and from east to west, lie minor ranges,
black with pine forests if seen near at hand, or in the distance mere
gray silhouettes against a sky of blue. Between these mountain ranges
lies everywhere the great prairie; a monotonous waste to the stranger's
eye, but not without its charm. It is brown and bare; for, except during
a few short weeks in spring, the sparse bunch-grass is sear and yellow,
and the silver gray of the wormwood lends an added dreariness to the
landscape. Yet this seemingly desert waste has a beauty of its own. At
intervals it is marked with green winding river valleys, and everywhere
it is gashed with deep ravines, their sides painted in strange colors of
red and gray and brown, and their perpendicular walls crowned with
fantastic columns and figures of stone or clay, carved out by the winds
and the rains of ages. Here and there, rising out of the plain, are
curious sharp ridges, or square-topped buttes with vertical sides,
sometimes bare, and sometimes dotted with pines,—short, sturdy trees,
whose gnarled trunks and thick, knotted branches have been twisted and
wrung into curious forms by the winds which blow unceasingly, hour after
hour, day after day, and month after month, over mountain range and
prairie, through gorge and coulée.

These prairies now seem bare of life, but it was not

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

always so. Not very long ago, they were trodden by multitudinous herds
of buffalo and antelope; then, along the wooded river valleys and on the
pine-clad slopes of the mountains, elk, deer, and wild sheep fed in
great numbers. They are all gone now. The winter's wind still whistles
over Montana prairies, but nature's shaggy-headed wild cattle no longer
feel its biting blasts. Where once the scorching breath of summer
stirred only the short stems of the buffalo-grass, it now billows the
fields of the white man's grain. Half-hidden by the scanty herbage, a
few bleached skeletons alone remain to tell us of the buffalo; and the
broad, deep trails, over which the dark herds passed by thousands, are
now grass-grown and fast disappearing under the effacing hand of time.
The buffalo have disappeared, and the fate of the buffalo has almost
overtaken the Blackfeet.

As known to the whites, the Blackfeet were true prairie Indians, seldom
venturing into the mountains, except when they crossed them to war with
the Kutenais, the Flatheads, or the Snakes. They subsisted almost wholly
on the flesh of the buffalo. They were hardy, untiring, brave,
ferocious. Swift to move, whether on foot or horseback, they made long
journeys to war, and with telling force struck their enemies. They had
conquered and driven out from the territory which they occupied the
tribes who once inhabited it, and maintained a desultory and successful
warfare against all invaders, fighting with the Crees on the north, the
Assinaboines on the east, the Crows on the south, and the Snakes,
Kalispels, and Kutenais on the southwest and west. In those days the
Blackfeet were rich and powerful. The buffalo fed and clothed them, and
they needed nothing beyond what nature supplied. This was their time of
success and happiness.

Crowded into a little corner of the great territory which they once
dominated, and holding this corner by an uncertain

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

tenure, a few Blackfeet still exist, the pitiful remnant of a once
mighty people. Huddled together about their agencies, they are facing
the problem before them, striving, helplessly but bravely, to
accommodate themselves to the new order of things; trying in the face of
adverse surroundings to wrench themselves loose from their accustomed
ways of life; to give up inherited habits and form new ones; to break
away from all that is natural to them, from all that they have been
taught—to reverse their whole mode of existence. They are striving to
earn their living, as the white man earns his, by toil. The struggle is
hard and slow, and in carrying it on they are wasting away and growing
fewer in numbers. But though unused to labor, ignorant of agriculture,
unacquainted with tools or seeds or soils, knowing nothing of the ways
of life in permanent houses or of the laws of health, scantily fed,
often utterly discouraged by failure, they are still making a noble
fight for existence.

Only within a few years—since the buffalo disappeared—has this change
been going on; so recently has it come that the old order and the new
meet face to face. In the trees along the river valleys, still quietly
resting on their aerial sepulchres, sleep the forms of the ancient
hunter-warrior who conquered and held this broad land; while, not far
away, Blackfoot farmers now rudely cultivate their little crops, and
gather scanty harvests from narrow fields.

It is the meeting of the past and the present, of savagery and
civilization. The issue cannot be doubtful. Old methods must pass away.
The Blackfeet will become civilized, but at a terrible cost. To me there
is an interest, profound and pathetic, in watching the progress of the
struggle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[177:1](blt34.htm#fr_29) For a more extended
account of this migration, see *American Anthropologist*, April, 1892,
p. 153.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daily Life And Customs](blt35)
