[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt30)  [Next](blt32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

### THE THEFT FROM THE SUN

Once Old Man was travelling around, when he came to the Sun's lodge, and
the Sun asked him to stay a while. Old Man was very glad to do so.

One day the meat was all gone, and the Sun said, "*Kyi*! Old Man, what
say you if we go and kill some deer?"

"You speak well," replied Old Man. "I like deer meat."

The Sun took down a bag and pulled out a beautiful pair of leggings.
They were embroidered with porcupine quills and bright feathers.
"These," said the Sun, "are my hunting leggings. They are great
medicine. All I have to do is to put them on and walk around a patch of
brush, when the leggings set it on fire and drive the deer out so that I
can shoot them."

"*Hai-yah*!" exclaimed Old Man. "How wonderful!" He made up his mind he
would have those leggings, if he had to steal them.

They went out to hunt, and the first patch of brush they came to, the
Sun set on fire with his hunting leggings. A lot of white-tail deer ran
out, and they each shot one.

That night, when they went to bed, the Sun pulled off his leggings and
placed them to one side. Old Man saw where he put them, and in the
middle of the night, when every one was asleep, he stole them and went
off. He travelled a long time, until he had gone far and was very tired,
and then, making a pillow of the leggings, lay down and slept. In the
morning, he heard some one talking. The Sun was saying, "Old Man, why
are my leggings under your head?" He

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

looked around, and saw he was in the Sun's lodge, and thought he must
have wandered around and got lost, and returned there. Again the Sun
spoke and said, "What are you doing with my leggings?" "Oh," replied Old
Man, "I couldn't find anything for a pillow, so I just put these under
my head."

Night came again, and again Old Man stole the leggings and ran off. This
time he did not walk at all; he just kept running until pretty near
morning, and then lay down and slept. You see what a fool he was. He did
not know that the whole world is the Sun's lodge. He did not know that,
no matter how far he ran, he could not get out of the Sun's sight. When
morning came, he found himself still in the Sun's lodge. But this time
the Sun said: "Old Man, since you like my leggings so much, I will give
them to you. Keep them." Then Old Man was very glad and went away.

One day his food was all gone, so he put on the medicine leggings and
set fire to a piece of brush. He was just going to kill some deer that
were running out, when he saw that the fire was getting close to him. He
ran away as fast as he could, but the fire gained on him and began to
burn his legs. His leggings were all on fire. He came to a river and
jumped in, and pulled off the leggings as soon as he could. They were
burned to pieces.

Perhaps the Sun did this to him because he tried to steal the leggings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fox](blt32)
