[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt31)  [Next](blt33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

### THE FOX

One day Old Man went out hunting and took the fox with him. They hunted
for several days, but killed nothing. It was nice warm weather in the
late fall. After they had become very hungry, as they were going along
one day, Old Man went up over a ridge and on the other side he saw four
big buffalo bulls lying down; but there was no way by which they could
get near them. He dodged back out of sight and told the fox what he had
seen, and they thought for a long time, to see if there was no way by
which these bulls might be killed.

At last Old Man said to the fox: "My little brother, I can think of only
one way to get these bulls. This is my plan, if you agree to it. I will
pluck all the fur off you except one tuft on the end of your tail. Then
you go over the hill and walk up and down in sight of the bulls, and you
will seem so funny to them that they will laugh themselves to death."

The fox did not like to do this, but he could think of nothing better,
so he agreed to what Old Man proposed. Old Man plucked him perfectly
bare, except the end of his tail, and the fox went over the ridge and
walked up and down. When he had come close to the bulls, he played
around and walked on his hind legs and went through all sorts of antics.
When the bulls first saw him, they got up on their feet, and looked at
him. They did not know what to make of him. Then they began to laugh,
and the more they looked at him, the more they laughed, until at last
one

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

by one they fell down exhausted and died. Then Old Man came over the
hill, and went down to the bulls, and began to butcher them. By this
time it had grown a little colder.

"Ah, little brother," said Old Man to the fox, "you did splendidly. I do
not wonder that the bulls laughed themselves to death. I nearly died
myself as I watched you from the hill. You looked very funny." While he
was saying this, he was working away skinning off the hides and getting
the meat ready to carry to camp, all the time talking to the fox, who
stood about, his back humped up and his teeth chattering with the cold.
Now a wind sprang up from the north and a few snowflakes were flying in
the air. It was growing colder and colder. Old Man kept on talking, and
every now and then he would say something to the fox, who was sitting
behind him perfectly still, with his jaw shoved out and his teeth
shining.

At last Old Man had the bulls all skinned and the meat cut up, and as he
rose up he said: "It is getting pretty cold, isn't it? Well, we do not
care for the cold. We have got all our winter's meat, and we will have
nothing to do but feast and dance and sing until spring." The fox made
no answer. Then Old Man got angry, and called out: "Why don't you answer
me? Don't you hear me talking to you?" The fox said nothing. Then Old
Man was mad, and he said, "Can't you speak?" and stepped up to the fox
and gave him a push with his foot, and the fox fell over. He was dead,
frozen stiff with the cold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Old Man And The Lynx](blt33)
