[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](blt32)  [Next](blt34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803271093/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Blackfoot Lodge Tales*, by George Bird Grinnell, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

### OLD MAN AND THE LYNX

Old Man was travelling round over the prairie, when he saw a lot of
prairie-dogs sitting in a circle. They had built a fire, and were
sitting around it. Old Man went toward them, and when he got near them,
he began to cry, and said, "Let me, too, sit by that fire." The
prairie-dogs said: "All right, Old Man. Don't cry. Come and sit by the
fire." Old Man sat down, and saw that the prairie-dogs were playing a
game. They would put one of their number in the fire and cover him up
with the hot ashes; and then, after he had been there a little while, he
would say *sk, sk*, and they would push the ashes off him, and pull him
out.

Old Man said, "Teach me how to do that"; and they told him what to do,
and put him in the fire, and covered him up with the ashes, and after a
little while he said *sk, sk*, like a prairie-dog, and they pulled him
out again. Then he did it to the prairie-dogs. At first he put them in
one at a time, but there were many of them, and pretty soon he got
tired, and said, "Come, I will put you all in at once." They said, "Very
well, Old Man," and all got in the ashes; but just as Old Man was about
to cover them up, one of them, a female heavy with young, said, "Do not
cover me up; the heat may hurt my children, which are about to be born."
Old Man said: "Very well. If you do not want to be covered up, you can
sit over by the fire and watch the rest." Then he covered up all the
others.

At length the prairie-dogs said *sk, sk*, but Old Man did not sweep the
ashes off and pull them out of the fire. He

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

let them stay there and die. The old she one ran off to a hole and, as
she went down in it, said *sk, sk*. Old Man chased her, but he got to
the hole too late to catch her. So he said: "Oh, well, you can go. There
will be more prairie-dogs by and by."

When the prairie-dogs were roasted, Old Man cut a lot of red willow
brush to lay them on, and then sat down and began to eat. He ate until
he was full, and then felt sleepy. He said to his nose: "I am going to
sleep now. Watch for me and wake me up in case anything comes near."
Then Old Man slept. Pretty soon his nose snored, and he woke up and
said, "What is it?" The nose said, "A raven is flying over there." Old
Man said, "That is nothing," and went to sleep again. Soon his nose
snored again. Old Man said, "What is it now?" The nose said, "There is a
coyote over there, coming this way." Old Man said, "A coyote is
nothing," and again went to sleep. Presently his nose snored again, but
Old Man did not wake up. Again it snored, and called out, "Wake up, a
bob-cat is coming." Old Man paid no attention. He slept on.

The bob-cat crept up to where the fire was, and ate up all the roast
prairie-dogs, and then went off and lay down on a flat rock, and went to
sleep. All this time the nose kept trying to wake Old Man up, and at
last he awoke, and the nose said: "A bob-cat is over there on that flat
rock. He has eaten all your food." Then Old Man called out loud, he was
so angry. He went softly over to where the bob-cat lay, and seized it,
before it could wake up to bite or scratch him. The bob-cat cried out,
"Hold on, let me speak a word or two." But Old Man would not listen; he
said, "I will teach you to steal my food." He pulled off the lynx's
tail, pounded his head against the rock so as to make his face flat,
pulled him out long, so as to make him small-bellied, and then threw him
away into the brush. As he went sneaking off, Old Man said, "There, that
is the way you bob-cats

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

shall always be." That is the reason the lynxes look so today.

Old Man went back to the fire, and looked at the red willow sticks where
his food had been, and it made him mad at his nose. He said, "You fool,
why did you not wake me?" He took the willow sticks and thrust them in
the coals, and when they took fire, he burned his nose. This pained him
greatly, and he ran up on a hill and held his nose to the wind, and
called on it to blow hard and cool him. A hard wind came, and it blew
him away down to Birch Creek. As he was flying along, he caught at the
weeds and brush to try to stop himself, but nothing was strong enough to
hold him. At last he seized a birch tree. He held on to this, and it did
not give way. Although the wind whipped him about, this way and that,
and tumbled him up and down, the tree held him. He kept calling to the
wind to blow gently, and finally it listened to him and went down.

So he said: "This is a beautiful tree. It has kept me from being blown
away and knocked all to pieces. I will ornament it and it shall always
be like that." So he gashed it across with his stone knife, as you see
it to-day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Past And The Present](blt34)
