[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](row00)  [Next](row02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WHAT MAKES A MAN SUPERSTITIOUS; HIS RELIGION, OR A LACK OF IT?

"THERE'S WITCHCRAFT IN PENNSYLVANIA AND WHEREVER ELSE YOU WANT TO FIND
IT--IN AMERICA!" "Preposterous;" "I don't believe it;" "Impossible;"
"Nothing to it;" "Well, I know where;" "They say it's true;" "She's an
old Witch," or, "He's a Devil"--sayings like these may be heard on all
sides when a subject such as this is brought up.

"There may have been 'witchcraft' of a sort a few generations ago, but
is this still practiced among the Pennsylvania Germans?" is not an
uncommon query when strangers come into the Keystone State.

Quite often, yes, more frequently than not, you will get an affirmative
reply from those who profess to know something about such matters.
Furthermore, there is considerable basis in fact for the general belief
that "witchcraft" still prevails in one of the most enlightened states
and sections of the country.

But why does it "hang on?"

Why?--Persistency in any form of witchcraft as it prevails in the minds
of men and women today, is that they haven't taken steps to inquire into
the subject--as to whether there is really any such thing as a "witch,"
and, what it might be.

Let us carefully examine what we can learn about them, as defined in the
"Century Dictionary:"

Witch, n. A man or woman. 1. A person (of either sex) given to the black
art; a sorcerer; a conjuror; a wizard; later and more particularly, a
woman supposed to have formed a compact with the devil or with evil
spirits, and to be able by their aid to operate supernaturally; one who
practises sorcery or enchantment; a sorceress.

2\. An old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant woman; a hag; a crone: a term
of abuse.

3\. A fascinating woman; a woman, especially a young woman or a girl,
possessed of peculiar attractions, whether of beauty or of manners; a
bewitching or charming young woman or girl.

4\. A charm or spell.

The reader will note, and it may be generally recognized that not only
an ugly woman, but a young, attractive one, too, can bewitch, or be
bewitching; i. e., "do things to you!" This is a radical departure from
the general belief that only old women, or sometimes old men, can
"bewitch."

These refer to witches in the flesh; then there are those which cannot
be seen, but according to some people, can be felt; i. e., can do bodily
harm, though they are only of the "spirit."

The "Century Dictionary" says still further, regarding an

Apparition, n. An appearance, epiphany, also attendants. 1. The act of
appearing or coming into sight; appearance; the state of being visible;
visibility. 2. That which appears or becomes visible; an appearance,
especially of a remarkable or phenomenal kind. Specifically--3. A
ghostly appearance; a specter or phantom: now the usual sense of the
word.

It will serve to keep the record straight to review briefly the meaning
of

Superstition, n. An ignorant or irrational fear of that which is unknown
or mysterious; especially, such fear of some invisible existence or
existences; specifically, religious belief or practice, or both, founded
on irrational fear or credulity; excessive or unreasonable religious
scruples produced by credulous fears.

 

"Where there is any religion, the devil will plant superstition," says
Burton, in "Anatomy of Melancholy."

Lowell says, in "Among My Books," first series, (p. 92): "A
superstition, as it's name imports, is something that has been left
over, like unfinished business, from one session of the world's
witenagemot to the next."

One cannot be sure at all as to how many sessions of the world's
"witenagemot" we have already had, but, whatever the number, we still
have the fears of men and women, scarcely alleviated in all the history
of the world. After life, death--then what? We have assurances of all
kinds, to be sure, but, as individuals we have yet to test these
assurances!

The philosophy of many centuries that instilled both hope and fear into
the heart of man, left him with the two well known spirits to swing and
sway his thoughts, as we see the swaying of leaves on the trees.

Frankly, can there be any religion or philosophy which does not preach
or teach that there is good and bad, both?--that if we have "angels" we
must have "witches" or some other equivalent to offset the other force?

We have in Pennsylvania, and in America, many men and women who belong
to the same church as their parents and grandparents, which brings out
the thought we have in mind, viz: "What was good enough for them is good
enough for me!"

Mosaic Influence Still Impelling.--Our social and religious backgrounds
are primarily Mosaic--where-ever we find ourselves in the Western
civilization. Yet Moses, whoever he was, had to rescue what he could in
philosophy and truth from a past fraught with pagan ideas. Many of those
old pagan ideas are today still our ideas.

It requires little knowledge to satisfy the average person that it is
very difficult, if not impossible to put one's fingers on a "spirit" (or
a "soul")--yet, isn't that what we do when we "dissect" such ideas as
witches, angels, and souls, and tell our friends that we have been, or
others have been "visited" by angels, or witches--or that a "certain
soul" actually went to heaven, or to hell?

It is a certainty that men and women over-imagine too many ideas dealing
with things and ideas, not actually of the solid earth; or that cannot
be taken apart and analyzed.

As defined by the dictionary, we, too, are in hearty accord in the
conclusion that witchcraft is derived from "suppositions,"
"suggestions," "imaginations," or "pipe-dreams" of simple folk.

Now "simple folk" are not always to be indicated as being persons who do
not agree with the personal views of the reader, or the writer!

There are many professional men and women whose manners and conduct in
life suggest to the layman that there can be "simpleness" among the
learned, too!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Witchcraft And Beliefs In Evil Spirits Came To America Long
Ago](row02)
