[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac04)  [Next](ybac06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# YUCATAN

#### BEFORE AND AFTER THE CONQUEST

###### BY

## FRIAR DIEGO DE LANDA

### SEC. I. DESCRIPTION OF YUCATAN. VARIETY OF SEASONS.

Yucatan is not an island, nor a point entering the sea, as some thought,
but mainland. This error came about from the fact that the sea goes from
Cape Cotoche along the Ascension passage to the Golfo Dulce on the one
side, and on the other side facing Mexico, by the Desconocida before
coming to Campeche, and then forming the lagoons by Puerto Real and Dos
Bocas.

The land is very flat and clear of mountains, so that it is not seen
from ships until they come very close; with the exception that between
Campeche and Champotón there are some low ranges and a headland that is
called Los Diablos.

As one comes from Veracruz toward Cape Cotoch, one finds himself at less
than 20 degrees, and at the mouth of Puerto Real it is more than 23;
from one point to the other it should be over a hundred and thirty
leagues, direct road. The coast is low-lying, so that large ships must
stay at some distance from the shore.

The coast is very full of rocks and rough points that wear the ships'
cables badly; there is however much mud, so that even if ships go ashore
they lose few people.

The tides run high, especially in the Bay of Campeche, and the sea often
leaves, at some places, half a league exposed; as a result there are
left in the seaweed and mud and pools many small fish that serve the
people for their food.

A small range crosses Yucatan from one corner to the other starting near
Champotón and running to the town of Salamanca in the opposite angle.
This range divides Yucatan into two parts, of which that to the south
toward Lacandón and Taiza <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) is
uninhabited for lack of water, except when it rains. The northern part
is inhabited.

This land is very hot and the sun burns fiercely, although there are
fresh breezes like those from the northeast and east, which are
frequent, together

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

with an evening breeze from the sea. People live long in the country,
and men of a hundred and forty years have been known.

The winter begins with St. Francis day, <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](ybac06.htm#fn_1) and lasts until the end of March;
during this time the north winds prevail and cause severe colds and
catarrh from the insufficient clothing the people wear. The end of
January and February bring a short hot spell, when it does not rain
except at the change of the moon. The rains come on from April until
through September, during which time the crops are sown and mature
despite the constant rain. There is also sown a certain kind of maize at
St. Francis, which is harvested early.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:\*](ybac05.htm#fr_0) Tah-Itzá, the country of
the Itzás, around Lake Petén.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Etymology of the Name of this Province. Its
Situation](ybac06)
