[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac08)  [Next](ybac10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. V. PROVINCES OF YUCATAN. ITS PRINCIPAL. ANCIENT STRUCTURES.

Some old men of Yucatan say that they have heard from their ancestors
that this country was peopled by a certain race who came from the East,
whom God delivered by opening for them twelve roads through the sea. If
this is true, all the inhabitants of the Indies must be of Jewish
descent because, the straits of Magellan having been passed, they must
have spread over more than 2000 leagues of territory now governed by
Spain.

The language of this country is all one, a fact which aided greatly in
its conversion, although along the coasts there are differences in words
and accents. Those living on the coast are thus more polished in their
behavior and language; and the women cover their breasts, which those
further inland do not.

The country is divided into provinces subject to the nearest Spanish
settlement. The province of **Chectemal** and **Bak-halal** is subject
to Salamanca. The provinces of **Ekab**, of **Cochuah** and of **Cupul**
are subject to Valladolid. Those of **Ahkin-Chel** and of **Izamal**, of
**Sututa**, of **Hocabaihumun**, of **Tutuxiu**, of **Cehpech**, and of
**Chakan**, are attached to the city of Merida; **Camol** (**Canul**),
**Campech**, **Champutun** and **Tixchel** are assigned to San Francisco
de Campeche.

There are in Yucatan many edifices of great beauty, this being the most
outstanding of all things discovered in the Indies; they are all built
of stone finely ornamented, though there is no metal found in the
country for this cutting. These buildings are very close to each other
and are temples, the reason for there being so many lying in the
frequent changes of the population, and the fact that in each town they
erected a temple, out of the abundance of stone and lime, and of a
certain white earth excellent for buildings.

These edifices are not the work of other peoples, but of the Indians
themselves, as appears by stone figures of men, unclothed but with the
middle

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

covered by certain long fillets which in their language are called
**ex**, together with other devices worn by the Indians.

While the author of this work was in that country, there was found in a
building that had been demolished a large urn with three handles,
painted on the outside with silvered colors, and containing the ashes of
a cremated body, together with some pieces of the arms and legs, of an
unbelievable size, and with three fine beads or counters of the kind the
Indians use for money. At Izamal there were eleven or twelve of these
buildings in all, with no memory of their builders; on the site of one
of these, at the instance of the Indians, there was established the
monastery of San Antonio, in the year 1550.

<span id="img_00900"></span>

[![THE CENOTE OF SACRIFICE AT CHICHEN ITZA. Photo by George Oakley
Totten](tn/00900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00900.jpg)  
THE CENOTE OF SACRIFICE AT CHICHEN ITZA. Photo by George Oakley Totten  

The next most important edifices are those of Tikoch and of Chichén
Itzá, which will be described later. Chichén Itzá is finely situated ten
leagues from Izamal and eleven from Valladolid, and they tell that it
was ruled by three lords, brothers that came to the country from the
West. These were very devout, built very handsome temples, and lived
unmarried and most honorably. One of them either died or went away,
whereupon the others conducted themselves unjustly and wantonly, for
which they were put to death. Later on we shall describe the decorations
of the main edifice, also telling of the well into which they cast men
alive as a sacrifice; and also other precious objects. It is over seven
stages down to the water, over a hundred feet across and marvelously cut
in the living rock. The water appears green, which they say is caused by
the trees that surround it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Cuculcán. Foundation of Mayapán](ybac10)
