[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ybac54)  [Next](ybac56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. LI. THE AUTHOR'S CONCLUSION AND APPEAL.

God has not only given through our Spanish nation all this increase of
these things, so necessary for man's service, that for these alone what
they give or will give to the Spaniards is no payment, but there has
come to them without payment that which can neither be bought or
deserved, which is justice and Christianity, and the peace in which they
live. For these they owe more to Spain and the Spaniards, and chiefly to
their very Catholic sovereigns, who with such continuous care and such
great Christianity have provided and do provide them with these two
things, than they do to their first founders, evil

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

parents who begat them in sin and as sons of wrath, while Christianity
gives them birth in grace and for the enjoyment of life eternal. Their
first founders did not know what order to give them that they might
evade the so many and so great errors in which they have lived. Justice
has taken them out from that through the preaching, and it must keep
them from returning; or if they revert, it must pull them out.

It is with reason then, that Spain can glorify God in that he elected
her among the nations for the remedy for so many peoples, and for which
they owe her much more than they do to their founders or progenitors.
For as the blessed St. Gregory said, it had been of little good to us to
be born had we not come to being redeemed through Christ. We can say too
with Anselm, that being redeemed is of no value to us if we do not
attain the fruit of redemption, which is our salvation. And thus they
err who say that because the Indians have received aggravations,
vexations and bad examples from the Spaniards, it had been better for
them not to have been discovered; because those were still greater
vexations and aggravations which they perpetually inflicted on each
other, killing, enslaving, and sacrificing themselves to the demons. As
to the bad example, if they have had such, or today have it from some,
the King has remedied it, and daily does remedy it by his Justices, and
by the constant preaching and persevering opposition of the men of
religion <span id="fr_47"></span>[\*](#fn_47.md) to those who set such
examples, or have set them; for the teaching is evangelical, and
scandals and had examples are necessary things. So I believe it has been
among these people, that they might understand, separating the gold from
the clay and the grain from the chaff, how to esteem virtue as they have
done; seeing with the philosopher how the virtues shine amidst the
vices, and the virtuous among the vicious; bad examples and scandals
were terrible afflictions indeed, were they not squared by what is good.

And so do thou, dearest reader, on thy part pray God therefore, and
receive my small effort with a pardon for its defects, remembering when
you meet them that not only do I not defend them (as St. Augustine said
of Tullius that he declared he had never spoken a word he desired to
revoke, which the saint disapproved because it is human to err); but
first, before you come to them, you will meet them revoked or confessed
in my introductions or prologues. Thus you will judge, in company with
the blessed Augustine in his letter to Marcella, the difference between
him who confesses his error or fault and him who defends it; and you
will pardon mine as the prophet says God does both mine and yours,
saying: "Lord, I said I will confess my ill deeds and injustice, and
thou dost quickly give pardon."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[112:\*](ybac55.htm#fr_47.md) *Los religiosos* was
used specifically for the members of the monastic orders, in distinction
from the regular clergy, whose heads were the Bishops, in whom alone
rested inquisitorial rights.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LII. Criticism and Correction of Certain Statements](ybac56.md)
