[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac16)  [Next](ybac18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. XIII. MONTEJO LEAVES YUCATAN WITH ALL HIS PEOPLE AND RETURNS TO MEXICO. HIS SON, FRANCISCO DE MONTEJO, AFTERWARDS PACIFIES YUCATAN.

The Admiral Montejo did not carry out his settlement as he planned . . .
. . . of one who has enemies, <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14)
because it was quite far from the sea for entry from and departure for
Mexico, and for receiving goods from Spain. The Indians feeling it a
hardship to serve strangers where they had been the lords, began to be
hostile on all sides, although he defended himself with his horses and
men, and killed many. Nevertheless the Indians grew stronger every day,
so that he found provisions failing, and at last one night he left the
city, leaving a dog tied to the clapper of a bell, near some bread just
out of his reach. The day preceding he had harassed the Indians by
skirmishes that they might not follow. The dog in trying to reach the
bread kept the bell ringing, keeping the Indians uncertain and expecting
an attack. When they discovered the ruse, they were furious at what had
been played on them, and sought to pursue the Spaniards in all
directions, but not knowing what road they had taken. The party that
followed in the direction they had gone caught up with the Spaniards,
making a great hue and cry as if in a chase of fugitives. Six of the
horsemen waited for them in the open and ran many of them down; one of
the Indians seized hold of a horse by the leg, and stayed him as if he
were a sheep. The Spaniards came to **Zilán** \[**Dzilán**\], a
beautiful place, whose chief was a youth of the Chels, and had become a
Christian and a friend of the Spaniards; he treated them well. This was
near Tikoch, which with all the other towns of that region was under the
sway of the Chels; here they remained some months in safety.

The admiral seeing that here they would be unable to receive aid from
Spain, and that in case of an uprising by the Indians they would be
lost, decided to go to Campeche and Mexico with all his people. From
Dzilán to Campeche it was forty-eight leagues, densely populated, so
that when he made known his purpose to **Namux Chel**, the chief of
Dzilán, the latter offered to make the road safe and to accompany him.
The admiral also arranged with the chief of Yobain, an uncle of him of
Dzilán, for the company of his two

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

sons, well disposed youths. Thus with these three youthful cousins, he
of Dzilán on horse and the others *en croupe*, they arrived safely at
Campeche and were received there in peace, there taking leave of the
Chels who returned to their homes, though the chief of Dzilán died on
the way. Thence they departed for Mexico, where Cortés had assigned a
quota of Indians to the admiral, notwithstanding his absence.

On arriving at Mexico with his son and nephew, the admiral instituted a
search for his wife, Doña Beatrix de Herrera, whom he had married
secretly at Sevilla, and a daughter he had had by her, named Beatrix de
Mendoza. Some say he refused to recognize her, but Don Antonio de
Mendoza, the Viceroy of New Spain, intervened and reconciled them.
Thereupon the Viceroy sent him as governor of Honduras, where he married
his daughter to the licentiate Alonso Maldonado, president of the
Audiencia of the Confines; then after some years they removed to
Chiapas, and from there he sent his son, duly empowered, to Yucatan,
conquering and reducing it to submission.

This Don Francisco, son of the admiral, was brought up at the court of
the Catholic king, and was taken along by his father on his return to
the Indies for the conquest of Yucatan; whence he went with him to
Mexico. The Viceroy and the Marquis Don Hernando Cortés thought well of
him, and he went with the Marquis on the trip to California. On his
return the Viceroy made him governor of Tabasco and he married a lady
named Doña Andrea del Castillo, who had come to Mexico as a young girl
with her parents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[22:\*](ybac17.htm#fr_14) A break in the
original here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. State Of Yucatan After the Departure of the Spaniards. Don
Francisco, Son of the Admiral Montejo, Re-Establishes the Spanish Rule
in Yucatan](ybac18)
