[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ybac31)  [Next](ybac33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. XXVIII. SACRIFICES AND SELF-MORTIFICATIONS, BOTH CRUEL AND OBSCENE, AMONG THE YUCATECANS. HUMAN VICTIMS SLAIN BY ARROWS, AND OTHERS.

At times they sacrificed their own blood, cutting all around the ears in
strips which they let remain as a sign. At other times they perforated
their cheeks or the lower lip; again they made cuts in parts of the
body, or pierced the tongue crossways and passed stalks through, causing
extreme pain; again they cut away the superfluous part of the member,
leaving the flesh in the  form of cars. It was this custom which led the
historian of the<span id="img_04700"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/04700.jpg) |

Indies to say that they practised circumcision.

At other times they practised a filthy and grievous sacrifice, hereby
they gathered in the temple in a line, and each made a

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

pierced hole <span id="img_04800"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/04800.jpg) |

though the member, across from side to side, and then passed through as
great a quantity of cord as they could stand; and thus all together
fastened and strung together, they anointed the statue of the demon with
the collected blood. The one able to endure the most was considered most
valiant, and their sons of tender age began to accustom themselves to
this suffering; it is frightful to see how much they were dedicated to
this practice.

The women made no similar effusions of blood, although they were very
devout. Of every kind of animal obtainable, birds of the sky, animals of
the earth, fishes of the sea, they used the blood to anoint the face of
the demon; they also gave as presents whatever other thing they had. Of
some animals they took out the heart and offered that; others were
offered whole, some living, some dead, some raw, some cooked. They also
made large offerings of bread and wine, and of all the kinds of food and
drink they possessed.

To make these sacrifices in the courts of the temples there were erected
certain tall decorated posts; and near the stairway of the temple there
was a broad, round pedestal, and in the middle a stone, somewhat slender
and four or five palms in height, set up; at the top of the temple
stairs there was another similar one.

Apart from the festivals which they solemnized by the sacrifices of
animals.. on occasions of great tribulation or need the priests or
**chilánes** ordained the sacrifice of human beings. For this purpose
all contributed, for the purchase of slaves. Some out of devotion gave
their young sons. The victims were feted up to the day of the sacrifice,
but carefully guarded that the. might not run away, or defile themselves
by any carnal acts; then while they went from town to town with dances,
the priests, the chilánes and the celebrants fasted.

When the day of the ceremony arrived, they assembled in the court of the
temple; if they were to be pierced with arrows their bodies were
stripped and anointed with blue, with a miter on the head. When they
arrived before the demon, all the people went through a solemn dance
with him around the wooden pillar, all with bows and arrows, and then
dancing raised him upon it, tied him, all continuing to dance and took
at him. The impure priest, ventured, ascended and whether it was mars or
woman wounded the victim in the private parts with an arrow, and then
descended and anointed the face of the demon with the blood he had
drawn; then making a sign to the dancers, they began in order as they
passed rapidly, dancing, to shoot an arrow to the victim's heart, shown
by a white mark, and quickly made of his chest a single point, like a
hedgehog of arrows.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

If his heart was to be taken out, they conducted<span
id="img_04900"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/04900.jpg"><img src="tn/04900.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

him with great display and concourse of people, painted blue and wearing
his miter, and placed him on the rounded sacrificial stone, after the
priest and his officers had anointed the stone with blue and purified
the temple to drive away the evil spirit. The chacs then seized the poor
victim and swiftly laid him on his back across the stone, and the four
took hold of his arms and legs, spreading them out. Then the flacon
executioner came, with a flint knife in his hand, and with great skill
made an incision between the ribs on the left side, below the nipple;
then he plunged in his hand and like a ravenous tiger tore out the
living heart, which he laid on a plate and gave to the priest; he then
quickly went and anointed the faces of the idols with that fresh
blood. <span id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_28.md)

At times they performed this sacrifice on the stone situated on<span
id="img_04901"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/04901.jpg) |

the top step of the temple, and then they threw the dead body rolling
down the steps, where it was taken by the attendants, was stripped
completely of the skin save only on the hands and feet; then the priest,
stripped, clothed himself with this skin and danced with the rest. This
was a ceremony with them of great solemnity. The victims sacrificed in
this manner were usually buried in the court of the temple; but it
occurred on occasions that they ate the flesh, distributing portions to
the chiefs and those who succeeded in obtaining a part; the hands, feet
and head want to the priests and celebrants; and these sacrificial
victims they then regarded as sainted. If they were slaves captured in
war, their masters kept the bones,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

and displayed them in the dances, as a mark of victory. At times they
threw the victims alive into the well at Chichén Itzá, believing that
they would come forth on the third day, even though they never did see
them reappear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[49:\*](ybac32.htm#fr_28.md) The above
illustration, after a drawing by Ann Axtell Morris from a wall-painting
at Chichén Itzá, is almost exactly reproduced on a repoussé gold piece
recovered from the great cenote, in which the incision in the chest is
also shown, of which we unfortunately cannot show a reproduction, but
which may be seen on display at the Peabody Museum in Cambridge. A
further striking similarity is also to be found in the illustration on
page 21 of the Gomesta manuscript, apparently a death but not a
sacrificial scene, where the man's body lies tied and prone (not supine)
on a table, facing into the head of a serpent which stretches coiled
almost as in the above picture. An identity of symbolism (which does not
in the least have to indicate either origin or transmission, as a
certain school seems to derive everything Maya straight from Egypt
because of other similarities) is perhaps somewhat curiously present in
the Chinese honorific expression for one's decease: "He has mounted the
dragon," and invoked the great mystery.

The sacrificial flint knife, with inlaid mosaic handle representing two
intertwined serpents, as shown on the next page, was also brought up
from the sacred cenote at Chichén Itzá. It reproduced by courtesy of Mr.
T. A. Willard, from his *City of the Sacred Well*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIX. Arms of the Yucatecans. Military Chieftains. Militia and
Soldiers. Customs of War](ybac33.md)
