[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ybac21)  [Next](ybac23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. XVIII. VICES OF THE INDIANS. STUDIES OF THE FRIARS IN THE LANGUAGE OF THE COUNTRY. THEIR TEACHINGS TO THE INDIANS. CONVERSIONS. PUNISHMENTS OF APOSTATES.

The vices of the Indians were idolatry, divorce, public orgies, and the
buying and selling of slaves, and because of being kept from these
things they came to hate the friars. The ones however who, apart from
the Spaniards, were most averse to the friars were the priesthood, as
being a class who had lost their office and its emoluments.

The method taken for indoctrinating the Indians was by collecting the
small children of the lords and leading men, and establishing them
around the monasteries in houses which each town built for the purpose.
Here all in each locality were gathered together, and their parents and
relatives brought them their food. Then among these children they
gathered them in for catechism, from which frequent visiting many asked
for baptism, with much devotion. The children then, after being taught,
informed the friars of idolatries and orgies; they broke up the idols,
even those belonging to their own fathers; they urged the divorced women
and any orphans that were enslaved to appeal to the friars. Even when
they were threatened by their people they were not deterred, but
answered that it was for their honor, since it was for the good of their
souls. The admiral and the royal judges always backed up the friars in
gathering the Indians to catechism, and in punishing those who returned
to their old life. At first the lords gave up their children with ill
grace, fearing that they wished to make little slaves of them as the
Spaniards had done, so that they gave many young slaves in place of
their own children; but when they understood the matter they sent them
with good grace. In this way the children made remarkable progress in
the schools, and the others in the catechism.

They learned to read and write in the Indian tongue, forming a
grammatical system, so as to study it like the Latin. They found that
six of our letters, D, F, G, Q, R, S, were not used or needed at all.
Others however they had to double, and some to add, in order to
understand the many meanings of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

some words. Thus **pa** means 'to open,' and **ppa**, spoken by tightly
compressing the lips, means 'to break'; **tan** means 'lime,' or
'ashes,' and **tan** (**t’an**) uttered forcibly between the tongue and
upper teeth means a 'word,' or 'to speak.' Apart from having different
characters for these things, there was no need for inventing new forms
of letters, but only to make use of the Latin ones, common to all.

They also gave orders that they should leave their homes in the forests
and gather as formerly in proper settlements, that they might be more
easily instructed and not make the fathers so much trouble. For their
support they also made contributions at the paschal and other festivals,
and also contributed to the churches through two aged Indians, appointed
for the purpose. Thus they supplied the needs whenever they went
visiting among them, and also adorned the churches.

After the people had been thus instructed in religion, and the youths
benefitted as we have said, they were perverted by their priests and
chiefs to return to their idolatry; this they did, making sacrifices not
only by incense, but also of human blood. Upon this the friars held an
Inquisition, calling upon the Alcalde Mayor for aid; they held trials
and celebrated an Auto, putting many on scaffolds, capped, shorn and
beaten, and some in the penitential robes for a time. Some of the
Indians out of grief, and deluded by the devil, hung themselves; but
generally they all showed much repentance and readiness to be good
Christians. <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[30:\*](ybac22.htm#fr_19.md) Landa evades saying
here that it was under his own leadership and assumed authority that
this assumption of full inquisitional rights, with a calling on the
plenary civil power, went on. The present work was written by him while
in Spain, not voluntarily but under formal charges, and quite certainly
to increase his own credit politically. As an outcome, both sides won:
the law was affirmed with full clearness, and the friars told not to
violate it further; while Landa was officially let off, and then allowed
to go back as bishop.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. Arrival of Bishop Toral and Release of the Imprisoned
Indians. Voyage of the Provincial of San Francisco to Spain to Justify
the Conduct of the Franciscans](ybac23.md)
