[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ybac18)  [Next](ybac20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. XV. CRUELTIES OF THE SPANIARDS TOWARD THE INDIANS. HOW THEY EXCUSED THEMSELVES.

The Indians took the yoke of servitude grievously. The Spaniards held
the towns comprising the country well partitioned, but there were some
among the Indians who kept stirring them up, and very severe punishments
were inflicted in consequence, resulting in the reduction of the
population. Several principal men of the province of Cupul they burned
alive, and others they hung. Information being laid against the people
of Yobain, a town of the Chels, they took the leading men, put them in
stocks in a building and then

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

set fire to the house, burning them alive with the greatest inhume, y in
the world. I, Diego de Landa, say that I saw a great tree near the
village upon the branches of which a captain had hung many women, with
their infant children hung from their feet. At this town, and another
two leagues away called Verey, they hung two Indian women, one a maiden
and the other recently married, for no other crime than their beauty,
and because of fearing a disturbance among the soldiers on their
account; also further to cause the Indians to believe the Spaniards
indifferent to their women. The memory of these two is kept both among
the Indians and Spaniards on account of their great beauty and the
cruelty with which they were killed.

The Indians of the provinces of Cochuah and Chetumal rose, and the
Spaniards so pacified them that from being the most settled and populous
it became the most wretched of the whole country. Unheard-of cruelties
were inflicted, cutting off their noses, hands, arms and legs, and the
breasts of their women; throwing them into deep water with gourds tied
to their feet, thrusting the children with spears because they could not
go as fast as their mothers. If some of those who had been put in chains
fell sick or could not keep up with the rest, they would cut off their
heads among the rest rather than stop to unfasten them. They also kept
great numbers of women and men captive in their service, with similar
treatment. It is affirmed that Don Francisco de Montejo was not guilty
of any of those cruelties nor approved them, but condemned them
severely, yet was unable to do more. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16.md)

In their defense the Spaniards urge that being so few in numbers they
could not have reduced so populous a country save through the fear of
such terrible punishments. They offer the example from the history of
the passage of the Hebrews to the land of promise, committing great
cruelties by the command of God. On the other hand, the Indians were
right in defending their liberty and trusting to the valor of their
chiefs, and they thought it would so result as against the Spaniards.

They tell of a Spanish cross-bowman and an Indian archer, who being both
very expert sought to kill each other, but neither could take the other
unawares. The Spaniard feigning to be off guard, put one knee to the
ground, whereupon the Indian shot an arrow that entered his hand and
going

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

up the arm separated the bones from each other. At the same moment the
Spaniard shot his cross-bow and struck the Indian in the chest. He,
feeling himself mortally wounded, cut a withe like an osier only much
longer, and hung himself with it that it might not be said that a
Spaniard had killed him. Of such instances of valor there are many.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[25:\*](ybac19.htm#fr_16.md) This reduction of
Cochuah and Chetumal was entrusted to Captain Gaspar Pacheco and his
son, who had already served against the Zapotecs. For sheer lusting
cruelty for its own sake, their record there vies with that of Pedro de
Alvarado among the Quiches of Guatemala. For another side of the story,
that of the burning and destruction of entire towns to concentrate the
Indians near the great central monasteries, and the conduct of the
*Franciscans and Landa himself* in their assumption of Inquisition
powers, see elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. State of the Country Before the Conquest. Royal Decree in
Favor of the Indians. Health of the Admiral Montejo. His
Descendants](ybac20.md)
