[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac14)  [Next](ybac16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. XI. PROPHECIES OF THE COMING OF THE SPANIARDS. HISTORY OF FRANCISCO DE MONTEJO, FIRST ADMIRAL OF YUCATAN.

As the Mexican people had signs and prophecies of the coming of the
Spaniards and the end of their power and religion, so also did those of
Yucatan some years before they were conquered by Admiral Montejo. In the
district of Maní, in the province of Tutul-xiu, an Indian named
**Ah-cambal**, filling the office of **Chilán**, <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) that is one who has charge of giving out
the responses of the demon, told publicly that they would soon be ruled
by a foreign race who would preach a God and the virtue of a wood which
in their tongue he called **vahom-ché**, meaning a tree lifted up, of
great power against the demons.

The successor of the Cocoms, called Don Juan Cocom after he became a
Christian, was a man of great reputation and very learned in matters and
affairs of the country, very wise and well informed. He was on familiar
terms with the author of this book, Fray Diego de Landa, recounting to
him many ancient things, and showing him a book which had belonged to
his grandfather, the son of the Cocom whom they killed in Mayapán. In
this was painted a deer, and his grandfather had told him that when
there should come into the land large deer (for so they called the
cows), the worship of the gods would cease; and this had been fulfilled,
because the Spaniards brought along large cows.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

The admiral Francisco de Montejo was a native of Salamanca, and came to
the Indies after the settling of the city of San Domingo, in the Island
of Española, after having lived for a time in Sevilla, where he left an
infant son whom he had there. He came to the island of Cuba, where he
gained a livelihood and made many friends by his fine qualities, among
these being Diego Velasquez the governor of the island, and Hernando
Cortés. The governor having determined to send his nephew Juan de
Grijalva to redeem the territory of Yucatan and to discover new lands,
after the news brought by Francisco Hernández de Cordova of how rich the
land was, he decided to have Montejo go with Grijalva. He being wealthy
supplied one of the ships and much provisioning, and was thus one of the
second party of Spaniards that discovered Yucatan; having seen the coast
of Yucatan he resolved to enrich himself there instead of in Cuba.

Learning the determination of Hernando Cortés, he followed him with his
person and fortune, Cortés giving him command of a ship and making him
its captain. In Yucatan they then met Gerónimo de Aguilar, from whom
Montejo acquired knowledge of the language of the country and its
matters. Cortés having landed in New Spain began at once to make
settlements, calling the first town Vera Cruz, after the blazon of his
banner. Montejo was appointed as one of the royal alcaldes of the town,
acquitting himself discreetly, and being so publicly named by Cortés
when he returned from the trip he made around the coast. For this he was
sent to Spain as one of the Procurators of the state of New Spain, that
he might convey to the King his fifths, together with a relation of the
countries discovered, and the things about taking place there.

When Francisco de Montejo arrived at the Court of Castile, Juan
Rodriguez de Fonseca, Bishop of Burgos, was president of the Council of
the Indies, and he was wrongly informed to Cortés’ prejudice, by Diego
Velasquez, the governor of Cuba, who claimed likewise the governorship
of New Spain. The majority of the Council thinking that Cortés seemed to
be asking money of the King instead of sending it, and Montejo finding
that on account of the absence of the Emperor in Flanders the affair
went ill, he persevered for seven years from the time he left the Indies
(which was in 1519), until he re-embarked in 1526. By his perseverance
he challenged the president and Pope Adrian who was regent for the
kingdom, and talked with the Emperor to the effect that he gave his
approval and disposed of the affairs of Cortés as justice required.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[19:\*](ybac15.htm#fr_13) **Ah-cambal** means
'one who learns, a pupil.' **Chilán** means 'orator.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Montejo Sails For Yucatan and Takes Possession of the
Country. The Chels Cede To Him the Site of Chichén Itzá. The Indians
Force Him to Leave](ybac16)
