[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac64)  [Next](ybac66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

### The Ordinances of Tomás López <span id="fr_53"></span>[\*](#fn_52).

*Of the Royal Audience of the Confines, promulgated in 1552*.

Coming from the Royal Audiencia in Guatemala, at the request of the
Friars in Yucatan, and decreed for the conduct and treatment of the
Indians.

In exercise of the power of our Emperor, vested in me, I command you,
the caciques, chief men and people, as follows:

No cacique shall be absent from his town, save for the temporal or
spiritual good, or as called by the padres, for over 50 days, on pain of
loss of office.

The Indians must not live off in the forests, but come into the towns
together, in good strong houses, under pain of whipping or prison.

To avoid difficulties in doctrination, no Indian shall change from one
town to another without permission of the local Spanish authorities.

Since many of the chiefs and older men, in the respect they hold by
their ancient descent, call the people into secret meetings to teach
their old rites and draw them from the Christian doctrine, in their
weakness of understanding, all such actions and meetings are prohibited.

The caciques shall not hold gatherings, nor go about at night, after the
bells are sounded for the souls in purgatory.

Every cacique or chief of a town shall carry in mind the list of all the
people. Every man of the common people absenting himself from his town
for over 30 or 40 days, save in public service or with the padres, even
with permission from his cacique, shall be punished by 100 blows and 100
days in prison.

Every town, within two years, must have a good church, and one only, to
which all may come. Nor may any cacique build any other church than the
one, under pain of 100 blows.

Every town shall have schools where the Indians shall be taught the
necessity of baptism, without which no one can enjoy God. The schools
shall be built by the town, and the caciques shall compel them thereto,
in the form and manner required by the padres, and at places designated
by them.

On the days for doctrination, one shall go through the towns, bearing a
cross and cloth, to call all people together, where all shall gather in
order, those of each town by themselves.

If any one, after having heard the holy word and left his false
doctrines, shall return to these, he shall be imprisoned to await the
due punishment to be ordered by the Royal Audiencia.

No Indian shall undertake by himself to preach the holy word save by
express license of the religious fathers.

No baptised person shall possess idols, sacrifice any animals, draw
blood by piercing their ears or noses, nor perform any rite, nor burn
incense thereto, or fast in worship of their false idols.

No Indian baptised, shall return to be baptised a second time.

Many Indians having been told that their children will die if baptised,
I command that all children be brought for baptism.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

Matrimony being in great respect among the Indians, I ordain that no one
shall have more than one wife, and that an adulterer shall receive 100
blows, and other punishments if he does not amend.

No cacique shall have to do with a female slave.

No one shall be so daring as to marry secretly.

No one shall marry twice, on penalty of branding with a hot iron in a
figure 4 on the forehead.

No purchase gifts shall be made to the woman's parents, nor shall the
youth be required by them, as by their old customs, to remain and serve
in their father-in-law's house for two or three years.

No one shall give a heathen name to his children.

All people must bend the knee before the sacrament, recite the prayers
fixed when the Ave is rung, and reverence the cross and images.

Every one, man or woman, must go to the church both morning and evening,
and say an Ave and Paternoster with all reverence.

At meals all shall say grace before and after, and on retiring at night
cross themselves and recite the prayers the fathers will teach them.

No one shall cast grains of corn for divination, nor tell dreams, nor
wear any marks or ornaments of their heathendom, nor tattoo themselves.

So lacking in charity and care even for their wives or husbands, or
family, are the Indians, that I command that all shall care for them
when sick, etc.

Where much sickness comes to a town, it shall be reported, and the
fathers shall have those at hand for instruction in holy dying.

All inheritances shall be properly cared for.

There shall be no holding in slavery, and all so held shall be set free.
But allow to the caciques, principal men or other powerful Indians to
hire people for their service, all of whom shall be reported to the
padres and taken to them for doctrination.

The custom of banquets to large numbers is so common, and so destructive
of Christianity, that I order that no general banquets be given by any
one save at marriages or like fiestas, but then no more than a dozen
people may be invited.

No dances shall be held except in daytime.

God gave us time for work, and time for his service; whereby I order the
keeping of all church fiestas, as and in the manner fixed by the
religious fathers.

All preparation of their ancient drinks is prohibited, and the caciques,
principal men, and even the encomenderos are ordered within two months
to gather and burn all utensils or cups used therein, on penalty of 20
pesos fine if they allow more to be made.

Towns must be in the Spanish fashion, have guest-houses, one for
Spaniards and another for Indians. Also marketplaces to avoid all
traveling about to sell or buy. Nor shall any merchant, Indian, Mexican,
Mestizo or Negro, be lodged in any private house.

Proper weights and measures shall be provided within two months, on
penalty of 20 pesos gold.

I command the raising of cattle to be introduced among the Indians.

The chief tribute of the country bang cotton mantles, I order that
teaching for this be given.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

I order that all women wear long skirts and over them their huipiles;
and that all men wear shirts and go shod, at least with sandals.

Since the Indians are always wandering the woods to hunt, I order that
all bows and arrows are to be burned. But each cacique shall hold two or
three dozen bows, with arrows, for special occasions, or necessity as
against tigers.

Good roads from town to town shall be kept in order.

No negro, slave or mestizo shall enter any village save with his master,
and then stay more than a day and night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[157:\*](ybac65.htm#fr_53) The full Spanish text
of these Ordinances will be found as an appendix to volume II of
Ancona's *Historia de Yucatan*, Barcelona, 1889; and later reprint in
Mérida.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proclamation Required to be Made by Every Chief of an Expedition
to the Indians at the Moment of Disembarking](ybac66)
