[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ybac60)  [Next](ybac62.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Map, and the Meeting at Maní.

In 1842, after Stephens and his party had finished at Uxmal, they went
as the Xius had done over 400 years before, to Maní. Being there
permitted to hunt in the archives for some records to throw light on the
past, he found not only the drawing reproduced in Cogolludo and later in
Morley's Copan, of what was supposed to be the massacre at Otzmal in
1536 (really a semi-prophetic **katun**-wheel), but also a map and two
papers dated 1556 and 1557, all three bearing the word **Uxmal**. The
full story should be read in his *Travels in Yucatan*, in volume two;
but in substance the earlier paper related, in Maya, how a commission
appointed by the governor, under the judge Felipe Manrique, and
accompanied by the interpreter *Gaspar Antonio* (our *Chi*), arrived
from Uxmal at Maní with an assemblage of the leading men, Xius and
others, to delimit and fix the boundaries of Xius, Cocoms and other
clans, in 1516. The other paper, also in Maya, tells of the

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span id="img_13300"></span>

[![](tn/13300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13300.jpg.md)

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

gathering at Maní in 1557 at the house of the Xiu chief man, Francisco
Montejo Xiu, governor of Maní, "and of the jurisdiction of Tutul Xiu,"
and how they settled the limits and erected crosses, at twenty-two
places.

By the aid of Cura Carrillo (later Bishop), they with much trouble got a
translation, of which the essential parts are printed by Stephens; and
also an engraving of the accompanying map. These papers he tells us were
in a thick volume, of which the 1557 document was on the 157th page, and
the other a few pages further on. To make our own story short, however,
these papers are certainly not the identical leaves in our volume, but
equally certainly our pages are contemporary transcripts. The map is the
same, with Maní in the center, and Uxmal showing, just as given by
Stephens. Practically the same roads lead out from Maní in each, but a
number of outlying town names are omitted in our copy, while several
personal names are inserted. Also a comparison of the text of the 1557
document here with Carrillo's translation shows that the originals must
have been substantially but not identically the same. Our copy omits
mention of the judge Manrique and the visit to Uxmal, but also it is
considerably longer, listing various towns not given in Stephens, ending
with the final statement that after all the proper inspections and
agreements of the various **almehenob**, the *ubatabil cahob* or town
governors, this certified 'transcript' had been made, on August 15,
1557, that all might see and know it as true.

Furthermore, similar independent references to this assemblage and its
work are to be found in the still unpublished Maya text of the Calkiní
Chronicle, <span id="fr_49"></span>[\*](#fn_49.md) seeming to show that
various certified copies of this great settlement were made for the
different regions involved, of the Xius, the Canuls beyond Maxcanú, the
Cocoms of Sotuta, those of Calotmul, etc.; and here we have the original
Oxkutzcab copies, those seen by Stephens having disappeared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[134:\*](ybac61.htm#fr_49.md) A photographic
facsimile of the Calkins has however been published by the Maya Society,
in its Publ. No. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The 1685 page by Juan Xiu](ybac62.md)
