[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ybac22)  [Next](ybac24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. XIX. ARRIVAL OF BISHOP TORAL AND RELEASE OF THE IMPRISONED INDIANS. VOYAGE OF THE PROVINCIAL OF SAN FRANCISCO TO SPAIN TO JUSTIFY THE CONDUCT OF THE FRANCISCANS.

At this point fray Francisco Toral, a Franciscan friar, and a native of
Ubeda, who had been for twenty years in Mexico and then come as Bishop
of Yucatan, arrived at Campeche. He, giving ear to the charges of the
Spaniards and the complaints of the Indians, undid the friars’ work, and
ordered the prisoners released. The provincial feeling himself aggrieved
thereat, determined to go to Spain, after first lodging complaint in
Mexico. He thus

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

arrived at Madrid, where the Council of the Indies censured him severely
for having usurped the office of bishop and inquisitor. In defense he
asserted the privileges held by his order in those territories by the
grant of Pope Adrian, at the instance of the Emperor; as well as the
support ordered to be given him by the Royal Audience of the Indies, the
same as given to the bishops. These defenses alienated the members of
the Council yet more, and they decided to refer him and his papers, as
well as those which had been sent by the Bishop, against the friars, to
fray Pedro do Bobadilla, Provincial of Castile, to whom the King wrote
commanding investigation and the performance of justice. Fray Pedro,
being ill, committed the examination of the affair to Fray Pedro de
Guzman, of his own order, a man learned and experienced in inquisitorial
matters.

To him, then, were presented the opinions of seven learned persons of
the kingdom of Toledo, namely: Don fray Francisco de Medina and fray
Francisco Dorantes, of the Franciscan order; master frayle Alonso de la
Cruz, an Augustinian friar who had spent thirty years in the Indies; the
licentiate Tomás López who had been an Auditor in Guatemala in the New
Kingdom, as well as a judge in Yucatan; D. Hurtado, professor of canon
law; D. Méndez, professor of the Sacred Scriptures; and D. Martínez,
Scotist professor at Alcalá. These declared that the Provincial had
acted rightly in the matter of the Auto and other things for the
punishment of the Indians. This being reviewed by fray Francisco de
Guzman, he wrote fully upon it to the Provincial, fray Pedro de
Bobadilla.

The Indians of Yucatan deserve that the King should favor them for many
reasons, and especially for the readiness they have shown in his
service. While he was occupied in Flanders the princess Doña Juana his
sister, who was then regent of the kingdom, wrote a letter asking the
assistance of those in the Indies. This an Auditor of Guatemala bore to
Yucatan, and having gathered the chiefs together, he directed a friar to
preach upon what they owed to his majesty, and what was asked of them.
Having finished his discourse, the Indians rose to their feet and said
that they recognized their obligation to God for having given them so
noble and Christian a king, and that they were grieved not to live where
they might serve him in person; wherefore whatever in their poverty they
had that he desired, they placed at his service; and if that did not
suffice, they would sell their children and wives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. Construction of the Houses of Yucatan. Obedience and Respect
of the Indians For Their Chiefs. Headgear and Wearing of
Garments](ybac24.md)
