[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ybac42)  [Next](ybac44.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

### SEC. XXXIX. THE AUTHOR'S EXPLANATION AS TO VARIOUS THINGS IN THE CALENDAR. HIS PURPOSE IN GIVING THESE THINGS NOTICE.

Together with the characters of the Indians shown above in our chapter
100 (Sec. xxxiv), they gave names to the days of their months, and from
all the months together they made up a kind of calendar, by which they
regulated their festivals, their counting and contracts as business, as
we do ours; save that the first day of their calendar was not the first
day of their year, but came much later; this being the result of the
difficulty with which they counted the days of the months all together,
as will be seen in the Calendar itself we shall give herein later. The
reason is that although the signs and names of the days of their months
are twenty, they were used to count them from 1 to 13; after the 13 they
return to 1 again, thus dividing the days of the year into twenty-seven
thirteens or triadecads, plus nine days, without the supplementary ones.

With these periodical returns and the complicated count, it is a marvel
to see the freedom with which they know how to count and understand
things. It is notable that the dominical always falls on the first day
of their year, without fail or error, no other of the twenty ever taking
that position. They also used this way of counting to bring out by the
aid of these characters a certain other count they had for their ages;
also other matters which, although they were important for them, do not
concern us much here. We shall therefore be content with saying that the
character or letter with which they began their count of the days or
Calendar is called **Hun Imix** (One **Imix**), which is this: <span
id="img_06800"></span> ![](img/06800.jpg) and which has no fixed day on
which it must fall. For each modifies its own count, and with all this
the dominical letter as they have it never fails to fall on the first
day of the following year.

Among these people the first day of the year always fell upon our 16th
of July, and was the first of their month **Popp**. Nor is it to be
wondered at that this people, however simple as we have found them in
many ways, also had ability in these matters and ideas such as other
nations; for in the gloss on Ezekiel we find that according to the
Romans January began the year, according to the Hebrews April, according
to the Greeks March, and according to the Orientals October. But,
although they began their year in July, I put their calendar here in the
order of ours, and parallel, so that our letters and theirs will come
noted, our months and theirs, together with their above-mentioned count
of the thirteens, placed in the order of their progression. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[\*](#fn_37.md)

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

And since there is no need for putting the calendar in one place and the
festivals in another, I shall place in each of the months its festivals
and the observances and ceremonies with which they celebrated it. Thus I
shall do as I before promised, giving their calendar and with it telling
of their fasts and ceremonies wherewith they made their idols of wood,
and other things; all of these things and what else I have told of these
people serving no other purpose than to praise the divine goodness which
so has permitted an\] has seen well to remedy in our times. This in
order that, in recording them, with Christian entrails we pray Him for
their preservation and progress in true Christianity; and that those
whose charge this is may promote and aid this end, so that neither to
this people for their sins, nor to ourselves, may there be lacking help;
nor may they fail in what has been begun and so return to their misery
and vomitings of errors, thus falling into worse case than before,
returning the evil ones we have been able to drive out of their souls,
out of which with so laborious care we have been able to drive them,
cleansing them and sweeping out their vices and evil customs of the
past. And this is not a vain hope, when we see the perdition which after
so many years is to he seen in great and very Christian Asia, in the
good, Catholic and very august Africa, and the miseries and calamities
which today our Europe suffers, and where in our nation and houses we
might say that the evangelical prophecies over Jerusalem have been
fulfilled, where her enemies encircle her and crowd her almost to the
earth. All of this God already had permitted for us, as we stand, were
it not that his Church cannot pass, neither that which is said
concerning her: *Nisi Dominus reliquisset semen, sicut Sodoma
fuissemus*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[68:\*](ybac43.htm#fr_37.md) In the pages
following, the manuscript sets out in full each of the successive 365
days, <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> with the names and character
together; with each it gives the day of the European month, and also the
succession of the Church dominical letters, *A b c d e f g*. To July
16th, **12 Kan**, the 1st of **Pop’**, he assigns the church dominical
A, fixing his calendar as computed for the year 1553, when July 16th
fell on Sunday, and the only year between 1525 and 1581 when it did so
fall. The present abbreviated transcript of Landa's work, made in 1566,
was thus written thirteen years after the computation was made.

In the manuscript the series of days begins not with the Maya **Pop’**
the 1st, but with our Jan. 1st; then when it reaches July 15th, with
**12 Lamat**, it skips a day, to begin the year, incorrectly, with **12
Kan**. A year beginning with **12 Kan** must end with **12 Lamat**, with
the next year beginning with **13 Muluc**. It therefore seems most
probable that the later copyist simply transposed the two halves of the
Maya year so as to start with our January, and hence the obvious error.
For now that our calendar correlation is definitely established, we know
that July 16th, Sunday, 1553, was **12 Kan**, the 1st of **Pop’**, and
the **12 Lamat** then came on July 15th, 1554, to he followed regularly
by **13 Muluc** on the 16th. And this completely disposes of any idea
that an extra bissextile day was inserted every four years.

In addition to repeating the glyphs for the days, the manuscript inserts
those for the successive **uinals** or 'months,' as they come. We shall
do the same here, using the standard type forms as we have for the
day-signs, also showing the forms in the manuscript. We shall also
arrange the calendar in Maya form, beginning with the month **Pop’**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XL. Months and Festivals of the Yucatecan Calendar](ybac44.md)
