[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dos08)  [Next](dos10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI. A Lotus of the Night

Then he said to himself: Though I cut off the tongue of this ill-omened
Wairágí, yet he never told me my way. And he went on, sword in hand,
along a silver path, among trees that resembled Rákshasas, for they let
in through the hair of their branches the light of the moon, which
peered down at him as if out of curiosity, and lit him on his way as if
in admiration of his courage. And as he went, gradually the trees grew
rarer, and at length he looked before him, and saw in a clear space a
dark blue forest pool, studded with moon-lotuses, as if created to mock
the expanse of heaven bespangled with its stars, a mirror formed by
Wedasa <span id="fr_57"></span>[f](#fn_57) to reproduce another world
below. And all about it flitted fireflies, looking like swarms of bees
that had returned

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

with torches, unable to endure separation at night from the lotus
flowers which they loved all day.

And as he gazed into the water, he saw in its smooth mirror the image of
a woman, dancing. And as she danced, her robes of the colour of grass
fluttered in the wind produced by her own movement over the curves of
her limbs; and drops of water sparkled in the moonlight like gems on her
bosom, which rose and fell like a wave of the sea in and out of the
shadow of her hair: for that hair resembled a mass of the essence of the
blackness of night. And she chanted as she danced with a voice that
sounded like a spell, and fanned the ear like a breeze from the Malaya
mountain <span id="fr_58"></span>[g](#fn_58). Then Umra-Singh raised his
eyes, and saw the original of that water-painted woman-image, dancing on
the other side of the pool.

Then she looked across and saw him, and their eyes met, travelling over
the pool. And instantly she stopped her singing and dancing, and clapped
her hands, and called to him like a *Kokila*: Come over to me, thou
handsome stranger, for I am weary of dancing alone, and I have a
question to

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

ask thee. And she leaned against a tree and stood waiting, with one hand
on the trunk of the tree and the other on her hip, and a heaving breast:
and she looked like a feminine incarnation of the essence of the
agitation of the ocean, stirred by the sight of the moon. And Umra-Singh
looked at her, and said to himself: Certainly the daughters of Rákshasas
are more dangerous than their fathers. And now it is well, that I am
fenced by the blue eyes of Shrí like a suit of armour, otherwise the
glances of this forest maiden would like an axe long ago have cleft my
heart in two.

Then he went round the edge of the pool, and found her on the other
side. And she beckoned to him as he drew near with a bangled hand, and
moving lips, and eyes that shone in the moonlight like the eyes of a
snake. And she came and stood before him, and put her hand on his
shoulder with a touch like a leaf, and looked up into his face with a
smile, and said: I am Ulupí, a Daitya's <span
id="fr_59"></span>[h](#fn_59) daughter, and here I live in the forest
alone, with none to whom to compare myself, save my own image in the
water. Tell me, for thou hast seen

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

other women, hast thou ever met with eyes more beautiful than mine? And
Umra-Singh looked down into them as into two dark pools, and he felt
them pounding his heart like a pair of fists <span
id="fr_60"></span>[i](#fn_60). And he said to himself: She may well ask,
and now, but for one other pair, her eyes need fear no rivals. But he
said to her: Beauty <span id="fr_61"></span>[k](#fn_61), thine eyes are
well enough: nevertheless the ocean has many gems, and doubtless each
thinks itself the best: but the Koustubha <span
id="fr_62"></span>[l](#fn_62) is above them all.

Then a cloud came over her face, and she flung away from him in disdain,
and stood pouting like a child. And suddenly she turned again, and put
up to her head the graceful creepers of her round arms, and undid the
knot of her hair, and shook it. And it fell, like midnight, about those
stars her eyes, and wrapped her all over like a veil, and rolled down
round her feet and along the ground, like a black serpent. Then with her
hand she put it away from her face, and shot through its meshes a subtle
smile, and said: At least thou hast never seen the equal of my hair? And
Umra-Singh felt

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

her glance strike him like a thunderbolt out of a cloud. And he said to
himself: Well may she ask; and now, if my soul were not already snared
in the long lashes of the eyes of Slid, it would be netted like a quail
in this extraordinary mass of never-ending hair. But he said: Beauty,
lovely at night is the heaven with its stars, but lovelier still the
dark blue sea, in which they are reflected, for it contains all their
beauty, and adds another of its own.

Then Ulupí was very angry, and she stood with flashing eyes, swelling
with rage. And suddenly she stooped, and gathered up her hair in her
arm, and came up to Umra-Singh, and flung it round him like a noose, and
whispered in his ear, with lips that caressed it as they moved: O
foolish bee <span id="fr_63"></span>[m](#fn_63), I am but a lotus of the
night: yet why despise me, in comparison with the absent lotus of the
day? It is hot and dusty, and I am cool and fragrant as the nectar of
that moon in whose light I blow. And Umra-Singh trembled. For there came
from her hair a strange wind, like a cloud of the sweet of a thousand
scents, that lured his soul to listen and

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

dream in the lulling murmur of her mouth. And as he closed his eyes for
fear, he saw before him the blue scorn in the eyes of Shrí, and the
sound of her laughter and the noise of the drums and the voices of the
criers boomed in his ear, and drowned Ulupí's spell. And he shook
himself free from her hair, and said: Beauty, I am a Rajpoot of the race
of the Sun: what have I to do with a lotus of the moon?

Then Ulupí screamed, like a wounded elephant. And she seized him by the
arm and shook him violently, and exclaimed: Hast thou a stone within thy
breast, instead of a heart, that my beauty cannot touch thee? For I know
that I am beautiful, and there is not beauty like mine in the three
worlds. And Umra-Singh looked at her, and wondered, for her fury made
her more lovely than before. And he said: O daughter of a Daitya, thou
speakest the truth: yet a vessel that is full can hold no more, be the
liquor what it may, and such is my heart. Let me now pass by thee, as
undeserving thy regard: for I am bound for the Land of the Lotus of the
Sun. Then said Ulupí, with a stamp of her foot: Fool! thou shalt never
see that Lotus Land.

And she looked at him with a jeering laugh: and instantly she sat down,
and wound herself up in

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

her long hair, and began to weep. And as she wept, the tears ran down
from her eyes like a river, and fell into the lake. Immediately the lake
began to rise and swell, and flood the wood with water. And as
Umra-Singh stood gazing at her with astonishment, he found himself
standing in a vast marsh, with the trees of the forest for rushes. And
he looked, and lo! suddenly that delusive daughter of a Daitya became a
mist, and floated away over the water like vapour. And Umra-Singh heard
her laughter dying away in the distance as she went, and he was left
alone in the wood, with the water up to his waist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[56:f](dos09.htm#fr_57) The Creator.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[57:g](dos09.htm#fr_58) From which the sandal
wood comes.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[58:h](dos09.htm#fr_59) A kind of demon, '*a son
of Diti*.' (Pronounce *dait*- as *white*.)

<span id="fn_60"></span>[59:i](dos09.htm#fr_60) A reminiscence of
Bhartrihari.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[59:k](dos09.htm#fr_61) Nothing can translate
*bálá*. It means child, woman, beauty, *beauté-de-diable*.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[59:l](dos09.htm#fr_62) Wishnu's great
breast-jewel (*Kou* as *cow*).

<span id="fn_63"></span>[60:m](dos09.htm#fr_63) This word here used may
mean either a *bee* or a *lover* or a *wanderer* (*bhramara*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. The Silver Swans](dos10)
