[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dos03)  [Next](dos05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

# NIGHT

#### A SLEEP AND A DREAM

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### I. A Lotus of the Day

BUT Anushayiní <span id="fr_29"></span>[a](#fn_29), when she disappeared
in the forest, fell down to earth like a falling star, and entered the
womb of the favourite wife of the King of Indirálaya <span
id="fr_30"></span>[b](#fn_30), and was born after the manner of mortals
as his daughter. And at that moment she lit up the birth chamber with
the radiance diffused from her body, which put the lamps to shame. And
the nurses and waiting women were astonished, for wonderful to say! the
lids of the child's eyes were fringed with long black lashes, looking
like rain-clouds hanging low to hide the rising moon. And suddenly those
lashes rose like a curtain, and there came from beneath them a flood of
blue colour, which pervaded the room like the odour of camphor and
sandal-wood made visible to the eye, and overcame

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the senses of all that stood by, till they were within a little of
swooning away. And like men lying on their backs and gazing into the
depths of the sky, they felt as it were enveloped in the colour of
heaven, and lost their perception of mundane affairs. For though they
knew it not, they were looking at the reflection of the glory of the
moon-crested god.

So they all stood round in silence, watching the child's eyes. And at
last, the King, and his ministers, and his physicians and astrologers,
drew a long breath, and looked at each other in amazement. And the
prime-minister said: King, this is a wonderful thing. For these eyes are
the eyes, not of a child, but of a sage <span
id="fr_31"></span>[c](#fn_31), or rather, of a god. And surely this is
no mere mortal maiden, but rather some deity, or portion of a deity,
smitten by a curse, and doomed thereby to descend for a period into this
lower world, to expiate awhile sins committed in a former birth. For
such things often come about. And beyond a doubt your Majesty is
favoured, in being chosen by the deity to be the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

means of his incarnation. Then hearing this speech of his minister,
whose words were always suited to the events, the King was excessively
delighted. And he celebrated the birth of his daughter with
extraordinary magnificence, and gave gold and villages to Brahmans and
the poor. And taking counsel with his astrologers and Brahman sages
skilled in names and their applications, he gave to his daughter the
auspicious name of Shrí <span id="fr_32"></span>[d](#fn_32). For he
said: Her eyes are like lotuses, and like the pools in which they dwell:
and surely they are the very echo of the eyes of the Goddess of Beauty
when she rose from the sea, and lay in her blue lotus cradle, lapped by
the foam of which she was composed, and gazing at the wondering waves
with eyes that mocked them, and robbed them of their hue.

Then time passed away, and the years with the seasons followed each
other like caravans over the desert, and old age and grey hair came and
took up their dwelling at the wrinkled root of the King's ear. And
meanwhile Shrí grew from a child into a girl, and at length the dawn of
her womanhood broke. And like the horns of the waxing moon,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

her limbs rounded and swelled into the very perfect orb of supreme
loveliness, and she became as it were the very salt of the sea of
beauty <span id="fr_33"></span>[e](#fn_33), inspiring in all who drank
of it insatiable thirst, and an intolerable craving for the water of the
blue lakes of her eyes. And at last there came a day when the King her
father looked at her, and said to himself: The fruit is ripe: and now it
is time that it were plucked and eaten.

So he went to the apartments of the women, to find her mother, his
principal Queen, Madirekshaná <span id="fr_34"></span>[f](#fn_34). But
when she learned the object of his coming, the Queen said:
*Aryaputra* <span id="fr_35"></span>[g](#fn_35), it is useless. For our
daughter will not even listen to the word husband, much less undergo the
thing. The King said: What is this? Should the cornfield refuse the
plough, or a maiden refuse to be married? Is she not now of ripe age,
and does not a grown-up maiden in the house bring upon herself and her
relations infamy in this world and the next? Madirekshaná said:

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Speak to her yourself, and persuade her to it if
you can. For of her own accord she told me, that her marriage was a
thing not to be thought of, even in a dream.

So the King sent for his daughter, to question her himself.

And after a while, Shrí came in, undulating as she moved like a
swan <span id="fr_36"></span>[h](#fn_36), and swaying like a flower
waving in the wind: for her waist could be grasped by the fist, and her
bosom was glorious, like the swell of an ocean wave. And like a child
she smiled at her father <span id="fr_37"></span>[i](#fn_37) with parted
lips and half-shut eyes, casting before her through the net of their
lashes the magical charm of the colour of a wet lotus: and her girdle
jingled as if with joy, while the flashing jewels with which she was
covered all over changed colour, as if with envy at being outshone by
the play <span id="fr_38"></span>[k](#fn_38) of her eyes. And the old
King looked at her with pride and wonder and delight: and he laughed to
himself, and said: Wonderful is the cunning

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

of the Creator, and incomprehensible the mystery of a woman's beauty!
For I am old, and I am her father, and yet I feel before her like a
domestic servant in the presence of a ruler of the world. Surely she
would drive a young man into madness and ecstasy. And did the Creator,
forsooth! form this incarnation of the intoxication of woman to no
purpose? Surely she is a husband's ideal correlative in human form! And
then he said to her: My daughter, it is high time that you were married:
for an unmarried daughter is a scandal in her father's house.

Then said Shrí: Dear father, do not speak thus. Let me live and die a
maiden, for I do not wish to be married <span
id="fr_39"></span>[l](#fn_39). The King said: Daughter, what is this
that you are saying? Is not a husband the very object of your birth?
Shrí said: Do not even dream of a husband for me. And there is a reason
for this: for I am different from other maidens. And hearing this, the
King was perplexed. And he looked at Shrí under his brows, and said to
himself: She speaks truth. Certainly

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

this daughter of mine, if she be mine <span
id="fr_40"></span>[m](#fn_40), is not like other maidens. For who ever
saw her equal in beauty, or who ever heard of a maiden objecting to be
married <span id="fr_41"></span>[n](#fn_41)? Or was my minister right,
and is she really some deity in disguise?

So day after day he continued to urge her and argue with her. But at
last, finding that his efforts to move her were as vain as if he were
trying to pierce a diamond with a cotton thread, he exclaimed in dismay:
Surely my crimes in a former birth were numerous and appalling, seeing
that their fruit is a daughter, whose obstinate and unintelligible
prejudice against a husband runs counter to the nature of woman, and
will be the means of destroying my salvation. Then at last Shrí said:
Dear father, do not be angry, and I will tell you the truth. Know that
I, too, wish for a husband, but only for one husband, and no other. Then
said the King: And

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

who, then, is that husband? Shrí said: I do not know. But he will come
to claim me, from the Land of the Lotus of the Sun  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[o](#fn_42). And where, said the King, is the Land of
the Lotus of the Sun? Shrí said: I cannot tell. But in a dream I saw a
lotus fall from heaven, and I heard a divine voice saying to me: Do not
hurry, but wait: for there shall come to you a husband, from the Land of
the Lotus of the Sun. For he was your husband in a former birth, and you
shall know him by a sign. Then the King said: And what is the sign? Shrí
said: I may not tell, for it is known only to the Deity and me. But now,
either abandon my marriage, or if you can, find me a man who has seen
the Land of the Lotus of the Sun, of caste becoming a king's daughter,
and he shall be my husband. For him only will I marry, and none other.

And when the King heard this, he was astonished, and sat silent, looking
at Shrí. And he said to himself:

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

\[paragraph continues\] This is a strange story, and the conduct of this
mysterious daughter of mine is inscrutable. What is this Land of the
Lotus of the Sun? Is it a fancy, the capricious dream of a girl? Or does
the dream really point to a previous existence? And he thought for a
while, and then he said again: Perhaps it is better to do as she says,
and endeavour to discover a man who has seen that Land. For where is the
harm? For even if he is found, there will always be time to consider.
And, moreover, in this way it may be that she will obtain a husband,
whereas she will certainly not get married in any other. Better that she
should get a husband, no matter how, no matter who, than remain a maiden
to destroy us all.

Then he dismissed his daughter, and summoned his chamberlains, and said
to them: Get criers, and send them through the city, and let them
proclaim by beat of drum: That any high caste man, who has seen the Land
of the Lotus of the Sun, shall share my kingdom, and marry my daughter.
And his chamberlains wondered at hearing the order. But they went
immediately, and told the criers the order of the King.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[21:a](dos04.htm#fr_29) That is, her soul, as
distinguished from her body: that part of her which, according to Plato
and the Bhagwad-Gitá (more logical than modern theologians) *is never
born* and *never dies*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[21:b](dos04.htm#fr_30) *The home of Shrí*, i.e.
a blue lotus, which is so called because the goddess Shrí appeared
floating in one at the creation.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[22:c](dos04.htm#fr_31) *shánta*: one who has
quelled the passions and attained peace. Of such, Shiwa is the chief.
But the minister drew his bow at a venture, and knew not how he hit the
mark.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[23:d](dos04.htm#fr_32) Hence the name of the
city, above.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[24:e](dos04.htm#fr_33) Beauty and salt, in the
original, are denoted by the same word.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[24:f](dos04.htm#fr_34) That is, 'a woman with
sweet seductive eyes.'

<span id="fn_35"></span>[24:g](dos04.htm#fr_35) A pretty term employed
by ladies in addressing their lords: 'son of an *arya*, a gentleman.' It
has no English equivalent.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[25:h](dos04.htm#fr_36) The old Hindoos had a
special admiration and a special term (*hansagaminí*) for a woman who
walked like a swan.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[25:i](dos04.htm#fr_37) There is here an
untranslateable play on the word *kamalahása*, which means both *the
opening of a lotus bud*, and an *irresistible smile*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[25:k](dos04.htm#fr_38) *wyatikara*, a word
expressive of the *varying* lustre or *wavering* coruscation of jewels,

<span id="fn_39"></span>[26:l](dos04.htm#fr_39) cf. Callimachus:

δός μοι παρθενίην αἰώνιον, ἄππα, φυλάσσειν.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[27:m](dos04.htm#fr_40) This touch arises from
the beautiful word for a daughter, *átmajá*, i.e. *she that is born from
yourself*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[27:n](dos04.htm#fr_41) A case, perhaps, not
absolutely unknown in the west: though beauty, like a fortress, must
always like to be flattered by a siege. But in the land of the Hindoos,
marriage is like being born or dying, a matter of course, a thing
necessary, inevitable, essential, *quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab
omnibus*.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[28:o](dos04.htm#fr_42) There is, in the
[original](errata.htm#1) here, a nuance not susceptible of direct
translation. According to the Hindoos, lotuses are divided into those of
the Day and Night, whose lovers are the Sun and Moon. The Lotus in
question is a Sun-lotus '*between the Twilights*,' i.e., buried in
night, and deprived of the presence of the Sun. An allusion to the title
of the story is thus introduced. But all this cannot be expressed in
English, as it can in Sanskrit, by a single word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. By Beat of Drum](dos05)
