[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dos16)  [Next](dos18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIV. Illusion

But Shrí, when she came to herself, sat weeping, and fearing for herself
in the future: for she foreboded evil from the malicious pranks of the
daughter of the Daitya. And yet she could not tell, how she could
possibly have offended her, or deserved her anger. And as soon as day
broke, she rose up, and began to go trembling through the wood, in which
the shadows of night still hung among the trees, starting at the noise
of the falling leaves, and yearning for emancipation from danger in the
form of her husband's presence.

Then after a while, she stopped and listened: for she heard among the
trees steps, as of one coming in her direction. And her heart beat
violently, as if to say: Let me abandon thy body, and so escape the
danger coming on thee. So she hid herself in a hollow tree, and peeped
out in terror. And suddenly, strange! there in the dim

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

twilight she saw her husband coming towards her, looking just as he did,
when she left him in the palace at Indirálayá. And instantly she ran
towards him, overcome by emotion and great surprise, and caught him in
her arms, exclaiming: At last, at last, I have found thee again. And she
wept aloud, and forgot in that moment all her sorrow; and she looked at
him, and laughed for joy, and closed her eyes, as if, like the sun, the
sight of him dimmed and overcame the faculty of vision. Then after a
while, she opened them again, and started and shrieked, and her blood
became ice, and her heart stopped. For he that held her in his arms was
not her husband, but a hairy thing with hideous eyes, that resembled an
incarnation of the brute in human shape; and it fastened those fearful
eyes upon her own, and laughed and whined and panted like a beast with
hot quick breath into her face. Then her senses abandoned her, like
cowards, and she sank down to the earth in a swoon.

And when at length she revived, she looked, and saw that the sun was
declining in the western quarter. But the moon had not yet risen, for it
was the beginning of the dark half of the month. Then all at once memory
came back to her, and she shook with agitation. And she said to herself:

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Was it a reality, or was it only an evil dream?
Surely it was but a dream; for I am very weak and tired. And even now I
cannot tell, whether I wake or sleep.

So she sat with her eyes closed; fearing to open them, lest she should
see she knew not what among the shadows of the trees. And then the
waning moon rose, and poured through the interstices of the leaves beams
faint and pallid, as if sharing her own terror. And at last, unable to
endure any longer the silence and the solitude, she rose up and began to
move slowly, with hesitating steps, through the dark wood, not knowing
where to go, yet not daring to stay where she was.

And suddenly, as she went, she looked before her, and there, in an open
space, again she saw her husband, lying still under a tree. Instantly
she stopped, and stood, balanced in the swing of vacillation. For the
joy of reunion, and the desire of safety, and the fear of solitude drew
her towards him like a threefold cord: while the memory of her
deception, and the fear of illusion, and the anticipation of unknown
danger, fixed her to the ground like roots. And she wavered and swayed
on her feet, like a young shoot fanned by opposing breezes: while large
tears fell from her eyes, like drops of

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

camphor from a moonstone <span id="fr_78"></span>[d](#fn_78). And as she
stood there doubting whether he were dead or alive, for his face was wan
in the light of the pallid moon, his eyes opened, and met her own. And
he sprang up, and ran towards her, while she remained unable to stir,
and took her in his arms, while she shrank from his embrace. And he
exclaimed: The sight of thee has lifted me out of the mouth of death,
for I had determined to abandon the body. And then he said again: Alas!
and why, O thou of the lovely eyes, dost thou shrink from me? But Shrí
remained silent, torn by suspicion, and shaken by the beating of her own
heart. And ever and anon she raised her eyes, and looked at him in
doubt. And then at last she said slowly: Art thou indeed my husband? is
it really thyself and no one else? Then he said: What is thy question or
thy doubt? Hast thou forgotten me already? Surely it is but a little
while since I lost thee in the palace of Indirálayá. Then said Shrí,
sighing: There came to me but now one who resembled thee in every
feature, and deceived

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

me: and even now, I shudder when I think of it, lest thou too should be
another such as he.

Then he said: Dear, thou art weak, and a dream has deceived thee: but
this time, it is no dream. Know that I am none other than myself, and
thou art with me. Let me dispel thy terror with a kiss. And he bent
down, and she raised her face with a smile, saying to herself: It was
nothing but a dream. But even as she touched his face, it changed, and
became gigantic and misshapen, with a large tongue that hung out of lips
that resembled those of a cow; and it broke out into loud laughter, and
disappeared. But Shrí fell to the ground, as if menaced by the
outstretched forefinger of death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[100:d](dos17.htm#fr_78) The Hindoos have a
superstition, illustrated in a previous page, that moonstones in the
rays of the moon distil a sort of lunar syrup, nectar or camphor,
supposed to be composed of the substance of the moon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. The Dead of Night](dos18)
