[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Americana](../../index.md) 
[9/11](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](052303)  [Next](101403.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### NATIONAL COMMISSION ON TERRORIST ATTACKS UPON THE UNITED STATES

#### Public Hearing

Wednesday, July 9, 2003

253 Russell Senate Office Building  
Washington, DC

#### CONTENTS

PANEL 1: TERRORISM, AL QAEDA, AND THE MUSLIM WORLD  
WITNESSES: ROHAN GUNARATNA, INSTITUTE FOR DEFENCE AND STRATEGIC STUDIES,
SINGAPORE; MAMOUN FANDY, SENIOR FELLOW, UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF
PEACE; MARC SAGEMAN, UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA

PANEL 2: STATES AND TERRORISM  
WITNESSES: LAURIE MYLROIE, AUTHOR; JUDITH YAPHE, NATIONAL DEFENSE
UNIVERSITY; MURHAF JOUEJATI, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY; MARK
GASIOROWSKI, LOUISIANA STATE UNIVERSITY

PANEL 3: THE CHALLENGE WITHIN THE MUSLIM WORLD  
WITNESSES: RACHEL BRONSON, COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS; GILLES KEPEL,
INSTITUTE OF POLITICAL STUDIES, PARIS; STEVEN EMERSON, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE INVESTIGATIVE PROJECT; AND DENNIS ROSS, WASHINGTON NEAR
EAST POLICY INSTITUTE

POST-HEARING MEDIA ADVISORY  

#### PROCEEDINGS

MR. KEAN: Good Morning. As Chairman of the National Commission on
Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, I hereby call to order our
third public hearing, on the topic of Terrorism, Al Qaeda, and the
Muslim World.

Many have compared the attacks of September 11, 2001 to the bombing of
Pearl Harbor, sixty years previous. There were, of course, important
differences in what transpired on both days. More people died on
September 11 than died during the Pearl Harbor attacks. And unlike the
case of Pearl Harbor, almost all who died on September 11th were
civilians. The planners of the 9-11 attacks targeted not military bases
of operation, but the heart of America's financial center and the seat
of its government.

There also are many similarities between what happened on both days. In
each case, a surprise air attack left thousands of Americans dead.
Immediately after both events, the President declared the US to be in a
state of war. In each case, our attackers had decided that they were at
war with us long before we realized we were at war with them. War for
them began with preparations for attack and the assembly of forces to
execute their attacks.

Now, as was the case 60 years ago, we confront a global war with all its
inherent uncertainties of dimension, duration and loss of life. To
defeat and destroy our enemy, we must understand more than the crimes
that are already committed. We must understand what drives and motivates
it; the source of its power; the resources at its command; its internal
strengths and weaknesses; the identity, roles, motives of its allies,
enablers and supporters; and its ability to adapt to changed
circumstances, especially after we struck back.

In other words, we must know everything we can about al Qaeda if we are
to crush it. To help us do precisely that, we have assembled a
distinguished group of experts to guide us in our work. Our first panel
brings together three distinguished experts to address the origins of al
Qaeda, Dr. Rohan Gunaratna is the author of "Inside al Qaeda: Global
Network of Terror." He currently is head of terrorism research and
associate professor of Institute for Defence and Strategic Studies in
Singapore. Our second speaker is Dr. Mamoun Fandy, currently a senior
fellow at the United States Institute of Peace. Professor Fandy is an
expert on Saudi Islamist movements, and the author of "Saudi Arabia and
the Politics of Dissent." Marc Sageman, our third speaker, is a member
of the American Psychological Association's Presidential Panel on
Terrorism. Dr. Sageman is an expert on the psychological aspects of al
Qaeda, recruitment and membership.

All prepared statements will be entered into the record in full, and we
would ask each of our witnesses to summarize their statements before we
turn to questions from the commissioners. Dr. Gunaratna.

MR. GUNARATNA: Thank you, Chairman Kean, ladies and gentlemen. I am
going to begin my testimony by asking the question, Why did al Qaeda
attack America's iconic targets on 9/11? I want to answer that question,
because I believe that even to this very date many Americans, including
policy- and decision-makers of the United States, do not understand why
al Qaeda mounted those attacks on America's most outstanding landmarks.

You must turn and examine al Qaeda's founding charter, a charter that
was written by Dr. Abdullah Azzam, the founder of al Qaeda, in March
1988, and published in "Al Jihad," the journal of the Arab mujaheddin, a
publication that was printed in Peshawar, Pakistan, during that period.
According to the charter of al Qaeda, al Qaeda is the vanguard, "the
pioneering vanguard of the Islamic movements." That is, as the spearhead
of Islam. According to al Qaeda, al Qaeda must mount attacks that will
inspire and instigate the other Islamic movements, as well as the wider
Muslim community that seeks to support, that al Qaeda wants to build
support, in order to continue with their political agenda. If you look
at the charter, the charter very clearly states that al Qaeda has a role
as the pioneering vanguard. And it is because of that specific role that
al Qaeda mounted attacks very selectively on your outstanding landmarks,
on your iconic targets, because by charter al Qaeda has a responsibility
to h how the way to these other movements, that the United States can
always be attacked and destroyed the same way the Soviet Union was
reduced from a superpower into Russia, the same way the largest land
army in the world, the Soviet army, was defeated in Afghanistan. By the
predecessor of al Qaeda, the Maktab al-Khid-mat, or the Afghan Service
Bureau, an institution which even had 30 officers inside the United
States during the Cold War, when Maktab al-Khidmat fought against the
Soviets in Afghanistan. And al Qaeda wanted to show the way to many
other Islamic movements, wanted to empower these movements. And that is
why al Qaeda built with the assistance of Taliban state-of-the-art
terrorist training and operational infrastructure in Afghanistan.

Throughout the 1990s, Afghanistan became a terrorist Disneyland, where
more than 40 different terrorist organizations were training and using
Afghanistan as an operational base at the time the United States, its
allies and its friends intervened in Afghanistan in October of 2001. But
for 10 years, the U.S. government, European governments, the
international community tolerated Afghanistan from becoming the center
of gravity of international training. The center where terrorist
organizations planned, prepared and executed operations.

If you look at the previous attacks conducted by al Qaeda, all those
attacks were mounted either by members who were trained in Afghanistan
and using Afghanistan as a training base. The U.S. government and many
other governments have seen 9/11 as an attack that is very different
from all its previous attacks. But if you look at the trajectory of al
Qaeda operations, there is an incremental escalation in al Qaeda
attacks. Look at August 1998, the East Africa bombings. Al Qaeda mounted
land suicide attacks against the U.S. Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania,
coordinated simultaneous attacks. If you look at October 2000, al Qaeda
mounted a maritime suicide attack. If you look at 9/11, al Qaeda mounted
an airborne suicide attack. And look at the sophistication of the
organization. When al Qaeda attacked those American targets, those land
targets in East Africa, the Americans increased the perimeter security
of their land targets. Then al Qaeda attacked a maritime target. Then
the Americans increased the perimeter security of their land and their
maritime targets. But then al Qaeda again deceived the United States and
conducted an airborne suicide attack. Al Qaeda could have never mounted
those attacks against those targets on 9/11 if it did not use airborne
vehicles to attack those targets.

So, and also if you look at the targeting of al Qaeda, there was
gradually a larger number of fatalities. There was an increase in
sophistication of the organization. The U.S. security and intelligence
community, the U.S. think tanks, the U.S. political leaders knew that al
Qaeda will strike the United States. If you examine the reports of the
Central Intelligence Agency, soon after the East Africa attacks, the
U.S. agency warned that it is a question of time that al Qaeda will
strike inside the United States.

But there was more than an intelligence failure. There was operational
failure. There was a failure to act. You knew that your country will be
attacked, but you did not do what was necessary to prevent your country
being harmed and humiliated. You knew that the intention of al Qaeda was
to kill American people wherever they could be found. But still you did
not act, and therefore you paid a very heavy price for it.

In the future, if you want to prevent these attacks, you must continue
the path you have adopted after 9/11 in terms of establishing closer
security and intelligence cooperation, especially with the Asian and the
Middle Eastern Muslim countries, because today the threat has moved
beyond al Qaeda. Today we are confronting a large number of Islamist
terrorist organizations.

Let us look at the two waves of attacks that we saw in October of last
year and May this year. The attacks in May this year were staged on the
12th of May by al Qaeda in Saudi Arabia. On the same day there were
attacks in Chechnya. On the 14th of May also attacks in Chechnya by
Al-Ansar Mujaheddin, a group that is very close to al Qaeda. For
example, the head of the Al-Ansar Mujaheddin in Chechnya, his real name
is Mohammed Al Ghamdi. He goes by the name of Abu Waleed. Mohammed Al
Ghamdi is the cousin of two of the 9/11 hijackers, Ahmed Alghamdi and
Hamza Al Ghamdi. So you can see the coordination of the attacks in that
week of May between al Qaeda and the Chechen group.

And then again on the 16th of May in Casablanca, the Casablanca attack
was not by al Qaeda but by an associate group of al Qaeda called
Assiarat al Moustaqim. And then again the previous day, that is on the
15th of May, again an associate group of al Qaeda, Lashkar-I-Jhanqui,
attacked 21 Shell and Caltex stations in Pakistan, coordinated
simultaneous attacks within a half an hour -- 21 stations attacked.

So you can see within that week al Qaeda, Assirat al Moustaqim, Al-Ansar
Mujaheddin and Lashkar-I-Jhanvui coordinating attacks. So what I would
like to say is that the threat has certainly moved beyond al Qaeda.

The last point I want to make is let's look at the attacks in October of
last year. The worst terrorist attack after 9/11 occurred in Bali on the
12th of October. That was not by al Qaeda, but an associate group of al
Qaeda called Jemaah Islamiya. Another group al Qaeda had armed, trained
and financed in Afghanistan during that 10-year period in Afghanistan.
And in that same week in October, we saw attacks against the U.S.,
against the French oil supertanker Limburg off Yemen, and also killing
of two U.S. personnel in Kuwait, which was by al Qaeda. So you can see
that, in the future, because we have damaged al Qaeda's training
infrastructure so significantly in Afghanistan, al Qaeda will
increasingly rely on organizations and groups it had trained, armed and
financed and ideologized; that is, given the ideological training of the
need to wage a universal jihad, not a territorial jihad. And these
groups will continue to fight. Al Qaeda will more or less remain in the
background, will be more an ideological provider, because it lacks the
operational capability, while these other groups will continue to fight
with al Qaeda in the background.

So it is a long-term threat. And to fight this kind of threat you need a
multi-pronged, multidimensional, multi-agency and a multinational
response.

The United States, although it is the most preeminent political,
military, economic and diplomatic superpower, you cannot defeat this
kind of threat unless you continue to work with your allies and your
friends, not only in the military field, but also in the political,
ideological, diplomatic and economic fields. Thank you very much.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, sir. Dr. Fandy.

MR. FANDY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ladies and gentlemen, since my
colleague talked about, a little more about al Qaeda, I will submit my
full testimony to the record, and I am just basically going to fill in
some added information on the testimony.

It is very important to first of all reverse the popular understanding
about al Qaeda that bin Laden is the main figure in al Qaeda, and
focusing on bin Laden puts our efforts in a different trajectory of
pursuing al Qaeda. In fact, if Osama bin Laden is the chairman of al
Qaeda, the real CEO of the al Qaeda organization is Ayman Zawahiri. And
although my colleague just mentioned to you that an airborne attack was
in its inception in Peshawar, in fact in 1981 as Ayman Zawahiri said he
was contemplating the Sadat association he was discussing with his
colleague Aboud Az Zumur to use an airplane and crash it in the stand of
President Sadat. Thus using planes to target high-level targets was not
conceived in Kandahar, but rather on the Nile shores in Cairo.

To understand Zawahiri is really key understanding of al Qaeda and how
it operates. Zawahiri, a man born in Egypt, in the southern part of
Cairo called Al Mahdi -- he was born in 1951. He graduated from medical
school in 1974 in Cairo, and joined the jihad movement in 1968 after he
graduated from high school to form Al Jihad movement. His jihad movement
was inspired by the ideas of the founders of the Muslim Brotherhood,
mainly the figure of Sayyed Qutb as well as Abu Al' Ala Maududi. Ayman
Zawahiri was arrested and kept in prison for three years in Egypt, and
left Egypt in 1985 for Saudi Arabia, and spent one year there working at
Anifis (ph) clinic as a doctor. And from there he moved to Peshawar.

Some of us are mystified by the name "al Qaeda." The origin of the word
"al Qaeda" was actually a guest house that was created by Ayman Zawahiri
with Mr. Assam, the Palestinian leader of the jihad in Afghanistan.
Ayman Zawahiri and his jihad movement coming from Egypt started an al
Qaeda guest house. The other group, which also came from Egypt, the
Islamic group, started another house called al Ansar, the supporters of
al Qaeda. The main umbrella sponsors in that neighborhood in Peshawar
and Pakistan and Afghanistan was represented by three figures, mainly
Gul Buddin Hekmatyar who represents also the branch of the Muslim
brotherhood, and that takes us back to the ideological trajectory of al
Qaeda, as well as Abdel Rebrasu Sayyef, who was also protecting the
Islamic group members who were coming again from Egypt via Jeddah, as
well as the Taliban and Mullah Omar, who sponsored Bin Laden and the
Zawahiri.

But to understand all of this, we cannot just focus on the technical
aspect of al Qaeda. We have to look at al Qaeda in its broader context
in the Muslim world. Al Qaeda hangs in a web of relations in the Muslim
world. Unless it's understood, we miss the whole point of al Qaeda.

Just, not to waste your time, I'm going to draw broader implications and
some policy recommendations. Since September 11th on balance I can say
we have won the war against the formal structure of al Qaeda, its
organization, its military capacity, and its financial networks. This
progress has been helped greatly by recent attacks on Riyadh on May
12th. In fact, if al Qaeda shot itself in the foot on September 11th, it
shot itself in the head on May 12th in Saudi Arabia, because practically
it dried the whole financial support and allows the Saudi state to start
an all-out war on these groups, because basically the threat is coming
home. Although we seem to understand the formal structure of al Qaeda,
we have yet to grasp the broader context and the forces that make such
organizations appealing to many people in the Muslim world, from which
al Qaeda and its affiliate organization draw their support and new
recruits.

One central area that we need to examine, and it's very important, is
the area of ideas and look at the media in the Arab and Muslim world.
The culture of terrorism is not a sentiment; it's an industry. It is
easy enough to identify individuals and governments who finance
newspapers, TV stations that promote extremist ideas.

But the media developed even by many moderate leaders of state and media
organizations in the Arab and Muslim world, even America's friends have
failed to take a clear stand in terms of their relationship with al
Qaeda. This is both in terms of how they present their ideas in the
media and how they deal with those who disseminate an actively radical
branch of Islam. The financial aspects of the media have to be
reconsidered and studied more in depth.

In many Arab newspapers and TV programs bin Laden can appear as an hero,
and even if al Qaeda is not named, its ideas and its mission is being
supported. This speaks in Qatar's al Jazeera and the Lebanese channels
and the Usubua in Cairo who recently called for praise, whoever puts the
bullet in the heart of any American.

Currently many governments in the Arab and Muslin world are happy with
the new division of labor, where the media is for bin Laden and his
affiliate organizations, and state power is for the traditional elite.
Thus, President Bush's question posed after September 11th, "Are you
with us or against us?" has not been answered throughout the Muslim
world. We need to have a balance sheet and wait for these answers from
every government in the region.

Terrorism in the Muslim world can be drawn as a triangle between three
points: states that harbor terrorists, terrorists themselves, and
finally the Islamic movements that provide the pool of recruits and
intellectual drive and justification for acts of terrorism. The current
policy addresses two elements of this triangle: terrorist organizations
like al Qaeda and states that harbor terrorists.

It has failed, however, to adequately understand the nature of the third
component of the triangle of terror, and it's important. In fact,
movements to be ahead of states in the Middle East -- at least the trend
points to the primacy of these movements in the Arab world, and we see
Hizbollah is much more important than the government of Hariri in
Lebanon. We see Hamas is much more important than Arafat, and all of
that.

The threat represented by these movements causes a loss of focus in the
fight against terrorism for the U.S. and for governments in the Arab and
Muslim world. It is clear that the U.S. and its allies are determined to
attack terrorism from above by searching out planners and perpetrators
of terrorist actions and drying up their financial resources.

But we have to keep in mind that these movements are part and parcel of
broad social tendencies. They represent a major obstacle for any
long-term strategy to simply attack terrorism from abroad. If the
incubators of terrorist organizations are to be done away with, we have
to allow and encourage alternative movements to take root. More civicly
and democratically-minded ideas have to show that they can have a
broader appeal. This requires the cooperation of Muslim and Arab
governments, but also attention to broad spectrum of social issues.

Currently governments and societies in the Muslim world are under
attack. Governments in particular are alarmed by the magnitude of this
threat, but they are not always sure whether they compromise or confront
these organizations.

Some governments recently came to understand the magnitude of the
threat. In fact, Prince Nayef of Saudi Arabia finally admitted that the
Muslim Brotherhood is the mother of all problems in the Arab world. And
Saudi Arabia hosted the Muslim Brotherhood during the Arab Cold War that
was between Nasser and King Faisal in the '70s. And, in fact, the Muslim
Brotherhood, one can argue that they hijacked the total educational
Saudi system and turned it around to produce what we know as al Qaeda.
The Muslim Brotherhood was the first Islamic organization with global
reach, in fact. With its headquarters now next to CENTCOM in Qatar,
under Sheikh Qaradawi, practically the Muslim Brotherhood has global
reach. It has offices in Germany. It has offices in Virginia next door.
It has offices in Yemen and other places.

So unless we really consider the Muslim Brotherhood as part of that
larger network, we fail to understand this whole organization. The
Muslim Brotherhood is responsible for the civil war in Algeria,
responsible for its civil war in Yemen, and responsible for the current
situation that we see in Egypt and in Saudi Arabia.

Just practically, one has -- before we make any clear policy about
terrorism, we have to understand that it is states that harbor
terrorists. It is organizations that conduct these acts. It is movements
that support and legitimate these acts and make them look good and look
attractive in the eyes of other Muslims. And at the center of all of
this is what we call moderate Islamic movements that, in fact, engaged
since 1928, at the inception of the Muslim Brotherhood, in secret wars
throughout the Arab world.

We have to understand also that the Arab and Muslim world are going
through a civil war, and we have to decide what position should we take
on this Islamic civil war. This civil war starts from the home, from two
brothers and sisters fighting over the headdress and cover, and jihad
through the whole society at large. It is very fundamental -- the
fundamental issues in the core of the Muslim world. We have to have a
clear position on where do we stand there.

Without addressing the third component of terror triangle, the war on
terrorism will lose its momentum. The U.S. and the world cannot afford
this. A constant stand on the Muslim Brotherhood and all movements that
provide support for al Qaeda-like activities is key to developing an
effective way of addressing the rise of terrorism in the Muslim world.
It does not make sense to target the branch of the Muslim Brotherhood
known as Hamas in the Palestinian territories and leave it in Cairo and
in Yemen and other places. We have to have a consistent stand on these
movements.

To stand as bystander also on the civil war in the Muslim world is to
expect the next generation of al Qaeda with nuclear weapons and
devastating consequences for the United States of America.

Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, sir. Dr. Sageman.

MR. SAGEMAN: Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the national
commission, thank you for inviting me today to testify about al Qaeda.
I'm not going to read my statement, because I agree with what has been
said before, but there are some few differences that I want to
highlight, and they have to do with the ideology, the members
themselves, the al Qaeda members, and the growth of the organization.
Unlike my colleague, I actually studied it from the bottom up instead of
the top down. And various patterns actually emerge. But before we can
actually understand the patterns, we have to understand why they are
doing it, the ideology.

Al Qaeda is part of a global movement which I call the global Salafi
jihad. The movement has its root in Egypt; I completely agree. It's a
violent Muslim revivalist movement which seeks to return to pure and
authentic Islam as practiced by the prophet and his companion. To them,
Islam is the answer, and on the recreation of the practices of the
devout ancestor, Salaf in Arabic, will bring glory and prominence back
to Muslims.

Salafists advocate a strict interpretation of the Quran, and they view
with skepticism any later innovation, for it might be a heretical
corruption of the original message. And here there's been an evolution
in the ideology. I don't really -- cannot go back 20 years and see the
ideology the same as it was 20 years ago, but the evolution which came
to its ultimate conclusion in 1998 was a process of evolution.

The first is the concept of jihad. And jihad is often a defensive
strategy when the lands of Islam are invaded by infidels. And this was
the strategy advocated by Abdul Azzam in Afghanistan.

The second strategy, one that's overlooked because we're all focusing on
jihad and violent movement, is the peaceful strategy of dawa, the call
to Islam. It consists of peacefully preaching the strict and literal
imitation of the prophet and his companion as the model of Islamic
society. This is a strategy of the Tablighi Jamaat, a born-again
Islamist movement operating informally at the grassroots level. It's
been very successful, but because it shies away from undue publicity and
stays away from politics, it has attracted very little attention, a
little bit like al Qaeda before they started bombing, but they're
peaceful.

A third strategy is what I would call the Salafi jihad, and that was the
one advocated by the Egyptian Salafists. They looked at their own
society and they branded it jahiliyya, which is the barbaric state of
ignorance that existed before the prophet's revelation, because the
modern leaders of Muslim states refuse to impose the Sharia, the strict
Quranic law, and the strict Islamic way of life. As such, they accuse
their leaders of being apostate, deserving death, and indeed they killed
Anwar Sadat. They advocate the violent overthrow of their regime. And
the priority here is to actually overthrow your own regime. It's really
to fight the near enemy, as they put it, as opposed to the far enemy.

And then, when they all congregated -- and Dr. Fandy is right; a lot of
the Egyptians went to Afghanistan -- and when they met there, they
really developed this global perspective, and that's the fourth
strategy, the global Salafi jihad. It was really first proclaimed by
Osama bin Laden in his 1996 fatwa, and it reverses the previous
strategy.

Now the priority is the far enemy, i.e. the United States, as opposed to
the near enemy. And the idea is that without the far enemy, the United
States, supporting the local governments, their local governments would
not be able to survive.

And their strategy is a need to inflict maximum casualties against the
opponent, for this is the language understood by the West, and
concentrate on the method of martyrdom operations as the most efficient
in terms of damages and least costly to the jihad. Al Qaeda is only one
of those groups.

I'm going to skip over the history, because I think that's been covered
pretty well. And what I'd like to do now is to give you a composite of
about 150 members of that jihad that I've collected and give you a
picture of who those people are.

They're very heterogeneous. There's three large patterns that emerge.
About 60 percent came from what I called core Arab countries, mostly
Saudi Arabia and Egypt. Thirty percent came from Maghreb Arab countries,
and they're fairly important, especially in Western Europe, or even
here. Ahmed Ressam is part of that. And 10 percent came from Indonesia.

In terms of socioeconomic status, two-thirds came from solid upper
middle-class backgrounds. Most of the rest came from what's called the
excluded Maghreb immigrants, second generation in France, as well as
western Christian converts. They all came from caring, in tact families.
The Indonesians were uniformly religious as children. About 60 percent
of the core Arab children were ,and almost none of the Maghreb Arab
children were.

As a group, they were relatively well-educated, with over 60 percent
attending colleges. Only the Indonesian group was exclusively educated
in religious schools, and I'll talk about that a little bit later. Most
of them had a good occupation, and only a quarter were considered
unskilled, with few prospects before them. Three-quarters were married,
and the majority had children.

I detected no mental illness in this group or any common psychological
predisposition for terror. The average age for joining was about 26
years. The Indonesians joined at a later age; the core Arabs at a
younger age. Three-fourths of the group decided to join when they were
expatriates. That means they were living in a country where they did not
grow up.

An additional 10 percent were second generation who felt a strong pull
to the country of their parents. So, about 85 percent were literally cut
off from the culture and social origins. And I'm going to develop that a
little bit more. The majority of the rest were Saudis, on whom we know
very little, so I can't really tell you much about that.

Compounding the isolations of a new country was the fact that they were
underemployed. By the time they joined the jihad, there was a dramatic
shift in devotion to their faith. So the only significant finding here
is that the terrorists felt isolated, lonely, emotionally alienated.
Otherwise they were a very diverse group.

How did they join the jihad? They did it through pre-existing social
bonds, with people who were already terrorists or they decided all
together to join the jihad as a group. Affiliation with the jihad was
through friendship, kinship, discipleship and worship. Sixty-five
percent of the cases had pre-existing friendship bonds with people that
were already in the jihad.

The typical scenario was a homesick young man to drift toward familiar
settings such as mosques to find companionship and to alleviate their
loneliness. Their clusters of friends formed spontaneously, and they
often moved in together in apartments.

Another 15 percent joined through relatives already in the jihad. The
Indonesians were all disciples of the same teacher. They first studied
in one of two religious boarding schools and joined the Jemaah
Islamiayya, which had been founded by their teacher.

The last 10 percent gave religious beliefs as the only reason they
joined the jihad. But whatever source of their social bonds, these
groups underwent a period of intense social interaction in their
apartments mostly and developed strong mutual intimacy which relieved
their previous distress.

As they became closer, they progressively adopted the belief and faith
of their friends, their most extreme friends. They knew Salafi faith
distanced them further from their childhood friends and families,
leading to increased isolation and loyalty to the group, which in turn
intensified their faith. They were ready to join the jihad.

The critical factor -- and this is a key issue -- was the existence of a
human link to the jihad who could actually arrange training in
Afghanistan. This was usually a peripheral acquaintance and a chance
encounter, and a formal invitation and acceptance to join the jihad was
actually done in Afghanistan after senior members were able to evaluate
them.

In terms of growth, the common element detected in all of them was, of
course, their link to the jihad itself. So if we trace the links, we can
actually see how they grow. Unlike the military organization, the global
jihad was structured around popular human hubs surrounded by more
isolated human nodes. From the historical data, it seems that the jihad
grew haphazardly around these hubs.

Surprisingly, there is no evidence of a comprehensive top-down
recruitment program in the global jihad. The pressure comes from the
bottom up, prospective young men eager to join the movement. I have
detected no dedicated recruiter in my search, and I've looked for it.
Nor is there any evidence of any recruitment committee with a full staff
and its own budget in al Qaeda headquarters, nor any evidence of
aggressive publicity campaigns to increase membership.

This absence of privileges kept its profile low enough, despite its
size, that it avoided detection by us in this country. On the other
hand, because of its haphazard growth, it left it vulnerable to the
preference of the people who volunteered for it, so that left huge gaps
in it.

Specifically, it's without a pool of members able to operate
clandestinely in the U.S. and thus limits its ability to wage war on
U.S. soil. This is the number one priority for al Qaeda or any of those
organizations in the jihad.

The growth of jihad depends on its ability to gain new members. Anger at
U.S. policy will increase the pool of potential candidates, but they
still need to establish the crucial link with the jihad to become part
of it. The degree of tolerance of the jihad also affects its rate of
growth.

In a tolerant country, like most western democratic countries, or Saudi
Arabia, Yemen, Malaysia and Tunisia, and Salafi mosques prior to 9/11,
potential members could listen to people who'd boast of their connection
to the jihad. "I was in Afghanistan. I trained. I'm a hero." And so
people approached them and said, "Gee, we'd like to do the same. Can you
connect us?" After 9/11, this has changed dramatically. People who could
have provided a potential link now become reluctant to reveal their
affiliation. The result of this growth pattern is a network that's very
robust, but it's also very vulnerable to targeted attacks, namely
against those what I call social hubs. If the hubs are destroyed, the
system breaks down into isolated nodes. The jihad will be incapable of
mounting sophisticated large-scale operation like the 9/11 attacks and
be reduced to small attacks by singleton. These hubs are vulnerable
because most communication goes through them. By following communication
back to them, good police work would be able to identify and arrest
these human hubs. This strategy has already shown considerable success.

In terms of policy recommendations, there are several. The greatest
priority right now is extensive penetration of these movements. The best
bet for penetration lies in recruitment from the pool of those who went
through the training but decided not to join the jihad. That pool right
now is being prosecuted for providing material support and resources to
the jihad.

Before prosecuting them, I would suggest that all efforts should be made
to try to turn them around and have them go back and join the jihad to
penetrate the jihad. However, at present it's unlikely because of the
fact that they fear prosecution. Perhaps a program of immunity in
exchange for a good-faith effort to help fight the jihad may convince
them to actually --

MR. KEAN: If you can start to wind up.

MR. SAGEMAN: I'm sorry?

MR. KEAN: To wind up.

MR. SAGEMAN: Yes, I'm almost done.

MR. KEAN: Thank you.

MR. SAGEMAN: It also requires the active support of American Muslim
community. And I'm concerned here about some accounts of strong-arm
governmental tactics antagonizing Muslim community in this country and
elsewhere. We really have to repair those bonds.

Also I think that we need to elicit the help of peaceful movements,
revivalist movements, such as Tablighi Jamaat, who would like to get rid
of all the people who have penetrated them and are violent, just like we
allied ourselves with socialists in Western Europe to fight the
communists. Here, I think, it's the same strategy.

And I think that, as Dr. Fandy mentioned, we really need to clamp down
on the anti-western and anti-American hate speech. And here I would
suggest the establishment of an international anti-defamation league to
monitor such speech and work with the press, religious organizations,
governments and respective justice systems to condemn and control it.
And there is some indication that now the Saudis, after the May 12th
bombings, are starting to do that. The last item is the war in Iraq.
This is -- now that we're there, it's going to become a litmus test of
our policy in all the Middle East. If we succeed, great. It's going to
be a model for other people to emulate. If we fail, it's going to
increase our problems, mainly the pool of people going to fight us.

So despite our major victories, we have not yet defeated this movement.
If we relax our vigilance, its network will spontaneously reconstitute.
If we continue our fight based on understanding of its network and
dynamics and with good police work and intelligence work, combined with
more global measures, and especially international assistance, we should
be able to conclusively eliminate it.

Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much. Questions from the panel? Senator Gorton.

MR. GORTON: Last week there was an election in Kuwait. The franchise was
limited to maybe one-third of the male residents of the country. And, of
course, women were not allowed to vote. And the radicals won
overwhelmingly. Now, it would be difficult to name a nation anywhere in
the world, especially a Muslim nation, in which the influence of the
United States has been more benign than it has been in Kuwait. It owes
its existence to the United States.

Does this not indicate -- I ask all of you this, but I'm going to quote
particularly in two places that Dr. Gunaratna says that radical Muslims
are only a minuscule percentage of all Muslims. Now, I think most of
your written statement, Doctor, is contrary to that, that the support,
at least passive support, is much broader. If we have not succeeded in
Kuwait in creating a society which is reasonably liberal, how in the
world do we, or does any western country that is not Muslim, tell
Muslims what true Islam is?

I'd like any of you to comment on that.

MR. FANDY: Just let me -- just because I was recently in Kuwait and I
followed the elections and all of that, probably I can say something
about it. Sir, one of the main lessons from the Kuwaiti elections is
that, one, the Muslim Brotherhood lost and gained only two seats. And
some Salafi radicals, the S-1, the Jihadist groups, certainly won seats,
especially Walid al-Tabatabai and others, who are very much anti-U.S.

But it is very important to understand in this context that Kuwait,
compared to the neighborhood -- at least women in Kuwait, I saw them
driving their cars and running around. Yes, they did not get the
suffrage. The emir of Kuwait put out a request for the parliament last
time, and again the Islamist radical forces clamped down on this and
women could not get the vote. But it is very important throughout the
Middle East -- not Kuwait alone. One thing we are not getting thus far,
whether it is in Iraq or Egypt or Saudi Arabia or Kuwait, is that we
need to hear gratitude for what we do in that part of the world. In
fact, governments are unable to come forth and say, "We are friends of
the United States."

And I think our problems throughout the Middle East is really about an
approach that has developed over the years that somehow we tolerate Arab
leaders telling us something in private rooms, and letting them deal
with their public the way they want to. It is very important for friends
of the United States to stand by the United States and speak out, that
indeed Kuwait was liberated by the United States. None of the Muslim or
the Arab world, if it were left to the devices of the Muslim or the Arab
world, Kuwait would have been occupied until this day. It is very
important that the governments come out and be grateful, even in Iraq it
is very important that the Iraqi people come out and be grateful.

The question for Kuwait -- I like the idea that Kuwait is experimenting
with democracy, whether it includes radicals or non-radicals. It is very
important to bring these people in in a dialogue. The one problem in
Kuwait which remains is the international element of the Muslim
Brotherhood represented by a group named al-Islah, that basically has
tremendous finances and capable to recruit. But Kuwait was good enough
to refuse the spokesperson of al Qaeda to be handed from Kuwait to Iran
recently. So it is very important to really push the government of
Kuwait into really being forthcoming on the question of Islamists, and
the question also of finances. But we have to realize that also they are
limited in their means. We have to technically assess these things in
tracing the finances that go to al Qaeda and other organizations.

But I wouldn't be very worried when some members, even if they are
extremist in their views, are part of the parliament. I would be
terribly worried about --

MR. GORTON: Well, they are a substantial majority of the parliament now,
are they not?

MR. FANDY: I don't think they will affect -- they are right now probably
10 members of parliament, including -- still the government has the
majority thus far. It's very important that we tell the government of
Kuwait very clearly that gratitude is the essence of friendship. And if
you talk publicly and increase the talk publicly about we are friends of
the United States, and people come out and speak about their gratitude,
then the media can affect everybody. But the Islamists and the radicals
are practically taking advantage of an atmosphere where everybody is
quiet about the friendship of the United States. So everybody is on the
run, because leaders are unable to come out and say, "We are friends of
the United States, and here are the reasons why, and here are the
reasons why these guys are wrong." Right now nobody is telling them that
they are wrong, whether it is in Saudi Arabia or Egypt or everywhere
else.

MR. GORTON: That -- okay, go ahead.

MR. GUNARATNA: Sir, I want to make two points. One is I would still say
that in the Muslim world it is minuscule of the Muslims that actively
support terrorism. There may be a larger percentage that supports the
various coffers that have been spearheaded by these organizations, but
in terms of active support, the people who give money, the people who
carry the explosive device and place it, it is still minuscule. If you
look at worldwide support for violent organizations, whether it is in
Northern Ireland in terms of support for the IRA, we have seen a maximum
of 15 percent of the public will support organizations that engage in
terrorism -- maximum 15 percent -- with one exception; that is, the
conflict between the Palestinians and the Israelis. About 60 percent of
the Palestinians support suicide terrorism. That is because there is a
very high percentage of the Palestinians who have been politicized and
radicalized and mobilized by groups like Hamas, Palestine Islamic Jihad
and Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade.

But other than that conflict, I would say that most other conflicts we
will find less than 20 percent of any population in any Muslim country
will actively support terrorism. This may change with time. This may
change, especially after 9/11, especially after U.S. intervention in
Iraq. But prior to that, we have not seen evidence of greater support --
not sympathy, but support for terrorist organizations.

MR. SAGEMAN: May I make a comment? Although I defer to my esteemed
colleagues, I think that the fear is probably greater than the reality
here in Kuwait. What needs to be done is discrediting those extreme
movements that are about to capture a lot of countries in the Muslim
world. At this point I don't think we have a stronger popular support in
the Middle East than Iran. And why? I think because the mullahs have
been discredited in Iran. Their policy -- see, it's a promise that
everything will become a like a paradise that is really attractive to
all the population. They are faced with a repressive regime, they are
faced with corrupt governments, and so they try something new, a little
bit like Algeria tried to do. And once those people will be in power,
you will see that there is absolutely no substance behind their
policies.

Now, the key here is not to allow them to gather like in Iran all the
levels of power to prevent other people from running a fair election,
even if they do like Iran that they have no power whatsoever. So this
really the one position that we have to insist that, fine, let
fundamentalists take over the government, and after five years you will
see the whole population turn around.

MR. GORTON: But isn't the fundamental problem of antipathy, whether
highly radicalized and involving terrorism or passive distaste of the
West a result of the three- to five-hundred-year reversal of roles in
the world? And is there any possibility that there can be a true
prosperity in the Middle East or the Muslim world, as long as 50 percent
of the population can't effectively participate, the whole female part
of the population? And how does that change, given the fundamental basis
of Islam itself?

MR. SAGEMAN: Well, again, if you look at Iran where the women vote, this
has changed quite a bit. It seems that the support really comes from the
base and not really from the top government. Actually, if you eliminate
the top 2,000 in the government you will have a very pro-American
country. Remember, this is a country that had spontaneous demonstration
in support of the United States right after 9/11 in the whole Middle
East.

What happened is that after a period of decolonization a lot of Middle
Eastern countries chose the secular socialist route, and this is what
has been discredited, and this really led to the popularity of
fundamentalist movements. They have to kind of go through a process of
learning; otherwise, still the promise will be there and unless you can
give in and give them what they want for a while and realize there is
nothing there, they are not going to stop being attracted to it.

MR. GORTON: Dr. Fandy?

MR. FANDY: I just wanted to -- I think it is very important what is said
here. The issue of women is very central for any reform. However, I
would like you to keep in mind that really what attracted an immigrant
like myself to the United States of America is the slogan of freedom.
And our message should not be jumbled up. As we talk to the Muslim
world, we have to be very clear that we are about freedom and democracy,
whether that democracy produces radical or non-radical. Even if they
were against us, as we know that there are institutions and mechanisms
that allow them in, as well as allow them out. We have to strengthen
institutions inside the Muslim world that provide mechanisms for people
to come into the public arena and debate on the basis of
one-man/one-vote, and make sure also that these governments have the
mechanisms to lift them out, as well when they are voted out. Thus far
these institutions do not exist. You might have one-man, one-vote,
one-time when the Islamists take over. If you have these safeguards that
indeed there is no chance for one-man, one-vote, one-time in the case of
maybe Iraq in the future or somewhere else, we need to strengthen the
mechanisms to allow these people to leave.

Now, our message, I think would be absolutely dangerous for the United
States of America to say that we are for selective democracy. We are a
democracy for this and for somebody when we are against it. We are for
democracy across the board. We are for participation across the board.
Otherwise, I think what we are suffering from in the Muslim world, sir,
right now is that our message is jumbled up. Nobody in the Muslim world
knows what it is our message on Iraq, what is our message on Islam. Do
we hate all Islam or half of it, or radical only? I mean, we have not
put out a strategically positioned message to the Muslim world telling
them who we are and what we are all about.

Now, we can differ on tactical issues, specifically case-by-case basis
like Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Oman, other things. But the overarching
message I think, with all due respect, ought to be uniform on the
question of freedom and democracy. And that's what makes the United
States of America attractive to the rest of the world. As we get jumbled
up, we lose the thrust that made this country great.

MR. GORTON: Yes?

MR. GUNARATNA: Sir, I believe that the situation can be reversed, that
is to identify what went wrong. America has been very generous to the
countries in the Middle East and in Asian countries, especially the
Muslim countries. But there is no gratitude. It is because American
assistance and the relationship that America has had with Middle East
and Asia has been largely government-to-government. It is very important
to invest more resources in public diplomacy, to educate the public
formally and informally in those countries. And I think that there must
be a counter to al Jazeera. There must be more work done to empower the
non-governmental organizations in those countries. And I think that
dealing with government-to-government has not created this good will.

One example is the U.S. government has been telling the Indonesian
government prior to the attack in Bali, October 2002, that there is a
terrorist network in Indonesia, but the U.S. government did not tell the
Indonesian people. So, when Bali happened, the first reaction of the
Indonesian people, or at least a segment of the people, was "our
military has done it." The people were not aware. So, I think it is very
important to invest in shaping the public opinion of the people in those
countries, in public diplomacy.

MR. KEAN: Ms. Gorelick.

MS. GORELICK: It's been very, very interesting. I'd like to switch gears
a little bit. The purpose of this hearing is really two-fold. One is to
understand the enemy so that we are assured that we're taking all
possible steps to meet that enemy. But the other is to determine why we
didn't see and appreciate the threat.

And so I would like to start with you, Dr. Gunaratna, and go back to
1988. You make a very powerful point in your writing, and you've alluded
to it this morning, that al Qaeda was essentially borne out of an
emboldened Islamic movement, emboldened by the fact that it help take
down the Soviet Union by defeating it in Afghanistan, which, of course,
we as a nation supported. We armed them. We supported them. We helped
create this very potent force. And as you point out, in 1988, this
movement was potent, with no enemy remaining.

What did we think at the time these people and this movement was going
to do? And what were the flaws, if any, in our foreign policy and in our
intelligence, that led this group to turn its sights on us and our
allies with seeming impunity? And also, I'd like to hear from you,
Professor Fandy, on that.

MR. GUNARATNA: Madam, the al Qaeda was created before the Soviet troops
left Afghanistan. The Soviet troops left Afghanistan in February 1989.
Al Qaeda was created in March 1988. But certainly, al Qaeda became a
very powerful organization because al Qaeda used the infrastructure it
had built during the -- at the height of the Cold War to fight the
Soviet army. So, certainly al Qaeda made use of the resources that came
to Pakistan and Afghanistan for that purpose. America did the right
thing by supporting the Mujaheddin to fight the Soviet army, but,
however, the failure of the international community, including the
United States, was after the Soviets retreated, withdrew from
Afghanistan. The West turned a blind eye to Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Pakistan, a front-line state in the war against the Soviets, was
abandoned. The U.S. government threatened Pakistan, neglected Pakistan,
neglected Afghanistan. And there were some Americans who told me at that
time, "Well, no, let them fight among each other. It really doesn't
matter to us, you see."

MS. GORELICK: If I might interrupt, as a student of that history, you
can perhaps shed some light on what it was that we in the United States
thought they would be doing. That is, is it your view that our view was
they would simply fight among themselves and be of no threat to anyone
else?

MR. GUNARATNA: Madam, the U.S. intelligence community had a very poor
understanding of those movements. Al Qaeda was created in March '88, but
if you look at, examine the CIA reports, until August 1998, none of the
CIA reports refers to Osama Bin Laden's organization as al Qaeda. It is
referring to Osama Bin Laden's organization as what? As the Islamic
army, or as the UBL network. So, that means for 10 years this
organization existed. And I think you invest something like $30 billion
on your intelligence for a year, right? But they did not know even the
accurate name of Osama's organization that had declared war on you in
1996.

So, I think that you need to invest more in human source penetration.
You need to divert some of your resources that you are investing in your
technical collection into agent handling operations.

MS. GORELICK: Professor Fandy. Thank you.

MR. FANDY: I don't think we have to take all the blame on this. On al
Qaeda, I think, is like any organization, is really part of these
transnational movements. Throughout that part of the world we have a
great deal of -- a number of failed states throughout. And we are also
were suckered in the process by other states in the neighborhood that
gave us their radicals and say "They will fight your jihad in
Afghanistan." In fact, they were emptying out their societies of this
threat, and we carried that baby throughout. And then we left them high
and dry in Afghanistan. We had no plans for what to do in Afghanistan
and how to deal with al Qaeda.

Al Qaeda, if you look at the makeup of al Qaeda, who are the foot
soldiers of al Qaeda? These are people who came from the GIA in Algeria,
came from the jihad in Egypt, came from supporters of Bin Laden in Saudi
Arabia, in Yemen, in also Europe. I mean, we have failed also to map
what we -- mapped the Muslim world in Europe, if you will, we have no
understanding of how to map the Muslim world in Europe into the
societies of Europe, and where do they fit, and all of that. It's a very
complex problem that requires a lot resources. It requires cooperation
from local governments. I think we could have done well had we
subcontracted, if you will, how to fight al Qaeda to local regimes if
they were willing, because they know more and they understand them more.
But somehow we failed to do so. I think it's very important to realize
that we allowed offices here that are extremely dangerous in the United
States, like Maktab al Khidmat in New York, or the Office of Jihad in
New York and in other places. So, the blowback effect was expected,
given our understanding that after the defeat of the Soviet Union, we
had no understanding of the mop up operation. I mean, we are always --
and I think our pattern is clear even in Iraq -- we win wars, but we
don't know how to win peace. And I think that's really a broader issue.
We have to understand how to win the peace. I think we did it in Europe,
but we failed afterwards. I mean, after World War II, I think if it
weren't for this whole plan of restructuring Europe, we created a Europe
that's sustainable. But after that, I think we did not pay attention to
this, and probably even the Iraq example can be very dangerous unless we
come up with the strategy of winning the peace.

MS. GORELICK: Thank you.

MR. SAGEMAN: May I address this issue. I turns out that of all three of
us, I was the one who was over there at the time. I was the liaison
officer with the Mujaheddin until I left Islamabad. And my view of the
history of al Qaeda is actually quite different since I was there.

I must say that it didn't even come across our screen. They were an
insignificant part of our fight against the Soviets. They were really a
hindrance, as a matter of fact. Whenever I ever heard about the Arab
Afghans, it was really in very derogatory terms by the Afghans
themselves. They really were not part of that war. Now, they hijacked
the notion that they were the ones who actually kicked the Soviets out
of Afghanistan and, you know, they had good PR in that sense. But I
don't really see that.

Now, if you can't have a linear view of history, as Dr. Gunaratna has,
then you really discount the notion that the Gulf I happened. And I
think al Qaeda is really more a result of Gulf I and having our troops
in Saudi Arabia and a progressive -- progression in ideology as I try to
really kind of outline in my statement -- the designation of the United
States as the priority really did not come until the mid- 1990s. I mean,
you cannot find that in 1988. I would completely disagree with that.

MS. GORELICK: That's a very interesting perspective, and I apologize for
forgetting that part of your very interesting non-linear career. There
really are not too many liaisons to the Mujaheddin who are also
practicing psychiatrists -- (laughter) -- and we are very happy to have
that peculiar combination before us today.

So, let me actually follow-up, if I might, because this is quite
interesting. What you are saying is that while the infrastructure was in
place so that at the time of, let's say a provocation arising out of our
very strong presence in the Gulf after the Gulf War and particularly in
Saudi Arabia, there really wasn't a decided threat to us between the
fall of the Soviet Union and the victory, if you will, of the Mujaheddin
and others in Afghanistan and the period in the mid-1990s.

But let me ask you then to put your liaison hat back on. Did we have the
resources in place to identify the fact that in the 1990s, the
mid-1990s, that threat had turned on us?

MR. SAGEMAN: I can only talk until I left the government in 1991, and at
that point, we did not. As I said, those Afghan Arabs did not come on
our screen. And having been involved, I kind of followed that situation
until I left in '91. We did not know then. We had no penetration of
them, to my knowledge. They just were not relevant at that time. They
became afterwards, during the exile into Sudan, when we realized that
there was a group there, and I think probably was the first time that
they came on our screen. But this is speculation. I was already out of
the government. I was out of the loop.

MS. GORELICK: Well thank you very much. I have a couple of other
questions, if I might.

I'd like to return, Dr. Fandy, to the point -- Professor Fandy -- to the
point that you made about whether we are really enforcing, if you will,
the president's view that we need to know who is with us and who is
against us. You make the point that the financial aspects of the media
in the Middle East really ought to be studied by us and -- or by someone
-- to determine what the support is for this massive propaganda machine
focused on us. And this may not be a fair question to you, but here it
is: Who do you say in the Middle East is with us, and who is against us?

MR. FANDY: I think to be absolutely honest, everybody in the Middle East
is ambivalent about us and about themselves, that there is -- there is
political risks that's calculated locally throughout the neighborhood
that if they come out full swinging with the United States that probably
they might lose their power. I mean, which is really sometimes not true.
These are -- everybody talks about the Middle East as the unstable area
in the world. I can tell you, this is the most stable area in the world
if people can rule for 18 and 20 and 30 years, that's very stable. We
haven't seen overthrowing of governments throughout. This is a very
stable region and people can afford to be with us. I think many
countries are with us, but also secretly with us. I think Egypt helped
us a great deal on intelligence after September 11th, but also Egypt
failed to come full force and be straightforward about their total
support for us.

MS. GORELICK: So, on the -- if you were making a list that included
public support and support in winning and helping to win the minds and
hearts of the people, or at least presenting a fair presentation of the
facts, you would find no one fully with us. Is that correct?

MR. FANDY: Well, I think no one is fully with us. Not only that, but
there's something extra that needs to be carefully studied. I think
there's something that can be called sort of "Saddam settlements in the
Arab media" that need to be dismantled, and also Muslim brotherhood
settlements within the Arab media that need to be dismantled. It is --
it is disheartening, if you study media organizations, that you find
people who fought in Afghanistan now wearing three-piece suits and doing
a talk show. This is -- this is preposterous. And I think we have -- we
have the knowledge and we know who is who amongst this group. We know
who is supporting what newspaper, who is financing it.

The problem is that sometimes we think that Arab media is very much like
Western media. These are legitimate organizations somehow for freedom of
expression. If you study certain newspapers that were created -- the
number of newspapers created by Saddam Hussein throughout the Arab world
and by the Iraqi intelligence services, from London, to Cairo, to Paris,
to other places, these are front organizations. We shouldn't have any
misgivings to make clear that al Qaeda, like any other organization, has
a media wing to it. It has public affairs officers. And these officers
exist and are implanted in all Arab media, in the same way that they had
officers within Arab armies and governments and that sort that supported
them.

MS. GORELICK: So, if I might summarize, your advice to us is not to
superimpose our western notions of what the press is and what its ethics
and values are on what we see in the Middle East and look at the funding
and the actual activities of these organizations.

MR. FANDY: Who is who, and who is doing what? I mean, this is very
important.

MS. GORELICK: I appreciate that. I have one final question. It was
interesting to me that Dr. Gunaratna, in response to Senator Gorton's
question, made a point of saying that the percentage of truly hostile
individuals in the Muslim world is minuscule, even if support for their
larger goals might be broader than that minuscule group.

So I'd like to address this question to Dr. Sageman, because I don't
have a lot of experience in foreign terrorism, but I have a lot of
experience in domestic terrorism. And the analogy is far from perfect,
but before the Oklahoma City bombing, there was a growing domestic
terrorist threat in the United States. It was a proliferation of people
who were overtly hostile and who were militant and who said that they
wanted to do violence within this country.

And what the government did in response was two-fold. One was to raise
the level of opprobrium in society for that sort of activity. We and the
culture made it clear that violence was just not an appropriate tactic.
And, two, we infiltrated everybody we could possibly infiltrate. And the
two tactics together, particularly after Oklahoma City, were, I think,
quite successful.

My question to you is two-fold. One, should we just be worried about the
minuscule group of actively hostile potential martyrs? Or do we need to
be as worried about the societal support that I think Slade Gorton was
getting at? And two, from your interviews and your sort of -- the
texture you've drawn from the interviews you've done, what are the two
or three best tactics we can use to diminish the potency of the violent
groups?

MR. SAGEMAN: Well, if I knew that, the government would probably hire
me. (Laughter).

MS. GORELICK: Well, we're considering that.

MR. SAGEMAN: Thank you. It's a very difficult two-pronged question. The
first one is, when you have terrorism on your own soil, it hurts more.
So the Saudis really were not concerned about 9/11. As a matter of fact,
they dismissed it. "It's not us." But when Riyadh happened, it became
real to them. So I'm not really sure that the domestic analogy can
really be transplanted to the foreign one.

The second, we have to penetrate them, absolutely, just like we did
here. But the key is really to prevent, even though the number of people
are minuscule -- there's 1.3 billion Muslims; there may be at most 2,000
people who are willing to commit violence, which is an infinitesimal
part of it -- there is still a fairly large pool of people who want to
graduate to that level. And what's missing is that human link.

And what we're doing now is really the appropriate way of doing it,
which is we don't really allow them to advertise freely in either Salafi
mosques or in Saudi Arabia or anywhere else that "Gee, I'm part of the
jihad; if you guys want to sign up, just come and see me afterwards and
I'll make the arrangements." So by eliminating that link, we just keep a
potential pool a potential pool and not the reality of terrorism.

MS. GORELICK: Thank you.

MR. GUNARATNA: Madam, could I?

MS. GORELICK: Certainly.

MR. GUNARATNA: No terrorist group can continue, can sustain, without
flow of support. These organizations are continuing to grow like
companies. They're growing because there is support. And that is why I
said, during my presentation, that public diplomacy is very important.
You have to invest in the public to create a societal norm and ethic
against terrorism and to say that these organizations are not Koranic
organizations, that they're heretical organizations, that they are
misinterpreting and misrepresenting Islam, that they're presenting a
corrupt version of Islam.

It is important to invest resources in that direction, because if you
disrupt public support for these movements, these movements will die.
They will perish. They will be very small in number and they will not be
able to conduct this type of high-impact operations. I also want to go
to the point that you raised with Professor Fandy about are they with
the United States. If you look at since 9/11, there have been arrests of
3,100 al Qaeda members and al Qaeda supporters, key supporters, in 102
countries of the world.

These Muslim regimes in the Middle East and in Asia are perceiving the
same threat that you are perceiving from these organizations, because if
you examine their trajectory, initially they want to topple those states
and create Islamic states.

Osama bin Laden said that it was too costly for them to conduct
terrorist operations in the Middle East against those corrupt Muslim
rulers and those false Muslim rulers and those corrupt Muslim
governments and said that they must change their strategy.

Their changing their strategy was they said they must attack the head of
the poisonous snake, the United States, that was protecting, shielding
those false Muslim rulers and those corrupt Muslim governments. That is
why they decided to strike the head of the poisonous snake, the United
States.

You see, so in terms of the changing al Qaeda strategy of near targeting
to distant targets and now returning back to the near targets, you see,
it has generated equal amount of fear in those countries that they are
being threatened by these groups.

So I think the United States have received measure of cooperation. Today
the most important al Qaeda members, they are not detaining in
Guantanamo Bay. They've been detained in secret U.S. facilities in those
Middle Eastern and Asian countries, Muslim countries.

MS. GORELICK: Well, if I can just summarize so that I can pass the baton
to my colleague here, your views, while not wholly consistent, are one
that we are getting good cooperation, if quiet cooperation, from many
countries because it is in their own self- interest to do so,
particularly since the attacks in Riyadh.

But, number two, we are failing to get that support in the whole area of
public diplomacy, represented by the media and otherwise, which is
permitting, A, the flow of funds, and B, a degree of public acceptance
of the kind of violence that has to be brought to an end. And I think
that those are very strong take-aways for us today, and I thank you for
your very helpful answers to my questions.

MR. KEAN: Thank you. Congressman Roemer.

MR. ROEMER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to, for
15 seconds, indulge our committee for just a comment to you and our
distinguished vice chairman. Yesterday, as a chair and vice chair, as a
Republican and as a Democrat, you went forward in a public press
conference, and in your usual artful and diplomatic way, you both went
forward with velvet gloves on and insisted that this commission get more
cooperation from some of the agencies that have been dealing with us
over the last several months and respond more forcefully to our
aggressive search for facts and for substance and for information.

I strongly applaud that bipartisan effort. It shows the consistency and
the force of, I think, our commission on this point. I might have used
some boxing gloves rather than the velvet gloves that you used. But with
particular reference to the Department of Defense and to the CIA and FBI
and main Justice, unless we start getting more of not just the document
flow but important, substantive documents, it's going to be very
difficult for us to forcefully move forward, and not just have important
academics appear before us, but have people like Dr. Berger, who might
have been in a position to know why we might have been slow in the 1990s
to identify al Qaeda; Dr. Rice, currently in the Bush administration, to
answer some of these questions about how the Bush administration
responded. That's very important for this commission, and I hope we can
get the White House's cooperation to forcefully move these facts
forward.

Dr. Gunaratna, you studied in my hometown of South Bend, Indiana, at the
University of Notre Dame. You know how direct we can be in the Midwest.
Let me start with a question with you, and then I want to get to one
question for all three panelists.

Mohammad Jamal Khalifa is an individual who is thought by some analysts
and intelligence experts to have a direct link to al Qaeda. He's a
Saudi. He is someone who was mentioned in a January 21st, 2003 Christian
Science Monitor article.

In that article, you're quoted -- let me read your quote. Quote: "Had
the U.S. followed the Khalifa case in the Philippines, I believe
September 11th could have been averted," unquote. Extremely powerful
words saying this one case was so important with an individual connected
to all this that if the U.S. had done their job, things might have
turned out differently.

First of all, do you stick by that statement, that quote? Secondly, if
you do, factually, in detail and with substance, why is that true?

MR. GUNARATNA: Sir, Mohammad Jamal Khalifa is the brother-in-law of
Osama bin Laden. He arrived in the Philippines in 1988 and he became the
first director, the founding director, of the International Islamic
Relief Organization of Saudi Arabia. He used the IIRO to funnel al Qaeda
funds to the Abu Sayyaf group and the Moral Islamic Liberation Front. He
also hosted Khalid Shaikh Mohammad, the brother- in-law of Ramzi
Mohammad Yousef, the first World Trade Center bomber.

And what we have seen is that the old Plan Bojinka, the plan that al
Qaeda had in 1994 to destroy 12 U.S. airliners over the Pacific
simultaneously, that operation was the genesis of 9/11 operation. If you
read the interrogation of Khalid Shaikh Mohammad, who is now in U.S.
custody, he has very clearly stated how 9/11 was planned, that it
originated from old Plan Bojinka, that plan.

MR. ROEMER: Have you had access to those interviews and that information
on Khalid Shaikh Mohammad?

MR. GUNARATNA: Yes, sir. In fact, in that debriefing, he says very
clearly that he put a bolt, a metal bolt, in his shoe and he mounted --
to test the security of the airports in the Far East. He traveled
through to those airports -- Seoul, Hong Kong, various other airports.
So you can see that in the planning of 9/11, the original seeds was out
of Philippines. And, in fact, they did the first dry run for old Plan
Bojinka, where Ramzi Mohammad Yousef, in fact, flew from Manila to Sibu
on a Philippine airline plane and he placed a nitroglycerine device
under his seat. He got off the plane in Sibu and there was an explosion
when the plane was coming close to Japan, and it killed one Japanese,
injured seven or eight others, made a hole in the fuselage. The plane
was going to Narita Airport in Tokyo, but the skilled pilot landed in
the Naha Airport in Okinawa.

And you can see that they were very serious. And the Americans were
quite happy with the outcome of old Plan Bojinka because they arrested
Ramzi Hamad (ph) Yousef in Pakistan. They arrested Walid Amin Khan Shah
(ph) in Malaysia. They arrested Abdul Hakim Murad, the first al Qaeda
pilot, in the Philippines. But they failed to arrest Khalid Shaikh
Mohammad, the mastermind of that operation.

MR. ROEMER: But specifically, Dr. Gunaratna, if the U.S. understands the
Bojinka plot, that planes could be used as weapons, how then, in not
only understanding that plot, not only going back and knowing that a
group had attacked the World Trade Center in 1993, how do you then avert
9/11 by following this one particular individual?

MR. GUNARATNA: Sir, Mohammed Jamal Khalifa was in the Philippines and he
was in touch with this group. But Khalid Shaikh Mohammed was the more
important man.

MR. ROEMER: So you say you get -- eventually you get Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed and that prevents 9/11 from occurring?

MR. GUNARATNA: Absolutely, because Khalid Sheik Mohammed was the
mastermind of 9/11. He organized that whole operation. The first
planning meeting of 9/11 was held from the 5th to the 8th of January in
Kuala Lumpur. Who chaired that meeting? Khalid Shaikh Mohammed chaired
that meeting. The first two hijackers to enter the United States they
were present at that meeting. So the 9/11 operation is an extension of
old Plan Bojinka. So the players of old plan Bojinka, they were not all
arrested.

MR. ROEMER: Let me pursue that line of questioning in a minute. Let me
go to Dr. Fandy for a question as well. Dr. Fandy, a former CIA agent by
the name of Robert Baer, writes in the May Atlantic Monthly issue that
particularly he is concerned about Saudi Arabia's support for
fundamentalism and for terrorism abroad. He states in this article many
things. But one of them, he claims that the Saudis have transferred 500
million to al Qaeda over the past decade. Now, do you think there is any
kind of credibility to a figure like that? How would you be able to
track that? And how would you measure the Saudi support with the United
States for fighting terrorism prior to 9/11?

MR. FANDY: To just be absolutely honest, I just don't know this figure.
I did not come across this figure. And also the idea of wire transfer or
transfer funds, I can probably say throughout the Arab world people use
cash and not banking systems, so it's very difficult to actually trace
it, unless the origin of the money came from a Muslim country. Unless
there is something that is really -- it -- the idea that it -- I haven't
seen from my study of Saudi Arabia that people use checks, or even when
they use bank deposits, this is not a really large group of the society.
Most people get their salaries in cash. So the idea of wire transfers --
that amount of money has to originate somewhere else. It could have
connection to Saudi Arabia --

MR. ROEMER: I think he insinuates, as Dr. Gunaratna did with respect to
Mohammad Jamal Khalifa, that some of the money was funneled through
charities and other --

MR. FANDY: That's right. I think that's the very central question for
really looking at Saudi Arabia, is to look at these charities. And I
talked to Saudis about this in interviews in terms of what do they think
of that. And I think sometimes they come off as these are the unintended
consequences of bad politics, that somehow they decided to upgrade Saudi
Arabia's image in the Muslim world; therefore they tried to help the
poor with schools, with other places, not knowing that the ideology as
well as the manning of these organizations was hijacked by al Qaeda
members. So there is -- I have no way of assessing whether this is an
honest claim or a dishonest claim, but I would say that probably given
what I know about Saudi Arabia that this is probably the unintended
consequences of bad policy and lack of foresight and long-term planning.
You see mosques and other things being supported by Saudi Arabia, even
in the United States, but Saudi students use them for four years when
they are here and then they are taken over by other people. So there is
no follow- up for these organizations.

Well, money from Saudi Arabia goes -- went to various groups of the
mujaheddin -- there was certain cultural support that this is a good
thing to fight the Soviet Union; also money went to organizations that
were fighting in Europe, in Bosnia to support their Muslim brothers and
their co-religionists, if you will, who were embattled in Europe. Yes, a
lot of money went into that. But how it is being used and who used it
it's very difficult to actually say certain money was authorized by
let's say officials or something of that sort. But certainly there was a
sentiment in Saudi Arabia that at the time was encouraging people to
support these charities.

Now, I think this is a very important issue to think about as we think
about probably phase two in the war on terrorism, really sort of drying
up these resources or drying up the swamps, if you will. We are looking
at really educational institutions and charities. We are looking at
really the software of the Muslim world, if you would. I mean, the
hardware and the money and everything else can be looked at very
carefully, but the software, the educations, what is in the Muslim
world's head, how people are being raised and educated and other things
-- this is our task. And that requires investigating very carefully
educational institutions, investing very carefully charities,
investigating very carefully textbooks and whatever goes into that bad
software. We have to rewrite that software, if you will. And if we don't
rewrite it, nobody else will rewrite it.

MR. ROEMER: So in response to Commissioner Gorelick's question about
emphasizing public diplomacy, emphasizing non-government-to- government
aid, emphasizing more help for the types of schools that can educate
young poor children -- not in madrassas but in other ways -- that is
extremely important to U.S. efforts in the future. On the same hand,
some of the charitable work that supports those efforts can be diverted
for terrorism, and that money can be raised in places like Saudi Arabia
or, as Dr. Gunaratna talked about, in the Philippines, and diverted Abu
Sayyaf.

MR. FANDY: Or United Arab Emirates and other places. The main issue for
public diplomacy is that we have done a lot for the world. I think our
problem is that you find schools that were built in Egypt or in
Indonesia or in other places -- the people took credit for these
schools, if you read the names of these schools, what they were called,
these were not called American schools or came to you through the
assistance of the United States. It is called Sheik So-And-So School, or
this Muslim radical leader. So we are paying the money, but the branding
of these schools is going to somebody else. And we are very much like
the Ottoman Empire in many ways. We do not follow (what the path is ?)
that we are supporting throughout the whole world what they are doing.
We visit them once a year, and that's it. We don't do a follow-up. And
empires, sir, should have always to have Philby and Shakespeare and
Lawrence of Arabia and people who know the realm of the empire. We don't
know the realm that we are claiming to have control over. We don't have
the expertise, languages and other things. And all of this really has to
be put in place. We have to follow up. We have to follow our money. Even
our money can go to al Qaeda, believe it or not. So it is very important
to just do these -- create institutions and systems of follow-ups to
know where our charities are -- our own charities -- are going. Our aid
sometimes goes to corrupt systems that find their way to also
illegitimate use of our own money.

So in many ways unless we have -- we have to understand this big
picture. There is a phase two of war on terrorism that is drying the
swamps, and here are the mechanisms that are in place. I think most of
us get worried about tactical small anecdotal evidence and try to draw
the big picture from that. That's not a good approach to it. The whole
plumbing system in the Muslim world is broken, and the Muslim world was,
if you pardon the expression, was flushing in its own neighborhood for
years, and we tolerated it. And now September 11th they flushed and it
came to New York. Unless we fix that sink and that system and that
plumbing system, it is our duty. Nobody else will fix it. People will
enjoy drinking their bad water, because they have been drinking it for
years.

MR. ROEMER: I appreciate your testimonies and your direct proposals to
try to fix the plumbing systems with other governments, with our
bilateral programs, with other governments, with our relationships with
other governments, and all those governments in the Middle East should
be on the table. I think the U.S., looking medium and long term should
look at ways to give incentives and carrots and sticks to Egypt and
Saudi Arabia to try and fix some of those problems.

Dr. Sageman, let me end with you. I know my colleagues are anxious to
ask you questions. You have intimately looked at the structure of al
Qaeda, and what's interesting about your testimony is you look at these
pretty sophisticated individuals, fairly well educated, coming from
middle class backgrounds without a lot of family, historical problems,
that are themselves in Europe, in Hamburg. And they eventually come up
with this plot, combined with muscle, so-called muscle on the airplanes
coming over from Saudi Arabia, about 15 of the hijackers come in. They
mix together in the United States, and pull off one of the most
devastating attacks in our nations history, and kill over 3,000 people.
It's a group of very sophisticated people coming with some other people
from other backgrounds. Is al Qaeda capable of this kind of plot,
pulling this kind of plot off successfully here and now today? MR.
SAGEMAN: I don't think so at this point. But if we relax in the future
--

MR. ROEMER: Why?

MR. SAGEMAN: Well, because are far more vigilant right now, and perhaps
we might have swung the other way, where anybody who looks a little bit
strange is now a guest of the FBI. But this will fade with time. People
really get tired of being so vigilant. So I am not saying that in a few
years from now they won't be able to do it. Right now today, no.

MR. ROEMER: In the United States?

MR. SAGEMAN: In the United States.

MR. ROEMER: But somewhere else they could. Dr. Gunaratna, do you agree
with that?

MR. GUNARATNA: Sir, there are three reasons why al Qaeda has failed to
mount large-scale terrorist operations in the United States since 9/11.
One is heightened public vigilance. As long as the public are alert,
terrorist groups cannot plan, prepare and organize a big terrorist
attack. Second is that there is unprecedented security, intelligence and
law enforcement cooperation in the United States and by the U.S.
agencies with agencies outside the United States, including in the Asian
and the Middle Eastern countries. And the third reason is that today al
Qaeda has been aggressively hunted. When you hunt the terrorist
organization relentlessly, that group does not have the time, space or
the resources to plan, prepare and execute big operations like 9/11. So
if you can maintain these three elements you will not suffer another
attack of that scale.

MR. ROEMER: And that's not to preclude the smaller, less expensive types
of attacks that we see on soft targets around the world?

MR. GUNARATNA: Certainly sir you will continue to witness attacks of the
scale of Bali, of Mombassa, of Casablanca, of Riyadh in the next few
years, because al Qaeda and its associate groups are still able to plan,
prepare and execute those operations, especially in the poorer countries
of the world -- of Asia, of Africa, of the Middle East, of the Caucasus.

MR. ROEMER: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Senator Cleland.

MR. CLELAND: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and the staff
for assembling the most profound group of witnesses I've ever seen to
talk about the enemy that attacked us and the rationale for that and the
understanding that we need to deal with this in the future. I would say
that if the government doesn't hire all of you by sunset today --
(laughter) -- they're making a big mistake.

Just a couple of one-liners here. Dr. Sageman, as liaison out of
Pakistan to the mujaheddin in Pakistan and as a psychiatrist, I just
want to know how long have you been feeling this way? (Laughter.) I'm
just kidding.

MR. SAGEMAN: You should ask my wife. (Laughter.)

MR. CLELAND: Professor Fandy, I was fascinated with one little tidbit
that you threw out, and that is -- and I just want to verify it -- that
the Muslim Brotherhood has an office in Qatar, where our CENTCOM
headquarters is, and in other foreign countries like Indonesia and
Virginia. (Laughter.)

MR. FANDY: Virginia is not a foreign country.

MR. CLELAND: I know. Is that really true?

MR. FANDY: Well, I think -- I mean, the Muslim Brotherhood is the mother
of all these movements in the final analysis. If you go and trace all
the ideas and the ideology that drove these 15 hijackers to drive these
planes into the World Trade Center, it is the ideas of Sayed Kutub bin
Abu Ali (ph) Meldoodi (ph) and all of that that came from the Muslim
Brotherhood. Yes, one of the major figures of the Muslim Brotherhood
leaders is Sheikh al Qaradawi, who lives in Qatar, who is the man
actually who selected who is who among the Muslim Brotherhood members
who became the staff of al Jazeera station. He's a very influential
figure in Qatar -- very central recruiter. He chairs also the Muslim
fatwa in Sweden, believe it or not, with the Muslim Brotherhood in
Sweden, creating these offices. So when there was the change of the
guard last year who heads the Muslim Brotherhood after the death of
their grand murshid, these men were consulted, from Lebanon to France to
Sweden, to Qatar to other places. There is a Muslim Brotherhood
International, if you will, that is an assembly of the men who were
driven out of Egypt during Nasser and stayed -- from Saudi Arabia and
other places in the world.

I stand by that statement, sir. I mean, mostly al Qaeda and all these
Islamic groups, when you see their relationship with America, they are
not standing next to us as number three. They are right there on our
shoulders. There was a Muslim Brotherhood organization that I came
across in 1992 that was in Virginia and Maryland as well. So there is an
extensive network of Islamic movements across the United States that is
not being studied, and it's not been studied very carefully.

One thing that I would like to emphasize here as we think of Muslims in
America, some of us started to really look at Islam in the same way as
Christianity is, so we look at a mosque in the same way we look at a
church. That's not true. There are Muslims who go only once a week to
the mosque. The mosque is not a social organization. The mosque is a
place where you receive your religious guidance, but not necessarily --
the mosque is not the parallel of the church, but somehow the Islamic
organizations made it clear to us that there is this sanctity of
front-door mosques if you will and things of that sort. These are open
for investigation, and one should look into how mosques are being built
-- and where the money came from.

MR. CLELAND: Well, thank you. I want to give some thoughts about
Vietnam, Afghanistan and Iraq. In listening to your conversation, I have
been thinking about the quote, "Oh, what a tangled web we weave,"
particularly in this murky world of covert or special operations and
dealing with guerrillas, suicide bombers and the like. As a Vietnam
veteran, I am painfully aware that during World War II the OSS actually
dropped supplies to Ho Chi Minh and his Viet men, because they were
fighting our enemy at the time, Japan, and the Japanese were in formerly
French Indochina. And in effect Ho Chi Minh was our guy, because he was
fighting our enemy. And, matter of fact, it was Ho Chi Minh who was a
big fan of Thomas Jefferson and the Declaration of Independence and
could quote it extensively. As a matter of fact, about the point, about
getting our word out and our message out about freedom and democracy, I
was talking to one of the staffers yesterday who is an expert on the
Middle East, he said, One of the best things we could do is just
circulate the Declaration of Independence throughout the Middle East to
the population there. And, by the way, I was thinking about Slade
Gorton's question about only men could vote in Kuwait, and only a third
could vote, and women couldn't vote, elected some clerics and so forth.
I thought about the history of our own country -- that was 1776 and the
terrorists were Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, George Washington.

But the point being though that at one time Ho Chi Minh was our guy.
After the Second World War, Roosevelt did not want to go back in and
support France and French Indochina. He did not believe in the
colonization of that area -- Churchill did. Ultimately we wound up
supporting the French as they went back in. Ho Chi Minh and the Viet men
fought the French. We ultimately supported them through about 80 percent
of that war, and they lost it. We got in there, and I was pat of the
10-year American war in formerly French Indochina, and in effect fought
Ho Chi Minh's North Vietnamese and VC. Now, interestingly enough, the
Russians supported the Ho Chi Minh. Well, you go now to Afghanistan.
There what a tangled web we weave. We are supporting the mujaheddin,
because they are fighting the Russians, who are our enemy, and
Afghanistan becomes their Vietnam, and we are supporting the guys that
now we call the terrorists, who then we abandon as the mujaheddin, and
now they turned into the people that we are now fighting -- we are
calling them terrorists.

Interestingly enough, too, now in the Iraq-Iranian war, silently and
tacitly we supported Saddam Hussein because of the extremists that took
over Iran and captured American prisoners and so forth and so forth, and
now then Saddam Hussein became the bad guy and we took him out.

Now, here's the question: In this massive world of 1.3 billion Muslims,
with obviously an avant garde Osama bin Laden and his terrorist
organizations and other terrorist organizations springing up -- and, Dr.
Sageman, did you say in many ways Osama bin Laden and al Qaeda kind of
got a jump start after the desert war in 1991?

I'd like to read to you a question -- an actual statement of Senator
Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, who is on the Foreign Relations
Committee, and my fellow Vietnam veteran, a statement that he made
before the National Press Club June 19, 2003, because what I am trying
to get at here, is you all described a milieu in which the United States
functions either well or ill, particularly in this troubled part of the
world, the Middle East, Senator Hagel says, "The June 2003 survey of the
Pew" -- P-E-W -- "Global Attitudes Project should be an arousing alarm
clock, not merely a wake-up call to all Americans regarding the
perception of America in the world today."

You're talking about America not getting credit, no gratitude and so
forth. The Pew project relied on public opinion surveys from 44 nations
in the summer and fall of last year and further data from 21 countries
in April and May of this year for a total survey sample of 54,000
people.

The survey finds a disconcerting message regarding American leadership
and credibility. From the Pew poll Senator Hagel quotes, the Iraq war
has widened the rift between Americans and Western Europeans, further
inflamed the Muslim world, softened support for the war on terrorism,
and significantly weakened global support for the pillars of the
post-World War II era, the U.N. and the North Atlantic Alliance.

Isn't that the kind of news that Osama bin Laden and the radical Islamic
extremists would welcome? And isn't that actually creating more problems
for us, more terrorism, more potential for attacks against the West? And
isn't this bad news? And is the Iraq war making it more difficult to get
after the terrorists, or is it making it easier, especially since we're
there with a quarter of a million troops in Kuwait and Iraq, with no end
in sight and no exit strategy? Dr. Gunaratna?

MR. GUNARATNA: Sir, terrorists themselves cannot master large- scale
support. They do not have the organization to do that. It is often the
whole reaction of states, of state actors, that lead to the generation
of large-scale support. That is why, when we fight terrorist
organizations, we must ensure that there is no overreaction or there is
no under-reaction, because if we do not react properly to a terrorist
group, the terrorists will think we are weak and they will attack us.

That is why, after U.S.S. Cole, no effort -- at least when East Africa
was attacked, you fired 70 cruise missiles. It did not have a positive
impact. But after U.S.S. Cole, you did not do anything. So it is
important for there to be some action. But there must not be
underreaction or overreaction.

The overreaction to 9/11 was U.S. intervention in Iraq. Iraq never posed
a direct and immediate threat to the United States. It was al Qaeda and
the associate groups of al Qaeda that posed a direct and immediate
threat to the United States. So U.S. intervention in Iraq, to get rid of
one man, you invaded his country. It was, again, the failure of the
intelligence community to get rid of that one man.

You do not have to risk all those troops by going into a country to get
rid of one man. You said that we took him out. You're referring to
Saddam Hussein. You said, "We took him out." No, sir, you have not taken
him out. He is still there. He's still challenging you. As long as the
core and the penultimate leadership of any government or any
organization, whether in exile or not, is active, that organization will
pose a threat to you.

So what we are looking at is U.S. intervention in Afghanistan was fully
justified. People fully supported you. But your intervention in Iraq,
you have not received that scale of support. In fact, that intervention
has not earned good will toward America. It has earned some criticism
and some displeasure. And the terrorist organizations will harness that
displeasure and that resentment and that anger in the Muslim world, and
they will grow in strength and size and they will become a greater
threat to you with time.

By going into Iraq, you have not reduced the threat of terrorism to the
United States in any way.

MR. CLELAND: And, in your opinion, maybe increased it?

MR. GUNARATNA: Certainly. Saddam Hussein, with finance and perhaps with
access to certain special weapons, may be a greater threat today than he
was in power in that country. We could have had a different attitude, a
different response to him at that time, than in a day like today.

MR. CLELAND: And we have 240,000 soldiers at risk in Kuwait and Iraq
now.

MR. GUNARATNA: So also we must look at the picture, the overall picture
in the Middle East. Overnight, the United States has become the
immediate neighbor of Iran and of Syria, and we must never forget that
in 1983 Iranian-sponsored Lebanese Hizbollah attacked; conducted a
coordinated, simultaneous suicide attack against the French and the
American bases. You lost 241 American troops, which was the single
biggest loss you suffered in such an attack prior to 9/11.

MR. CLELAND: That was Lebanon, right?

MR. GUNARATNA: Yes, Lebanon. MR. CLELAND: The Khobar Towers.

MR. GUNARATNA: No, no, sir. I am referring to the attack on the U.S.
Marine barracks in Beirut.

MR. CLELAND: Yes.

MR. GUNARATNA: Hizbollah conducted a suicide attack. The point that I
want to make here is that the disposition of Iran and toward Syria has
not dramatically changed toward the United States. Today the United
States is the immediate neighbor of Iran and Syria. You are in an area
where you do not have very good friends.

MR. KEAN: We've got --

MR. CLELAND: Dr. Sageman?

MR. SAGEMAN: Very short. Basically, Senator, you've increased the pool
of potential terrorists, but you still --

MR. CLELAND: Increased the pool of potential terrorists?

MR. SAGEMAN: But you still need to make the linkage for Osama bin Laden
to be able to tap into it. He still needs that link. There is no direct
translation from anger against the United States to being a terrorist.
You still need the training. You still need the resources. And unless
you have that link, you're not going to increase terrorists.

MR. CLELAND: Thank you. Professor Fandy.

MR. FANDY: I think I have the opposite view on this one. Osama bin Laden
and Saddam Hussein and Ayman Zawahiri are born in the Arab and Muslim
context. And after people in Iraq saw the mass graves that Saddam
Hussein left, actually there is a change of opinion. What we need is the
support of states to actually come out and condemn Saddam Hussein for
what he did to the Iraqi people.

I think the American presence in the region is reassuring for its
stability. There is no single state on its own. And we've seen in 1990,
we waited for the Arab solution for the reversal of the invasion of Iraq
to Kuwait; it never materialized. I think it is the responsibility of
the superpower to ensure the stability of that part of the world.

I think taking out Saddam Hussein and his regime will encourage Arab
states to become part of a regional arrangement for peace solutions that
regulates relationship amongst all the Middle Eastern states. And also
as we push within the new agenda of reform, we can regulate the
relationship between governments and their own people. And with a
package like this, probably we can -- (inaudible) -- if you will, for
the issue of terrorism. I'm not sure that that will increase the risks.
I think the biggest story during the Iraq war is that there was no --
throughout, there was an Arab country, a major country, being attacked;
its leadership has been changed. I have yet to hear of one attack on a
single soft target for America during that war. That was the biggest
story. There was tacit support for that war in the people -- on the part
of the people who were concerned.

Syria draws a lesson from this war. Iran is drawing lessons from this
war. All the neighborhood are drawing lessons from this war. People know
now that America is a Middle Eastern country, if you will. It has
borders with Syria and whatever it is, and it can attend even Arab
League meetings. So it is -- now the Middle East is our responsibility.
We have to fix it. We cannot worry about -- we cannot leave -- we cannot
afford to fail in the Iraq.

MR. CLELAND: Young Americans are being killed every day. And it seems
like in a few weeks more Americans will have been killed after the
president, in effect, declared victory than during the actual combat.
And this seems to be unending. That seems to me to look more like
Vietnam and Somalia than Desert I. And I just wonder if you feel -- how
long is this going to go on? How many Americans are we going to lose
before this thing gets cleared up?

MR. FANDY: I think there is a threshold in terms of what kind of numbers
can we afford. But it is very important to get Middle Eastern states
themselves to stand by us shoulder to shoulder, that indeed they support
this operation. Thus far we do not have the open support, and we need to
get that.

Secondly, I think we are ambiguous about Iraq like we are ambiguous
about everything else. Iraqis and Middle Easterners want to hear
probably from America that we own Iraq for the next three years and come
back to us after three years and we'll give it to you. But right now
nobody knows when will America leave this force of occupation.

So that whole ambiguous atmosphere, that's not clear; it's creating in
the minds of many Iraqis that this might go for a long, long time. We
need to give these people a timetable as to when we're going to put
together an Iraqi government and when we are leaving.

MR. CLELAND: Well, right now the Third Infantry Division out of Fort
Stewart, Georgia owns part of Iraq, and some of those are getting killed
every day. It's one of my concerns.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much, Senator. We're running out of time, so
I'll ask the commissioners to ask a quick question, and if you could
confine your answers as concisely as possible. Senator Gorton.

MR. GORTON: One specific question. One or more of you used the phrase
"failed states" in connection with at least part of the Middle East and
Southeast Asia. And I suppose if there were a gold medal for failed
states, it would be Somalia. And several of you have mentioned that
Somalia, of course, now is a source or a base for terrorism.

What would your advice be to the United States with respect to its views
toward Somalia? Should we be attempting anything there to bring
democracy, justice, a reduction of a terrorist base in that most failed
of all states?

MR. GUNARATNA: Sir, the United States must work with the other states in
the Horn of Africa trying to bring stability in Somalia. Already al
Qaeda maintains a presence in Somalia. A few months ago the CIA took a
very important al Qaeda man out of Somalia. Of course, that operation
was successful because the CIA was able to work with a certain faction
in Somalia that cooperated with the U.S. government.

I believe that the other governments in the Horn of Africa will assist
and work together with the United States to ensure that stability is
restored in Somalia. It is very important to do what it takes to prevent
countries from failing, because it is in such countries that terrorist
organizations will base themselves. Terrorists are like sharks. They
repeatedly move in search of such opportunities where there is a lack of
law and order and where they can recruit, establish training camps, and
continue to fight.

MR. GORTON: Any other comments? MR. FANDY: I think Somalia is paramount
for the United States; from the history of the Cold War until today,
strategically important. During the Cold War it was strategically
important. Somalia -- (inaudible) -- and all that trade in the Red Sea.
It's very important for us strategically, but also it's very important
to show that indeed America cares. And we do care.

I think we cared about the Muslim world in Europe, and we have not made
the case for that. It is very important to make the case that also we
care in putting together another Muslim country and make it work.
Otherwise I would agree with my colleague that it will be safe haven for
all these terrorist organizations.

MR. SAGEMAN: Well, let me put a little spoke in those wheels. Despite
being a failed state, Somalia still cooperated with the CIA in arresting
that al Qaeda officer. It's not so much the failed state, because there
are a lot of failed states in Africa, and they don't really seem to be
all that promoting terrorism. They have their own problems; Congo, for
instance, being one, or even Nigeria, but Nigeria is not a failed state.

The point is that even in failed states you can work with various
factions. It's not the failed state itself. It's really the failed state
that allows training bases to be there for skills and resources to
develop, to develop large terrorist operation. You can very well work
with the various factions in failed states to prevent that from
happening. So, it's not so much a failed state itself, it's the
opportunity that they allow in terms of developing those bases.

MR. GORTON: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, sir. Commissioner Ben-Veniste.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to commend
the staff for assembling a series of panel, this panel in particular,
for providing us with a very stimulating discussion this morning.

I would like to like to pick up on the subject of the future of
terrorism and -- which is, of course, a central issue to our mandate as
a commission -- and address my question to Professor Fandy, who talked
earlier about the importance of winning the peace in Iraq. And I would
like you to comment on Dr. Sageman's statement that it was the U.S.
force deployment in Saudi Arabia following Gulf War I that substantially
stimulated the growth of al Qaeda. On the one hand, we have this set in
motion by reason of the invasion of Iraq a full menu of disparate forces
within that country seeking hegemony or at least a substantial say in
the future of Iraq. We have the Kurds in the north, the interests of the
Turks, the Shi'as in the south, the influence of Iran to be dealt with,
the clerical movement that is strong and afoot, the disenfranchised and
unemployed Sunnis who were formerly in power and that now don't have a
paycheck, many of them from the army. All of this militates for our need
to stay the course and sort all of this out.

Yet, at the same time, our mere presence in Iraq in these very
substantial numbers stimulates the recruitment of jihadists, if not to
al Qaeda but to other groups which may not yet be on our collective
screens as we go forward.

How do we deal with this dichotomy of it being both a benefit to have
removed this tyrant and yet at the same time unleashing forces in that
part of the world which will, perhaps, as we have heard today, greatly
stimulate the recruitment and growth of other jihadist movements?

MR. FANDY: Well, sir, the question is if we zero in on Iraq and look at
the very specific data about Iraq, we know that really in Iraq we do not
have a problem that's a, in Kurdistan. America does not have a problem
in Kurdistan. In fact, you know, the Kurds were celebrating the U.S.
independence day, and like -- I mean, there was a huge celebration --

MR. BEN-VENISTE: The Turks were not celebrating --

MR. FANDY: The Turks were not celebrating next door.

There's also a general stereotype that the Shi'a of the South are very
much influenced by Iran and very much can turn the whole thing sour. In
fact, the level of terrorism in the southern part of Iraq is very
limited. The leader of the Shi'a, Sheikh al-Hakim, Bakqr al-Hakim, and
others put out at least moderate statements about their view of the
change of forces in Iraq.

The problem of Iraq is really about the Sunni center that lost its
control of power over the 30 years of Saddam's rule and before. These
are the people who are kicking and screaming for that change of power
distribution inside Iraq. So, to really exaggerate that question and
make it -- this is the question of the whole Iraq, there are a variety
of attitudes in Iraq about the U.S. I would say the most recent polls
that I read, it was only 20 percent were not grateful. The rest of the
Iraqis saw the United States as a liberating force --

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Well, without delving too deeply because we don't have
the time, would it be fair to say that without the United States
military presence, we would be in the situation, or Iraq would be in a
situation where it would be very likely that all of these elements would
soon be at each other throats? My question goes to Dr. Sageman's
observation, and perhaps Dr. Gunaratna shares this in view of his
earlier comments, that this has provided a very substantial recruiting
poster, if you will, given the history of recruitment post the
deployment of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia following the Gulf War for
future jihadist and militant and vicious attacks on our own populations?
MR. FANDY: The different -- the different poster -- the poster that
people read also in the region, that the United States is here and here
to change bad regimes that committed huge crimes against their own
peoples. And there are also a lot of recruitment for that that's going
on.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: So, there may be a win-win situation for the jihadists
and the pro-American sentiments, such as -- (inaudible) --

MR. FANDY: I think the jihadists are the losers in the Iraq thing. I
think it shows that the United States is capable and willing to commit
its force to actually -- after September 11th, the whole strategic
environment changed, that we are forceful about the deployment of our
force -- we're no longer reluctant. And that is a very strong message.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Could we have a brief comment from each of the other
two?

MR. GUNARATNA: Sir, I disagree. I believe that Iraq has the potential to
become the new theater for jihadists, to psychologically and physically
for them to train and to conduct operations against the United States,
its allies and its friends. And I believe that the flow of foreign
fighters into Iraq -- Syrian and Iran has not done much, and I believe
that these fighters are now coming mostly from North Africa, from the
Middle East, and with time there will be people who will come from Asia,
from Europe, the cradle and the convert Muslims from the Caucuses. And
unless the United States takes decisive to stem, to control the flow of
these foreign fighters and also to stabilize the situation in Iraq, Iraq
will become a very important, a very significant theater for these
jihadists.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Do you prescribe more force?

MR. GUNARATNA: More force, and also more opportunity.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Smarter force?

MR. GUNARATNA: And also more diplomacy. More diplomacy. You have to
target and destroy Saddam Hussein and his key people who are inside that
country. You have to deal with Iran and Syrian in such a way, where the
flow of these foreign fighters will be blocked. If you do not do that,
you will continue to have more U.S. troops dying in Iraq every day, and
the number will increase.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Dr. Sageman, do you agree?

MR. SAGEMAN: No. Actually, I sit on the fence. Before you can have
almost offered me a job here; now you can offer me Paul Bremer's job.
Thank you. I think the two scenarios are plausible. And Iraq is both a
threat and a promise. And that really very much depends on what Paul
Bremer is going to do. They're very likely, both of them. And at this
point it's two early to tell which one will unfold. MR. BEN-VENISTE:
Thank you.

MR. KEAN: I know there are four other commissioners who have questions,
but we're 25 minutes over the panel, so we've got to say at this point,
I apologize to the commissioners, their questions, and say thank you all
very, very much, and we appreciate very much your appearance.

MR. KEAN: Okay, if we could call the hearing back to order. Yeah, I've
got a gavel. I'll use the gavel. (Gavels.)

As we all know, the United States has designated a number of states,
including Iraq, Iran and Syria, as state sponsors of terrorism. The
difficulties in assessing the attitudes and policies of these states
toward al Qaeda are the tasks of our next panel. Addressing these very
complex subjects will be two noted experts on Saddam Hussein's Iraq: Dr.
Laurie Mylroie, author of "Study of Revenge: Saddam Hussein's Unfinished
War Against America," and Dr. Judith Yaphe, Middle East Project Director
at the Institution for National Strategic Studies of the National
Defense University. Dr. Murhaf Jouejati, scholar-in-residence at the
Middle East Institute, will consider Syria. Mark -- make sure I get this
right -- Gasiorowski --

MR. GASIOROWSKI: Yes.

MR. KEAN: -- professor of political science at Louisiana State
University will tackle the equally complex job of assessing Iranian
attitudes toward al Qaeda. Ms. Mylroie.

MS. MYLROIE: Thank you very much for the invitation to address you this
morning.

A major policy and intelligence failure occurred in the 1990s, namely
the emergence of a serious misunderstanding about the nature of major
terrorist attacks on the United States. Prior to the 1993 bombing of the
World Trade Center, it was assumed that all major attacks against the
United States were state-sponsored. The Trade Center bombing is said to
mark the start of a new kind of terrorism that does not involve states,
and that is simply not true.

And what I'm going to say to you is going to be different than you heard
earlier this morning, and that's because the information on which I am
basing these evaluations is the evidence from the trials rather than the
intelligence. And because terrorism throughout the '90s was treated as a
law enforcement issue, that evidence, I would suggest, is more
important, more relevant, and more reliable in understanding the
terrorist threat.

I'll speak briefly about three plots: the '93 Trade Center bombing, the
'95 plot to bomb a dozen U.S. airplanes in the Philippines, and 9/11. My
focus will be on the masterminds -- individuals like Ramzi Yousef and
Khalid Sheikh Mohammad. My point will be: we do not know who these
people are. Their identities are all based on documents in Kuwait that
pre-date its liberation in 1991, and those documents are not reliable
because Iraqi intelligence was there for seven months. Indeed, there is
substantial reason to believe that these masterminds are Iraqi
intelligence agents.

Now, the '93 bombing of the Trade Center is supposed to be the start of
a new, stateless terrorism. But New York FBI, the lead investigative
agency, its director, Jim Fox, believed that Iraq was behind the bomb.
Why? It was huge. It was meant to topple one tower on to the other, and
it left a crater six stories deep in the basement floors. Fox's
background was counter-intelligence, and he believed that the
individuals he was arresting immediately after the bombing, like the
26-year-old Palestinian Mohammad Salama, who was detained as he returned
to the Ryder rental agency for his deposit on the van that carried the
bomb. These individuals alone could not have carried out such an attack.
There were also Iraqis all around the fringe of the plot. One of them,
Abdul Rahman Yasin, came from Baghdad before the bombing, returned
afterwards. He's still an indicted fugitive. Also, see Salama's many
phone calls to Iraq at a crucial early stage of the plot, which are part
of my testimony. That's government exhibit 824, a page from Salama's
phone bill, evidence from his trial.

But the key point is the identity of the mastermind, Ramzi Yousef,
without whom that bomb could not have been built. He entered the United
States on an Iraqi passport in the name of Ramzi Yousef, and fled the
night of the Trade Center bombing on a Pakistani passport in the name of
Abdel Basit Karim. There really was an individual Abdel Basit Karim,
born and raised in Kuwait. He graduated high school, then went to study
in Britain, got his degree in June of '89, and returned to Kuwait. And
apparently he was still there a year later when Iraq invaded. Yousef
obtained the passport on which he fled New York by going to the
Pakistani consulate with Xerox copies of the 1984 and 1988 passports of
Abdel Basit Karim saying he was Karim, he had lost his passport, and he
needed a new one to get home. The consulate didn't like the
documentation, but nonetheless gave him a temporary passport, and that's
the passport on which Yousef fled. The copies of Karim's passport that
Yousef presented to the consulate were also evidence in the trial. If
you look at government exhibits 739 C and B, you'll see the first two
pages of those passports. You can look at the signatures, and you'll see
that they're radically different.

Also, a Pakistani address has spaces for a permanent address in Pakistan
and a present address in Pakistan. The present address in those
passports is blank because the family lived in Kuwait. But the permanent
address has changed. The permanent address is, in a Pakistani passport,
the family's place of origin. By definition, it doesn't change. But in
the 1984 passport, it says Karachi; the '88 passport, Baluchistan. The
signature is different. The permanent addresses are different. Those
documents went through a scanner.

And similar problem exists with Karim's file in Kuwait. As a routine
matter, Kuwait's interior ministry maintained a resident alien file on
Karim. Information was taken out. There should have been front -- Xerox
copies of the front pages of passports with the signature, the picture,
et cetera. The Kuwaitis recognized that that was missing because of
Iraq's occupation. What they didn't realize was that the whole file was
corrupted. Information was added. There was a notation that Abdul Basit
Karim and his family left Kuwait on August 26th, 1990, traveling from
Kuwait to Iraq, crossing to Iran at Salancha on the way to Pakistani
Baluchistan where they live now. But no one gives his whole itinerary
when he crosses a border. That information doesn't belong in the file.
Moreover, on that day, there was an Iraqi army of occupation -- no
Kuwaiti government. The Iraqis put that information into Abdul Basit
Karim's file.

Finally, Yousef's fingerprints are in that file. But everyone's
fingerprints are unique, so that can mean only one of two things:
Yousef's real identity is Abdul Basit Karim, or someone switched the
fingerprint cards.

I met with Karim's teachers in Britain for a whole variety of reasons,
including that Yousef is tall and Abdul Basit Karim was medium to short
-- two different heights. Karim's teachers believe, as do I, that their
student is not the bomber, that the student died in Kuwait, and that
Ramzi Yousef assumed his identity.

And if Yousef is not Karim, that means a file in Kuwait was tampered
with, including switching the fingerprint cards for the evident purpose
of creating a false identity for a terrorist.

You're all aware of the practices of Soviet-style intelligence agencies.
Agents not attached to an embassy are called illegals, and it's standard
practice to develop false identities or legends for illegals.
Reasonably, only Iraq could have tampered with Karim's file in Kuwait,
including switching the fingerprint cards, while it occupied Kuwait.
Iraqi intelligence created a legend for an illegal, and that's the
significance of Karim's file.

Now, in '95, Yousef was involved in a plot to bomb a dozen U.S.
airplanes in the Philippines. Arrested with him was an individual known
as Abdul Hakim Murad. Murad is supposed to be Yousef's childhood friend
from Kuwait. And, like Yousef, Murad is also Baluch. Khalid Sheik
Mohammed was indicted for that plot, too. Mohammed escaped and went on
to head al Qaeda's military committee after al Qaeda moved to
Afghanistan, and he masterminded the 9/11 attacks. Mohammed is supposed
to be Yousef's maternal uncle, but his identity like that of Yousef and
Murad is based on what he himself has told other people, and documents
in Kuwait that predate Kuwait's liberation from Iraq. Neither are
reliable. We don't necessarily know who Mohammad is.

Now, U.S. authorities understand the three other, quote, "relatives" of
Yousef -- two older brothers and a younger cousin -- there is a chart on
the back of my written statement -- they are also key al Qaeda figures.
The brothers, and perhaps the cousin, were also born and raised in
Kuwait and their identities, too, rest on Kuwaiti documents. Notably,
these people are all Baluch, Sunni Muslim people living in eastern Iran
and western Pakistan. Iraqi intelligence has long-standing ties with the
Baluch. It used them against Iran.

Prior to the Trade Center bombing, no Baluch was involved in terrorism
against the United States. Yes, there's nothing to do with them. And no
Baluch organization is on the State Department's terrorism list. Why
should Baluch attach the United States, except for the link to Iraqi
intelligence?

It's essentially the claim now of U.S. authorities that the core of the
murderous terrorist attacks from the Trade Center bombing to 9/11, at
that core is a particularly talented and murderous Baluch family.
Yousef, his friends, his uncle, two brothers, and a cousin. Yet there is
another explanation. This is not a family. Rather they are Baluch
illegals given legends by Iraqi intelligence on the basis of documents
in Kuwait.

Recently I asked an Israeli retired from the number two position in
military intelligence which made more sense: "Is this a murderous family
or illegals with legends?" He replied: "It's obvious. It's obvious that
these are illegals with legends."

There's a major lapse in the investigation to take these identities at
face value. That question must be pursued, and there are suggestions
about doing that in my written statement. The odds are high that these
people are not whom they claim to be, and demonstrating that would
constitute a clear link between Iraq and the 9/11 attack, as reasonably
only Iraq could have created these legends while it occupied Kuwait.
That would also demonstrate that there is no new kind of terrorism that
does not involve states. This terrorism was part of a war that did not
end with the 1991 cease-fire, but continues to this day. Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Dr. Yaphe.

MS. YAPHE: Thank you very much inviting me. I want to thank the
committee very much for inviting me to testify. And for purposes of full
disclosure -- you may know this already, but let me state it for the
record -- I worked for more than 20 years for the Central Intelligence
Agency as a senior analyst on Iraq, Iran, the Persian Gulf. I continue
to follow this in my career now, where I am at National Defense
University. The comments and analysis that I am offering are my own.
They don't represent the Agency, they don't represent the Department of
Defense, or the University. And I say that for pretty obvious reasons.

My testimony focuses on the role and actions of Iraq as a state sponsor
of terrorism under the control of Saddam Hussein. Iraq under Saddam was
a major state sponsor of international terrorism. They almost wrote the
book, and I've read the books that have been written. Iraq under Saddam
was an active sponsor of terrorist groups, providing safe haven,
training, arms, logistical support -- requiring in exchange that the
groups carry out operations ordered by Baghdad for Saddam's objectives.
Terrorist groups were not permitted to have offices, recruitment, or
training facilities, or freely use Iraqi territory under the regime's
control without explicit permission from Saddam. To mix a metaphor, if
you took Iraq's shilling, you did Iraq's bidding -- or Saddam's bidding,
more directly.

Saddam used foreign terrorist groups and terrorism as instruments of
foreign policy. Groups hosted by Saddam were denied protection. If he
wanted to improve relations with a neighboring country and encourage to
attack the same countries when Saddam wanted to pressure them. If they
refused Saddam's requests, they were exiled. Now, conventional wisdom
casts Saddam as a terrorist, a primary consumer of the terrorist tactics
and methods, and an enemy of the United States. And that is all true.
Conventional wisdom describes Iraq under Saddam as a primary state
sponsor of international terrorism, and that is all true. If the
mathematics is correct, then the conventional conclusion must be that
Saddam and Iraq are responsible for acts of terrorism against the United
States, going back to the 1993 Trade Towers attack to perhaps 9/11.

Furthermore, this argument would say Saddam and al Qaeda leader Osama
bin Laden cooperated in planning and conducting operations on U.S.
targets. These assessments are incorrect in my personal view and in my
professional judgment as a scholar and intelligence officer on Iraq.

Simply put, Saddam Hussein supported extremist groups that would respond
to his orders and work against his enemy. This unfortunately does not
make him the primary suspect or the eminence gris for al Qaeda's attacks
on the United States.

Now, there are a couple of truths to keep in mind. He used terrorism to
intimidate Iraqis at home and abroad, and he did that, as we all know,
very well. We know by the way we have an unsolved murder in McLean of an
Iraqi businessman. That was almost certainly an act of an Iraqi
intelligence officer, and a very good one. Now, could there have been an
al Qaeda connection? Oh, let me before I do that let me -- some other
truths. The reasons to do that, to support Iraq's revolutionary
credentials and ensure his own role as a great Arab leader, intimidate
rival leaders and governments, he gave safe haven and training to a wide
range of groups, the Abu Nidal group, the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine, the Democratic Front for the Liberation of
Palestine, a Hawari group. He created the Arab Liberation Front as a
personal surrogate in the war, which he used recently to pledge $25,000
to every martyr in the intifada against Israel.

Abu Nidal is one of the primary evidences. He urged Abu Nidal to attack
Hafez al Assad, his primary rival for Arab leadership and Ba'athist
leadership. He also encouraged attacks -- we've heard a lot about the
Muslim Brotherhood this morning -- they were also a group he liked. He
used the Syrian faction, but only against Syria. Other than that, Saddam
was not interested in religious-based Islamic extremists, because he
knew he was their next target after they finished their primary target.
And I would argue that spreads itself to al Qaeda, which Saddam
certainly was aware had him on their list after he got the Americans out
of Saudi Arabia, after the ruling families in the Gulf were liberated,
Saddam would have been next on his list of undesirables to be replaced.

And you know what's interesting, because we have seen Sabri al Banna,
Abu Nidal, in and out of Iraq for several years. When he refused to
cooperate with Baghdad on attacks against Syria, he was told to leave.
He came back again later when he was found to be useful. He died last
summer, almost a year ago, of four gunshot wounds to the head. The
Iraqis describe this as suicide. I don't think so. I would imagine that
Saddam decided to remove the evidence of his links to one of the most
notorious of international terrorists at a time when the United States
was increasing pressure on him to reveal weapons of mass destruction and
accusing him of sponsoring al Qaeda. What could be more convenient?

Abu Abbas. Remember Abu Abbas, the Achille Lauro? He also lived for many
years, and still did up until the war, in Iraq, and threatened targets
during the intifada, just a year ago, from Iraq. Saddam again helped
many others. But to show how this was a policy, beside the Palestinians,
they are targeting the Israeli Jewish, Western and moderate Arab
targets. In the 1980s, he sheltered the anti-Turkish PKK, the Kurdish
Workers Party.

When he wanted to pressure Turkey he let them go loose against the
Turks. When he wanted to be nice to Turkey, he let them cross the border
in hot pursuit to eliminate the PKK. He sheltered the Mujaheddin-e
Khalq, the Iranian anti-regime group which helped him in his fight
against us. He supported their attacks against Iran when it was to his
benefit, and on occasion, he would threaten to close them down when he
wanted to get closer to Tehran for whatever reasons.

Now, Saddam's security services and surrogates were successful in
certain areas, especially internal, especially defectors, especially
businessmen abroad who were kind of sloppy. But the security services
showed little success in planning or ordering operations against foreign
targets. Palestinian dependents refused to launch operations against us
in the prelude up to the Gulf War in late 1990, early '91. They failed
to get their own agents abroad to conduct attacks on the eve of that
war. They were all arrested as they got off the plane. Very sloppy
tradecraft. And their attempt to assassinate President George Herbert
Walker Bush I think was another example of incompetence on their part.

Now, the al Qaeda connection, to move swiftly along: Did Iraq need al
Qaeda? Probably Saddam might have liked a group like that, but I don't
think he would have needed them. I've said given the reasons why I
thought -- and it is in my testimony -- I think he saw him as a threat,
Osama as a threat, rather than as a potential partner. Do Osama and al
Qaeda need Iraq? I would disagree with my colleague. I don't think they
did. I think the groups were and remain global in scope, compartmented
in design and membership, in organizational infrastructure and
operational planning. Many of the leaders are well educated -- you had
that all this morning in earlier testimony. They operate on a
need-to-know principle. It's not one just restricted to the intelligence
community, the Soviets. The Muslim Brotherhood used it. The Muslim
Brotherhood was effective. You've heard a lot about them. I would simply
point out that they never needed state support -- state sponsorship --
to conduct their activities.

So we have questionable assumptions. I find troubling the use of
circumstantial evidence and a corresponding lack of credible evidence.
To jump to conclusions on Iraqi support for al Qaeda, I will look for
credible, reliable records, open sources from the community, or
clandestine. Now, I worked on terrorism, in the Counterterrorism Center
for three years. I know the kind of information you get. Nice people,
heroes of their country, do not give you information. They are not
patriots, they are not untarnished sources. They are people who do this
stuff, people who do terrorism that you have to deal with. And you have
to use your skills -- especially hard to sort out truth from fiction,
who has a grudge, who is trying to convince you of something for their
purposes. I don't think that guilt by circumstance should trouble
anyone. I think it should trouble us. I think the chain of evidence is
not good. And I would also say that because a person or an agency or a
government does not agree with one's assumptions, it does not mean they
are mistaken, stupid, or deliberately obstructive. It means we have a
trouble in gathering intelligence, in gathering proper evidence, and we
need to be careful.

Let me go quickly to just a few other points that I wanted to make in my
few minutes remaining. The unwillingness of Saddam and Osama to consider
cooperation is not because they had different sects -- one's Sunni,
one's Shi'a -- or different ideologies. Saddam was no ideologue. I think
the point again was I think it was more of a danger to Saddam. It was a
risk he didn't need to take. And I don't think that the evidence -- now,
I do want to point just briefly, because we have had a very interesting
turn of events just this morning announced, and that was the arrest of
one of the al Qaeda -- excuse me, the Iraqi intelligence officer in
Prague who was supposed to have met with Mohammad Atta. Now, evidence
about those meetings I think we have an excellent opportunity to find
out if they took place. We also have in our control the Iraqi
intelligence officer, the senior operative who was also an ambassador in
Turkey, Tunisia, and Jordan, who allegedly went to Kabul and met with
Osama both then and in Sudan in 1994, and that's Farouk Hijazi. And I
don't see we've seen any evidence of his interrogation either, but we
have them in custody.

My point would be simply this -- and maybe it's not so simple -- that I
would expect an intelligence agent to have contact with any organization
-- I don't care if it would be al Qaeda, the Soviets, or any one who was
willing to operate against the United States. I'd be disappointed. They
wouldn't be doing their jobs. His purpose would have been to assess
intent, operational capability, and recruitment potential. It would not
have been sufficient for both to just simply hate the United States.
Saddam always demanded total loyalty from and control over any group he
supported. And I don't think al Qaeda would have agreed to any of that
kind of subordination or control. So I think that complicity -- we need
to talk.

Now, this will bring me to my conclusion. I know my time is up. I have
three simple recommendations. First, I think you have to all recognize
the limits as well as the strengths of intelligence. It's not a science.
I think it's an art. I especially think when you deal on Iraq and when
you deal on these issues of terrorist infrastructures, networks, and
support, you have to do a lot of homework, you have to read a lot, and
you have to I think -- it's not all going to be a smoking gun and
looking for clear evidence. That's the science -- it would be nice if it
were that science. So I would say that, again, recognize the limits what
can and cannot be given you. And also I think one has to read carefully.
Always check reliability statements and do not just accept what is not
vetted or because someone says it's true, it must be true, it sounds
like it's true. Again, I think we all have to remember that the sources
on any of this are not the best you'd like.

My final plea would simply be intelligence does not make policy. Policy
should not shape intelligence. I think one has to look very carefully.
If anything, the metaphor of the onion and the Middle East is true: the
more layers you peel away, the more complicated the story gets. Thank
you very much.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much. Dr. Jouejati.

MR. JOUEJATI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am truly very honored to be
here today. I have but a few remarks, and I will approach Syria and
terrorism not from the micro level, but rather from a macro level.

President Bush, we know, stated that you are with us or you are with the
terrorists. Ms. Condoleezza Rice stated there are no good terrorists and
bad terrorists: terrorists are terrorists. I think the realities in the
Middle East are bit more complex than this.

According to the State Department definition of terrorism, terrorism
means premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against
noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents usually
intended to influence an audience. If that definition is correct, then
groups such as the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, the PFLPGC, Hamas, and
the PIJ are all terrorist organizations. And it so happens that Syria
has hosted these terrorist organizations, and therefore, Syria is a
state sponsor of terrorism.

Syria has supported these groups in order to advance its objectives, its
realpolitik objectives. It has also supported these groups for the
furtherance of the larger Arab objectives, which is the liberation of
territories occupied by Israel. And it has used at least some of these
groups in order to cut down -- this is at least in the recent past --
Yasser Arafat to size in order to deny him the autonomy of movement that
he has always sought.

Syria of course doesn't see things this way. Syria sees these groups as
national resistance freedom fighters; that their struggle is a
legitimate one, which is to liberate their occupied territories.
Moreover, Syria denies supporting these groups but claims that it hosts
them by way of them having press offices in Syria. And, at any rate,
these organizations are the representatives of the some 500,000
Palestinian refugees that are in Syria. But in reality, what is the
nature of the assistance of Syria to these groups? I have never in my
young career, my 20 years of research on Syria, have never found any
evidence that Syria finances them, as Israelis would argue. Nor have I
seen any evidence that would buttress the Syrian argument. In fact, I
think Syria allows these groups, specifically the PFLPGC, to operate
businesses inside Syria, the profits of which return back to the PFLPGC,
in order to sustain its cause and its operations.

There are no training camps, to my knowledge, of Hizbollah in Syria.
There are no military bases of Hizbollah. There are no offices of
Hizbollah in Syria. And Syria claims that it provides Hizbollah only
with moral, political support.

That is difficult to believe, especially that it is a known fact that
arms that leave Iran to Hizbollah transit through Syrian territory. And
so Syria, in this particular instance, has at least some influence with
Hizbollah by closing the routes at will.

Having said that, Syria does not report any political group, any
terrorist group, outside the Middle East. Syria is solely concerned and
its foreign policy is centered on the Arab-Israeli conflict. But given
that support, given that logistical support that Syria provides these
organizations, some in the administration have voiced their concern
about Syria and even have talked of punishing Syria for that support.

Where there's difficulty, however, is that simultaneously Syria has been
perhaps one of the closest partners of the United States in the war
against al Qaeda. Syria saved Canadian and American lives. Syrian
security services apparently have tipped off the Canadian and American
authorities of an impending attack against Canadian and American
government institutions.

Syria again saved American lives in that it tipped off the CIA of an
impending operation against the administrative unit of the 5th Fleet in
the Bahrain. This information is in the public record. Syria, by
providing information on Mohammed el Atta, on Marwan al-Shehhi, on
Derkanzali, the financial conduit to al Qaeda, by providing this
information to the CIA, has enabled the CIA to break-up cells in Europe.

Syria cooperates with the CIA on al Qaeda because it has itself been a
target; in fact, the first target of Islamic militant fundamentalism.
Syria was nearly at a civil war at the end of the '70s and the early
'80s when the Muslim Brotherhood wanted to unseat the Hafez al-Assad
regime and to destabilize Syria. And so Syria has been a target and does
not want this brand of radical Islamic fundamentalism to gain any
foothold in the Middle East, and especially not in Syria.

But, of course, the cooperation that Syria has provided the CIA is also
self-centered. Syria wants to improve relations with the United States.
And Syria wants to improve relations with the U.S. not only to improve
relations with the U.S., but also to be able to have the U.S. perhaps
not on its side but as an impartial mediator in the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

But Syria has done a lot against al Qaeda with the United States, in
cooperation with the United States, and clearly Syria should be rewarded
for fighting terrorism. The problem is, if we go back to what President
Bush and Mrs. Condoleezza Rice says, the problem is, how do we punish
Syria for harboring terrorism and reward Syria at the same time for
fighting terrorism?

Obviously, the two are mutually exclusive. And this should tell us
something that might be wrong with our own definition. Terrorism in the
Middle East did not emerge in a vacuum. Terrorism is a product of
military occupation, specifically Israel's occupation of Arab
territories.

How do we change Syria's behavior? Well, we can threaten Syria with
political and economic sanctions. Historically that pressure has made
Syria go in the other direction. When the U.S. and Israel struck a
strategic alliance in the 1980s, Syria embraced the Soviet Union, or
rather vice-versa. When there was the Turkish-Israeli alliance in the
mid-1990s, Syria, who had been the foremost enemy of Iraq, opened up to
Iraq. Pressure now, I fear, would throw Syria further into Iran's arms.

We can threaten Syria militarily. We might get Damascus' attention that
way. And we did. And as a result, Syria did apparently, allegedly,
reportedly close the offices of the PFLPGC and of Hamas and the PIJ. My
question is, how long will this be before their leaders return to Syria
and open offices elsewhere?

Rather -- and I have here only one suggestion, if I may, with humility
-- rather than simply punishing Syria or simply rewarding Syria, I think
the U.S. should show both sticks and carrots; sticks by maintaining the
U.S. assertive tone vis-a-vis Damascus, and carrots by showing U.S.
resolve in ending the Arab-Israeli conflict peacefully and in accordance
with U.N. land-for-peace resolutions.

This the U.S. can do by, one, including Syria and Lebanon in the road
map, and this immediately, and two, by leaning on both sides to the
conflict -- and this includes Israel -- to abide by the U.N.
land-for-peace resolutions. Once there is peace, Syria is on record as
wanting to normalize diplomatic and other relations with Israel, and
also disbanding any anti-Israel groups.

Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Dr. Gasiorowski.

MR. GASIOROWSKI: I'd like to thank the committee for inviting me to
testify here. I was asked to talk about Iran's motives in supporting
terrorism, and so I will begin with a brief overview of what Iran does
along these lines these days and then talk about what Iran's motives are
and what the decision-making process is that leads Iran to support
terrorism or not in given cases. And then finally I'll conclude by
saying a few things about the prospects for change in Iran's behavior
along these lines.

So, first of all, Iranian support for terrorism. Of course, thinking
back to the 1980s, especially the early 1980s, Iran was doing a great
deal in the way of supporting terrorism, most importantly, supporting
Hizbollah against the United States acting against its neighbors in the
Persian Gulf, the Saudis and others; and in the late '80s and early
'90s, assassinating Iranian exiles in Europe. And Iran deservedly has a
very bad name for these activities.

Iran has changed a certain amount in the past 10 years in this regard.
Most importantly, they are no longer assassinating Iranian exiles in
Europe. This ended in around 1996. And also they have stopped the
behavior that they were pursuing in the '80s and the early '90s
supporting subversive groups in the Persian Gulf, in Saudi Arabia, in
Bahrain and Kuwait. So there have been important changes in recent years
in Iran's behavior.

That being said, Iran clearly does still support important terrorist
groups today. We can distinguish three categories, and there's possibly
a fourth that Iran may be involved in.

First of all, the groups that Iran is most closely connected with and
most strongly supports are groups in the region that share their Shiite
revolutionary ideology or that share ethnic connections with Iran. Of
these, of course, the most important is Hizbollah in Lebanon, which has
been closely connected with Iran since its founding in the early 1980s,
and it is just simply blood brothers of the Iranian revolutionaries.

Also, a very similar type of group in Iraq, the Supreme Council for the
Islamic Revolution in Iran, SCIRI, also was founded very much with
Iranian help in the early 1980s.

The third group that Iran has very close long-standing ties with is the
Northern Alliance in Afghanistan, most of whose members are ethnically
Persian or at least related or are Shiites. They are now our friends in
Afghanistan and we helped them or they helped us overthrow the Taliban.

So these are the main groups that Iran is involved with; I mean to say
the groups that Iran is most closely involved with. Each of these has
changed quite substantially in recent years. SCIRI in Iraq is now
behaving itself pretty well, at least by comparison with Sunni groups in
Iraq. The Northern Alliance, as I said, has been working with us; worked
with us against the Taliban and is now, most of its members, at least,
cooperating with the government of Afghanistan; indeed, populating the
government of Afghanistan. Even Hizbollah in Lebanon, which has a great
deal of blood, including American blood, on its hands, has changed quite
a bit in recent years. Especially since the Israeli withdrawal from
Lebanon in 2000, it has engaged in little or no activities that could be
called terrorism, though certainly it remains a substantial threat along
those lines. So those are the groups that Iran is most strongly
connected with.

Secondly, the Palestinian Islamist groups -- here we're talking about
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad -- these are Sunni groups.

These are groups that are rather far from areas of immediate concern for
Iran. Nonetheless, Iran clearly supports these groups, perhaps less
closely than the first category that I mentioned, but there's no
question that Iran is involved with these groups as well. And they are,
of course, today very actively involved in targeting Israel interests in
the region.

Thirdly, Iran has been evidently involved with Palestinian secular
non-Islamist groups. The main evidence for this, as we all know, is the
Karine A, which was a ship that about a year and a half ago that was
intercepted by Israelis delivering weapons from Iran to the
Palestinians. Certainly Iran is less close to these secularist groups,
but there's no question that it has had this involvement.

Finally, there's the question of Iran's connections with al Qaeda. The
United States government has repeatedly charged in the last couple of
years that al Qaeda members are taking refuge in Iran, and indeed the
Iranian government has acknowledged this.

However, there's never been any clear, definitive evidence that the
Iranian government is supporting them. It might be rogue elements of the
Iranian security forces or it may simply be that these groups are there
without any connection with the Iranian government. This is just simply
not clear.

Secondly, Iran's motives in supporting terrorism. There are basically
three. Historically, most important has been Iran's Shiite revolutionary
ideology. Throughout the '80s and early '90s, when Iran was very deeply
involved in this sort of activity, it was largely for the purposes of
spreading its revolution.

However, during the course of the 1990s, the revolutionary fervor
dissipated quite substantially in Iran. Today, there's only a relatively
small group of hardliners, mostly located in the Revolutionary Guards,
who still care about exporting the revolution. And so this is now not
really a major issue anymore other than the fact that the Iranian
government has to sometimes respond to the interests of these
hardliners.

And in any case, the ideological motive in Iranian foreign policy really
only applies to the first of the groups that I've talked about who share
Iran's Shiite revolutionary ideology, not really to the others. And
specifically, al Qaeda does not at all share Iran's revolutionary
ideology. And this is really the main reason that people are skeptical
of connections between the Iranian government and al Qaeda.

Al Qaeda and its affiliates in Afghanistan and Pakistan are strongly
anti-Shiites. They are Sunni wahhabis. Wahhabis are very, very
anti-Shi'a for various reasons. Al Qaeda and its affiliates have been
involved in a lot of anti-Shiite attacks in the region. Probably
something like 100 or so Shiites have been killed in Pakistan, Iran, and
Afghanistan in the last five or 10 years.

And indeed, Iran, partly for that reason, has supported anti-Taliban
forces. Iran was by far the main supporter of the Northern Alliance
before U.S. forces came along in late 2001 and began to work with them.
Indeed, Iran almost went to war with the Taliban; massed 270,000 troops
on Afghanistan's border in 1998. So Iran and Qaeda and its affiliates
have a long history of very bad relations.

For this reason, it's pretty doubtful that the Iranian government has
been involved with al Qaeda, though, of course, anything is possible in
the Middle East, and I certainly wouldn't bet my retirement money that
there is no connection there.

There's a third possibility. It may be rogue elements of the Iranian
security forces that have been involved with al Qaeda. I don't really
know, and I don't even think that anybody in the U.S. intelligence
community really knows.

The second reason Iran supports terrorism, and I think more important
these days than the first, than the ideological reason, is the tactical
uses that terrorism provides for Iran. Terrorism can be a useful weapon
for Iran. I'll just give two very prominent examples.

First of all, Hizbollah. Although Hizbollah has largely or entirely
stopped its terrorist activities in recent years, it remains a very
potent threat, very well-armed, very well-equipped, very capable of
doing all kinds of bad things. And Iran is largely responsible for
giving it these capabilities over the years. And clearly there's a very
close working relationship.

Many people believe Iran has nurtured this continuing capability for
terrorism on the part of Hizbollah to serve as a form of deterrence
against the Israelis, and perhaps to some extent against the United
States. In other words, if Israel directly attacks Iran, Iran might turn
Hizbollah loose on Israel. So that's a good example of how terrorism can
be tactically useful for Iran.

Much the same in a rather different way is true of Iran's continuing
relations with groups in Afghanistan and with certain groups among
Shiites in Iraq. Clearly these groups give Iran a fair amount of
influence in those respective countries and enable Iran to do various
things. So the second motive for supporting terrorism, then, is that it
can be tactically useful. To a country that is not militarily very
powerful, can't really stand up to countries like the United States and
Israel, terrorism gives it a way of doing so.

The third influence on Iran's support for terrorism are foreign policy
constraints. And this is a negative influence. Increasingly in the last
10 years, Iran has wanted better relations with the West for economic
and diplomatic reasons, and Iran has long realized that its support for
terrorism is a major obstacle to that.

And it's indeed for this reason that Iran gave up some of the more
drastic things that it was doing in the early 1990s -- the
assassinations in Europe, subversive activities in the Persian Gulf Arab
countries. It gave up these things, it seems clear, largely because it
wanted better relations with the EU countries and with the GCC
countries.

Similarly, in the last year or so, Iran has extradited an unknown number
of al Qaeda members, also evidently for diplomatic reasons, to defuse
criticism from the United States.

Very quickly, what is Iran's decision-making on these matters? It seems
that decisions on whether or not to support terrorism are largely made
at the very top levels. Of course, this excludes this question of al
Qaeda, which may be supported by rogue elements of the security forces.
But generally speaking, I think the very top leaders in Iran are
responsible for these decisions, and specifically supreme leader
Khamenei.

That being said, I think that these decisions are the result of a
pragmatic weighing of the pros and cons of engaging in any given
terrorist activity for Iran. And again, I would cite as evidence Iran's
decision to give up the assassinations in Europe, to give up subversion
in Saudi Arabia and other GCC countries. Clearly this was a weighing by
Iran of the pros and cons, and Iran decided to stop doing it. This
suggests Iran is relatively pragmatic in its support for terrorism.

So, then, finally, what are the prospects for change? I think there are
two main things that we can look to that might lead Iran to further
reduce its involvement in terrorism; first of all, a positive outcome in
the domestic power struggle that has been raging for a long time in
Iran. I think if the reformist faction led by President Khatami were to
come to power, which doesn't seem very likely these days, we would see a
substantial change and Iran would really move toward fully normalizing
its relations with the U.S. and with the West.

Secondly, I think the other major prospect for change is that I think
there is a fair amount that the United States could do to offer Iran
both positive and negative incentives to stop its further support for
terrorism. I'll leave it to the State Department to decide what to do
along those lines, but I would say certainly both carrots and sticks
would be appropriate here.

Thank you very much.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, sir. Commissioner Lehman.

MR. LEHMAN: Yes. First I would like to join my colleague and friend, Tim
Roemer, in commending the chairman and vice chairman for what's been
achieved.

While it's good that some of our commissioners continue to look at the
empty part of the glass on what's been achieved, I think the updates
from our task forces yesterday leave no doubt that our chairman and vice
chairman have succeeded in getting access to more sensitive information,
important information, and information essential for us to do our job
than any commission in history.

We have the broadest mandate in history, and I think we have obtained
access greater than any commission in history. There's still more to be
done, but there's certainly no doubt in my mind that not only are we
succeeding in doing the job that Congress gave us, but that we will
succeed very effectively in producing what the country expects of us.
So, thank you.

I would like to also commend the previous panel in setting, I think, the
right insight for the way we look at this issue, particularly the
subject of your panel, that what we face here is not a clash of
civilizations, but, in fact, an Islamic civil war and one in which we
must take sides and we must force our friends also to take sides. Tthat
the phenomenon is one of jihadism. It has many manifestations, the most
well-organized and recently effective of which was al Qaeda, but that is
not the only one. And if we succeed in continuing to dismantle and
destroy it, that is not going to solve our problem.

So as we look at state sponsorship of terrorism, I think we ought to
question -- and I'd like to get the views of each of the panelists on
what has come to be the rubric, really, set by the State Department's
annual report on terrorism, as much too narrowly defined.

We note, for instance, that in each of your testimony that each of the
state sponsors of terrorism that you have addressed have their own
particular interest in why they are doing it. And some support some
groups; others support other groups. And then, of course, there is one
of the biggest issues in its absence from the list is the Saudi role in
this Islamic civil war.

There seems to be little doubt that much of the funding for many of
these terrorist groups, whether you say it's entirely unintentional or
some intention, has flowed from Saudi sources. The 300-some schools and
mosques supported by the Saudis around the world preach a kind of
wahhabi fanaticism that is certainly fertile ground for recruiting of
terrorists. Yet this doesn't fit into our rubric of what state
sponsorship is.

And when I hear people describe how benign the Syrians currently are and
the Iranians currently are, and I think back to how effectively both of
their governments cooperated in putting together that attack on our
Marines in Beirut and the fact that most of the principals who carried
out that attack, an attack for which we never retaliated and, as far as
I know, have no plans to retaliate against, are still operating, still
training in Balbek, and still training new generations of jihadists.

And so it seems to me our definitions need refining. I mean, many would
point out that the European community allows Hizbollah and Hamas openly
to raise money legally throughout Europe. Is this -- should this fit
into the rubric of state sponsorship of terrorism?

So I would like each of you to address how we should change the way the
U.S. government looks at state sponsorship, because it creates, each
with their delicatessen of special interests, an environment throughout
the Muslim world in which terrorist groups can flourish, can train; some
do well here, some do well there. But it is a swamp that clearly we are
not addressing effectively in the rubric that we now apply in our
government policies.

Ms. Mylroie, would you --

MS. MYLROIE: Yeah, I appreciate your comments. I appreciate your point,
say, about wahhabi money and how negative -- the negative impact on the
region in promoting anti-Americanism. And there was a recent story in
the New York Times how Indonesia, which is this kind of mild kind of
Islam and elements are getting Saudi money as well. It's a very negative
impact.

But, with all due respect, I think that that is one issue; it's an
important issue. And there is another issue. What was the structure of
authority, organization, which allowed 19 people on September 11th to
kill 3,000 Americans in less than two hours? And they're not the same
question, because it really can be shown, if the commission would pursue
this line of inquiry even a little bit, that these people lack the
capabilities to do that on their own.

Al Qaeda was a front for Iraqi intelligence in much the same way that
Hizbollah is a front for the Iranians and the Syrians. And the
administration repeatedly speaks, senior administration officials, about
the nexus between terrorist states and terrorist groups; talks about
terrorism using weapons of mass destruction, including biological
weapons. They describe that as the greatest threat to the United States.
And that threat can become more evident if we do not properly, carefully
organize and recognize these structures of authority, because a
terrorist group allows a terrorist state, say, to inflict mass
casualties on this country with an anthrax attack or a botulinum attack.
So, I think, two different issues.

MR. LEHMAN: Ms. Yaphe?

MS. YAPHE: Well, Dr. Mylroie's answer leaves me kind of breathless
because I think she's doing exactly what troubles me the most about
leaping to great conclusions, that Iraq -- that al Qaeda was a front for
Iraqi intelligence. I'm sorry, I need evidence. If I'm -- if there is
evidence, if we can get some material that says this, fine, but I don't
see it now.

The question ,among many of the questions, why would Saddam Hussein have
given to a group like al Qaeda that he couldn't control, that that did
pose a threat, an existential threat to him, why would he give them
those weapons of mass destruction -- botulinum, chemicals, radioactive
whatevers -- when he didn't want to admit he had them himself? Now, to
give them to a group that fingerprints would have been easy to trace
back, I would think. I don't see why he would do it. I don't think he
sent them to Syria. I think he learned a great lesson in 1990 when he
sent his aircraft off to Iran, never to be seen again. These are not
things you share or give away, especially if you can't get them back,
you can't control, and they won't do you greater danger.

I do think, though, looking ahead, as part of your question -- which is,
I think, a good one -- is that is there are future threat here? Because
it's one thing to say about the past, Saddam could or couldn't, did or
didn't, but the question becomes what use will terrorists be able to
make of the new Iraq, especially an Iraq that in which law and order is
not clearly or fully established and may not be for quite a while, in
which you have elements running around, whether they are Ba'athist
loyalists or disgruntled army officers who are no longer employed.
Whatever the reason, Iraq is going to be a dangerous country --
dangerous for us and for a lot of others.

And leaving those elements aside and getting back to your question, even
under Saddam there was indications of outside support going to help
internally based Iraqi Islamists -- whether they were Sunni or Shi'a. I
think Saddam certainly believed that the Saudis were helping to spread
wahhabism, especially among the Sunni Arab center. Iran has been
involved in sheltering Iraqi Shi'a dissidents, refugees, and those
groups of with which it has a clear contact. But more than that -- I'm
not so worried about what Iran might do or might think they could do --
I think we vastly overestimate and I think the Iranians do too, the
influence they will have on the new Iraq -- but the point is that Iraq
had within its own structures the Shi'a community. And the Shi'a
community is a very complicated thing, but I'm thinking now of the
mosques and the religious community where there were, in effect, shadow
governments, networks that we saw as soon the regime, the old regime was
gone, could come out and could do things from getting the streets
cleaned, imposing local law and order, setting up local authorities,
getting the schools opened, the hospitals, taking over city hall.

Now, what could that mean for the future? They have a capability to
attract and to influence believers in Iraq and how they go could be very
important. If they will say "do not interfere with, we do not support
acts of terrorism or opposition," or if they say "we will sanction
opposition," if they sanction opposition to the occupying force, which
is what they see us as and what we are, then we will see a growth of
operations, be they military based, terrorists, whatever, there will be
an increase.

But much of that can be resolved and will be inside Iraq. I don't see,
you know, a foreign hand in that, per se.

The one remaining question will be the allegation that Saddam supported
and allowed al Qaeda camps in northern Iraq, which was in Kurdish
territory that was outside of Saddam's control. I have more of that in
my testimony, but I think my point is that looking ahead, yes, there
will be Islamist extremists in Iraq -- maybe encouraged by the outside,
but probably with a lot of their own support, energy and money to come
from inside, and what we need to do is to think of a way to disarm this
as a weapon and find a way to bring this, absorb this into a system in
which Iraqi Shi'as, be they of an extremist mind or a moderate mind,
whether they're secular or religious, see more to gain by having a stake
in society than by trying to just, you know, blow us up and get us out
of there.

MR. LEHMAN: Before we go to Mr. Jouejati, I'd like to just ask a short
follow-up. There have been many press reports of the recovery of
materials in Afghanistan and in Baghdad that indicate that al Qaeda
received technical training in weapons of mass destruction, and received
not only training but some ability to manufacture some of them. Have you
seen such evidence that the Iraqis are involved in this? And if not
Iraqi intelligence, who?

MS. YAPHE: No, I've seen the press reports just as you have. And
frankly, I wouldn't be surprised if the Iraqis did provide some kind of
training. That would be a perfectly normal thing -- train them, see if
you can suborn them, see if you can take them over -- but that wouldn't
mean that they trusted them or that they did operational planning. I
think you have to be careful to sort out what you try to do to wins
hearts and minds of these groups to work for you and your objectives and
where you draw the line. But again, I, as I say, that's almost what you
expect to be part of the trade craft and the mission of the intelligence
of these groups, and being in contact with or trying to win over and
find out a lot about to penetrate these organizations. And we know that
the Iraqis were highly successful in penetrating organizations that were
opposed to them, the dissidents abroad, other terrorist groups -- why
wouldn't they have tried that with al Qaeda? I mean, what did they have
to lose?

MR. LEHMAN: Mr. Jouejati? MR. JOUEJATI: Thank you very much. I always
envy Dr. Yaphe for being so articulate, and it always happens that I am
right after you to speak. (Laughter.)

Again, I will, if I may use generalities and the macro approach, there
are two components that are interlinked. The Middle East needs peace,
and the Middle East needs democracy. Hizbollah would not exist had it
not been for Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982. Hamas would not see
the light of day, nor would it have states sponsoring it if there was no
Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza. There will always be the
crazies out there who want to destroy Israel, but they will be
marginalized if there is peace in the Middle East. And we know the
contours of the political solution to the crisis in the Middle East.

The Middle East needs democracy. In the 1960s, both the 1950s and the
1960s, and even in the 1970s, the states that are secular are viewed by
the people as having failed. And you would talk to many people on the
streets -- whether in Syria or in Jordan or in Egypt -- and they will
tell you: "Well, we have tried socialism and it has failed and failed
miserably. We've tried capitalism and that too has failed. What we need
to try now is something, an ideology that is rooted in our territory,
and that is Islam." And this Islam becomes even more radical in the
absence of democracy because people are not empowered. And so they give
up -- they give themselves up to the divine. The divine is going to save
them.

Militantism, radicalism in Islam increases when it is combined with the
socioeconomic factor. In Syria specifically, if there was the rise of
the Muslim brotherhood, it is because of the socioeconomic conditions.
And it is because -- and I have done my research -- the 50 top leaders
of the Muslim brotherhood in Syria are the grandchildren of the 50
largest landholders of Syria in the 1950s. And these properties were
nationalized by the socialist government of the Ba'ath and the
grandchildren -- again the socioeconomic factor is very important in
this -- took up arms against a regime that they cannot change through
the vote.

And so again, if we only address one of the two components, we're not
going to get anywhere. We need to have peace in the Middle East, and we
need to have democracy in the Middle East.

When the United States appears to be the ally and supporter of
undemocratic regimes in the Middle East, this sends the wrong signal to
the people, and therefore part of the enmity and the resentment against
the United States.

MR. LEHMAN: Mr. Gasiorowski.

MR. GASIOROWSKI: I agree with the thrust of your question, that state
sponsorship is a very problematic concept, and indeed the whole, you
know, meaning of the word "terrorism" -- exactly who is a terrorist,
what are terrorist acts? I wouldn't throw them out altogether, but
certainly they're problematic. The Middle East is an area that is, you
know, composed of infinite shades of gray -- no black and no white,
really. And so more than anything else what's needed is subtlety in
looking at the region and working with the region, and using these
terms. And I don't say that, you know, with a lot of criticism. I think
that most of the people certainly that I have interacted with in the
State Department and elsewhere in the U.S. government have that kind of
subtlety. I wouldn't quite say that for the people at the very top, but
that's another matter.

With respect to state sponsorship, I think, you know, we certainly do
need to go after state sponsorship. These countries that are being
discussed in this panel have done a lot of very bad things, certainly
all three of them, especially Iran, no question about it. And so we
certainly need to use sticks -- military force, covert means, are an
essential part of solving this problem in the region.

However, we also need to address the underlying causes. I mean, it's no
surprise that it's the United States that is being attacked, not
Ireland, or the Dutch, you know, or the Italians. It's us who is being
attacked because we are the ones with the big footprint in the region.
We are the ones very close to Israel, which has caused so much misery
for Palestinians. We are the ones now occupying Iraq. We are the ones
closely supporting governments in places like Egypt and Saudi Arabia
that are very unpopular.

So, in addition to using sticks, and in addition to going after states,
there are other things as well that we need to do, and we have been
doing to some extent, but I think probably not with enough emphasis.
Certainly diplomacy, you know, the presentations by myself and Murhaf, I
think, have indicated that there's quite a bit of room for maneuver, at
least with Iran and with Syria, to get them to reduce their activities
of this support.

But, I think ultimately, most importantly, we need to change the overall
U.S. posture in the region, push for a more even-handed approach by the
United States, certainly push for an end to the Israeli-Palestinian
problem, you know, an equitable solution to that problem, and a gradual
reduction of the U.S. posture in the region, which is simply, you know,
causing problems, and simply aggravating people in the region.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you. One last question to both Ms. Mylroie and Dr.
Yaphe. What about Salman Pak? It's been so much in the news. Was this a
training facility for hijackers?

MS. MYLROIE: Well, that is what two Iraqi defectors said soon after
9/11. One of them even drew a picture of the area and said, "here's an
airplane parked right here, which was -- which Iraqi intelligence used
to train non-Iraqi Arab militants to take over airplanes." Satellite
photos corroborated that fellow's account. When the marines overran
Salman Pak they captured non-Iraqi Arab militants. They interrogated
them. They said: "These people told us, you know, it looks like they're
being trained for, what they told us indicates they're being trained in
terrorism." So, yes, Salman Pak was, was a terrorist training camp.

I'd like to add one more point, though.

What you're seeing here in this exchange, which is somewhat unfortunate,
between me and my colleague, is I think kind of the microcosm of what
happened as the United States went to war. We went to war because senior
administration officials believe Iraq was involved in 9/11. But as we
did that and they tried to articulate it, they heard, and it would come
out in the form of disgruntled individuals within the bureaucracies,
including the CIA, leaking to the press "there is no evidence." This cry
always, what the Wall Street Journal called an echo chamber, "there is
no evidence."

I did, in 10 minutes -- I thought it was kind of nifty to do it in 10
minutes -- talk about three major terrorist attacks against the United
States, and gave -- highlighted some very specific evidence, mainly, you
know, the question of who are these people. So again, what you're seeing
here is the bigger fight that has gone on, you know, in the national
media.

MS. YAPHE: Well, I'll take exception to that. I don't think that that's
necessarily the case. It is true, we do see things differently, and
that's -- that happens among people to tend to look at things from a
different perspective.

But let me go back, first, Laurie is absolutely right about Salman Pak.
That's been known as a terrorist training camp for many years.
Palestinian extremists, terrorists of many kinds that the Iraqis
supported went through their training courses there. I think the
question is the sightings by one or two -- there were two defectors who
claimed that extremists were -- Islamists were being trained there, and
I think they made the conclusion they had to be al Qaeda -- or somebody,
I don't remember who did -- but they based that on the fact that they
prayed a lot and wore beards. Again, maybe they were Islamists, maybe
not. To answer your question, yes, that has been a long-known training
center, having to do with probably all kinds of terrorist acts,
including, yes there was an aircraft there. I think initially some
people identified that as a Boeing aircraft. It's not. To the best of my
knowledge, that's a Soviet -- and old Soviet Antonov that's been there
for many, many years. So, were they training to take over an American
aircraft? They probably were just training on techniques to do whatever
terrorists train to do, but yes, that has been known.

I'll let it go at that.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Mr. Ben-Veniste, and then Commissioner Thompson.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to echo the
comments of my fellow commissioners and friends, Tim Roemer and John
Lehman, in commending our chair and vice chair for their delivery
yesterday of our first interim report on the issue of compliance with
our document and other requests made to the executive branch. I don't
know that I would use the pugilistic analogy of Tim Roemer -- that's not
my way, as many of you would know -- (laughter) -- I prefer John
Lehman's analogy to the glass being half full. And I can assure those
who are watching our activities that our staff has pretty much gulped
down that glass and is thirsty for more.

You all should also know that the interim report was the product of a
unanimous, bipartisan, and very collegial effort on the part of all
members of this commission, analyzing what we have requested to date and
what we have received. And I must say I am gratified in reading what the
spokespersons from the executive have said as reported in the newspapers
today, with respect to a pledge of cooperation. Particularly, I would
hope that the procedures which the White House has put in place for our
review of certain of the materials with which we have disagreed and
which we view as necessarily impeding our ability to utilizing the
information will be rethought and that we will have a constructive
resolution of that issue.

The information that we are receiving and expect to receive in the very,
very near future will allow us to be more informed than we may be at the
present moment with respect to what our intelligence services have
discovered with respect to matters which have been discussed here today
during this panel. And so I'm hopeful that the words that the White
House spokespeople have provided to the media will be matched by deeds,
and that we will move quickly to assimilate that information.

Let me direct my questioning to Dr. Mylroie. You start your prepared
remarks with the observation that the reasons that we went to war in
Iraq were not as well understood as they might be. And I think many
observers would agree with that statement. You go on, however, to
suggest that a justification for our invasion of Iraq was the role of
Iraqi intelligence operatives in actions directed against United States
civilians.

Is it fair to say that your provocative theory that Iraqi intelligence,
directed by Saddam Hussein presumably, had a hand in both the 1993 and
September 11, 2001 attacks against the World Trade Center and our
Pentagon is something which you have promoted over a period of time in
your written work and in other appearances?

MS. MYLROIE: Yes, I -- MR. BEN-VENISTE: Is it also fair to say that the
principle reason underpinning your conclusion that the Iraqis were
behind these two terrorist attacks is that Ramzi Yousef was an
intelligence agent of the Iraqi intelligence service?

MS. MYLROIE: That is among the reasons, yes.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: And you have also suggested that Khalid Sheikh Mohammad
was also an Iraqi operative, is that correct?

MS. MYLROIE: I believe he is, yes.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Now, clearly, in the various organs for publicizing
this theory on television and in books and articles, you have made your
theory known to officials of the U.S. government at various levels, is
that correct?

MS. MYLROIE: Yes.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: And, of course, in the very short time which is
allotted here today, and on the basis only of what's in the public
record and what we've been able to read and look at on the basis of your
published statements and your presentation in written and oral form
today, it would be impossible to go through these details and form a
penetrating examination of your hypothesis. But I want to make a couple
of observations. It's fair to say at the least that your theory has not
been accepted by other scholars in your field, such as Dr. Yaphe, is
that correct?

MS. YAPHE: I'd say that.

MS. MYLROIE: I think, and I have a book forthcoming on this dealing with
the scholars in my field that even if one looked only at the question of
Iraq's weapons as it became known after Hussein Kemal defected, and
particularly the biological weapons, that 95 percent of the scholars in
my field behaved in a way that one cannot support. And I pushed one of
them very hard -- it was November '98.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: So your answer is that it is correct that scholars, at
least 95 percent of them, have not supported your hypothesis?

MS. MYLROIE: In my forthcoming book, "Bush Versus the Beltway," I deal
with the scholars. I don't think their opinions --

MR. BEN-VENISTE: You don't have that copy to hold up right now?

MS. MYLROIE: No, it will be out the end of the month. I don't think that
constitutes any significant criticism whatsoever, given how they dealt
with this.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: And you attribute a CIA motive by the intelligence
community for rejecting your theories of Iraqi sponsorship for these two
horrific attacks on the United States and its civilian population to the
CIA and other intelligence agencies, justifying their prior mistakes. Is
that fair to say?

MS. MYLROIE: Say when they concluded that there was no state
sponsorship, they did not have the evidence from the FBI investigation,
because of grand jury secrecy laws prevailing then. And they had no
basis for making that claim.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Now, is it fair to suggest that the current
administration would not be reluctant to embrace your theory as a
further justification for the invasion of Iraq, if evidence obtained
since 9/11 -- debriefings of captured al Qaeda members, et cetera, which
we will have access to, and have already begun receiving access to --
supported the notion of Iraqi sponsorship for either attack --

MS. MYLROIE: Senior --

MR. BEN-VENISTE: -- '93 or 2001?

MS. MYLROIE: A senior administration official told me in specific that
the question of the identities of the terrorist masterminds could not be
pursued because of bureaucratic obstructionism.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: And who was that?

MS. MYLROIE: I wouldn't want to mention the person's name publicly, but
a senior and well-informed person. I have been working with him on the
question of Khalid Sheik Mohammed. He said, "We're sorry, we just can't
do it because of the bureaucratic obstructionism regarding the question
of Ramzi Yousef's identity." So I went ahead and put it in the public
record.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Now, the public record -- and I'll make reference to a
June 22nd, 2003, newspaper article published by the Washington Post
under the byline of Walter Pincus, who is one of the most respected
journalists analyzing the intelligence community in our country,
reported that there was significant doubt cast on this very al
Qaeda-Iraqi connection. It references a National Intelligence Estimate
from the fall of 2002 -- still classified, but this is a report which
now is in the press. And of course the National Intelligence Estimate
reflects the combined consensus of the U.S. intelligence community. And
that report suggested that the National Intelligence Estimate concluded
that while there had been some contact in the early '90s -- I think
something which Dr. Yaphe has also concluded -- while Osama bin Laden
was living in Sudan, those early contacts had not led to any known
continuing high-level relationship between Iraqi intelligence and al
Qaeda. And, as I say, we are in the process of obtaining information
from debriefings and other sources which could conceivably throw more
light on it. But your reluctance to mention even the name of someone who
we could ask about this doesn't help us terribly much.

MS. MYLROIE: I can ask that person if he will give me permission to do
so.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Okay, well we would appreciate it.

Now, your suggestion that Khalid Sheik Mohammed was an Iraqi
intelligence operative would seem to be something which we would be in a
position -- we as a government -- would be in a position to investigate
very carefully, since he is no longer in circulation, and reports are
that he has been interrogated and is providing information. So are you
aware of any information based on the interrogation of Khalid Sheik
Mohammed to suggest that he has acknowledged some Iraqi hand in his
terrorist activities?

MS. MYLROIE: I can only cite to you what the friend, retired from
Israeli intelligence, number two position, a lot of experience, said,
"It's obviously that these are legends."

MS. YAPHE: That is not evidence.

MS. MYLROIE: Evidence is something that --

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Let's not -- I think you've answered my question that
in fact to your knowledge -- I am not suggesting it doesn't exist
somewhere, or might not somehow develop. But to this point with respect
to the significant information that has been provided already by Sheik
Mohammed, there is no corroboration for your theory. And presumably that
would be something that would be of interest for the administration to
put forward, given the other events that occupy the front page of the
newspaper on a daily basis. In fact, today's Washington Post, as Dr.
Yaphe has pointed out, suggests that we are able to investigate still
another of the early allegations relating to Iraqi intelligence and a
potential al Qaeda connection, and that is the arrest in Iraq of a
high-level Iraqi intelligence operative named Ahmed Khalid Ibraham Samir
al-Ani -- is that correct, Dr. Yaphe?

MS. YAPHE: Yes.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: This is a man who supposedly met with 9/11 terrorist
and murderer Mohammad Atta, supposedly in Prague, in the spring of 1991.

MS. MYLROIE: 2001.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: 2001, I'm sorry, 2001, just months before the 9/11
disaster. This is a report that was first sponsored by Czech officials,
and subsequently they have pulled back substantially from their original
suggestion that this Iraqi intelligence operative met with an individual
who they identified initially as Mohammad Atta. Again, do you subscribe
to the notion that in fact Mohammad Atta met with Mr. al-Ani in Prague
in the spring of 2001?

MS. MYLROIE: I think it's an open question. I don't have the information
that allows me to make a clear judgment one way or another.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: So presumably on an ongoing basis, with our interactive
relationship now with the FBI and the intelligence community, we will be
able certainly by the time we are able to give our report, throw
significant light on that issue, if it hasn't already been made public
before.

There are a number of questions I would ask with respect to the
hypothesis that you have put forward which basically it seems to me
relies on the notion that the passports utilized by Yousef, principally
his passport, was somehow doctored up during the period of time that
Kuwait was occupied or controlled by Iraqi intelligence operatives. But
let me ask you whether you have any evidence or even a suggestion that
there are other examples of the use of Iraqi documents for use in
terrorism that originated from this brief period of time that Iraqi
intelligence controlled certain aspects of the Kuwaiti infrastructure.

MS. MYLROIE: There was a document found in Iraq recently in which the
palace, Saddam Hussein's office, sends out a memo to all the Iraqi
intelligence offices -- this is April 2002 -- saying that they are to
prepare the documents that they have that were taken from Kuwait's
archives, they are to remove any notes that they have made in the
margin, but prepared these documents because Iraq will return them in
October -- except those documents that were used for intelligence
purposes. So that does establish that Iraq went carefully through the
Kuwaiti archives, and there were at least some documents that were used
for intelligence purposes.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: But is there any suggestion, Dr. Mylroie, that aside
from the one example you have focused on, any other documents from that
period of time carried by, utilized by, or any way used by terrorists
which we have come into contact with and have been able to interrogate?

MS. MYLROIE: Well, Ramzi Yousef came into the United States on an Iraqi
passport which to all appearances his travels begin in Baghdad.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: But that's the same example that you've used before,
and my question --

MS. MYLROIE: No, I referred to the Pakistani passport on which he fled.
This is a different passport. You can talk about Abdul Rahman Yasin, who
came from Baghdad before the Trade Center bombing, returned to Baghdad
afterwards, stopping in Amman at the Iraqi Embassy there before going on
to Baghdad, where he was for a decade. Lesley Stahl interviewed him last
year there.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: These are the same individuals that you suggest are in
the same operation, correct?

MS. MYLROIE: Yeah.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Okay. So my question goes to put that aside is there
any other evidence of use of those documents during that period of time
in which Iraqi intelligence controlled Kuwait to suggest that this was a
pervasive use or misuse of those documents?

MS. MYLROIE: Only the people that I name in that chart, Ramzi Yousef,
Abdul Hakim Murad, Khalid Sheik Mohammed, Abdul Moneim -- supposed to be
--

MR. BEN-VENISTE: The same individuals that we're talking about --

MS. MYLROIE: And Ali, Abdel Aziz Ali. Yes, they are legends created by
Iraqi intelligence while it occupied Kuwait.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Mr. Chairman, I simply don't want to monopolize all the
time in running this to the ground, but you can understand we don't have
the freedom to spend a lot of time in exploring in detail these
allegations, but we will certainly look for any indication that would
support the suggestion of an Iraqi sponsorship for either of the World
Trade Center disasters as we go forward with our work. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Commissioner Thompson.

MR. THOMPSON: I'd like to ask the panel to assess the same question: Do
you think that America's military, diplomatic, and intelligence
bureaucracy is as capable today dealing with both cultural enemies --
that is to say non-state sponsored, non-state terrorists -- as well as
Islamic states whom we've never confronted before in our history to any
great extent, in the same way that we've dealt with other countries in
earlier and what seemed to be simpler times, like our engagement with
the Soviet Union during the Cold War or engagement with China, both of
which engagements has led in a change of relationships where we now look
at both of those countries as either friendly or neutral, as the case
may be? Do our institutions today have the capacity to deal with all of
these Middle Eastern states, all of these Islamic groups? And, if they
don't, what do we do about that? Because one of our mandates is to
advise the American people on how we can protect ourselves in the
future. And it troubles me that this is a different kind of enemy or a
different kind of confrontation than the American public and maybe even
the American government is used to. Dr. Mylroie?

MS. MYLROIE: No, I agree with you, I don't think we have the
capabilities. I think part of the problem has to do with building up
regional expertise, and that was never really a high priority regarding
the Middle East, as it was compared to the Soviet Union and China. One
of the things I think that's flawed about my field of study is you can't
become secretary of State based on being a Middle East expert, or
National Security Council advisor, but you could be a China or Russia
expert. So the best and the brightest don't go into the field, and I
very much include myself. If I had higher ambitions for myself, I would
not have chosen to be a Middle East expert.

And the thing is regarding the Middle East for the most part it's not
important to the United States except the Arab-Israeli issue, except
that every 10 years there is a war there. So every 10 years you have got
a lot of resources poured into the study of the region, but people
forget about it, and you know you end up with a -- not enough people who
really know what they are talking about to deal with the issue. So on a
general level I think there needs to be much more resources put into the
training of individuals to handle Middle East issues, language training,
and that has to be a sustained effort, and independent of Arab-Israeli
issues which really take most of the attention most of the time.

MS. YAPHE: Yes, I would agree with what Laurie says. I think she's
absolutely right. Which means -- this is the way I got my education,
which was by federal government money, national defense, foreign
language and the education act which paid me to get a Ph.D. looking at,
what, at exotic cultures, studying exotic languages, the Middle East,
for which I have I think paid back in a sense all my work has been
government work. But you know I thank the federal government and those
grants for enabling me to -- well, I won't say become a smart person,
but to gather my skills on what I think is the most fascinating area.
When I started doing Iraq, nobody looked at it. There were only two or
three people -- who cared? -- the 1970s, anyway. Who would have thought
this would have become such a growth industry to guarantee full
employment through retirement? And I think -- and we need to do a lot
more of that.

I want to answer your question by saying something which I found deeply
disturbing, and it goes back to my experience. I don't want to be seen
as an apologist for the agency, or for our efforts on counterterrorism
or anything else. I often get in trouble. I don't share the
administration's views, but again I think that's -- the issue here is --
again, what I found so deeply disturbing, the lack of cooperation. When
I started doing counterterrorism in the mid-1980s, Bill Casey had just
set up the Counterterrorism Center to be a proactive, and I couldn't
believe the fights. But it was understandable -- turf fights. This is my
asset, this is my territory, this is my issue, not yours. And I thought
-- not just within the CIA, but within the community at large -- and I
had hoped after several years that we had gotten past that. And I was so
disturbed with the information coming out from your committee and the
work it's doing, and the investigations into what did we know and what
didn't we tell anybody -- you know, across town -- is appalling. And I
would hope that if nothing else, this has come at a very, very high cost
-- we should have learned the lesson. I hope you get access to the full
range of publications, especially on this issue of Iraq and terrorism,
because I think it will show you how difficult it is to analyze all of
the full range of information and come to different conclusions.
Estimates are very valuable, if they are allowed to express at the same
time not just consensus but what could be wrong with this document. You
know, what could go wrong, where could we be wrong, or what could happen
to change our judgments. Estimates don't always do that. It is the voice
of the community. The more consensus you want the less you are going to
get of the real feel for the certainties and questions over the issues,
and that's what you need to know.

I would just simply point out one more thing. Working on the Middle
East, but working especially on Iraq, and I think it's true of several
of the other countries, but I think Iraq especially, it's been a denied
area. We have had diplomatic representation for very few of the past 30
years. It's a society where everybody watched everybody else and
reported. You had spies in the neighborhood, spies in your club, spies
next-door, maybe in the apartment, who would tell on who you saw, who
you talked to, what you did. It was not at culture that encouraged
contact. Certainly diplomats could use the normal cocktail party route
to gather information that was so easy and so conventionally used. Iraq
was not German after World War II. It was not Italy after World War II.
It was not Moscow. You know, I wouldn't say the problems were less. They
were serious. They were frightening. I read John LeCarre all the time.
It's my bible. It's a cultural thing one acquires, I guess.

But my point is, these were groups. And I think you heard that this
morning from the first panel. Recruitment was done by who you knew. They
don't have recruitment agents that go out like the CIA does, "Come and
work here; here's our posters, you know, and here are the benefits
you'll get." Recruitment is who you know. It's done initially through
mosques, and everyone knows everyone else. You're fully vetted. It's a
compartment. You don't know who's in the other cell.

How do you break into that? And I will say this. I don't think it's
talking out of school, but I think this issue was looked at for a long
time, going back to when I was in counterterrorism. How do we go about
penetrating these organizations? And how do you go about seeding people;
you know, the language of the legend and the mole and all this other --
you know, these technical terms, if you will.

The point is, to do that in a society where everything is known,
everything is closely held, and everyone knows everyone, is virtually
impossible to do with the same kind of brilliant success we clearly had
in Europe after World War II.

MR. THOMPSON: Let me interrupt you just there, because my second
question was going to be -- and I'll just pop it on you now -- Dr.
Sageman said on the first panel this morning that what we have to do is
take this pool of people who might have gone in for training with the
jihad but didn't join the jihad for some reason but now we're maybe
unfairly prosecuting them because they've provided assistance to those
who did engage in terrorism, and we should solicit them, train them and
double them back into the cells of the terrorists. How realistic is
that?

MS. YAPHE: It's like a movie, I think. I don't think it's that easily
done. I had trouble with a bunch of things I heard earlier this morning,
and I think that's one of the things that I find very troubling. That is
not an easy thing to do. Doubling -- you know, again -- tradecraft that
worked in Europe. And I don't want to talk out of school. I'm not a
professional in all of this. But different methods, different times,
different problems, different strategies are needed.

There's a lot of talk today also about root causes. You won't solve the
problem. You won't stop recruitments. You won't end the attractiveness
of Islamic extremism by giving everybody a job, solving everyone's
economic woes. You're still going to have this problem persisting.

Our getting out of Saudi Arabia -- we're simply moving someplace else in
the neighborhood, but that's not going to solve our problems as being a
target of these extremists, nor will it solve the Al Saud's problem of
still being a target. It simply moves things around. But the primary --
you see, the problem will still remain because it has so much to do with
a basic and fundamental view of society, of yourself, your esteem, and
what will it take to restore us to greatness.

MR. THOMPSON: Dr. Jouejati?

MR. JOUEJATI: Thank you. It's not only about understanding these
organizations or penetrating them better and so on. It's not only our
knowledge about the Arab-Israeli issue or lack of knowledge about the
Arab-Israeli issue. It's the whole political culture that is very
complex. And I think there needs to be a greater harmony, a more
harmonious relationship between academia and the bureaucratic capability
that you talk about.

In academia, for example -- and here, if I may refer to Syria -- in
academia, they will tell you that Syria is embedded both in the
institution of sovereignty -- it's a state -- and it's embedded in the
institution of Arab nationalism. And by virtue of the history and
Syria's involvement in the Arab national movement, more legitimacy comes
to it from what it does in the Arab arena than how a state would
otherwise behave.

And so that would -- from an academic level -- that would explain a lot
about, say, Syria's ties to Hizbollah and why it's not as simple as
telling Damascus: "Stop your ties with Hizbollah." It would be political
suicide in Damascus, and Mr. Bashar Assad is not about to commit
political suicide.

So what bureaucrats say, usually, is confined to their perceptions of
reality. And these perceptions do not always conform to the reality. And
so there should be, I think, a greater marriage between academia and
between the bureaucratic capabilities.

Dr. Michael Barnett of the University of Wisconsin has made absolutely
wonderful studies. I don't know how many people in the State Department
read them or try to read them or try to understand Syria or Egypt
through them.

MR. THOMPSON: Mr. Gasiorowski.

MR. GASIOROWSKI: I've interacted a fair amount with U.S. government
experts on Iran in recent years, and my general impression is that they
have a pretty good understanding of Iran, even though they can't go
there, haven't been able to go there since 1980. So I don't think that
the fundamental problem lies in the capability of the experts in the
U.S. government to understand at least Iran. I can't speak for how this
applies to other countries. And indeed, I certainly don't think that
academics have any better idea. And having spent an awful lot of time in
Iran in the last 10 years, I don't think that people in Iran have a
better idea of what's going on in that country than people do in the
State Department and other agencies of the U.S. government, quite
frankly.

I don't think the problem really lies in the capabilities of, you know,
the State Department and the intelligence agencies in the U.S.
government. I think they're pretty good. Of course, there's always room
for improvement. Hiring more people from the region, you know,
first-generation Iranians or Syrians or Iraqis, can always help, no
doubt.

I think really the problem is at higher levels in general. It's how top
U.S. policymakers have used the information they get from the experts or
fail to use the information they get from the experts. That's where I
would focus most of the blame.

MR. THOMPSON: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Any further questions? If not, I'd like to thank you all very,
very much. We appreciate your work. We're going to reconvene at five
minutes past 2:00, we will reconvene for our third panel.

MR. KEAN: Our third panel will turn from specifics of particular groups
and nations to the broader questions of the links between religion and
culture, politics and violence that produce al Qaeda and similar groups.

With us are Mrs. Rachel Bronson, senior fellow and director of Middle
East studies at the Council on Foreign Relations, and Professor Gilles
Kepel, of the Institute of Political Studies in Paris and author of
"Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam." In addition, we will hear from
Steven Emerson, executive director of The Investigative Project and
author of "American Jihad: The Terrorists Living Among Us." And Mr.
Dennis Ross is on the way, the Ziegler (sp) distinguished fellow at the
Washington Near East Policy -- so I think he'll be here shortly, and Ms.
Bronson, if you could begin.

MS. RACHEL BRONSON: Mr. Chairman, Mr. Vice Chairman, Board of
Commissioners, thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. It's
a particular honor to testify before the chairman. I'm a born and bred
Jersey girl, and my formative years were spent hearing that "New Jersey
and I were perfect together." (Laughter.) So, it's quite a pleasure to
be here.

MR. KEAN: I'm sure you were. (Laughter.)

MS. BRONSON: I was asked today to talk about the notion of whether we
are facing a clash of civilizations or a clash within civilizations, and
I'd like to present to the commission a slightly different lens to view
it through. I think we're involved in a political and economic struggle
rather than a struggle of civilizations, and that if we allow ourselves
to define this as a clash of civilizations, we will -- we will not have
policy options to respond, that we will alienate and abandon those in
the region who really do struggle for our success and our dwindling
supporters out there will have fewer and fewer issues and ideas to rally
against.

But, saying that this is -- it's about politics and policies doesn't
offer easy answers. Many of our policies are put in place for very good
reasons and have been carefully thought through. And so it's not a
palliative to argue that this is about policy and economics, but rather
I think gives us some way to think about what we're facing and to define
the tools to respond to.

The problem we face today, I think, is trying to dry up these swamps of
al Qaeda and terrorism, but that also means changing the climate in the
Arab and Muslim world. So, to illustrate what the climate out there is
that we face, I think any of you or us who go out to the region know
that things are pretty terrible for Americans out there right now. But
some numbers, I think, might also be helpful. And if you haven't seen
it, there's a terrific study by Pew that I commend to everybody, but
there's some startling figures that are worth pulling out.

In Indonesia, those viewing the U.S. favorably fell from 61 percent to
15 percent in the last year. In Turkey, 71 percent of the population
expects an attack against their country, a NATO ally, in the near
future. Seventy-one percent of Palestinians think Osama Bin Laden can be
trusted to do the right thing in foreign policy. And anti-Americanism
has become the flavor of the month, not only in the Muslim world but
among our traditional allies. Look at the response we've had in South
Korea, in Germany, in Saudi Arabia and Egypt.

Five of seven NATO countries support a more independent relationship
from the United States. But very striking, according to this poll, the
bottom has fallen out of support for American in most of the Muslim
world. It is the main conclusion from the report. And far away from the
day in 1962, when Prince Faisal of Saudi Arabia, who became the king,
told President Kennedy that "after God, we trust in the United States."

Now, I believe in the situation we're facing are a result of decisions
we have made since the Cold War and decisions that our partners,
friends, have made in the Middle East, and it flows directly from the
Cold War. I view September 11th as part of the Cold War, even though the
Cold War had ended a decade before. The choices we made in Afghanistan
directly led to September 11th, and the choices we made in the '90s to
abandon certain countries for geopolitical reasons led directly to
September 11th. And I think a quote from Brzezinski really sort of
captures about how to think about this as part of the Cold War struggle.
Brzezinski had said "What was more important in the world view of
history, the Taliban or the fall of the Soviet empire? A few stirred up
Muslims or the liberation of Central Europe and the end of the Cold
War?" And I do believe that if our policymakers were told in the '80s
that some of the decisions that they were making would result in the
deaths on September 11th, the bombing of the Cole, the African
embassies, and all of that was to bring down the Soviet Union, I think
they very well may have said it would have been worth it. They wouldn't
have said it in those words, but I think in the calculation, that is
something at the time they would have lived with.

During the Cold War, obviously the United States chose a strategy of
working on states for geopolitical reasons rather that ideological
compatibility. They were determined not to recreate the experience of
the British and get too involved in the domestic and foreign policies of
their partners and allies. It was a conscious decision. And what has
been fascinating to me is to look back at documents in the 1950s where
the Saudis were actually funding Hashemite groups who were also,
bizarrely, pro-communist -- this is at a time when they were our partner
in fighting the communists.

The British were desperately worried about this and beseeched the United
States to get involved and to try to use their influence to affect the
foreign policy of their partners. The United States steadfastly refused
because, again for very good reasons, we would refuse to recreate the
British Empire. But the result of not getting involved in the domestic
politics of our partners has had costs and ramifications that we are
grappling with today. And as the committee thinks about offering
recommendations, I think this is a very tough issue and a tough nut for
you to crack.

The United States does not want to be an imperial power, and yet some of
the price, which is al Qaeda, comes out of a result from not being too
involved in the domestic politics of our partners. And so arguing for a
change in policies has vast ramifications for U.S. foreign policy, and
will have its own set of costs, but it very well may be the path that we
choose to move forward with. Listen to the words of Egypt's Imam
Zawahiri, who argued that "the U.S. claims to stand for human rights and
democracy but forces corrupt regimes on the Muslim world." It is very
surprising that elements of al Qaeda would argue that we weren't
involved enough in the foreign policy of states, but this is what brings
recruits to al Qaeda.

Again, a number of our policies have had challenges. I think our policy
in the '90s, and more recently in how we chose to fight Saddam Hussein,
was an absolute disaster for our relations with the Muslim world. In the
early to mid-'90s, we had the Arab world calling for a more active
policy against against Iraq. But instead we were very comfortable with a
strategy of dual containment, about keeping Saddam in his box. That led,
during the '90s, to increasing anti-Americanism. I was doing research on
this in the '90s, I can tell you from first-hand, it was something that
al Qaeda was using to recruit. It was this festering anti-Americanism
that did not begin on September 11th -- September 11th hastened it but
it was growing throughout the '90s. And statements by our policymakers
that the strategy of containment was worth the lives of half-a-million
Iraqi children ricocheted through the Arab world and had significant
affects that drew people against us.

Now, all the hatred and anger is surely not a result only of our
policies, and I would be vastly irresponsible if I left you with that
notion. But I do want to convey that our policies do have something to
do with what we're seeing today. But consider also the choices that our
partners have made. During the 1970s and '80s, leaders across the Arab
world supported and funded Islamic radical groups. They did so at the
time because their real enemy isn't domestic politics or the secular
nationalists. Israel funded Islamic groups, Egypt funded Islamic groups,
Tunisia funded Islamic groups. They sent money in this because they were
fighting domestic opponents. Israel, the case that many of us know best,
was putting money into groups that would eventually become Islamic Jihad
and Hamas. But as they were putting money into these, and then in the
'70s and the '80s we had the boom in oil prices, where the Gulf states
began funding mosques and schools across the world, the Saudis sent
significant funds to Pakistan, Afghanistan, Central Asia, Africa, and
beyond. In Afghanistan, as I mentioned, in the 1980s, we had a pact with
the Saudis that we would -- we would fund dollar-for-dollar covert
operations in Afghanistan.

Many Middle East states then used this growing Islamic opposition which
they had fostered as an excuse for enacting emergency decrees and
erasing civil liberties. This oppressive, increasing totalitarian state
-- these totalitarian states across the region have stamped out any sort
of domestic response and criticism. And the only outlet for people now
is this venal Islamic opposition. They're the only ones that are able to
survive.

So, what can we do about this situation? The United States does have
tools in our kit box, and we have to be thinking about preventive
measures that we can take. In my written testimony, I suggest four, and
I'll quickly go through them.

One is the administration's engagement in Arab-Israeli issues is very
productive. Arab-Israeli problems are not the cause of this. When things
were going well in the peace process, you still had al Qaeda organizing
and motivating. What you hear from moderates across the region
relentlessly that active American involvement helps their cause, and
absence of American involvement directly hurts the friends that we have
out there, and so our current involvement is very positive.

The second thing we can do is commit to nation-building. we have
undertaken massive projects in Afghanistan and in Iraq. After
Afghanistan, the Arab world was looking at -- here is a Muslim country
that we were committed to improving and changing, and they were watching
us. Our lack of clear effort to try to fix the problem led to a lot of
resistance to support the United States. It empowered our enemies that
the U.S. cares very little about what goes on in the region.

We have to think about ways to help our friends, not our enemies. We
have to look at the social and economic challenges that the region is
facing and try to think creatively of how we can help the number of
unemployed young people in the region. We need to focus on education and
going one on one with the kind of nasty funding that's going on
throughout the world and show that the United States can offer an
alternative. We are a country of competition, and surely we can compete
on this.

And lastly, we have to improve the communication channels between
Washington and the world, not only in explaining our policies but
hearing the concerns of those in the region. From an independent
investigation I was doing during the recent fight in Iraq, there was a
noted lack of hearing what the local concerns were, and many of them
were quite valid.

In the future, I think our real challenge is not turning this into a
clash of civilizations. Look at all the hot spots we are likely to face
-- Afghanistan, Iraq, Chechnya. You can look at Nigeria, Sudan. We will
be operating against organized Islamic opponents. Unless we have a
positive alternative, the rest of the world will define us as a clash of
civilizations, and we will be the greatest loser of all.

Thank you. MR. KEAN: Thank you very much. Mr. Emerson.

MR. EMERSON: Chairman Kean, Vice President Hamilton, distinguished
members of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks on the U.S.,
thank you for inviting me and having this hearing. I'm going to
summarize and just isolate several comments in my testimony. Obviously
the rest is available for scrutiny and for questions.

I think it is very important, at the outset of this hearing, to never
lose sight of the fact that the killers behind the murder of 3,000
Americans on September 11th were not generic terrorists without clear
political and religious motives. The terrorists were not simply a band
of fanatics who, as so many officials and pundits have repeatedly
stated, had simply hijacked a religion.

Because of a fear of engendering charges of racism by Muslim leaders, a
charge that is routinely applied to anything critical of militant Islam,
there has been an assiduous effort to avoid labeling the terrorists of
9/11 by some commentators for what they really were -- militant Islamic
terrorists.

Their behavior was informed and guided by their misguided interpretation
of Islam. Unfortunately, efforts to sanitize the discussion of Islamic
terrorism have led to explanations that exonerate the masterminds and
perpetrators of any responsibility for their actions. In fact, the
special Hollywood broadcast after 9/11 noted that the attack of 9/11 was
simply, quote, "pure evil and had nothing to do with religion."

In fact, the 9/11 attack had everything to do with religion. It had to
do with the doctrinal interpretation of Islam by militants. At the
outset, it is critical to point out that militant Islam does not equal
Islam. Islam as a religion, like Christianity and Judaism, does not
endorse violence. Islam is a vibrant religion that gives spiritual
comfort and meaning to its vast number of practitioners. And there are
precious few, as they exist, Islamic writers, intellectuals and clerics
who openly and unambiguously repudiate violent Islamic ideology.

But for the peaceful majority of Muslims around the world, it is not the
West that is avoiding these distinctions. It is the militants who are
trying to raise these distinctions by claiming there is no such thing
as, quote, "Islamic extremism." They have tried to hide under the
protection of the mainstream majority.

Anti-American radicalism was pervasive in the Muslim world long before
the events of September 11th and not limited to bin Laden and al Qaeda.
One only need read the translations of the Muslim media in many parts of
the world, including the West, to see the resentment, hatred and anger
even in countries that are our strategic allies, in particular Saudi
Arabia. Persistent denial that radical Muslims are responsible for the
September 11 attacks, with the belief that either Israel or the U.S. had
secretly launched the attacks, is further evidence of this rampant
radicalism. The extent of radicalism in the Muslim world has gone
largely unrecognized, particularly before 9/11, because of premeditated
deception, a cloak of religiosity, intimidation, the power of Saudi
Arabia and other oil producers, and a tendency by many in the West to
dismiss radical statements as nothing more than rhetorical posturing.

In the last two years, it has been the genuine although belated
recognition that the problem and threat posed by al Qaeda is not limited
to card-carrying members of this terrorist group. But although al Qaeda
carried out the horrific attack of 9/11, the larger problem the U.S.
faces is the militant Islamic culture and mindset that gave birth to al
Qaeda.

In this regard, al Qaeda is actually shorthand for a much larger
religious phenomenon -- militant Islamic fundamentalism that has spawned
violence and terrorism against the U.S., the West, Islamic moderates or
other perceived enemies of Islam. Within the framework of militant
Islamic fundamentalism, a culture of violent jihad has become a common
denominator sanctioning violence, terrorism against moderate and secular
Muslims, Americans, westerners, Christians, Jews, and other infidels.

To be sure, the Muslim world is not the only religious umbrella under
which religious-sanctioned terrorism has taken place. There have been
Christian, Jewish, Sikh, Hindu, and other terrorists, for example. But
today, no other religious-inspired violence matches the scope and
transnational breadth of militant Islamic fundamentalism.

According to research we have conducted, Islamic terrorist attacks have
now occurred and been planned and supported in more than 100 countries
around the globe in the past 10 years. One of the basic problems when
confronting radicalism in the Muslim world is the unwillingness by some
western academicians, editorialists, and leaders to recognize the
pervasive institutionalized support and dissemination of jihadist
ideology.

The undeniable fact is that Islamic militants dominate or exercise
disproportionate influence over the religious, academic, and media
institutions in the Muslim world, with the notable exception of several
countries such as Turkey and Indonesia. Within the Muslim world, the
religious hierarchy has been traditionally controlled by Islamic
fundamentalists.

The question that we now face and which will be of the discussion today
is what should the response be, what caused this radicalism, and how
should we behave in the future? Let me just state this: I do not believe
that the enmity, anger, and hatred developed among Islamic
fundamentalists in the Islamic world is a result of U.S. policies. I
believe it is the result of the U.S. existence. It is a rejection of
American pluralism, American secularism. Let me read to you a quote by
Yusuf Al-Qaradawi, a militant Islamic leader that some journalists have
defined and described as a, quote, "moderate," including a recent story
in the Washington Post. Mr. Qardawi is a leader of the Muslim
Brotherhood, living in Qatar. Let me read to you a quote.

"Secularism may be accepted in the Christian society, but it can never
enjoy general acceptance in an Islamic society. Islam is a comprehensive
system of worship and legislation. The acceptance of secularism means
the abandonment of the Sharia, a denial of the divine guidance and the
rejection of Allah's injunctions. For this reason, the call for
secularism on Muslims is atheism and a rejection of Islam."

This is the underlying guide and motif that has led to the development
of Islamic militancy. If Israel were to disappear tomorrow, disappear,
and an Islamic state were to replace Israel from the river to the sea,
the mantra of Hamas, there would still be the same amount if not greater
degree of Islamic fundamentalism.

The problem lies in a vast, pervasive system of Islamic radicalism,
largely perpetrated and sponsored by the Saudi Arabian government. And I
don't think it's a coincidence that we see the rise of fundamentalism
around the world coinciding with the oil revolution in 1973-74.
Petro-dollars began to fuel this.

In the last 25 years, major radical Islamic institutions -- I describe
some of them in my testimony; the World Assembly of Muslim Youth, the
Muslim World League, International Islamic Relief Organization -- some
of which are tied to 9/11 forensically and clinically, these groups have
been responsible for fueling Islamic militancy around the world.

It is the Al Jazeera and other media stations that have largely inflamed
Arab views and Islamic views about the United States. I do not believe
the United States is culpable or responsible for the rise of extremism.
If we look at extremist movements, generally speaking, we in the West
like to associate extremist movements with being only part of a minor
view. We like to believe that they can be isolated.

What we have in the Islamic world is a much more pervasive system of
beliefs, unfortunately dictated and manipulated by a disproportionately
radical control over the institutions of the media and of Islamic
religious institutions.

I do not agree with my colleague, Ms. Bronson here, that, for example,
Israel was putting money into the groups that would eventually become
Hamas and Islamic Jihad. Israel, for example, in the 1980s was allowing
Islamic institutions to develop in Gaza and the West Bank because that's
what it tried to do in terms of allowing more freedom to local
populations.

Unfortunately, it was occurring at the same time the entire Islamic
world was being radicalized, in part by jihad in Afghanistan, as a
result of which, when Hamas was created and Islamic Jihad was created,
we also saw the creation of more than a dozen other radical Islamic
groups in Algeria, Tunisia, and elsewhere.

This whole rise of Islamic fundamentalist ideology is coterminous with a
vicious type of belief system that views the West, the United States and
the enemies of Islam to be defeated, subjugated or repressed. In the
Islamic militant mindset, the world is divided between Dar al Harb and
Dawa Islam.

Dar al Harb is the house of war, where it's permissible to wage war
against those institutions or countries that do not subscribe to the
Sharia or are not under Islamic sovereignty. Dawa Islam is the house or
the abode of peace. That's where Islamic sovereignty reigns, such as in
Iran, as it used to in Afghanistan, as well as now in the Sudan.

I do not believe we have silver bullets here. There are no silver
bullets when it comes to stopping terrorism. There is absolutely no
doubt in my mind that law enforcement needs effective tools, as they
have been given under the Patriot Act, to fight terrorist groups, seize
their assets, as they have done.

The problem is militant Islamic clergy, not just in Saudi Arabia or
Qatar or elsewhere, but also in the United States, have portrayed every
single attack on terrorist groups, including the freezing of assets and
the arrests of actual terrorists, as somehow an attack on Islam. It is
these, quote, "moderate" Islamic clerics -- and I say so-called because
they pretend to be Islamic moderates to the West, but in fact they are
not.

I'll give you one very good example -- the World Assembly of Muslim
Youth. It's a Saudi-run foundation with offices in dozens of countries.
It has openly supported Islamic terrorism. There are ties between WAMY
and 9/11 hijackers. It is a group that has openly endorsed the notion
that Jews must be killed.

WAMY, in 1995, after the Oklahoma City bombing, issued a statement and
provided money to the victims of the Oklahoma City bombing, together
with other Islamic groups, in an effort to portray itself as being very
sympathetic to American problems and trying to show that it was
anti-terrorism. It is this very group that has consistently portrayed
the United States, Jews, Christians, and other infidels as enemies who
have to be defeated or killed. And there is no doubt, according to U.S.
intelligence, that WAMY has been tied directly to terrorist attacks.

The problem is, WAMY and its external group of publications tries to
issue statements protecting its identity as a moderate group when, in
fact, it is anything but.

In the end, I believe we are left with one very resolute thing: We have
to stay the course. We have to stand up for the American principles of
pluralism, the notion of the right to disagreement, the notion of the
United States as a menace to the Islamic militants, not because of U.S.
policies, but because of the very principles underlying our creation.

Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you. Mr. Kepel.

MR. KEPEL: Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, thank you very much
for inviting me and for inviting a Frenchman under the circumstances.
(Laughter.) I'll try to be as focused as possible, and I'll try not to
be normative. That is to say, I'm not going to make policy
recommendations.

I would like to try to address one issue which I think is also an issue
with which this commission is concerned, i.e., how did we get there? How
did we get from those radical Islamic militants who fought jihad against
the Red Army against Afghanistan in the '80s and who were, at the time,
backed both by the USA and by petro-monarchies, if you wish, to 9/11?

And I think we can try to understand how the phenomenon progressed from
one to the other and how -- and pardon my French, if I may say so -- but
how, in a way, jihadi chicken came home to roost.

As you know, when the Soviet army invaded Afghanistan in late December
1979, this had been a terrible year for American interests in the area.
Ayatollah Khomeini had seized power in Iran as of February 1st. In early
fall, the grand mosque in Mecca, then still under the control of a
traditional friend of the United States, the Saudi dynasty, had been
besieged and freed only after a heavy battle, and also American hostages
had been taken in your embassy in Tehran.

So, on the one hand, you had a revolutionary understanding of Islam, the
Iranian one, which was claiming to use the origin of Islam as a means to
fight against the West, and on the other hand, you had the Soviet army,
which had gone down towards the hot seas or the warm seas following Lord
Garrison's great game scheme. So for some reasons, then, this challenge
to the United States was not fought via the force of arms. Seventy-nine,
as you know, was five years or four years after the end of the Vietnam
War, and the war against the Soviet Union was waged by proxy, was waged
vicariously, thanks to those militants, those Islamist radical
militants, who suddenly became freedom fighters.

I mean, they were called to jihad; that is to say, to fight against the
infidels that had encroached on the land of Islam by those very same
clerics that my colleague, Steve Emerson, mentioned earlier on, Sheikh
Qardawi and a few others who, at the time, saw that their interests and
the interests of the United States coincided.

And so, not only from inside of Afghanistan, but also from Algeria,
Egypt, the Philippines, even the inner cities of the suburbs of some
European countries with Muslim immigrant populations. Then you had a
sort of international brigade, international Islamist brigade, that went
to Afghanistan.

Then the issue was to kill two birds with one stone; on the one hand, to
inflict a Vietnam, if I may say so, on the Soviet army, on the Red Army,
and on the other hand, to light a sort of counter-fire against the
Iranian revolution, and to press the sort of claim about political Islam
in a way which would not be anti-American but rather anti-communist,
anti-atheist, if you wish. By 1989, both of those objectives were, to a
large extent, met. On the 15th of February, 1989, the Red Army pulled
out of Afghanistan, admitting its defeat. Though, the pro-Soviet regime
in Afghanistan would only crumble three years later. And in the same
year, 1989, Ayatollah Khomeini died after he had signed a truce with
Saddam Hussein, who at the time was the darling of the West, of the
U.S., of France of course, and of the petro-monarchies, because he had
resisted the expansion of Iran to the west, thanks to the war, the sort
of attrition war, war of the trenches, that took eight years between
Iran and Iraq.

So, then in 1989, to a large extent when we think of that war, this is a
war that had almost no cost, because from conservative estimates, and it
is difficult to know, but I am sure that in your capacity as a
commission you will have those figures and you will make them public.
Generally speaking academics like myself would have no access to real
information -- consider that the cost of jihad in Afghanistan was
approximately $1.2 billion per year, half of it was being paid by the
oil countries, those $600 million for the American taxpayer, if I may
use an American colloquial expression, it's peanuts for getting rid of
the Soviet Union. And so plus the fact that no Americans were killed
there. I mean, the ones who fought against the U.S.S.R. were those
bearded guys who at the time were called "freedom fighters." They had no
mothers, or their mothers wouldn't demonstrate or picket down there on
the Mall, and they would have no visas, anyway. And so this was
perceived as an operation which almost cost nothing.

Well, then there was a problem, because as of 1989, most people believed
that there was no hurry or no reason to give any retribution to those
troops, that if one stopped paying the jihadists who had been there for
eight years and five years at times in the caves in Afghanistan and in
Pakistan, they would evaporate, they would disappear. They would go back
to their countries of origin and disappear. And, conversely, many people
thought that there was no need to compensate the Iraqi regime of Saddam
Hussein for the human price it had paid for the West to a large extent
in the war, and for the oil monarchies in the war it led against
Khomeini's Iran between 1980 and 1988.

So that led to tremendous misunderstanding, to use a euphemism, between
the former allies; i.e., the U.S. forces and the U.S. administration and
those freedom fighters a.k.a. jihadists. And in spite of evaporating,
those people who knew nothing else but waging war began to turn against
the ones who had fed them and to bite the hands that had given them food
and shelter. That took place particularly after the crucial turning
point that was the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on August 2, 1990, when as
the Saudi regime called the U.S. to the rescue on the 7th of August.
Then Saudi Arabia, in the eyes of those militants got the same status as
Afghanistan, if you wish. It was there again part of the land of Islam
that was invaded by infidel armies. Hence, jihad against America became
legitimate. Not all of the religious establishment that had backed the
jihad against Soviet-occupied Afghanistan backed the jihad against
American, quote-unquote "occupied" Saudi Arabia. Nevertheless, some did.
And that led to a rift within the Islamist movements between the
radicals who then would engage against Saudi Arabia, against America,
and the so-called moderates who would be taken into politics of
cooptation by the regimes, like the Muslim Brothers in Egypt, and so on
and so forth.

So, anyway, that led to a situation where sort of the most radical, the
most violent elements in the movement suddenly became apolitical. I
mean, they would believe that violence in itself was not only a means
but an aim. And in doing so they sought to have a remake which would ape
what had been jihad in Afghanistan that was successful, because it
ousted the Soviets. That developed into two different moments along the
1990s. From 1992 to 1996 approximately they tried to develop guerrilla
movements, mimicking the Afghan one -- in Algeria, in Bosnia, in Egypt,
later in Kashmir, in Chechnya. And to a large extent those movements
failed. They did not manage to seize power, because ultimately they were
unable to draw a large constituency to back them.

And then, in the second half of the 1990s, then those groups who were
closely knit and who traced back to the Afghanistan period -- the
training camps and the network which was created there. As you know the
term "al Qaeda" in Arabic means base -- it means database -- al Qaeda --
(speaks Arabic). That's because bin Laden and his likes had put all
jihadists on the database, on a computer database so that they could
know where they were after they left the camps, right? And so they
turned to another tactic, which was terrorism, and by terrorism as
opposed to guerrilla, I mean action which did not need the backing of
the masses, but action which would be done in closed groups -- very
spectacular, with the media as sort of a loud speaker. And that was
intended to change the mentality of those masses and to mobilize them,
to show that the enemy was weak and that through violence they could
achieve their aims.

Now, to conclude, at first action was directed essentially against
Saudi-American relations. Most of the bombings took place in relation to
that, the 1996 bombings against American servicemen in Dharhan in June
or July 1996, in Eastern Saudi Arabia; then the bombing of the two
embassies on the 7th of August 1996. And the 7th of August is the
anniversary of the call by the Saudis to the American troops on the 7th
of August 1990, which is the main symbolic date for them. Then the
U.S.S. Cole in October 2000. And all that did not lead to any change in
the U.S.-Saudi relationship and the U.S-ruling-family-in-Saudi Arabia
relationship.

And then in my view this is how we got to sort of the further step, an
escalation in this logic of terrorism, which led to 9/11. Nine-eleven
also has to be put into context, because in my view it is something that
uses a language which is already if you wish in use at the time.
Nine-eleven comes approximately a year after the beginning of the second
intifada. During the second intifada who have those kids who have become
"heroes and marchers," quote/unquote, in some part of the youth in the
Muslim world who blow themselves up in these areas in Tel Aviv and what
have you. There again the retaliation of the Israeli army is such that
whatever those terrorists do against the Israelis nevertheless,
militarily the Israelis keep the upper hand. And the 9/11 bombing to
some extent is a means, is a continuation of both the previous bombings
of the bin Laden group around Saudi Arabia and so on and so forth, and
it blends that with, if you wish, the gesture of the terrorism
activities in Palestine and Israel against the Israelis, to show that
they are able to overcome their military weakness that they can fight a
superpower. And in doing so, they had hoped to mobilize the masses
throughout the Muslim world in order to show that they could topple
America.

This, I think, was a failure, and as far as we can judge as of now they
have not been able to do so. And what that led to was the toppling of
the only significantly pro-terrorist regime in the Muslim world; that is
to say Afghanistan. The Taliban regime was down. Then the Saddam Hussein
regime disappeared. And in my view -- and I was asked to read the final
part of my written piece in my statement, so I will abide to that -- so
the political cost of such campaigns of suicide bombings and terrorism
seems in my view to be considerable and its gains questionable. There is
only the exultation of a small minority who have locked themselves into
a mentality where terrorism becomes an end in itself. Thank you for your
patience.

MR. KEAN: Thank you. Mr. Ross.

MR. ROSS: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the commission.
Along with you, I have just heard a number of interesting perspectives,
and I think what I am going to offer is something that complements what
you've heard. It doesn't necessarily agree with everything, but I think
it is designed to create even more of a context, at least as it relates
to the Middle East. I am going to encapsulate what I wrote in my
statement by talking about what I consider certain basic realities.

One reality is the reality that confronted me on 9/11: I had all the
questions I think that many of you are now exploring, among which, How
is it possible that we could have been so catastrophically surprised?
What fundamental assumptions were we making that were not the right
assumptions? And how do we correct that? -- among other things. But I
didn't have any question about where this had come from. I had no doubt
that this had a Middle Eastern connection. I understood very clearly
that the kind of brand of radical Islam that tends to glorify martyrdom
on the one hand and makes us the embodiment of evil, the source of
contamination of the faith, responsible for corruption their culture, in
effect being responsible for supporting the intruder in their midst. All
these things combine to ensure that the kind of attacks that we saw came
from those who embrace this kind of radical Islam, and they are
primarily in the Middle East. So I had no doubt this is where the source
of the terror came from.

I also reacted at the time to some who have said that, Well, if we just
had peace between Arabs and Israelis, and especially between Israelis
and Palestinians, which is the core of this conflict, that basically we
wouldn't have had this attack. Now, believe me on this one: no one has
committed more of his time to trying to resolve this conflict than I
have, and I remain as committed as ever. But you have to go back to
where we were in the year 2000 to realize that in the midst of the
planning for 9/11, we were at a point when most in the Arab world
actually thought we were going to resolve this conflict. In fact, had we
the way most of them thought at that time, we still would have had 9/11,
because in a sense 9/11 wasn't about the Israeli- Palestinian issue. To
be sure, the Israeli-Palestinian issue sours the climate. To be sure,
especially with the advent of the intifada, it did create more of a
sense that somehow something had to be done. And the images of the
intifada that were being broadcast on Arab satellite TV, which was in
effect re-Arabizing the Palestinian conflict, were the kind of images
that were bound to add to the sense of anger and resentment. And anger
and resentment is the essence of what people like Osama bin Laden and
their organizations depend upon. They have to have anger and resentment,
they have to have frustration, they have to have no hope to be able to
build a body of recruits.

And, unfortunately, when it comes to the Middle East, they have very
fertile ground, even if you didn't have the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We are talking about a landscape, at least psychically, that
is characterized by a sense of humiliation. It is characterized by a
sense of indignity. It is characterized by a sense of betrayal. And it
goes back at least 80 years -- actually longer. Part of it is the sense
that what was once a glorious history is gone. Part of it is a sense of
betrayal of promises that were made at World War I. It is interesting
that in the very first videotape that Osama bin Laden released, after
9/11, he referred to 80 years of humiliation, and he was, in effect at
least implicitly, talking about the promises that had been betrayed
after World War I when there was supposed to be independence for the
Arabs. Well, not only did they not get the independence, but their image
of having one Arab state, which was going to be the key to
reestablishing their glory, was also frustrated. They were denied this.
Again, they were betrayed.

So the sense of betrayal has deep-seated roots in this part of the
world. And the feeling that somehow there is an ongoing humiliation
where the outside world has imposed on people in the Middle East, that
adds to that sense of indignity, is also very much a part of that
landscape.

Now, the imposition is not only what is done from the outside. It's also
what is done from the inside. Today in the Arab world the feeling is
that most are imposed on by their own regimes. And that, too, adds to
their sense of anger and frustration. Now, the fact is this creates a
context. It also creates a context where, in the current setting, most
regimes don't address the anger and frustration -- they try to deflect
it. They want to make somebody else responsible for these ills. And,
indeed, when you have a history where you can refer to betrayals, it's
always easy to do so. And, unfortunately, some of our friends are in the
lead, at least in terms of what they allow to be said within their
societies as a way of deflecting anger away from them and on towards us.

Now, 9/11 in some respects did create a watershed in the region, at
least in terms of some of the liberal voices. They became stronger after
9/11 in terms of calling for a kind of introspection, in terms of saying
that, you know, it's not necessarily the Americans who are to blame.
Some of these observers, some of these Arab liberals, some of these Arab
reformers began to say, we need our religious authorities to come to
grips with modernization and with modernity. We need our political
leaders to come to grips with the fact that they lack legitimacy. We
need our intellectuals to give up what is the kind of comfortable
conformity that described most of the intellectual discourse and realize
that in fact they have to embrace change and not simply resist it.

And you might ask why am I going through all this with this commission?
Well, I think the answer is if we want to understand the roots of 9/11,
and if we want to understand why terror may continue, we have to
understand in fact what produces the kind of hostility, the anger, the
sentiments that we see. We have to understand that some of this is
obviously directed against the local regimes and some of it is directed
against us. Now, we are frequently accused -- and this produces a lot of
resentment -- of having a double-standard. To be sure, when that charge
is made, when it is commonplace almost everyplace in the region, the
focus is principally on Israel. But if you think that that's the sole
basis of their view of a double-standard on our part, then you wouldn't
really capture the understanding of what really goes on in the area.

We are resented in no small part because we are seen as using democracy
as a tool or as a weapon. We are seen as using democracy as a tool or as
a weapon against those that we don't like, but never against those that
we do like. We are seen in a sense as mouthing the words of democracy
but then supporting regimes that are seen as being repressive in
regional terms. Now, in identifying this analytically -- I am not
sitting here and suggesting that somehow we should withdraw our support
for countries like Saudi Arabia or Egypt or others. I am saying,
however, that if we are going to deal with the issue of resentment, if
we are going to deal with the issue of double-standards, one of the
things that we are going to have to do is be more consistent in terms of
what we stand for. We don't have to push any of our friends over the
cliff, but we do have to be very clear about who we are, what we stand
for, what is important for us.

There are in fact, as I said, Arab liberals who are saying today that
what is required in their part of the world is the rule of law. What is
required for them is an independent judiciary. What is required for them
is a vigorous anti-corruption campaign or set of campaigns. What is
required for them is tolerance, the minority rights. What is required
for them is transparency and accountability. What is required for them
are women's rights.

Now, these happen to embrace what we believe in. And one of the things
that is going to be very important for us is for us to adopt a position
in which it's clear we stand with those who represent those kinds of
values. Our friends in the region should know from us that we will be
very clear not only in private but in public about supporting those
groups, those reformers, who are committed to these kinds of values.
They should understand very well, and those in the region should
understand very well, that when those groups get suppressed we will not
be silenced in response to the suppression of those groups.

If 9/11 demonstrated anything for us, it demonstrated one unmistakable
lesson: We can no longer be indifferent to what goes on within the
societies within the region. For a long time, we cut our own deals with
some of our friends. As long as they supported us in the region or
outside the region, we basically turned a blind eye to what went on in
their homes. Now, at one level it made perfect sense. But 9/11
demonstrated that there was a consequence for us. There was an affect on
our security. Being indifferent to what was happening in their societies
was actually a prescription for us not actually paying attention to what
was required for our security.

We can no longer be in a position where some of our friends, to deflect
anger from themselves deflect it onto us, because the consequences of
socializing that kind of anger, that kind of hostility, ends up being
manifested in what we saw on 9/11.

Now, here again don't mistake what I am saying to somehow think that I
don't think that hard power and only soft power is the answer to
terrorism. I don't believe that. I believe that the use of hard power is
essential. I believe that in terms of Osama bin Laden, al Qaeda, and
other terrorist groups we have to respond to them using military force.
We have to demonstrate something very profound: We have to demonstrate
their way doesn't work. They prey on the imagery of humiliation, and
they have the answer to humiliation. But we also have to demonstrate
that the only they that they will produce is more victimhood -- not
success, more victims from their standpoint. They have to be seen as the
embodiment of failure. There's a long history in the Middle East of
trying to defy the powerful on behalf of the powerless. Osama bin Laden
is the latest in a long line. Saddam tried to do that, you go back to
Nasser. All tried to somehow embrace and represent the powerless by
defying the powerful. Well, this becomes an argument in and of itself
for us to be I think successful in terms of proving they cannot succeed.

Let me just sum up since I see the red light is on, and I always respect
the red light. Let me just sum up by saying the following: It is very
important for us to use hard power where appropriate and necessary. But
we also have to be realistic. The military cannot provide us the only
answer that we need any more than improving law enforcement, which is
essential, any more than improving intelligence, which is essential, any
more in cutting off financial flows to terrorist groups, which is
essential, any more than ensuring that there aren't safe havens. All
that is important. But we will have to use all the instruments at our
disposal, and we will have to press very hard to make it clear that any
use of terror discredits any cause that employs it. As long as
resistance is seen as being the equivalent of a normal way to deal with
your cause, then we are going to find that suicide bombs are somehow
seen as being legitimate. If they are legitimate in the Middle East,
they are going to be legitimate anywhere else. We have to focus very
heavily on how we discredit that. In the end, we also have to create
models of success -- for example, in Iraq. And the last line of what I
wrote was: We have to focus on how we make the power of our example as
important as our military power. When we do that, we will succeed in
this war. Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, Mr. Ross. Commissioner Fielding.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the risk of making it sound
like we are all in a frenzy of self-congratulations and adoration, I
would like to thank the staff for putting together such terrific panels
as we have had today, and certainly helping our learning curve. And I
would also echo the comments made earlier by my fellow commissioners and
friends in support and thanks to the chair and vice chair for their
leadership. Though, Tim, I am in the half-full club of that group.
(Laughter.)

Seriously, the requests that we have made and the staff has made are for
the most sensitive documents and information the executive branch has.
They are of unprecedented scope. And thus far the response is to come up
with an unprecedented scope of material, which I trust will continue,
and we will, I trust, also get all the information that we need to
complete our work.

I would also like to thank this panel -- very, very enlightened and
enlightening report. Obviously there are some differences, and we are
going to have to parse through them. I am not sure we are capable of it,
but we'll sure try.

You know, the chairman made a very interesting observation this morning
when he opened it and he said al Qaeda was at war with us before we
realized we were at war. And I think that's very telling, because it
really gets down to the essence of what we are trying to discern here,
and that's why did we not grasp, what didn't we grasp, what didn't we
understand, and what can we learn so that we can impose a little
discipline upon ourselves and try to prevent that from happening again?
And I assure you that this panel has helped us, and will in our
deliberations be a great help to us, and we are very appreciative.

I find it interesting, not being a student of this at all, there seemed
to be two features that marked the September 11th attacks; that was the
willingness of the perpetrators to commit suicide and the ruthlessness
of the people who sent them to commit that suicide, and then to justify
it, attempt to justify it, in terms of Islam. I don't see how that
reconciles itself with Islamic doctrine or law, on the one hand. And to
say that it was in the name of Allah or whomever is actually blasphemy
in and of itself.

And yet I was reading the other day a review of a book called "Through
Our Enemy's Eyes," and the author, who is apparently anonymous at this
point, says, among other things, that Osama bin Laden is more than a
terrorist and hence more dangerous than generally thought. He is revered
in the Islamic world much as Thomas Jefferson or Theodore Roosevelt
would be in the United States.

And I find that that is fascinating, and I would welcome the comments of
the panelists, quite frankly, because what we're trying to do here at
this panel is to look for the factors in the Muslim world that are
exploited at this point by terrorist organizations to justify their
cause, to justify their actions, and why this exploitation exists and
how it could be thwarted and how we should organize ourselves to at
least try that goal.

So I would appreciate, to the best you can, describing to us what you
believe, each of you, is the current public attitude in the Arab world
generally, and more generally in the Muslim world, towards bin Laden,
and if there's a trend, if there's growing support or not growing
support.

Ms. Bronson, could I ask you first?

MS. BRONSON: Sure. It's obviously a big question, and there's a lot that
contributes to what we see. Part is the kind of education throughout the
world that students are receiving. In sort of anecdotal evidence,
somebody I was speaking to from eastern Saudi Arabia said when he was
growing up -- he's about in his 50s, 60s -- he received about an hour
and a half of religious education a week in school. His children are
receiving three to four hours a day.

Take that and think about the kind of funding that's going into mosques
and schools across the region, the kind of things that we're hearing
about that are being taught. We have a real problem. It's generations
coming up who've been schooled on nothing but a very awful strand of
what the religion means. Add that to the fact that the Middle East --
the Arab Development Report was referenced -- is the furthest behind in
political freedoms and liberty. Economically it's stagnant. Populations
are bulging. Most of the population in the region is below 50 percent.
Most of the population is below the age of 15. And they're not receiving
the kinds of skills that will get them jobs, so they're unemployed and
they're hanging around, and there's nothing to do. And smart kids who
come back from American universities come back and can't do anything
with what they've learned. It's a stagnant political culture.

But why I sort of focus on the sort of education part of it is my
frustration that we are not offering alternatives to what is going on in
the region. In the late 1990s in the Gulf, we had a very heavy military
presence compared to historically where we've been. We offered very
little social and economic policies to bolster or support our military
presence. We cut back on all the kinds of programs that we used to have
to woo Europeans to the United States.

If you think of it now, it's somewhat crazy that we felt we had to woo
Europeans. But surely if we felt we had to have good exchange programs
with the Europeans, triple that for what is required for the rest of the
world, where the cultures are so different.

When I was doing my research, looking at the social and economic lack of
policy, I had people asking me, "Where's U.S. policy taking us?" And in
some ways that can be a very frustrating question, because the first
response is, "Take yourself somewhere. Don't wait for the U.S. to do it.
Do it yourself."

But we are very involved militarily abroad. We are notably uninvolved in
other ways. And I think as the commission thinks about where we go, it
is so striking to me that the obvious lesson of September 11th isn't to
get heavily involved in supporting secular education in Pakistan. That
seems like a somewhat obvious one, given what we know. And yet that
doesn't seem to be a fundamental focus.

So I think we do have to come down strong on policies emanating from the
region that we don't agree with. I think that's half the battle. I think
the other half is to be creative about how to have programs and ideas
out there that allow our potential supporters to support us. Right now I
believe we're offering precious little in the area of the world that we
have defined as a significant problem for the United States.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you. Mr. Emerson.

MR. EMERSON: I think your question is right to the point. And I'm not so
sure we're ever going to come up with the right answers. Let me just
offer a couple of thoughts. One, Islam, unlike Christianity and Judaism,
has yet to undergo a genuine religious reformation. Now, there are
reformists in Islam and there are those that unambiguously condemn
terrorist groups. But by and large, the institutionalized control of the
Islamic militant hierarchy is pervasive.

And absent that reformation, there is an absence of a secularist class
or of a reformist class. And consistent with that is the fact that,
absent that reformation, that means that bin Laden is not just a, quote,
"terrorist leader." He's a religious leader and a political leader, and
there gives infusion to the credibility of a message.

You know, in part of my testimony, as part of a larger investigation
that my organization is carrying out, we're looking at the exact
textbooks that are being disseminated, in this case by the kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, in the United States. And this was done by the embassy
here in Washington. And I'm just going to give you a couple of examples.

One is a textbook for eighth grade talking about triumphing over the
unjust enemies and recalling Islamic history, when Islam was on top of
the world and basically saying the mujaheddin were on top of the world,
or holy warriors, and now were not.

And the second example is an 11th grade textbook talking about that the
believer must show the infidels rudeness and violence in the ways of
jihad and the way of Allah. Now, this doesn't reflect Islam
intrinsically. It reflects the interpretation of Islam by the militants,
who unfortunately have disproportionate control.

The question is, what will dislodge them? What will discredit them? What
will embolden the true reformists? One thing I can tell you is the more
the U.S. -- the U.S. is struck by an incredible amount of
contradictions. In Egypt we have pumped in a lot of money, increasing
amounts of money, close to $2.5 billion a year. The USAID program is
very elaborate in Egypt. And yet the amount of anti- American
radicalism, let alone anti-Semitism, has increased.

And if you look at Saudi Arabia, you find tremendous support by middle-
and upper-class youth, who are not impoverished, are not missing jobs,
are not missing income, but subscribe to the same radicalism that the
suicide bombers subscribe to in the West Bank and Gaza. So it's a
trans-class, trans-economic phenomenon.

I believe ultimately we need to encourage, through either overt but as
well as covert programs, the whole reformation of Islam, the true
emboldenment and power of genuine Islamic moderates, not the false
moderates who say they condemn terrorism, but then when they're asked
about bin Laden they say, "Well, he's not a terrorist" -- the genuine
ones.

The fact is we are beset by the contradictions. If we get more involved
in the Islamic world, the more it's perceived as the crusaders coming
back. The sense of injustice and double standards that Ambassador Ross
talked about has been endemic since the Islamic world began being part
of the losing end against the West in the late 1700s. And everything has
been portrayed since then as a problem of the crusaders.

So you have a mentality that views everything, going back not just 80
years but 200 years, as an attack on Islam. Nothing we do, whether it's
Radio Sawa or another type of -- which I think is a good thing, but not
sufficient at all -- is going to counter the effective control on the
media, Islamic institutions, educational institutions, that Rachel just
talked about, that are deeply embedded within the societies in that
area.

Now, we can ask for secularized curricula, but the bottom line is
they're not going to accept it, because to accept secularism, as Qardawi
said, is to accept the defeat of Islam. So the question is, how do we
discredit the militants? How do we embolden the moderates? How do we
foster a genuine reformation in Islam?

And one of the things that I suggest -- and it's only one thing, and it
may not work out -- is that the U.S. government begin to create academic
chairs around the world and centers, either through U.S. money or
through institutes, quasi-official institutes like we have the U.S.
Institute for Peace or the other democratic institutes, that will create
genuine centers of learning and empowerment for reformists in Islam.

MR. KEPEL: Thank you. Well, I will make no attempt at reconciling the
views of Ms. Bronson and Mr. Emerson, but just to focus on the three
questions that I think you asked. The first one was how come al Qaeda
was at war with us -- and I include even our part of the world in this
task -- before we knew.

Two, how come this suicide thing became so prominent? Is this something
Islamic or not? And three, about the popularity of Osama bin Laden. And
I think we can get rather precise here.

How come al Qaeda was at war with us before we knew? I'm sure that on
this matter, the work of your commission can shed a lot of light. In my
view, something took place which we do not know, really, and those who
talk don't know and those who know don't talk, for the time being, until
we read you what you're going to do, of course.

Between, say, 1989 and 1991-1992, most of those jihadists were people
who had access to this country. They came here. They were treated well.
They lectured. There were a number of centers gathering funds for jihad
in Afghanistan. A number of students from the Muslim world on American
campuses were recruited to go to jihad, and so on and so forth.

And for some reason, it was believed or it must have been believed that
those people would, say, create no danger, and even maybe that it would
be useful to keep some sort of access to them in the event that some
sort of revolution like the Iranian revolution would take place in the
future.

If you remember, no one in the U.S. actually knew anything about the
people who seized power in 1979, among other reasons, because the shah
of Iran had poured so much money over DC, over the beltway, at the time
that no one knew anything about the Iranian opposition.

So, in order not to make the same mistake, a number of those people were
(treated?) here -- were visible. And for the French, this is something
very clear, because much of the Islamist position in Algeria was
received here because many people thought in the early '90s that Algeria
would become an Islamist state. And their representatives were here.
They were seen by members of the administration, and so on and so forth.

So I guess that probably there was some sort of misassessment or
misunderstanding of those groups and the belief that they could be under
control, and that when you stopped paying them, they would disappear,
which is not at all what happened.

And I guess there was a whole -- it's not only an issue, I would say, of
this or that agency that was incompetent. It was more a general policy
orientation, and the fact that it was believed that they could be used,
that they would not turn against the ones who had been by their side.
But for that, I guess we have to have access to a number of classified
documents, and we academics can only use ifs and subjunctives. That's
why I'm eager to read what you're going to write.

This issue of suicides -- truly in the Sunni Muslim world, which is 85
percent of the Muslim world, suicide is not at all valued. On the
contrary, when suicide is perceived as such, it is something which is
seen as taking back what God had given and it is a sin which leads those
who commit it to the fires of hell; hence the qualification of the 11th
of September, for instance.

There was a semantic battle between a number of doctors of the law as to
whether or not 9/11 was suicide or whether it was martyrdom. And maybe
this is one of the reasons why some people deem Sheikh Qaradawi, who is
the darling of Steven Emerson here, a moderate, because Sheikh Kardawi
(ph), who's -- he's the sort of -- how do you say -- the televangelist,
if I may say so, in Al Jazeera; he has his program every Sunday morning.
Well, he had, because now he's having some difficulties with the Qatari
state. And Al Jazeera is something between 45 million to 60 million
viewers, so it's not nothing.

And he would claim that 9/11 was a suicide operation because there was
no legitimate jihad against the U.S. and that those people who did it,
provided they were Muslims and not agents of Mossad, like rumors spread
in the Muslim world, they were burning in the fire of hell.
Nevertheless, he would contend, those who planted bombs or who blow
themselves up in pizzerias or wherever in Israel, those were not
suicides. They were martyrs, because they fought in the name of God to
reclaim the land of Islam that had been stolen by the infidels. So it's
an issue. I mean, it's not only scholarly issue. It's very sensitive
political issue.

Actually, I believe this issue of suicides in modern Islamic societies
came to the forefront with the Iranian revolution and with the fact that
in Shi'a Islam, the sacrifice of the self is much more valued than it is
in Sunni Islam. Shi'ite militants and volunteers would go and blow
themselves up on Iraqi mine fields during the Iraq- Iran war in the
1980s, and that allowed the Iranian regular forces to proceed.

Now, this contaminated those other Shi'as who are Arabs, i.e. in
southern Lebanon. And then the Hizbollah tradition developed on this
suicide bombing thing. They were Shi'as, just like the Iranians, but
they were not Iranians. They belonged to the Arab world, if you wish.

And that, in a sense, became a model because, particularly after Ehud
Barak decided to pull out Israeli troops from Lebanon, southern Lebanon,
in May of 2000, then this was perceived by the rank-and-file people in
the Arab world as the only military victory, the only Arab military
victory of date. And so hence this issue of suicide gained some sort of
ground and credibility as a means to achieve aims that would otherwise
be unreachable.

But then it sort of -- it became loose. It stopped being under control
because there was endless overbidding in this issue of suicide in
Palestine and Israel particularly. But eventually this issue of suicide,
you know, cannot be understood if you don't put it in context with the
media, and particularly with the satellite television thing.

I mean, suicide allows you to -- a suicide attack, a suicide bombing --
to be in the news, to be in the front page. And this is catching
attention. And stop broadcasting suicide bombings and you'll see that
suicide bombings, if not disappear, I mean, at least lose a lot of their
political interest.

So how come young people with education, and even at times with western
education, get into those suicide operations? One issue, of course, is,
as Dennis Ross mentioned, because there's such an amount of despair,
that people think they have no other way. I mean, this is the only thing
they can do. There is no solution, and so on and so forth. So this is
the sociological dimension which can be discussed.

One other thing is that nowadays -- and this is going back to something
Mr. Emerson said earlier -- that we now have a different type of Islamic
learning which has gained prominence, particularly during the Afghan
years, the Afghan jihad years, where obscure interpreters of the book
have now become extremely active, people who do not speak everyday
language but who would look out for the sort of most difficult verses or
sayings of the prophets and who would claim that they have authority in
order to fight the Jews, fight the Christians, and so on and so forth.

And there again, then you have the possibility to them, I mean, to have
control over minds which are not well-grounded in sort of religious
learning. Here clearly there is a big problem in terms of what is
Islamic learning in the Muslim world today and who has been able to
capture this issue.

Third, and very briefly, about the popularity of Osama bin Laden, I
mean, definitely he was quite popular after 9/11 amongst the youth. And
let me tell you an anecdote which I heard in an Egyptian (dialect?), in
Egypt and in other places. It's the story of a woman in a restaurant who
wants to go to the toilet, and she goes directly to the men's room. So
the waiters tell her, "No, no, no, lady, this is for men. You go to the
other restroom for the ladies." And she asks, "Why? Is Osama bin Laden
inside the men's room?" And they say, "No, of course he is not." Then
she said, "So I can go, because he is the only male left in the Arab and
Muslim world."

And this is something which is -- she did not fear anything; all the
others were, you know, castrated. And this is something which is kind of
telling; i.e., that he was seen, if I may say so, again, in Saudi
Arabia, in a country where there are a lot of zeros in checks, I mean,
as the only hero. And then I guess that this doesn't have to --
shouldn't be underestimated.

Nevertheless, his problem is that he cannot deliver, and he's just like
an Andy Warhol -- Andy Warhol said that everybody would be famous for 15
minutes. Well, he's been famous for a little more, but he has
disappeared. I don't know whether he's dead or not. Maybe you'll
discover that also; I mean, we hope. But bin Laden, in a way, you have
the activist bin Laden; I mean, the man who was part of this al Qaeda
network.

And al Qaeda -- it's a strange story, because they never called
themselves al Qaeda. Al Qaeda was a nickname, and it was something -- I
mean, this was not a fabrication by the press in this country or by
intelligence agencies, but rather a way to focus on something. You know,
it was a nebulous thing. They would call themselves the vanguard of
Islam. But al Qaeda -- no Islamist movement in my knowledge -- and I
have been studying them for 25 years -- has ever called himself such a
thing, right? So calling them a base was a means to focus on them.

So, bin Laden, who is the activist on the one hand and you also have bin
Laden who is sort of the media icon, and if not this great scholar of
Islam at least this great scholar of media, Orson Wells, once said the
worst -- I mean, the best guy is the more money you make at the box
office. And clearly bin Laden was seen as such a fabrication. I mean,
bin Laden without TV coverage is just like a fish outside the aquarium,
and he doesn't deliver. He doesn't deliver anything significantly. He
doesn't allow people to make more money, to survive, to lead better
lives. And nowadays his name is less and less mentioned.

So I think today reference to bin Laden, he will be another of those
failed Arab heroes -- you know, those heroes who said that they would
bring something that ultimately they brought nothing but havoc.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you. Ambassador Ross, I hate to ask a fourth person
to respond to the same questions, but I'd appreciate your thoughts.

MR. ROSS: I'm happy to. Look, let me start where Gilles ended. I go back
to something I was saying earlier. There is the appeal of the defier.
There is a desire to stand up to those who humiliate you. There is the
impulse to have somebody who will represent the powerless against the
powerful. He embodied that, because as I said before he's not the first
to try to do that. The problem with defiers is ultimately if you are
going to succeed you have to produce and not just defy. And every single
one of the defiers so far has ultimately failed, because they have not
produced.

But they are still able to tap that sense of resentment, that sense of
anger, and the appeal of martyrdom. I mean, it's another expression of
this. I mean, here's someone who is prepared to inflict pain on those
who inflict pain on us. Until there is more of an effort in the region,
by religious leaders as well as political leaders, to discredit this,
you are not going to see anything change. And you can't have one kind of
terror that's okay and another kind that isn't. When you go in and you
-- you know, you blow up a night club in Tel Aviv, that's terror -- it's
not resistance. When you blow up a pizza parlor, that's terror -- it's
not resistance. But when every Palestinian school at that time would
actually put up banners to proclaim the glory of the suicide bomber who
did that, when the Arab media generally would do that -- well, you know,
that's hardly going to be something that becomes illegitimate.

Now, since 9/11 we have seen some change in that. And since the Saudi
9/11 we have seen some more change in terms of that, because when local
leaders begin to see that they are not deflecting the threat away from
themselves, but it is something that will be visited upon them, they
begin to take a somewhat different view. It's a kind of reformation in
Islam. The problem is it has to come from within. It cannot come from
without.

Now, there is the potential for more change coming from within -- not
just among the religious, but more generally speaking. And we have to
look at what the fall of Baghdad has meant psychologically throughout
the Arab world. Nobody expected that it was going to be Stalingrad, but
they did expect that there would be resistance. And when it collapsed
very quickly without resistance -- and this is a capital with a glorious
history -- then it reminded everybody in the region that there was
something really rotten with Saddam Hussein's regime, but it also
reminded them that this was a regime that was more extreme than theirs
but not in many was dissimilar from theirs. Now, what that does when it
creates the sense that there's rot, it tends to strengthen two very
different approaches. One is the fundamentalist approach, because after
all they have a very simple explanation for what's wrong and how to get
well. But it also has emboldened the reformers, who also have their own
explanation for what's wrong and how to get well, which is one of the
reasons that I say I'm very strongly in favor of us doing more with
reformers. It's not the whole story. I think what Rachel said about
education should be an important part of what we do. I think we have to
recognize something critical to this whole enterprise. What the defiers
need is a complete sense of hopelessness. It's what makes -- it isn't
just what creates the anger and frustration, but it creates a sense,
well, you have nothing to lose. We have friends in the area who for
their own reasons are going to have to begin to figure out how they deal
with very young populations that are increasingly alienated who feel
there is no prospect, no possibility, no hope of inclusion. Unless you
begin to see the possibilities created -- you don't have to have a
revolution, you don't have to transform the reality overnight, but you
have to begin to create a sense that something can change. In Saudi
Arabia right now the crown prince has embraced a call for reform from
Saudi liberals, and he's facing in fact real resistance from other
members of the royal family. One of the things I suggested in my
statement is this is not a struggle that we should be indifferent to or
neutral about.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you all for very fine answers. Mr. Chairman, I don't
want to monopolize all of the questioning of this panel.

MR. KEAN: We'll turn it over then to Senator Cleland.

MR. CLELAND: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Ross, we give you
tremendous kudos for taking shuttle diplomacy to a high level, unheard
of in modern times. So thank you very much for all that time on
aircrafts trying to work on the problems of the Middle East.

May I just say that, Ms. Bronson, I fully agree that this Samuel
Huntington thesis of a clash of civilizations is exactly what we don't
want to have. But I am afraid that in terms of what are the results of
our policy that it may begin to have that effect and create more defiers
or create more alienation, Mr. Ross. I'd like to just read to you an
excerpt from a speech by Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, to
the National Press Club luncheon June 19th, 2003, regards the Pew, P-E-W
Global attitudes project, in terms of a survey how they see in effect
America. Senator Hagel says the June 2003 survey of the Pew Global
Attitudes Project should be a rousing alarm clock, not merely a wake-up
call to all Americans, regarding the perception of America in the world
today. The Pew project relied on public opinion surveys from 44 nations
in the summer and fall of last year, and further data from 21 countries
in April and May of this year, for a total survey sample of 54,000
people. The survey's finding, according to Senator Hagel, carries a
disconcerting message regarding American leadership and credibility. And
from the poll he quotes, "The Iraq War has widened the rift between
Americans and Western Europeans, further inflamed the Muslim world,
softened support for the war on terrorism, and significantly weakened
global support for the pillars of the post-World War II era, the U.N.
and the North Atlantic Alliance." Mr. Ross, are we creating more
defiers? Are we creating more hopelessness, more alienation, by the Iraq
war and the massive presence that we have there? It looks like an
open-ended ground war with us losing more and more people every day.

MR. ROSS: Well, I think obviously we have to have what I would call a
balanced approach. I do think the military dimension of it, as I said,
is indispensable. And for many who said before the war that we would see
an incredible uproar and a collapse throughout the Middle East if we
went to war, we haven't seen what many suggested that we would. That
said, we have to succeed in Iraq. I mean, it's one thing to demonstrate
that the Saddam Husseins and the Osama bin Ladens fail, and their way
will always fail and only produce continued humiliation. Sure there will
be some who react to what we did as this is one more humiliation
inflicted from the outside. But I think the majority also recognizes one
of the things I said. There is something really rotten there, and they
have to fix it. Now, we need to think about, A, how we can help them; B,
where we invest heavily we also have to show that our way can work.

There isn't an American blueprint that can be imposed on the Middle East
-- not a chance. You can't impose democracy, you can't impose peace. But
you can support those who share those values. And what we do in Iraq has
got to in fact demonstrate that what we said we were going to do is in
fact what we have done. We cannot be seen as occupiers. We have to be
seen as liberators. We have to show that the Iraqis are the ones who in
the end will determine their destiny, not us. We will have to find a way
to put an Iraqi face on what is going on the sooner the better. We will
have to do this in a way that obviously in the end shows that our words
reflected who we are. So I don't believe that what we have done in Iraq
necessarily creates a bigger problem for us. But if we were to come back
a year from now and find that the situation looks the way it does today,
then I would be much more concerned.

If a year from now Iraq looked like it's on the right track, then I will
tell you I think that will help us in the war on terror in terms of
emboldening those who believe there has to be a different way, and the
Middle East has to look different.

MR. CLELAND: Mr. Kepel, I am a Vietnam veteran and followed the French
in Indochina. The Americans have followed the Turks and the British in
Iraq. You want to respond to whether or not this survey of global
attitudes about involvement in Iraq lessens our chances of doing better
on the war on terrorism? Does it create more Osama bin Ladens as Mubarak
once said?

MR. KEPEL: Well, thank you. Do you want me to answer in my capacity as a
Frenchman or as a scholar? (Laughter.)

MR. CLELAND: Whichever you are most comfortable with.

MR. KEPEL: Well, coming from being -- seeing myself as a stinky-
cheese-eating weasel -- (laughter) -- and that may explain why the image
of the present American administration and my country, to use an
euphemism, extremely positive. And I once even thought that people
should shoot some of the American media people for portraying French
people with the weasel heads and -- I don't mean some other groups,
discrimination -- I don't know, that's another story.

So I would say that the view of U.S. policy outside the U.S. nowadays,
and I can to some extent speak for Europe, for this is where I live, and
half the Muslim world, because this is what I study -- is that the U.S.
is mainly interested in its vested interests more than it is interested
in the common good. And this may be right or wrong. I mean, you are free
to approve or disapprove of it, but I think that this is a very deeply
rooted feeling worldwide. And that means what? That means that groups of
people, in the middle class mostly, who would otherwise be willing to
follow the U.S. lead, or who would largely, as in the case of Western
Europe, share a fair amount of values that we have in common, now feel
that the U.S. leadership is not really trustworthy, because it leads to
U.S. interests more than it leads to a shared sort of global leadership,
if you wish. And if such beliefs are held in a number of European
countries where we share the same culture, we share a number of things,
to a large extent, then definitely this is felt much more in the rest of
the world. So I would say that there's a lot to be done probably in
patching up those differences in terms of not only the declaration, but
also action. That for instance clearly when we talk about Iraq, Iraq was
a military victory, an American military victory. Though some, and some
very well placed people in the administration, which I saw today, told
me it was not a victory. The war was not really over, and that, you
know, many Iraqis still believe that the war is not over, which is a
mistake militarily speaking.

But nevertheless, if we assume that this is a victory militarily,
because the Saddam Hussein army is done and so on and so forth, how come
it did not translate into a political success? How come the Iraqi middle
classes have not emerged just like, say, the Polish middle classes, or
the Russian, or the Czech middle classes after the lid of the Soviet
system had been taken away? Now, the lid -- the lead lid, if I may say
so, of the Saddam Hussein fascist, communist, or what have you --
Ba'athist regime has been taken away. But nevertheless, you don't find
an organized civil society in the Iraqi cauldron underneath.

I wonder to what extent the U.S. is perceived in the region for that
purpose as the honest broker -- I mean, as the honest midwife which will
give birth to Iraqi -- the democratic Iraq, which will, in its turn,
lead the way, and if most people in the region do not say that the
reason why the armed operation was called was called Operation Iraqi
Freedom and not Operation Iraqi Liberty was that the acronym for
Operation Iraqi Liberty would have been O-I-L -- (laughter) -- and that
O-I-F was more misleading. So, you know, definitely there is -- there is
a problem, I would say, of communication.

There is also a problem of -- it's definitely the U.S. and the British
were the ones who were instrumental in bringing Saddam down. But I do
not think, I do not think that they can be the only ones to bring the
Iraqi -- Iraqi society back on its feet. And without the participation
of the international community, there will always be some feeling of
suspicion which will hamper the very efforts that the U.S. are doing in
Iraq. And I think this is -- you know, some people say that nowadays the
Europeans who are not pro-war rejoice. We don't. I think that a disaster
in Iraq is a disaster for all of us and for the whole world.

So I would rather say that we have to join forces, and we weasels are
ready to forgive you for all those insults. (Laughter.)

MR. CLELAND: Thank you, Mr. Kepel.

Speaking of O-I-L, there is a book out by two French journalists who for
three years looked at the American experience, particularly in
Afghanistan and the Middle East, called "Forbidden Truth: U.S.-Taliban
Secret Oil Diplomacy and the Failed Hunt for Bin Laden," Jean-Charles
Brisard and Guillaume Dasquie.

MR. KEPEL: Dasquie.

MR. CLELAND: Do you happen to know the gentlemen? Do you put any faith
in --

MR. KEPEL: Yeah, I know those gentlemen. Brisard is the one who is the
counsel for the victims of the 9/11 blast, I think. And Dasquie is a
journalist specializing in intelligence.

MR. CLELAND: Worth reading, from your point of view?

MR. KEPEL: This is on the record, right? (Laughter.)

MR. CLELAND: Thank you very much.

Steven Emerson, please, sir? Your comments about America's role in the
world and whether or not this global attitudes project, saying that the
war in Iraq has reduced, in effect, American -- well, has widened the
rift between Americans and Western Europeans, further inflamed the
Muslim world, softened support for the war on terrorism, and
significantly weakened global support for the pillars of the post- World
War II era, the U.N. and the North Atlantic alliance. Again, are we
creating more Islamic radical terrorists by this effort?

MR. EMERSON: I think that if one looks at surveys prior to the Pew
Charitable Trust Survey, looking at surveys. for example, right after
9/11, one sees an incredible degree of radicalism that existed prior to
the U.S. invasion of Iraq. For example, BBC reported in November 2001
that, based on a telephone survey of 500 British Muslims, it was
reported that 67 percent believe that the U.S. was unjustified in
blaming bin Laden for the attacks on September 11th. In 2002 Gallup
poll, published in USA Today, admittedly not as scientific as other
polls, but interviewed 10,000 people in nine mostly Muslim countries; 61
percent said the Arabs did not carry out the September 11th attacks.

I'm going to relate to you just a personal experience that occurred
within the last year, when I gave a speech in Ohio at the University of
Toledo Law School. And I could see there was a lot of hostility in the
room. There were about a thousand people, and I'd say several hundred
were Muslim students or Muslim representatives. And at one point, a
young woman wearing hijab got up and started heckling me.

And I engaged her, and she said to me, "We know the Israelis were behind
9/11." And I said, "How do you know?"

Then she says, "Because we see it on Al Jazeera." So I said, "And that's
the limitation?" She says, "Well" -- she challenged me, she says, "Well,
how do you know that bin Laden?"

Now, there was no way I could get beyond and behind her reality; that's
a fact. What it demonstrated to me, that there is this extremist view
that, unfortunately, exists out in other parts of the world, not limited
to the Muslim world, but certainly in large parts of the Muslim world
there's a dominate view the U.S. is evil, is engaged in an anti-Muslim
conspiracy, and that's why bin Laden, you know, labeled his fatwas a
declaration against the crusaders, invoking the crusades.

And I think this type of extremism has existed, which reflects sort of a
variant of what Huntington said -- not a clash of Islam and the West,
it's a clash between militant Islam and the West, or a clash between
militant Islam and Islam.

And I'll be frank with you that I don't have the answers in terms of
trying to unravel this type of extremist views. I do know that the
propagation within public institutions -- of schools, popular media --
constantly reinforces the notion of the extremist views of the U.S. as
an evil country, and unless and until that type of culture is changed --
and some of it can be changed with just a simple ruling by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia -- until -- and in fact, Pakistan, to its credit, has
shut down more than 10,000 madrassas that were teaching jihad in the
last two years. There can be efforts, and it may not pay off for another
10 years, that would reduce the allure of the jihadist culture.

MR. CLELAND: Thank you.

Ms. Bronson, you have the last word.

MS. BRONSON: Sure. Thank you. In my submitted testimony, I refer to an
article by Peter Rodman, who is now deputy assistant secretary of
defense for International Security Affairs. He had a very prescient
article, written in 2000, about growing anti- Americanism. And he said
this is a structural problem; we are the sole remaining superpower. We
are considered the hyperpower and something to organize around.

And so part of this challenge that we have is structural, and our
policies can temper that. But we do have a challenge that we didn't
during the Cold War, where we could play off an opponent. So I think
it's important to remember that this was out there, and I think much of
it was growing throughout the 1990s, and we probably didn't pay enough
attention to it.

In terms of Iraq, I think Iraq exacerbated it by the way we went to war.
We had to go to war in Iraq, as far as I'm concerned, because it was a
rallying point for radical groups, because they were pointing to the
ugly effects of sanctions, and allowing Saddam to march around his box
and destroy this important civilization within Iraq, within the Arab
world. But the radicalism wasn't, in my view, some of these ties -- the
argument wasn't these ties to al Qaeda, it was the radicalization of the
entire region, because we seemed so complacent in allowing Saddam
Hussein to continue to rule.

I think it was a very important -- it was the way by which we went to
war I think that is causing us some challenges.

I think this very much was a war that was sanctioned by international
law and U.N. resolutions, and it was unfortunate that we had the
doctrine of preemption right before it. It warped the debate about what
this was actually about. But I would say that exacerbated it, although
it was necessary, and I wish we could have found a different way to go,
and I think it was possible to find a different way.

But where we are today, we must get Iraq right. I have had calls from
Oman, people saying, "Get this right," because they need positive
examples, as referred to, I think, by Dennis Ross. We need to have
successes. We need a success in Afghanistan or a success in Iraq. We
have engaged in a massive project.

Consider what we poured into Germany alone between 1948 and 1950. We
poured in $8 billion. We have now said that all we are going to pour
into reconstruction of Iraq is $1.7 billion -- the $8 billion in current
dollars -- $1.7 billion in all of Iraq. We took 30,000 troops and made
them police officers and constabulary forces. We armed them with horses
and police riot gear. We're reluctant to do that in Iraq.

We really are nation-builders. It's an uncomfortable role, but we have
taken on that challenge. And unless we work extremely hard and put
serious resources behind our involvement, losing Iraq will prevent the
middle class from coming out; it will be this lead lid. The Iraqis don't
know that the Soviets are gone like the Poles knew that the Soviets were
gone -- they don't know that Saddam is gone. We have to make absolutely
clear this war very much is still going on. Whether you agree or
disagree with how we went to war, whether the war -- this is very
important to this part of the world that we absolutely get it right,
because our friends need a victory. They need us to have a victory. And
right now, they see precious little reason to rally around the United
States.

MR. CLELAND: And one of our panelists today, the gentleman who wrote the
book "Inside Al Qaeda" -- I forget his name -- from Singapore, mentioned
that Iraq could become the new Afghanistan; not the rising middle class
taking over and putting together a civilized society, but really, an
attraction for people who rallied around the Mujahideen in Afghanistan
now rallying around American forces in Iraq, and that that could become,
in effect, a breeding ground for the terrorism.

Fascinating panel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much, Senator. I want to thank this panel,
particularly. You were a wonderful way to finish our day, each of you
more articulate than one before. Thank you very much; you've helped us a
great deal. I appreciate your coming. That will end the hearing for the
day.

MR. KEAN: This, as you all know, was our third hearing. And the purpose
of the hearing was to help us understand the enemy we face and the war
that we're now waging. We're obviously not ready to give you any
conclusions yet at this point, but we can note, perhaps, some
observations that we heard from the 11 witnesses who testified today.

What the witnesses described was not really a clash of civilizations,
pitting Islam against the West. It was a political and economic
struggle, as I heard it, within Islam, within a civilization, what one
witness called "the 40-year civil war" in the Muslim world.

One study we heard about today estimated that 80 to 90 percent of the al
Qaeda terrorists are either expatriates or the children of immigrants.
In other words, these are people who were separated from their culture
and social origins. And when you're separated like that, you find
identity in something else, and they find their -- found their identity
in a cause. And that cause turned them into terrorists. But the cause
must be linked to an organization to do that, and for many that
organization, of course, turned out to be al Qaeda.

Secondly, we heard that al Qaeda is not a terrorist superpower.
Witnesses stated it can't mount another 9/11, even as still it carries
out attacks against what they called "soft targets" overseas.

Al Qaeda is just one combatant, then, in this wider war. It's one
organization, with global aspirations. But other witnesses called
attention to the Muslim Brotherhood, founded in Egypt as a global
network for the ideology of terrorism. And, with al Qaeda now weakened,
it has to lean more on the actions of associated groups who are fellow
combatants, as the effort to change the Muslim world.

Lee?

MR. HAMILTON: Chairman Kean and I have been comparing notes through the
morning and afternoon, and the observations he just made I certainly
concur with. In addition, I think I have some others that I will make,
and I think he concurs with them as well.

First, we heard a number of positive opportunities in this war. Let me
mention several of them to you. One is, we heard that extremists offer
their version of Islam as an alternative to failed secular
dictatorships, but once the extremists come into power, as in countries
like Sudan and Iran, they reveal their promise to be an illusion. You
remember the statement that Professor Kepel had at the end of his
remarks, and I quote it: "The political cost of the campaign of the
suicide bombers seems to be considerable and its gains questionable.
There is only the exaltation of a small minority who have locked
themselves into a mentality where terrorism becomes an end itself," end
of quote. This is an end that may not command broad appeal. That's a
positive note, I think, that was struck on more than one occasion in the
afternoon and morning sessions.

Secondly, we heard about some of the peaceful strains of Muslim
fundamentalism, strains of opinion that would really be partners with us
in the war on terror, and certainly rebutting the image that equates all
devout Muslims as terrorists.

Third, we heard suggestions that our policy should focus on the media
environment, where newspapers are fronts for the terrorists and where
the, quote, "the culture of terrorism is an industry," end of quote,
where leaders are afraid to speak the truth to their citizens and tell
them bluntly that terrorism is wrong and evil.

And next we heard witnesses say that the terrorists are drawn from
clusters of individuals organizing around haphazard networks of
relatives or friends. Patterns such as that, I think, offer
opportunities for us to deal more effectively with the threat of
terrorism through intelligence and law enforcement and other means.

And finally, let me just observe that we heard about a number of key
challenges, of course, to American foreign policy. Several of them stood
out. You'll remember one of the witnesses talked about the Middle East
now is the responsibility of the United States. And others urged that
the terrorists must be hunted down relentlessly, but they cautioned that
we should allow a country -- we should not allow a country like
Afghanistan to turn into what one witness called "a terrorist
Disneyland." The witnesses helped us to understand that this hunt
requires unprecedented international cooperation in a variety of areas:
diplomacy, law enforcement, intelligence, as well as, of course,
military. And the word "multi-faceted" kept popping up quite frequently
in the testimony of several of the witnesses to describe the kind of
effort that will be necessary in the war on terrorism.

Witnesses stressed the importance of a clear American message to Muslims
in the Arab world and to emphasize American values -- freedom and
democracy, representative government -- on a consistent basis. That was
a theme struck by several witnesses during the day.

Finally, witnesses stressed the importance of using not just the stick,
but carrots as well, and indicated that dealing with terrorism is much
more complicated than just use of military force, although that is often
important. But diplomacy and economic policy, public diplomacy and other
aspects of American foreign policy can play a very important role in our
addressing terrorism in the world.

All in all, I thought it was an afternoon and morning of -- very rich
with ideas and opinions and suggestions and policy proposals for the
commission, and, I think, an exceedingly productive afternoon for us.

STAFF: Kindly state your name and your affiliation.

Q Dan Friedman of Hearst Newspapers. Some of the panelists in the
morning panel seemed to suggest under questioning that they didn't think
that al Qaeda could launch another 9/11 attack on the scale that they
did launch. Do you agree with that assessment?

MR. KEAN: I don't think -- personally, I don't think I have enough
information yet to agree or disagree with that particular assessment.
They -- that seems to have been the pattern up to this point. They also
warned us, though, that if they were able to find another base, another
place to mount operations from, that they could again launch some very
serious and massive attacks. And so it obviously should be a point of
American policy not to allow another country to exist that allows them
to have that base.

MR. HAMILTON: I heard that sentence, too, and I reacted very positively
to it. (Laughs.) And I'm sure most Americans would.

But I think it's important for us to emphasize that we're not trying
this afternoon to draw conclusions from all of this. We, like perhaps
you, are hearing much of this for the first time, so our assessment will
be made later. But that judgment came from more than one, and it came
from two or three very qualified people. Their opinions deserve our
respect, and it's a bright light for us, a matter of real hope.

Q (Off mike) -- I'm with CBS News. Could you talk about what kind of
cooperation you're getting from the various executive branch agencies in
terms of the report; getting the access to the witnesses you want and
getting the documents you've requested in a timely manner?

MR. KEAN: Yeah, we've -- if you look at the report that we issued
yesterday, we go down agency by agency by agency, all through the
administration. And in some of those agencies, the cooperation is quite
good, and we got a number of things that we needed. In other agencies,
where in some cases we've made massive requests, we've haven't gotten
the materials we needed, and we certainly haven't gotten them in a
timely fashion. The deadlines we've set have passed. We've got our own
deadline; by statue, we've got to report by next May. So we can't brook
that kind of thing. We've got to get the information we need to do our
work.

So while I think the White House is cooperating, I think they're trying
to do their best to help us in a number of ways, some agencies, led at
the moment by the Department of Defense, is not cooperating to the
extent we need that cooperation. Now, it's better than it was, and it's
moving in the right direction. But the next two or three weeks are going
to be vital. Talk to me in another two or three weeks.

MR. HAMILTON: Let me just observe that we are, number one, asking for an
enormous amount of material. We measure material not by pages, but by
boxes. And we are getting and asking for not a few pages, but hundreds
of thousands of pages. So the request to the executive branch
departments and agencies is very, very large. It is understandable to me
that they can't handle it quickly or overnight. I'm not apologizing for
them, I'm just saying that we're making a very large request.

Now, secondly, the requests that we are making are, in some cases, not
in all, relate to very sensitive material. And it is understandable by
both the chairman and myself that it takes a little while for those
kinds of requests to work their way through the bureaucracy.

This is a difficult task for us, and as the chairman has said, we must
have that information. We must have it if we're going to do our job.
We're going to get it. We're impatient. We think a lot of it has been
slow in coming, but we understand the reasons. There is a bureaucratic
inertia. These people have things other to do than to answer our
requests. There are national security concerns. There are conditions
that attach to our requests that we have to work out -- that are
complicated to work it out -- so that it's mutually agreed upon, under
what kind of circumstances can we see the material, particularly when
it's the most sensitive material that the government possesses.

I think we're making good progress. We've got a long way to go. We
certainly need the very strong support from the White House to help us,
and I was most pleased with the statement I read in the paper this
morning from the White House that the president remains very committed
to cooperating with the commission and helping us get the material we
need.

Q (Name inaudible) -- CNN. Senator Schumer is calling for the inspectors
general of both the Justice Department and DOD to investigate whether or
not there has been stonewalling by those agencies, and he cited the
administration's initial reluctance to form the commission that you're
now heading. And he seems to be suspicious that they're stonewalling for
a reason. Is he going too far?

MR. HAMILTON: We do not have the impression that we're being
stonewalled. We -- that's not to say we're entirely satisfied with the
rate at which the materials are coming in. But I think the word
"stonewalling" is not an accurate reflection of the circumstances we are
now in.

We were critical, as the Senator's new release mentioned, I think, of
two agencies particularly, the Department of Justice and the Department
of Defense. We think we're quite justified in the criticisms that we
made of those two departments. And we have some reason to think that our
first report is going to be productive in getting the material we need.

So I think that's the status of it now, and we will wait for the next
few weeks, which we think are very crucial in terms of whether or not we
can successfully do our work.

MR. KEAN: We've got to remember that in doing our work we are launching
what we believe is the largest investigation of the United States
government in this country's history. Now, I don't think the departments
were ready for that. (Laughs.) I don't think the administration was
ready for that. They have promised cooperation. They have promised
increased cooperation. They have put more people on task helping us
directly -- in fact, they've put now four people full-time directly from
-- in the Justice Department at the request of the White House to help
us secure the materials we need in a timely fashion. I think that's
going to work. I'm an optimist. I believe it's going to work, and I
believe we will start getting these materials. But it is -- you know, as
I say, the next three weeks to a month are going to tell the story.

Bob?

Q Governor, Bob Braun from the Star-Ledger. Professor Kepel mentioned
that as an academic he doesn't have any access to real information, and
he also said he spoke with if's and subjunctives. I'm wondering why,
while the panel were all very fascinating and interesting, why the
people who actually made the decisions weren't here as opposed to those
who have opinions about those who made the decisions.

MR. KEAN: Well, we're doing this in a number -- this was a hearing,
because part of our mandate from the United States Congress is to study
al Qaeda, to know the history of the enemy. That's part of the -- that's
part of our mandate. Some of the people who we will be calling in the
future from the various agencies, the departments who had direct
responsibility on 9/11, we want a little more information before we talk
to them. Some of the materials that we've requested we need in order to
conduct those interviews. So we thought it would be more productive to
have them a little later on. But they will -- they will be here.

MR. HAMILTON: We've got to be brought up to date ourselves. We're
stepping into a moving stream here. A lot of work has been done. I don't
consider myself any kind of an expert on al Qaeda. For example, I need
to know an awful lot about it. And I began that learning process as I
looked over the materials for today's hearing and continued it during
the day. The second comment is that I think the academics of the world
greatly exaggerate the handicap they face -- (laughs) -- by not having
access to information. I've been on both sides of that. I fully
understand, I believe, that the amount of secret information that you
get that is not available to the public is very, very small, and almost
never -- I can hardly think of an instance when it would alter your
judgment.

MR. KEAN: It is very interesting --

MR. HAMILTON: Almost all necessary facts are and should be in the public
domain.

MR. KEAN: It's -- just to echo what Chairman -- what Vice Chairman
Hamilton said, it's -- what's fascinating to me, as a non-Washingtonian
who has not, up to this point, been involved in any of these agencies or
any of the intelligence business, to read highly classified materials
and have to read them under certain conditions, because they were highly
classified, and to have read all the material before in the newspaper.
(Laughter.) That was a new experience for me. But it's happened more
than once and, I suspect, will happen again.

Q Margie Burns, American Reporter. I have question regarding the DOD,
which you mentioned a couple of times. All my uncles were in the
military, and you know, that tends to leave a great big paper trail. We
read in the early days after September 11th that several of the
skyjackers had received their flight training on military installations
here. Wouldn't that be -- is the DOD holding up what might permit you to
identify these particular attackers -- you know, height, weight, blood
type, that kind of thing?

And might that be -- my follow-up question would be, might that be just
a few pages, rather than hundreds of thousands?

MR. KEAN: We have asked -- we've made a massive request of DOD. And what
we are -- and they have not denied us anything. They haven't said,
"You're not going to get anything." What they've done is just not given
it to us yet. So to say it's coming -- but deadlines pass one week after
another, and it doesn't come.

We, for instance, need -- and Forrest, you mentioned the airlines -- we
need all the information from NORAD very, very badly. That's DOD
information. We haven't gotten it yet. So that's the kind of thing we're
talking about.

Q I'm John Judge with 9/11 CitizensWatch. That's a community oversight
group, citizen oversight group, and we work with some of the families.
And the panel today didn't address some of the questions that the
families have raised. For instance, the state sponsorship panel did not
include any information about Saudi Arabia as a potential sponsor. I
know some of the families are bringing a suit in that regard.

There have also been questions raised by a number of the researchers
about the identities of the people on the plane, whether that's finally
resolved, that these 19 people that were formally named in the press are
in fact the people that were on the planes and were they on the planes.

Some of that rests with airline lists of passengers that don't mention
any of the names and things that haven't been resolved. And I'm
wondering if the commission has sort of gone from the official statement
to looking into al Qaeda as the suspect, or whether you plan to do
additional work on what really happened that day, who did it and who
those people were?

MR. KEAN: That's what the final report will be all about, really. It
will be the history of that particular day, the history of what
happened. What we talked about today was one of the reasons in the why
it happened, some of the hatred that exists out there in the world. And
most importantly, there's going to be some recommendations so that no
families have to go through this again, to try and make the country
safer. That, I know, is most important to the family groups that I've
talked to. Those are the three areas. We will be talking about Saudi
Arabia, there's no question about it. Saudi Arabia's at the heart of a
lot of this, and we'll be having meetings on Saudi Arabia.

MR. HAMILTON: I agree with your comment about Saudi Arabia. Several of
us talked about that during the lunch break. We had an expert here on
Iran, we had an expert on Syria, for example. We did not have a person
who we questioned, at least, with regard to Saudi Arabia, although I
think Rachel has just completed a book on Saudi Arabia.

MR. KEAN: Rachel is just about to come out with a book on it, yeah.

MR. HAMILTON: That was a gap in the hearing this afternoon. We'll cover
that gap in due time. And with regard to the identity of the people,
those are questions -- I don't think this panel would have that
information. We'll do our best to get the answers to the questions the
families have raised. They've been very good, incidentally, about
supplying those questions to us. We've had a number of meetings with
them. We'll continue to do that, and we will try to answer as many of
the questions they've raised as we possibly can. Some of them, I must
say to you, are going to be extremely difficult to answer.

Q A brief follow-up on another concern the families have had, and some
of the researchers, is that none of the testimony to date has been taken
under oath. And I'm wondering if you're planning to take testimony under
oath in the future, or whether you see that as a necessity for what
you're doing?

MR. KEAN: It probably depends on what the circumstances are and who the
witnesses are, and we'll make that decision, probably, as we go along.
It may be necessary at some point, or better at some points. At other
points, you don't really want to -- once you're under oath and a lawyer
and all of that, it changes the nature of what you're hearing. And so,
we've got to make the determination as we go along as to whether we do
that, and when we do that and with what witness we do that.

MR. HAMILTON: My own experience on that is you've got to be careful with
that. Everybody not involved in hearings I think tends to think, "Oh,
let's put these folks under, oath and that will guarantee that they tell
the truth." There's some element of that that is valid.

On the other hand, I think one result of putting people under oath is
they become much, much more cautious; they're very careful with their
language, and you don't learn as much because they are thinking all of
the time, "I'm subject to perjury charges." And so it is not automatic
that you get better information, more complete information, by putting
people under oath.

Q Sean Waterman from United Press International. We heard some testimony
and some questions today about the U.S. military action in Iraq. Are you
-- is there any -- I mean, will you be addressing that in your report,
possible blow-back, whether it has lessened or increased the terrorist
threat to the United States?

MR. KEAN: It certainly, in my mind, is not central to the mandate that
Congress has given us. I think we've got to be very, very careful when
we go outside our mandate, because our mandate by itself is enormously
wide and enormously deep. On the other hand, when you're talking about
the Middle East and things coming out of the Middle East, obviously Iraq
comes up, and so it will be at least peripheral to our work and be there
as we move along.

But I think we've got to be very, very careful about not expanding the
mandate to the point where we don't do what Congress has required
because we've expanded it beyond that.

I don't know if you feel the same way.

MR. HAMILTON: Well, it's -- I think it's a judgment the commission has
to make in the future as to what kind of policy issues we get into and
which ones we don't get into. I don't think it's our task to review
American foreign policy writ large, and I think we'd go down a lot of
false trails if we tried to do that.

I was kind of fascinated this morning or this afternoon -- this
afternoon, I guess, when you had very direct contradiction between two
people, one of them saying American foreign policy has consequences, and
the other saying American foreign policy does not have consequences, but
American values -- freedom, for example -- has very large consequences.
So you get some fascinating differences of opinion. I think it's
possible that both things are true, from my point of view. They're not
mutually exclusive. But they are fascinating questions. I don't know
that, as the chairman has said, they're directly relevant to our task.

We have a fairly narrow task. We're to make judgments about how to make
this country safer. That's the most important thing we're working on,
how to make it safer. And that means basically we look forward much more
than we look back. We do look back in order to try to understand -- in
order better to look forward, but I'm quite sure our report is going to
focus on the future.

Q (Shaun Waterman) In the past, commission members have told me that
questions -- the kinds of questions that are going to come up have been
discussed prior to these public hearings, and indeed individual members
have, as it were, been given a mandate or subject area that, for
whatever reason, they want to. So just to press you a little bit on this
question, I mean, did you as a commission discuss the possibility of
asking these questions, or were they raised because of individual
members', you know, curiosity or --

MR. KEAN: Well, the way we've been -- well, both, really. The way we've
been conducting these hearings is, to make sure that all commissioners
have a chance to question, and question in areas that interest them, we
generally assign lead questioners for every panel. So every member of
the commission gets a chance to be a lead a questioner for some panel.

Now, when those lead questioners are finished -- and the staff will help
them to prepare, as far as research and as far as suggested questions
and so on -- once those questioners are through, then, as you saw today,
a number of commissioners have other questions that have been raised by
the testimony beyond what the initial questions have answered, and they
will ask questions based on their understandings and what they want to
learn.

So that's generally the way we've been proceeding. And sometimes -- the
only problem we have is sometimes, as happened in the morning panel -- I
had four commissioners burning to ask questions, and we just ran out of
time. That's the only problem we have.

MR. HAMILTON: I don't think the chairman and I asked a question today.

MR. KEAN: Yeah. We were --

MR. HAMILTON: I couldn't get it in. (Laughs.)

MR. KEAN: (Laughs.) I had a couple, but I just figured, well, might as
well let the other commissioners handle it.

Yes?

MR. HAMILTON: Okay. Thank you.

Q Laura Rozen. I'm a freelancer. Let me just ask one last question. What
is your work plan for the future? What kind of hearings can we expect in
the next days?

MR. KEAN: Our general -- (inaudible) -- schedule, really, is -- and this
is approximate -- we meet every other week, generally for about two
days, with dinner the night before and then a meeting or what have you
during the day.

We're trying to hold public hearings approximately once a month,
although that -- public hearings, as you can imagine, take a tremendous
amount of staff time. And we're continually watching to make sure that
we're not -- that staff is able to concentrate on their main job, which
is, you know -- (laughs) -- putting together the information to write
the report, and we don't get too distracted. But we understand the
public hearings are a very important part of the process, and we want to
continue them. But that's our general -- that's our general schedule,
subject, of course, to change at the will of the commission.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9/11 Commission Hearing 10/14/2003](101403.md)
