[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Americana](../../index.md) 
[9/11](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](101403)  [Next](120803.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### NATIONAL COMMISSION ON TERRORIST ATTACKS UPON THE UNITED STATES

#### Public Hearing

Wednesday, November 19, 2003

Drew University  
Madison, New Jersey

#### PRIVATE-PUBLIC SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS FOR EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS

CHAIRED BY: THOMAS H. KEAN

HIGHLIGHTS OF NEW JERSEY'S PUBLIC-PRIVATE SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS:

JAMES E. MCGREEVEY, GOVERNOR, NEW JERSEY;

RISKS AND CONSEQUENCES OF TERRORISM FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR:

JOHN DEGNAN, VICE CHAIRMAN, THE CHUBB CORPORATION;

PANEL ON SKYSCRAPER SAFETY ISSUES FROM 9/11 FAMILY MEMBERS:

MONICA GABRIELLE, CO-CHAIR, SKYSCRAPER SAFETY CAMPAIGN;

SALLY REGENHARD, FOUNDER AND CO-CHAIR, SKYSCRAPER SAFETY CAMPAIGN;

PANEL ON PUBLIC-PRIVATE INITIATIVES SINCE 9/11:

MICHAEL F. BYRNE, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION
COORDINATION, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY;

DENNIS J. REIMER, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL MEMORIAL INSTITUTE FOR PREVENTION
OF TERRORISM;

RICHARD A. ANDREWS, SENIOR DIRECTOR, NATIONAL CENTER FOR CRISIS AND
CONTINUITY COORDINATION;

PANEL ON PRIVATE SECTOR EXPERIENCE ON 9/11:

WILLIAM Y. YUN, PRESIDENT, FIDUCIARY TRUST COMPANY INTERNATIONAL;

PANEL ON STANDARDS FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND BUSINESS CONTINUITY:

GLENN CORBETT, PROFESSOR OF FIRE SAFETY, JOHN JAY COLLEGE OF CRIMINAL
JUSTICE, MEMBER, NIST INVESTIGATION, AND BERGEN COUNTY FIRE CAPTAIN;

RANDALL YIM, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL PREPAREDNESS TEAM, GENERAL ACCOUNTING
OFFICE;

PANEL ON FUTURE STRATEGIES FOR PRIVATE SECTOR PREPAREDNESS:

WILLIAM G. RAISCH, DIRECTOR, GREATER NEW YORK SAFETY COUNCIL;

PETER R. ORSZAG, JOSEPH A. PECHMAN SENIOR FELLOW IN ECONOMIC STUDIES,
THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION;

JAMES HAVIARIS, VICE PRESIDENT FOR OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT,
ROCKEFELLER GROUP DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION;

THOMAS SUSMAN, PARTNER, ROPES & GRAY AND CHIEF AUTHOR OF BUSINESS
ROUNDTABLE REPORT ON "TERRORISM: REAL THREATS, REAL COSTS, JOINT
SOLUTIONS"

MR. THOMAS H. KEAN: If I could call the hearing to order. Ladies and
gentlemen, before we begin, let me bring your attention to a yellow
sheet of paper entitled "Emergency Procedures in the Baldwin Gymnasium."
While no one anticipates any emergencies or fire alarm today, part of
emergency preparedness includes being aware of your surroundings and
looking around whenever you go into a building like this and seeing
where the fire exits might be. Since the focus of this hearing is on
emergency preparedness, we want your visit here to Drew University to be
a safe one, so please take a moment to look over this sheet and be
prepared.

So as chairman of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the
United States, I hereby call this hearing to order. I guess I want to
additionally thank the President of the University. But I'm glad -- and
thank you all for coming to the university here. I want to particularly
thank Emily Walker and Ellie Hartz, as members of the Commission staff,
for all they did to organize this hearing and to assemble the really
extraordinary panels of witnesses that we will hear from shortly. I also
want to thank Former Attorney General John Farmer for pitching in here
to help as well.

Let me also express the gratitude of the Commission to the staff of Drew
University for all the behind the scenes work they did to assure the
success of the hearing. Much of the attention on national preparedness
in the two years since 9/11 has centered understandably on the
government's role. The government has an absolutely essential role in
making sure that we are prepared in the homeland. But almost lost in
this tremendous focus on what is the federal and state government doing
has been the fact that 85 percent of our nation's critical
infrastructure is controlled not by the federal government or the state
government or local government, it's controlled by the private sector.

Now, clearly, any successful preparedness strategy must engage the
private sector in partnership with the government at every level,
whether it's local, state or federal. Today's hearing, I suspect, will
demonstrate what Comcast Chairman Michael Armstrong said, providing
homeland security is our country's most critical joint venture. So
today's hearings then underscore the importance of the private sector in
preparing for and responding to disasters, and will provide the basis
for the commission's consideration of recommendations to promote energy
preparedness -- emergency preparedness in the future.

Now, the families of the 9/11 victims care deeply about this particular
issue, and we as a commission share their belief that addressing the
issue of private sector preparedness is essential to our work as a
commission and even to our security as a nation. Our discussions today
have shown that the tenants of the World Trade Center varied widely in
their levels of preparedness on 9/11. Many of those companies lacked
proper evacuation plans. Many others had never practiced plans for
evacuation.

Communications were disrupted immediately, and in many cases there
wasn't any backup system that was available. In other words, employees
didn't know what to do, and after the event, when companies were trying
to account, to the families and others for their employees, they had no
system for finding out where those employees were. So many companies
didn't even have an accurate list or a count of employees on 9/11.

Now, business continuity, of course, was also a problem. Now, obviously
no one could have predicted that horrible catastrophe, but there were
elements of preparedness that would have assisted, nevertheless. The
lessons learned on 9/11 by those companies located at the World Trade
Center have led to notable changes in the way some companies are going
about emergency preparedness and providing for the safety of their
employees.

But how much has really improved? What lessons have we really learned?
Well, a recent survey sponsored by Guardmark, a security firm, reported
that 45 percent of some 800 companies that they interviewed were still
not conducting emergency drills.

Well, are we spending more on emergency preparedness? The conference
board study on security spending since 9/11 reports that spending on
security has only increased an average of 4 percent over pre-9/11
spending. Well, are we more prepared? The Wall Street Journal noted
recently, and that was on September 29th, 2003, that while, and I quote,
"some companies have been revising and updating their workplace security
plans since September 11th, a large portion appear to be blithely
unprepared for any sort of attack. And many don't even have an effective
evacuation procedure in place."

Now, we must not just learn from 9/11. We have to learn permanently. The
Commission is concerned that as time passes, the lessons of 9/11 will
fade, and our resolve to be better prepared will fall casualty to
complacency and sometimes even bottom line expediency.

This hearing today will provide information that will help us make
recommendations to ensure that the lessons we've learned on 9/11 will be
challenged into action and improvements in overall preparedness, so that
in case -- in the deadly case of any tragedy in the future, people will
be prepared, and as many families as possible will be reserved from the
horrible fate of the families of 9/11. So that is what this hearing is
all about.

Our first witness is here -- no, not yet. No, not yet. Governor, yes.
It's my pleasure at this point to introduce the Governor of the state of
New Jersey, who's been not only a -- he first served as mayor of
Woodbridge successfully, then as governor of our state. He's a long and
dear and old friend of mine, and, Governor, it's a pleasure to have you
open up our hearing today.

GOVERNOR JAMES E. McGREEVEY: Thank you, Governor. And, Governor, if I
could, to my right at the table is Mr. Sid Caspersen, the director of
the Office of Counter Terrorism. To Governor Kean, to Vice Chairman
Hamilton, to the Commission members and staff, particularly Governor
Kean, again, welcome home, and thank you for your long, dedicated
service to this state and particularly your leadership with Mr. Hamilton
as to this commission.

The state enjoys the opportunity to share with you our knowledge and
experience. New Jersey was injured deeply on September 11th. We lost
nearly 700 of our own citizens. Approximately one out of every four
persons who died at the World Trade Center called the Garden State home.
Our lives, our sense of security, our economy, were all shaken. But we
have worked to take the grief, the pain and the anger and to channel
them into making our state measurably safer.

New Jersey in many respects has worked to set a national standard for
designing and implementing a comprehensive security strategy. In that
effort, the private sector has been an indispensable partner. They hold
nearly 90 percent of the critical infrastructure in our state, including
the nation's highest concentration of oil refineries, oil storage
facilities and pharmaceutical and chemical manufacturing facilities. No
domestic security plan would work without their cooperation and
dedicated involvement. And so today I thank you for the opportunity to
share with you some of the ways we're working with the private sector to
make our state measurably more secure.

Any discussion of the domestic security in our state begins with the New
Jersey Domestic Security Preparedness Task Force, which was created in
the weeks after the September 11th attack. This body, unique to New
Jersey, represents intergovernmental collaboration at its highest level.
The task force is chaired by the attorney general and consists of
Cabinet-level officials charged with significant security
responsibilities. These individuals gather regularly to focus on the
most pressing security issues confronting our state: counterterrorism,
weapons of mass destruction, and bioterrorism, among others.

I'd particularly like to commend former New Jersey Attorney General John
Farmer, currently senior counsel to this committee, who served as the
first chairman of this task force. The Task Force Infrastructure
Advisory Committee is comprised of representatives from New Jersey's 23
industry sectors. The various IAC groups meet regularly among themselves
to share information and security strategies. They also meet with the
task force and their liaisons and state agencies, such as the Department
of Environmental Protection for the chemical sector, and the Department
of Health and Senior Services for the healthcare sector.

During the past two years, the task force and the IAC have worked with
industry to develop best security practices. These recommendations
focused on prevention, mitigation and response and recovery from
terroristic activities. They include considerations such as site
specific vulnerability assessments, target hardening and mitigation
measures, protocols for background checks, protocols related to
security, protocols for adjusted security measures, based on changes in
the Homeland Security Alert System, communication protocols, crisis
response, contingency and continuity plans.

In 2002, the IAC sectors all submitted best security practices to the
Domestic Security Preparedness Task Force for review. Now we have
embarked upon a second generation of industry best security practices.
After they are approved by the task force, they are sent to my office
for final approval. In every case, I have directed the appropriate
Cabinet officer to work with the industry sector and to monitor
compliance towards full implementation of best security practices.

In this second generation review, we have already approved 10 of 23
recommendations. We are working in partnership with the private industry
to get these practices in place as rapidly as possible. We have also
established an innovative relationship with Business Executives for
National Security. A memorandum of understanding has been drafted
between BENS and the state Office of Emergency Management to provide a
database of business sector volunteers and resources that could be
deployed during an emergency.

Working alongside the task force is the Office of Counterterrorism,
whose Director Sid Caspersen, who sits with me here this morning. This
office, which I created with the Attorney General's Office through
executive order last year, under the direction of Sidney Caspersen, a
25-year veteran of the FBI who headed the agency's Office of
Intelligence Community Support for New York City, the OCT has taken
significant steps towards fulfilling the mandate to identify, detect and
deter terrorist-related activity in New Jersey.

As my chief liaison to the federal intelligence and law enforcement
communities, the Office of Counterterrorism has forged close ties with
the Office of Homeland Security, the FBI, the Department of Energy and
the Transportation Security Agency. This partnership has allowed us to
develop unique initiatives, like the New Jersey law enforcement
counterterrorism training, which has trained literally thousands of
state and local police officers across this state.

It has also enhanced our infrastructure protection efforts. For example,
if I again -- if I could praise the efforts of Secretary Ridge, the
Department of Homeland Security, we have implemented a buffer zone
protection plans for a number of the state's high-risk chemical
facilities. To test our plans, we conducted New Jersey's first buffer
zone protection plan tabletop exercise.

The Domestic Security Preparedness Task Force, the Office of
Counterterrorism are now working with the Department of Homeland
Security to expand their training on buffer zone protection to critical
infrastructure sites in the chemical and petroleum industries identified
by the state. This sort of cooperation is critically important because
the private sector has every right to expect the government, state and
federal, to approach them in a cogent, unified manner. We need to
continue improving the coordination so that we are complementing one
another's efforts to strengthen security.

OCT is also sharing information and intelligence with the private sector
as to potential threats. In the past year, they have sent out more than
80 bulletins and alerts to various industry sectors. They have developed
a secure website for infrastructure protection that serves as a
statewide clearinghouse for information. And they have deployed a
high-speed notification system called the Communicator that
automatically sends alerts to an unlimited number of individuals, groups
or teams by phone, pager, fax and e-mail.

Another way we are working with the private sector is through the
Medical Emergency and Disaster Prevention and Response Expert Panel,
MEDPREP, under the leadership of Dr. Clifton Lacy. It is a collection of
the state's top health experts, drawn from a wide range of backgrounds,
such as emergency medicine, infectious diseases, as well as hospital
care. Through MEDPREP, we've become the first state to have a 24/7
bioterrorism rapid response team to provide medical expertise for
suspected bioterrorism events. We are the first state to install 800
megahertz non-interruptible radios in all of our acute care hospital
facilities, and the New Jersey Hospital Communications Network
interconnects 85 such hospitals with state government and one another,
allowing for a reliable interoperable communication in the case of a
large-scale terroristic event or natural disaster.

We are also including the private industry sectors in our training
exercise. The Infrastructure Advisory Committee and the task force
created the Domestic Security Exercise Support Team, which has begun
exercises and training simulations that incorporate both public and
private sector players. The State Board of Public Utilities, for
example, has already run a tabletop exercise with water and energy
sectors to determine how to best maintain continuity of operations in
the face of a terrorist attack.

Early next month, the Department of Environmental Protection will be
participating in a similar tabletop exercise with our petroleum
industry. The Board of Public Utilities is also working with the IAC to
review the results of the August 14th blackouts. This incident provided
an excellent test case with a new spirit of cooperation between the
public and private sectors. Through close communication with the utility
in that case, PSE&G, we were immediately able to get the state police
resources to support local police services based on information we
received from the utility literally on a minute-to-minute basis.

Just this past Saturday, New Jersey and the Port Authority, along with
the Federal Office of Domestic Preparedness and 600 local county and
state first responders from 70 agencies, staged one of the largest
full-scale emergency exercises in New Jersey history. The exercise
simulated the release of biological and radiological agents at Port
Newark. Although we await formal after-action reports, from all accounts
the exercise went extremely well. I mention this exercise because it is
a good example of the cooperation needed at all levels to prepare for
future acts of terrorism.

In closing, I want to emphasize again how critical it is that the
private sector, which controls 90 per cent of our state's
infrastructure, be involved in all security planning. They hold much of
the critical infrastructure in our state and throughout our nation, and
we must consult with them early and often. In New Jersey we have done
that, and as a result, we are immeasurably more secure than we were two
years ago, and we're working to become safer every day. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Governor, thank you very, very much. Would you be willing to
take one question from Senator Gorton?

GOV. MCGREEVEY: Yes. And Mr. Caspersen.

MR. KEAN: And Mr. Caspersen, yes.

SEN. SLADE GORTON: Governor, that is an extraordinarily impressive
record in the two years since 9/11, but would you say a word about the
degree of cooperation you get, in a sense, upward in the other direction
with the various federal agencies and the interest that they have in
what you are doing at the local level and with the private sector?

MR. SID CASPERSEN: I'll answer that if you don't mind. We have a great
working relationship with the Department of Homeland Security, with the
FBI, with CIA and with NSA even, and with the 10 northeast regions'
state Homeland Security directors and their governors' offices. We
established our own information sharing system within the 10 states in
northeast region, realizing that we all rely on one another.

Something happening in Delaware could easily -- and Maryland could
easily be happening in New Jersey, New York, or all the way up to Maine.
So we have a really good information sharing. We share information every
day. We created a number of web portals allowing people to access our
databases securely. We've set up a Memex intel system which we are
giving to the FBI, they already have it in place.

The Office of Counter Terrorism works both with the Philadelphia office
and with the Newark office. We're also putting it at NYPD. We have staff
there that we keep in the NYPD intel center to make sure we monitor all
the time what's going on in the city. Anything affecting the city would
obviously affect New Jersey.

We are putting these web portals in Homeland Security. They are
designing an initiative for a pilot project for information sharing for
the northeast, using the northeast as a pilot project. Both New York and
New Jersey would have regional intelligence centers established, having
secure communications with Homeland and the other intelligence agencies.

So I think we're doing that but we're working very hard now with the
private sector, with DOE, with the Information Analysis and
Infrastructure Protection Group, and we've designed a system where we
can instantly communicate with our private sector, both sector-wise and
both all across the state. We just met with some partners in New York to
help them do the same thing in New York with some of their private
sectors.

SEN. GORTON: The feds aren't cutting you off from information you
consider vital?

MR. CASPERSEN: We are getting information from a number of federal
entities, including the FBI. The process of having this new intelligence
sharing center creates an atmosphere where we're on the link with the
other intelligence agencies we will actually be doing analysis with,
DHS. I think what they're working through right now at the federal level
is the TTIC, all the combined agencies being together there, and getting
that information piped down to DHS and getting it out to state and
locals. I think being fair to them, they're working very hard on the
system. Coming from the federal system I realize how difficult that is,
but I think they're really making great strides.

General Libutti, the undersecretary who's in charge of information
protection for DHS is very aggressive in getting the system out and
hopefully it will be signed off and we will be implementing it within
six months in New Jersey and New York, because I think they're striving
to do that.

GOV. MCGREEVEY: And if I can, I'd also like to give praise to Secretary
Ridge. I think Secretary Ridge and many of the governors -- in fact, I
was among the first governors, the governors to call for the adoption of
the Office of Homeland Security. We very much want to recognize
Secretary Ridge's efforts, but also one-stop shopping. As everyone on
this commission knows, governors frequently have to go from department,
to department, to department, and homeland security, as across the
breadth of state government, to say the least, frequently was an arduous
process. And I believe Secretary Ridge has worked very closely with this
nation's governors to provide not only a single point of entry but to
work collaboratively.

One recent example was, for example, in Port Philadelphia, Port Camden,
as opposed to Port Newark, Port Elizabeth and the Port Authority, there
existed slightly different protocols for manifests. It was Secretary
Ridge's leadership that helped to provide a uniform framework so that
we're operating, ironically, in the same pattern in the southern half of
New Jersey as we are in the northern half. The only area that of concern
-- that continues to be of concern is obviously the question of funding.

In the Administration's approach of sometimes focusing on the density of
cities, municipalities, New Jersey happens to be the most densely
populated state in the nation. We were not able to access some of that
funding based on having a singular large city, despite the fact that we
are that most densely populated state. Secretary Ridge did provide a
significant level of intervention but it still remains that the funding
formula, both because of the congressional allocation -- New York and
New Jersey still receive less than $1.75 per person, whereas North
Dakota is $7 plus and Wyoming $10. But in addition to that, our concern
that the present funding formula that focuses on occasion on a municipal
or citywide, city-centric approach, sometimes places New Jersey at a
disadvantage.

But that being said, I believe Secretary Ridge has performed a
phenomenal task, and not only centralizing but being available and
working cooperatively and trying to put a measured elasticity into a
system so that it continues to be responsive as opposed to become simply
another bureaucracy.

MR. KEAN: Thank you. Governor McGreevey, Mr. Caspersen, thank you very,
very much for being here with us today and for your leadership. Thank
you very much.

GOV. MCGREEVEY: Thank you very much, Governor.

MR. CASPERSEN: Thank you.

RISKS AND CONSEQUENCES OF TERRORISM FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR

MR. KEAN: Perhaps no aspect of the private sector is more keenly attuned
to the challenges of private sector preparedness than the insurance
industry, which must value and allocate the risks associated with a
possible terrorist attack. Chubb took the lead in the immediate
aftermath of 9/11 when it decided to honor all claims, declining to
invoke the standard wartime exclusion, notwithstanding the President's
statement that the nation was at war, and in a climate of great
uncertainty in the rest of the insurance industry about what to do. Here
to talk about Chubb's experience on 9/11, the current climate for
terrorism insurance, and future challenges is John Degnan, vice chairman
of Chubb Corporation, and former attorney general for the state of New
Jersey.

MR. JOHN DEGNAN: Thank you, Governor Kean. With your permission I've
asked Matt Campbell, who's the general counsel of our Commercial
Insurance Division to join me here, in case the Commission has any
technical questions which Matt may be more able to answer than I am.
Governor Kean, Vice Chairman Hamilton, members of the commission, I
welcome this opportunity to appear before you this morning on behalf of
the Chubb Corporation. I'm vice chairman of that company, as the
governor has said, and the company has been in the business of providing
property and casualty insurance for over 120 years.

We were one of the largest insurers of the World Trade Center itself and
of the tenants of the World Trade Center, and expect to pay, as a
company, $3.2 billion in gross losses arising out of the September 11
attack on the World Trade Center. It's obviously the largest loss that
we've ever experienced and surely the greatest tragedy that we've ever
managed, and we're very proud of the role that both Chubb, and for that
matter, the entire property and casualty insurance industry has played
in meeting our promise of claims payments.

You've asked me this morning to address three subjects, and I'll try to
do so briefly. I've submitted to the Commission a more extended set of
comments. The first question was our experience as a company in the
aftermath immediately after September 11. Second was our experience in
the current insurance marketplace in the context of a Terrorism Risk
Insurance Act, sometimes called TRIA. And third, the consequences, at
least from our perspective, of a failure to reauthorize TRIA, which
would -- or substitute legislation, which without congressional
intervention will inspire at year end 2005.

So let me start with how we responded to the September 11 attack. I
suppose like most folks did, I'm sure members of the Commission, we
first confirmed that our family members, our employees, our colleagues
and our friends were safe. We reached out to hear their voices, we
rejoiced over their emails, we generally reassured ourselves as human
being that the awesome horror generated by that event would not cripple
us, either as individuals or as a business.

Then within only hours, we had to set about the task at hand, as so many
others did. As a company, we had to determine whether, in the absence of
a full understanding at that time of who the responsible parties were
for this event, whether the attack fell within the wording of the
traditional War Act exclusion that most insurance policies have. If it
did fall within the definition of a war, then the event would not have
triggered covered losses under many of the policies then governing the
tenants and the owners of the World Trade Center.

That analysis, as you can imagine, was undertaken in the context of an
unknown dimension of the ultimate loss, Who knew on September 11, aside
from the personal tragedy dimensions, what the economic consequences
would be? But we all knew that it would be many billions of dollars, and
surely the largest loss the insurance industry has ever experienced.

Obviously it could have been about the company proposition, although no
one had that on their mind that day. Frankly, the debate even within our
own company was intense and often emotional about whether this was a
war, whether there was coverage under the policies, and whether we would
pay the claims. We had no idea whether our reinsurers -- in our
business, when a risk is too large we pass off some of that - re-insurer
who stands in our stead in paying the losses. And we had no idea,
because they had War Act exclusions in their reinsurance treaties with
us, whether they would invoke the War Act, many of these not being U.S.
reinsurers. And if we said that the War Act did not apply and paid
claims and the reinsurers said, yes it did, we won't reinsure you, it
meant that we would lose the benefit of the reinsurance.

The President and others in authority that day were, it turns our
correctly, probably referring to the event as an act of war, and that
had an impact on our deliberations. Finally, though, within about 12
hours of debate, we did what Chubb has, in my judgment, always done, the
right thing, and we announced that we would not apply the War Act
exclusion and we would adjust and pay all covered claims with speed,
empathy and integrity.

While Chubb generally gets credit for having been the first insurance
company to publicly acknowledge that position, I'm very proud to say
that our industry all came to the same conclusion, reinsurers and
insurers alike. And as my submitted testimony indicates, the private
sector insurance proceeds, by and large, in my judgment, defeated the
economic goals of the terrorists who sought to bring down our economy.
It was certainly my proudest moment as an officer at Chubb and as a
member of this industry.

I don't want to leave this subject, though, without giving the
Commission just a glimpse of how our people at Chubb responded. There
are too many incidences of personal sacrifices to recount here, but one
set of them exemplifies them all. Our claims adjusters who handle
workers' compensation claims came together as a team that day on a
volunteer basis to service the most difficult of all claims that have
come out of the World Trade Center, those involving injuries or deaths
to the employees of our insurers.

Our claims personnel solicited and received permission from the New York
Department of Insurance to condense the application required for a
workers' compensation claim from about 108 questions to eight. We got
permission to accept these claims on an oral basis rather than a written
basis, and instead of waiting for the families to submit the claims, we
put our people together in a crisis unit and asked them to call family
members, and we had perhaps 900 plus of the deaths that emanated from
the World Trade Center loss.

We wanted to try, as paltry as it seems, to soften the economic loss to
families whose losses were obviously un-reimbursable, either emotionally
or economically. But if we could make emergency benefits available, as
we had the right to do under the policy within 72 hours, we didn't want
to wait until somebody submitted the claim, that they needed the money
that day. The calls we made were often emotional and sometimes reached
family members who had not yet acknowledged their losses, and they often
produced tears and certainly always empathy. In time, some of our own
people needed grief counseling.

The Chubb adjusters did what needed to be done economically, as so many
people did in those days after September 11, to soften the crushing, and
as I said, the un-reimbursable loss of a family member. Like so many
others in the company -- in the country -- Chubb and its people
responded selflessly and generously and it made me proud to be part of a
response which was so much more powerful and inspiring than the attack
which prompted it.

Now, with your permission, let me turn to the current environment in the
insurance marketplace. After a frustrating and often discouraging public
debate, Congress passed and the President signed in November 2002, the
Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, TRIA. It took consistent and firm
leadership from President Bush and a handful of persistent and
constructive Congressional leaders to secure passage of that bill more
than a year after that event. There's general agreement, I would say,
that at least as it is operating in its first year, TRIA does provide
some level of solvency protection for insurers.

Nevertheless the program today has some significant shortcomings. First,
perhaps of most concern, is that the per insurance company retentions
simply are too high. Before September 11, for example, when an insurer
looked at a workers' compensation risk for a financial services
provider, as many of the companies in the World Trade Center were, the
maximum probable loss of such a firm was relatively low compared to
often other more dangerous lines of work. White collar workers generally
don't experience the same incidence of claims or severity of claims that
manufacturing workers experience, and we underwrote to that risk.

But after September 11, even a moderate sized financial services company
can face a maximum risk of more than half a billion dollars. So even
under TRIA, each individual risk that we write has a probably maximum
loss of up to the per company deductible, and insurers continued to be
faced with staggering potential losses. Second, TRIA does not
effectively prevent states from preempting federal law. For example,
because insurers are required to provide insurance for what we call fire
following a terrorist attack in 26 of our states, we're forced to apply
inconsistent standards of both underwriting and pricing to national
clients who have risks that overlay many state involvements, and we have
to tailor the product as well to that.

And third, unlike Pool Re, which is the reinsurance device put into
place in the U.K. to deal with terrorist attacks, TRIA is voluntary for
the policyholders. An insured makes a decision, based on the
availability of terrorism coverage and the price, whether they want to
buy it. As a result, the market is experiencing what we call adverse
selection, that people with the greatest exposure to terrorist events.

Those who, for example, work in signature buildings, such as the Empire
State Building in New York or the Sears Tower in Chicago, generally are
buying the terrorist insurance. But if you live in a low -- or you work
in a low-rise office building outside Des Moines, Iowa, you're less
likely to buy terrorism insurance. And the only way insurance really
works as a mechanism is if the fortunate many take care of the
misfortunate few by allowing their money to be pooled to deal with
catastrophic risk. But because terrorism presents such unique risk
management issues and concerns, policyholder participation in a
terrorism insurance arrangement should be compulsory.

About 80 percent of our clients and customers are buying terrorism
insurance, but there are many companies in the insurance industry who
are experiencing much lower rates of companies and customers actually
buying the insurance. So as I noted, while TRIA does have some basic
value in insuring protection for the solvency of the insurance industry,
it does have defects.

And I'd now like to address the challenges that the marketplace will
face in trying to manage the risk of terrorism after TRIA expires, the
potential prospects of TRIA extension. And I'd like to begin with the
very real concern of insurer solvency. TRIA will expire, if nothing else
happens, on December 31, 2005. Sadly, the threat of catastrophic
terrorism risk will remain after that date. The expiration of the
current TRIA program will exacerbate the solvency challenge faced by
insurers.

And to give this issue some context, consider that currently the United
States domestic property and casualty industry has approximately $300
billion in surplus. But roughly half of that represents automobile
insurance and homeowners insurance, leaving approximately only $150
billion -- if you can put an only before that amount. But that's set
aside to pay for all types of commercial insurance losses. If we had
another event in the order of magnitude of $70 billion, which was the
early projection of loss for September 11 -- it's come in somewhat lower
than that -- the economic consequences against that $150 billion surplus
would be significant to say the least, and would seriously jeopardize
the financial stability of the industry, clearly rendering insolvent
many of the insurance companies whose capital base is less strong than
others.

I would hope that the Commission would agree that were the insurance
industry to be insolvent after the next terrorist, event, as it wasn't
after this one -- it was solvent after this one -- the economic
reverberations of our inability to pay would be felt not only in the
United States but around the world. The insurance losses associated with
the World Trade Center attack were huge and unprecedented, yet they
could have been substantially larger if, for example, the attack had
occurred only a few hours later, when even more people were in the
towers, if the planes had hit a lower floor or if there was less time
available for evacuation.

And the consequences for the primary insurance industry in the future
would be far greater than those horrendous consequences of September 11,
because if TRIA did not exist, private reinsurance for terrorism,
private reinsurance that we would buy from other insurance companies, is
generally unavailable today in the marketplace and certainly unavailable
for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological risks in particular.
Accordingly, some governmental program is needed. And the approach of
the Commission today to study private-public partnership in addressing
this risk as a nation is critically important.

Currently the industry, the insurance industry, is looking at a variety
of options. They include a federal reinsurance program, a combination of
regulatory standards and terrorism reinsurance pools, a workers'
compensation only backstop. If TRIA is not available for property risks
going forward, would it make sense to make it available for at least
workers' compensation risks, where coverage is mandated, an insurance
company must provide terrorism coverage for a workers' compensation
loss. A tax deduction, perhaps for terrorism reserves, or a federal
terrorism reinsurance bond mechanism, state-based solution. Or even
private sector solutions in combination with those.

Unfortunately, each of those options in some way has substantial flaws.
Given the current reluctance of many to extent TRIA, it's doubtful that
the administration and Congress would seriously consider a federal
terrorism insurance program, despite the fact that nine countries
already have such a program in place. The current system under TRIA of
regulatory standards and federal reinsurance might be suitable for ultra
high-risk facilities, such as nuclear reactors or chemical plants,
biological plants or telecommunications and cyber infrastructure.

However, our attention cannot be limited to those exposures. Terrorists,
as we know, most often strike at soft targets in an attempt to disrupt
everyday life. An effective federal terrorism insurance program,
therefore, has to address the exposures presented by high profile, and
to a terrorist, highly desirable targets, like sports arenas,
universities, shopping malls, daycare facilities, and even hospitals.
And while these soft targets are perhaps the most emotional risks, the
greatest terrorism threat to the insurance industry's solvency is
workers' compensation.

Inconsistent state regulation limits insurers' ability to effectively
respond to workers' compensation exposures. It would frankly benefit the
insurance industry and all who rely on it if TRIA were improved and
extended if only for workers' compensation. But a truly effective
federal program should really address other lines of insurance as well.
The tax deductibility of terrorism reserves, which are currently not tax
deductible to an insurance company does create an adverse budget scoring
implication, growing the federal deficit.

The TRIA bill, by the way, originally improved by the House Financial
Services Committee, did have such a provision in it. It would have
allowed insurance companies such as Chubb to set up reserves against the
possibility of a terrorist loss, but it was stripped out by the House
Ways and Means Committee. The purchase of federal reinsurance bonds
would probably do little in the short term to build capacity. Those
bonds would have to have fairly low interest rates and have restrictive
access to the funds. State-based solutions would not be able to build
sufficient capacity, nor would they address the reality that terrorism
is truly a national problem that must be addressed nationally in a
consistent way.

So to rely solely on the private sector to solve the problem cannot be
the right way. The terrorism risk is too great, the consequences too
terrible to rely only on the private sector's ability to solve it and
absorb the loss. Another terrorist attack is sadly a virtual certainty.
Only its manner and its timing and its magnitude are impossible to
predict. Unfortunately, current prospects for improving or extending
TRIA are dim. Even the administration which worked so hard to pass the
original bill has indicated it does not plan to push for extension.

As I've said, though, insurers alone probably cannot provide the
coverage needed in the face of an incalculable risk. If you can't
quantify the risk and determine its probability, it becomes essentially
an uninsurable risk. As a result, the insurance industry, and I would
suggest even the economy as a whole, remains at great risk. An effective
federal insurance program is an absolute necessity, and wouldn't it be a
shame if it took another terrorist tragedy on U.S. soil in order to
induce us all to do the right thing.

On that note, Governor, let me end by thanking you for the opportunity
to appear before you today and particularly to you and Vice Chairman
Hamilton and the other members of the Commission for your attention and
your leadership on this critical issue. I would be happy to answer any
questions that either you or members of the Commission might have.

MR. KEAN: General, thank you very much.

Commissioner Gorelick.

MS. JAMIE S. GORELICK: Mr. Degnan, it's good to see you again. Thank you
very much for your testimony today and for your thoughtful comments.
While I might wish to return to the body of what you presented today, I
would like, I think, to focus on the role of the insurance industry in
getting the private sector to where it needs to be.

The Chairman noted at the outset that the national security of this
country sits on a bed of infrastructure that is owned privately. And
that is a signal challenge to all of us, how to get the private sector
to do what it needs to do to harden itself against attack, to ensure
that it has procedures to mitigate the harm if there should be an
attack, to make sure that it responds approximately to protect its
people and its facilities. That is, I think, the largest challenge that
we face in the subject matter of the hearing today.

And I come at this not only as a member of this commission but as the
co-chair of a commission with Sam Nunn on critical infrastructure
protection in the late '90s, where we looked at this. And we're very
frustrated by what we saw as a lack of incentives for industry to do
what we thought needed to be done. Now, traditionally your industry has
led the way. Where there is a potential harm that can be mitigated,
there have been incentives in the pricing of the insurance product that
lead a business to say, well, this is cost-effective to do.

The Governor came before us and laid out a broad consultative process
with industry. If I had had the chance to ask him a question, I would
have said, you have cash-strapped companies in your state. What is going
to make them, besides a sense of duty to their employees and patriotism,
which are good motivators but only go so far when you're trying to
manage a business, do what they need to do? And so that's what I'd like
to talk to you about.

When it became clear that if you had airbags in your automobile, your
losses would be lower if there were an accident, and therefore the
insurance company would give you a cut of your rate. Same thing with
fire alarms in your house. Where is the industry in establishing a set
of best practices that companies can use to aspire to and to try to get
their procedures so that their people and their facilities are protected
and hardened? Do we have a set of best practices and do we incent
companies to adopt those best practices?

MR. DEGNAN: It's a great question, Ms. Gorelick and I think --

MS. GORELICK: Well, thank you.

MR. DEGNAN: -- it does focus on exactly the right issue, both from an
overall economic impact of the terrorist incidents and on the
insurability of those losses. Let me answer your question first, bluntly
and honestly. There are no standards nationally available that deal with
all terrorist events. There are, though, a number of initiatives
underway that deal with standards for what I would refer to as
conventional terrorist attacks. That would include a nuclear,
biological, radiological attack, which raise questions that are much
more difficult to address from a standards point of view.

The federal government has taken some steps by virtue of creating
working groups around certain kinds of best practices to disseminate
information about the availability of those kinds of protective or
precautionary devices. There are groups like the National Fire
Prevention Association that are developing best practice safety and
physical security recommendations that would help mitigate the magnitude
of a loss from a conventional nuclear attack.

And while I said that there are standards available, effectively today,
much of what you suggested needs to go on is going on with respect to
conventional terrorism and property risks or business interruption
losses that would flow from those property risks. So, for example, at
Chubb. And I think this is pretty typical of the insurance industry
today. We have loss prevention control experts. Before we write a risk,
we send them out to do an analysis of the structure and the procedures
that are in place in that structure.

Based on their findings, if they've made a determination that the
company insured has taken precautionary security measures, and I'll list
some of them for you, we will write that risk more willingly. We'll
probably write it with a smaller deductible so that the insurance dollar
comes into play at a lower dollar loss. We'll probably provide more
limits if the insured wants higher limits available for the loss than we
would if the risk were greater in order of magnitude because of an
absence of security devices. So some of the things we look at would be,
do they have a disaster recovery plan?

Financial institutions, by the way, are mandated by the federal
government, and many of those that lost all of their assets in the World
Trade Center, and many of their employees were up and running and doing
business within a matter of 72 hours --

MS. GORELICK: Most of them here in New Jersey.

MR. DEGNAN: -- after the loss, many of them coming to New Jersey to use
space in order to do that, until they could get back to New York.
Where's the company's physical location? Is it in a high-risk,
high-profile building or is it even within a high-profile city but a
less high-profile building? Does the company do evacuation drills on a
regularly basis, something Governor Kean mentioned? Are delivery
vehicles authorized to be on the premises? Are their physical security
barriers that prevent access to the building?

Do companies use employee screening processes to monitor who they hire
to protect themselves from self-inflicted terrorist events? Are the
ventilation systems properly protected? Do they use reflective paint in
the stairwells so that people can evacuate the premises more quickly?
Are chemicals stored on the premises, and if so, how secure they are?

Our loss control folks look at those things and then advise the
underwriters with respect to the underwritability of the loss. Again,
only against a conventional terrorist act would I argue that you can
responsibility underwrite. But we do take into consideration where state
law allows, and it doesn't always, us to adjust a price based on that,
certainly to provide more favorable terms and conditions to an insurer
who has taken those steps. So there is an economic incentive. I
apologize for the length of my answer.

MS. GORELICK: No. I had a lengthy question, you're entitled to a lengthy
answer. Would it be more powerful in moving industry to implement state
of the art evacuation procedures and the hardening of buildings against
attack if there were a clear and more universally accepted set of
standards? I mean, you've indicated there's a proliferation of
information and that your underwriters make a qualitative assessment,
but my concern is that the lack of clarity and the lack of unity as to
what is the right thing to do breeds a lack of incentive and impetus to
do what needs to be done.

MR. DEGNAN: Clearly I think there's not much doubt that a uniform
national set of standards that govern property exposure to conventional
nuclear attacks would be desirable for the insurance industry, and more
importantly, for the companies that have responsibilities for their
shareholders and their employees to provide an environment which is safe
and allows them to continue to conduct business. That does not exist
today.

MS. GORELICK: And that would be for all manner of terrorist attacks
then?

MR. DEGNAN: Well, it's not easy but it's much more -- it's easier,
frankly, to get one's arms around a set of standards in the face of
conventional terrorist attacks, such as an attack on a property or a
building or a particular company.

MS. GORELICK: And yet we know --

MR. DEGNAN: Much more difficult than radiological, nuclear, biochemical
attacks to devise what those standards would be. We have not been able
to do that.

MS. GORELICK: And yet we know that even such basic standards as
standards for evacuation procedures, standards for the construction of
buildings, where the attack could be with a much more conventional
weapon don't exist, and there are few incentives to make them exist.
Isn't that true?

MR. DEGNAN: Yes. But that's not a reason not to do it. I didn't mean to
suggest that. There are -- a precedent would be the uniform fire code,
which provides standardized sets of procedures and best practices. And I
actually am recommending and supporting the notion that we ought to have
such.

MS. GORELICK: Now, you mentioned a regulatory barrier. Is there a
barrier for the insurance industry to offer price incentives to
companies that abide by best practices, let's say if there were a set of
best practices out there?

MR. DEGNAN: You know, the insurance industry is regulated by 50
different state regulators. It is one of the few major sectors in our
economy that requires public oversight that's not done at the federal
level. Chubb and many of the companies in our business would support a
federal optional chartering system which would allow one federal
regulatory to oversee insurance regulation. But the answer to your
question is yes, there are barriers, because in many states, commercial
property forms need to be filed in advance of their being put on the
market.

Rate structures in many states are very minutely regulated and
controlled by the state departments of insurance, many of whom are very
slow to respond and insensitive at times, not all of them, to the
exigencies that require a quick decision. So I would pose that to you as
a significant barrier in the ability of the private sector to respond to
the normal marketplace impulses or factors and developments that we
would want to respond to.

MS. GORELICK: Well, that's a very helpful answer and very concrete. So
far I've taken from your testimony, in addition to the concerns you've
raised about TRIA, that, while we have a lot of information out there
about what might be the best way to protect ourselves, we don't have any
coalescing around a set of standards that can be implemented, if you
would, by the insurance industry. And even if we had the standards,
there are regulatory barriers to offering very clear-cut price
incentives to companies to adopt those standards.

MR. DEGNAN: Potentially. And I would focus not just on price but on
terms and conditions. Many companies are willing to pay whatever it
takes, as long as they can buy enough insurance and they can have it
attach at a level which doesn't render them insolvent before the
insurance comes into place.

MS. GORELICK: Well, I accept that perfectly. It seems to be me that more
broadly one could call it financial incentives to do what is right. I
noticed that the Business Roundtable in April came out with a call on
boards of directors to make security a key part of corporate governance,
and you probably have a window into corporate America that most people
don't have. In the report it notes that security generally is a
responsibility of someone fairly low down in the organization, not
someone very close to the senior leadership and certainly not close to
the boards of directors. And it generally calls on corporate America to
change that and to make security an important part of corporate
governance. Has that happened?

MR. DEGNAN: It's certainly happened at our company. I chair the internal
security caucus group that overlays all of the departments of the
company. Our board requires an annual update now on the status of our
disaster recovery planning and our business continuity planning as well.
I would -- I don't know for a fact, but my sense is, as an insurer of
many companies, directors and officers' liability, that boards are
treating this as a board level matter for attention these days, and when
that happens, inevitably the management of a company treats it as a
critical imperative.

Certainly in publicly traded companies today, a director would be taking
a risk in terms of liability, and not assuring himself or herself of the
adequacy of the planning measures and security measures that a company
should take. So I suspect it is happening. I was taken by Governor
Kean's remarks at the beginning that many of these things do not seem to
be evidenced in surveys that are done. From our perspective it's much
different, much better and much more engaged than it was before
September 11.

MS. GORELICK: Do you at Chubb or do you as an industry have data that
reflect these changes, because the data that are available to us are not
particularly consistent with that assessment? I don't have any reason to
question your anecdotal perception but the data seems to reflect that
little has been done, and if that were true, it would be of significant
concern to us, and we would address it perhaps differently if we had
different facts.

MR. DEGNAN: I wish I did. I don't. It was anecdotal. But one empirical
piece of data that I could refer you to is the fact that about 80
percent of our insureds are buying terrorism coverage. That says to me
that there is an awareness of the risk on the part of the customer and a
willingness to pay a price to secure at least economic protection
against it. If they have that, one would surmise that they are incented
\[sic.\] highly to minimize the risk as well as buying coverage for it.

MS. GORELICK: If they're behaving rationally --

MR. DEGNAN: Which not all do.

MS. GORELICK: -- which occasionally is not the case. Mr. Degnan, I want
to note that the record of Chubb's activities in the days following 9/11
is really an impressive one. And, you know, I've read Steve Brill's book
and read your account of what occurred and the business decision that
you made that reflected the values of your company, which was to step up
to the plate and fulfill the commitments that you had made to your
insureds.

Your testimony, in part, urges us to look forward to the unhappy
possibility that this is not a one-off event. And most of the witnesses
whom we have heard from in the course of our inquiry so far who are
experts on terrorism say that no matter what we do to one extent or
another, some additional attacks in our country are inevitable. And so
my last question to you is this. Do you think that your industry could
and will respond in the same way in the future, which was with a, if I
may characterize it, a sense right off the bat that it was the right
thing to do to pay these claims? Do you think that you and your industry
will be able to act in the same way in the future?

MR. DEGNAN: There will certainly be desire to act in the same way in the
future on the part of not only Chubb but of almost every company,
particularly domestic companies in the industry. Whether we're able to
or not is the more fundamental question. It's very interesting to me.
The insurance industry is not a very popular industry in this country,
to be honest. When I came to Chubb and I went to a party afterwards and
someone said, "Well, what have you done, John, with your career," and I
realized I had to say I'd been a politician, a lawyer and now I'm an
insurance company executive, I tried to change the subject.

(Laughter.)

When September 11 happened, within a matter of days, the airline
industry secured a limitation by federal law on its liability, defined
by its insurance liability standards. So Congress essentially said, pay
all of your limits but you don't have to be exposed to any liability.
Even Mr. Silverstein, the owner of the World Trade Center, from Congress
got a federal bill which limits his liability to his insurance proceeds.
The insurance industry did not at the time ask for any assistance in
paying these losses. We said, notwithstanding an unknown dimension of
those losses, we will pay them. In fact, sitting here today, I'm very
proud of the fact that we have and are continuing to pay all of those
losses.

What we asked for was help against the next one, because these aren't
insurable risks, they're government responsibilities to protect its
economy and its people. It took us until November 2002, and only at huge
political price, to convince Congress that they should provide a
mechanism to soften the economic blow on the next event so that we can
meet the promise in the same way we were able to do from our own assets
on September 11. Absent TRIA, to be very candid with you, and in the
event of a catastrophic loss in the order of magnitude of the World
Trade Center alone, much less the greater one that we all know could
happen, there are many companies in our industry who will not be able to
honor that promise because they won't have sufficient assets to do it.

Last point of this. You know, what an underwriter generally does is try
to dimension what the ultimate loss could be. How much is the building
worth? What would it cost to rebuild it? How long will it take their
operations to get back up in operation, so their business interruption?
And we try to put a price to that. It sounds like a mechanical process
but it's a fairly sophisticated process. And then what we do is try to
price against the probability of that loss.

Now, in terrorism, we can generally dimension the potential loss. We can
make a projection of how much is likely to be lost. What we can assess
is the probability that that loss will occur. And unless that critical
component of the underwriting process can be empirically demonstrated,
one can't price the risk, and therefore if you can't price the risk you
can't assemble the pool from everyone who wants insurance that allows
you to spread the risk to the few who are hurt.

The fundamental proposition I'd leave with this commission is, yes, the
insurance industry will do what its contracts oblige it to do. We'll do
even more. We'll do all that we can. But it would be wrong to rely on
insurance as the softening mechanism against economic terrorism that it
was after September 11. We won't be able to.

MS. GORELICK: Thank you for your testimony.

MR. DEGNAN: Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, General. One last question, and that comes from
Secretary Lehman.

MR. JOHN F. LEHMAN: Thank you.

Mr. Degnan, I have a double-barreled question, following on- to
Commissioner Gorelick's question. As we examine the vulnerabilities and
the inadequacies of the private sector emergency preparedness and crisis
management, that the lessons are being drawn from 9/11, we face really
two contending schools of what to recommend.

One is government mandates and regulation on compliance, other kinds of
compliance such as corporate governance certification and so forth, on
the one hand. On the other hand, seeking standards to become enforceable
from the private sector. And the reason why the insurance industry is of
such interest to us is, as one of the most regulated of industries, they
also have evolved -- the industry has evolved some of the best standard
setting and rating agencies, like ISO, Insurance Services Office, and so
forth.

Does the structure exist within the insurance services industry and the
industry itself to provide the kind of ratings such as you did after
Hurricane Andrew and so forth for building code compliance to provide
the answer to these concerns that we have, so that you'd have a direct
mechanism for rating a skyscraper as complying in fire drills, building
codes compliance, inspections and so forth? Or is it you feel we have to
depend on the federal government to do this for our overall private
sector property? Because we're going to recommend one direction or the
other or some combination.

And the second, as a related part of the question, do you and your
underwriting and your evaluation that you so effectively described in
writing and underwriting for these kinds of policies, find a significant
difference between regulated industries like utilities, on the one hand?
Are they better at it because they're regulated, compared to other
industries that are totally unregulated?

MR. DEGNAN: On your first question, Mr. Secretary, I believe that the
expertise exists within the property and casualty industry today to
devise consistent standards for conventional terrorism risks. We are,
notwithstanding the highly regulated environment in which we work,
though, fiercely competitive, and we are businesspeople ultimately. We
find it sometimes very difficult to put that done to coalesce in one
group, and we run some antitrust risk when we do, to say that there's a
common set of standards against which we will all underwrite. So there
are antitrust considerations to be taken into account and there are
competitive considerations to be taken into account.

If, in combination with a federal regulatory entity or some other
consolidating unit that was authorized to do that, I can say without any
hesitation that the industry would be extremely eager to contribute
collectively whatever expertise we have in handling losses in the past,
or this one, to that process. And I do think that we would all be aided
and better informed and that the country would be better off if there
was such a set of standards that could be devised. While we have the
expertise, I don't think we'll be able to do it on our own. So it needs
to be in combination with others.

As to the second part of your question, without a doubt, in my judgment,
regulated risks are easier to write. I made the point about financial
services institutions, where every investment bank is required by the
federal government -- every bank is required by the federal government
to have disaster recovery planning and business continuity plans. That's
one of the reasons, to be candid with you, that Chubb is such a large
underwriter of financial institutions and why we were the second or
largest loss provider or payer in the World Trade Center. These are our
kinds of clients. We like them because they have those plans in place.

And, frankly, as large as our loss was, had they not had business
interruption capabilities in place to get them up and running in 72 or
96 hours, our loss would have been much greater. The proof of the
success of the underwriting to those kinds of preparedness levels is
actually exhibited in the size of the loss that we incurred, which would
have been much larger without that. I know less about the utility
industry, but I'd hazard a guess, although we're not a large writer of
utilities for other reasons, that the existence of disaster preparedness
preparation, for example, with them and the increased security around
their perimeters make them a more underwritable risk for the companies
who do that today.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you.

MR. KEAN: General, thank you very much for your time and for your
testimony.

MR. DEGNAN: You're welcome.

MR. KEAN: Good work. Thank you.

MR. DEGNAN: Thank you, Governor. Members of the commission, thank you.

(Tape change)

PANEL: SKYSCRAPER SAFETY ISSUES FROM 9-11 FAMILY MEMBERS

MR. KEAN: -- and of the need for private sector engagement and
preparedness, then the families of the victims of the attacks on 9/11.
Two family members are here with us today to talk about their ongoing
work.

Sally Regenhard and Monica Gabrielle have formed a Skyscraper Safety
Campaign group, looking into the issues of evacuation, safety and
building codes. Sally lost her son, Michael, age 28, of the Engine
Company 249 and Monica lost her husband, Richard, who worked at Aon who
worked in World Trade Center II on the 103rd floor. Sally and Monica are
working with the distinguished advisory panel, as well as leading
interested groups throughout the country to develop and implement
changes to the fire and building codes, as well as evacuation procedures
and firefighting technology for skyscrapers. They were instrumental in
getting the Columbia University Evacuation Study of the World Trade
Center off the ground and I believe they're going to discuss some of
that today.

MS. MONICA GABRIELLE: Good morning.

MR. KEAN: Good morning.

MS. GABRIELLE: My name is Monica Gabrielle. I am co-chairperson of the
Skyscraper Safety Campaign and a widow of 9/11. I would like to thank
Governor Kean, Congressman Hamilton and the commissioners for allowing
me this very important opportunity to provide testimony regarding 9/11.

On the crisp clear morning of September 11, 2001, my concentration was
abruptly shattered by the extremely loud and out of place sound --

MR. KEAN: Excuse me. Could you speak up a little bit, or put the
microphone a little closer, one or the other? I think some of the people
in the back are having a little trouble hearing.

MS. GABRIELLE: My concentration was abruptly shattered by the extremely
loud and out of place sound of an airliner careening down the island of
Manhattan. Minutes later, in my office, I was facing the inconceivable
scene being watched by millions, black smoke pouring out of one of the
World Trade Center towers. What separated me from the millions, my
husband was in one of the towers and I didn't know which one. At 9:02,
it would make little difference, as I watched the second plane swing
around and slam into the second tower. Both towers were now hit and
burning.

The shock setting in would be completely embedded into my being as I
watched the first tower fall, now knowing it was Rich's building. It
would be three days before I would get any information regarding what
Rich had endured. He, along with a group of colleagues, was waiting on
the 78th floor sky lobby for one of the express elevators when the
second plane hit. The group and approximately 200 others in the sky
lobby at the time were thrown around as the building swayed by the
impact. Rich was hit by the marble walls, which fell on his legs,
breaking and/or crushing them. He was pinned under the marble debris and
unable to move.

He was waiting for rescue, most likely under the most gruesome
conditions imaginable: fire, smoke, dead, dying, and quite possibly the
sound of the building collapsing and falling apart. Imagine their relief
when Battalion Chief Orio Palmer and Fire Marshall Ronnie Bucca appeared
like angels to help them to safety. These unbelievable men were in the
process of coordinating the evacuation of the injured when the building
collapsed, stealing their last breaths, crushing every person still in
there to death only 59 minutes after impact. They never had a chance.

In my voice, hear the voices of all the victims of the needless,
horrible murder crying out. Let my voice, on behalf of all the victims,
implore you to listen and listen well. Families left behind to suffer
from the memories of this atrocity are too many. We have an obligation
to the victims, the families and the citizens of the United States to
look at what went wrong and to make sure we do everything in our power
to ensure safety and security in buildings going forward.

We must first separate the events of September 11th into two categories:
the terrorist attacks and the subsequent building failures, which alone
encompass a variety of appalling conditions. Unbelievably, evacuation
emergency preparedness were sorely lacking or totally non-existent on
9/11. This, along with critical flaws in the design and construction of
the buildings, contributed to the ominous conditions occupants found
themselves in, which ultimately claimed the lives of thousands.

I am here today to speak about evacuation emergency preparedness. On
September 10th, I, like so many of you, had little knowledge in this
area. I, like so many of you, entrusted my family's security and safety
to others. That ignorance changed one day later. During the course of
the past two years, I have been shocked to discover how very deadly that
decision was. In order to properly move forward, we must first go back.
As the World Trade Center began to accept tenants in December of 1970,
it was fairly common knowledge among those close to the project that
there were inherent problems, safety issues, if you will.

The construction of the buildings would be termed fragile by their
critics, the fire service, the very service commanded to protect it. The
towers shot upward into the sky to the height of 110 stories, a quarter
mile. They contained lightweight floors, acre-large expanses of open
floor space, substandard fire proofing. The thinnest, lightest steel
would be found at the top. Worst of all these innovative, experimental,
mammoth buildings were constructed and opened without any automated
sprinkler system installed in them.

Subsequently, in any major fire, the risk would be great. There were no
fire barriers on these acre spans of open floor space, no water, still
the best measure against fire. Any fire was free to spread and spread
quickly. The potential occupancy of each tower was 25,000. Each tower
had only three staircases, clustered in the center core of the building,
along with the elevators, and contained no cement or masonry. The only
protection afforded in any emergency or evacuation, whether stairs or
elevators, were two layers of fire rated gypsum board, or drywall.

The World Trade Center, over the course of its life would have numerous
incidents which would give the Port Authority the opportunity to address
the very serious challenges regarding the safety and security of the
occupants. As would become all too evident, the strategy of
defend-in-place would not work in any major fire in these buildings.
Their inherent design flaws, and most importantly, the inadequate,
untested fireproofing would require full evacuations each time.

Unbelievably, with all the warnings, the Port Authority, in its
arrogance, claimed that these were indestructible buildings, never
prepared the tenants for that eventuality. On September 11th, this
negligence would cost the lives of thousands and the faulty fireproofing
would play a major role in bringing the buildings down.

Before midnight in February of '75, an arson fire was started at the
Trade Center inside a closet with switching -- telephone switching
equipment, cabinets filled with paper and fluid for office machines.
This, combined with the open floor design, allowed a fire to get out of
control very quickly. It would take 132 firefighters three hours to
finally put it out.

Fire Commissioner O'Hagan stated at the time, "Had the building been
fully occupied, and given the stack action that exists in this 110-story
building, the rescue problem would have been tremendous." Although it
was night, everyone had to evacuate, the maintenance workers, cleaners,
security. Pressure was applied and the Port Authority made some
concessions. They installed more walls and doors on open floors, they
improved some of the alarms and communications, they installed fire
smoke detectors. Yet the one sure thing to help control a fire was
ignored: water. The sprinkler systems were just too costly to install.

In '81, the Trade Center towers had another scare. A Boeing 707 on its
way to JFK International Airport missed hitting the tower by a mere 90
seconds. What had been speculative was now a reality. One of the risks
to the towers and their occupants now included the danger of collision
by a commercial airliner and fire from its jet fuel. During the '80s the
Port Authority finally set the funds aside and started the sprinkler
installation which would happen over the course of many years.

In '84, with growing concern with the global climate and terrorism,
Peter Goldmark, who was the executive director of the World Trade Center
at the Port Authority at the time, ordered a report on the vulnerability
of the towers. The Office of Special Planning was born and charged with
the task. Appointed to oversee the project was Edward O'Sullivan. He
spoke with many domestic and international intelligence agencies and
conducted a top to bottom investigation of the towers and assessment,
and it was clearly evident that there were numbers of vulnerabilities.
The danger for a potential bomb in the parking garage, a plane hitting
the towers, even a building collapse was a serious concern.

When they questioned Leslie Robertson, the original structural engineer,
with this concern, he claimed that the towers were Gibraltar. By the
time the report was eventually completed, Mr. Goldmark had left the Port
Authority. He was no longer there. Consequently, the excellent
recommendations of eliminating the public parking, or at the very least
doing random checks of cars coming into the garage, dispersing the
emergency centers, installing better internal radios, battery powered
lighting, more video cameras, these were all ignored.

The poor decision making about the recommendations would come back to
haunt the Port Authority on February 26th in '93, when a bomb did go off
in the sub-basement, as had been feared. The lack of additional security
in the parking area allowed the van loaded with explosives to enter. The
lack of emergency lighting made the evacuation of thousands a terrifying
experience. The lack of the proper venting, the stack effect, caused the
life-threatening risk with the smoke that eventually covered the entire
towers.

During the '93 evacuations, the lack of preparedness was blatantly
evident. People didn't know what to do, they didn't know where to go.
The standard optional drills which consisted of moving to a designated
area, going down two floors and waiting for instructions, the
defend-in-place strategy, didn't help in this extreme circumstance. The
evacuation lasted over 10 hours and the buildings quickly filled up with
black acrid smoke. Everything went out, lights, ventilation, elevators
stopped, trapping people in the cars filled with smoke.

Some tried to walk down to safety, only to return because it was too
smoky to come back -- to go all the way down. People were absolutely
terrified. Those who knew the building's construction well, the Port
Authority engineers, they were able to dig their way through the gypsum
board with keys and nail files and escape from a stopped elevator.
Others went down through dark smoky stairwells holding on to the
shoulders of the person in front of them. The stairwells quickly become
crowded as people from other floors entered.

Several were rescued by helicopter off the south tower. After the '93
bombings, some safety improvements were made. Battery operated emergency
lighting was installed in the stairwells, luminescent paint was added. A
separate emergency command center was put in each building. The ever
inadequate and in some places non-existent fireproofing was finally to
be increased to one and a half inches, three times the amount that was
currently on the trusses. This was to be done as tenants moved out. It
would set a potential timeframe for completion at over 10 years. At
9/11, it had not been completed.

For most, the years following the '93 bombing resulted in complacency.
For Morgan Stanley, more vigilance. This company took the initiative to
make sure its employees knew exactly what to do if there was ever
another emergency. The only way to accomplish this was to practice,
practice and practice. As a result of the constant drilling, on the
morning of 9/11, the only casualties Morgan Stanley sustained were those
of the employees going back to help others. So far, each and every
incident that occurred at the Trade Center was an opportunity for an
honest, critical look at the safety of the buildings, at the evacuation
and potential problems with the evacuation of getting nearly 50,000
occupants out quickly.

It was an opportunity to address these things in order to minimize
injury or death in the event of another major catastrophe. The bombing
in '93 was a major indication that evacuation of these buildings was a
very real problem and a comprehensive plan needed to be drawn up,
fine-tuned, disseminated, implemented and practiced. An enormous task to
be sure, but these were enormous buildings and they brought with them
enormous responsibility.

On the morning of September 11th, the first day of school and primary
voting would delay many, thereby saving their lives. Unfortunately,
many, too many, were at their desks. Occupants of the towers consisted
of the usual diversity, employees, people from branch offices for day
meetings, companies conducting breakfast meetings, visitors, messengers.
When the planes hit the towers, they virtually sliced right through the
buildings, penetrating the soft curtain with little to no resistance,
taking with them all means of escape above the impact zone in tower one
and leaving a lone and barely known about stairway open in tower two.

What happened in those towers is unforgivable. Untold numbers were
instantly killed because they were in the direct path of the planes.
Those at and above the point of impact in tower one endured unimaginable
conditions, as is evident by the number who chose to leap to their
death. Others tried frantically to escape, only to learn that every
potential access to safety was closed to them, the stairwells were gone
and the elevators were gone. Unable to go down, the soon-to-be victims
went up. Up to the roof where they encountered locked doors. No one had
bothered to tell them that rooftop rescue was no longer an option. Their
only escape and chance of survival would have been a rooftop rescue.
They waited for help that would never come, a quarter mile above ground.

These innocent souls stood at windows waving to attract attention hoping
and praying that someone would reach them in time. Last calls were made,
final messages were sent. Too smoky, can't breathe. Should we break a
window? What should we do, where should we go, how do we get out?

In tower two, similar events were occurring. The difference, tower two
had a critical 15-minute window of opportunity to evacuate, a missed
opportunity to minimize the casualties. Instead, occupants were told to
stay, to go back. Many already in the process of leaving the building
turned around, trusting the announcements that the building was secure.
That decision would cost them their lives. Once again, untold numbers
were killed by the planes.

Once again, others would find themselves searching for a way out only to
be met by locked doors, stairwells that were destroyed, elevators that
didn't work. Some were trapped in offices. Again the roof was sought as
a point of rescue, again locked doors, wasting precious minutes going
up, instead of finding the one lone staircase left, never having been
told the rooftop rescue wasn't an option. Again, final messages were
sent, too smoky, can't breathe. The ceiling is falling in, the floor is
giving way, the stairwells are blocked, the stairwells are gone.

Some of these soon-to-be victims were on phones with loved ones,
pleading for information and options. No communication from the Port
Authority was forthcoming. Innocent victims sitting in offices waiting
for instructions on what to do, most likely contemplating their fate.
Innocent victims waiting for rescue, all of them perished, many while
still on the phone with their loved ones. These memories will haunt us
forever.

At present, there are two investigations of the World Trade Center being
conducted. Congress has charged the National Institute of Standards and
Technology with the daunting task of conducting a federal investigation
into the building failures. Columbia University is conducting an
evacuation study. These investigations, along with others around the
world, will hopefully submit very concise recommendations which will
address the safety and security of occupants in buildings. It is our
hope that this commission will push to make sure that those
recommendations end up fast-tracked into best practices.

It is our hope that this commission will make an irrefutable statement
that it is imperative for all concerned, real estate, architects,
builders, code groups, fire service, and advocates for safety to speak
in one voice to ensure that recommendations become mandates quickly. It
is our fervent hope that the first obvious recommendation issued by this
commission is the immediate removal of the immunities to critical
building and fire codes, the bare minimum standards, which are currently
still enjoyed by the Port Authority in the construction of the new World
Trade Center as I speak to you now.

Safety concerns need to be addressed before construction begins, not
after. Economic gains cannot be allowed to dictate what those safety
measures will be. Emergency preparedness cannot be allowed to remain a
vague notion. We must educate all citizens to be able to get out of a
life-threatening situation quickly. We must provide them with the tool,
knowledge. The responsibility must rest with anyone potentially
affected, building owners, building managers, tenants, employers and
employees.

In closing, I would like to say that prior to September 11th, I was
simply a wife and mother. My life's goal was never to be a public
spokesperson or advocate; however, that horrible day has changed my life
dramatically. I am honored to be heard on behalf of all the families
whose lives will never be the same.

I sincerely hope that this commission understands a legacy of truth,
accountability and reform is the greatest tribute to all the innocent
victims of this tragedy. The time has come to address the deadly
mistakes of 9/11. A safer environment for our children and for all of
America will be a direct result. We now look to you for leadership.
Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much.

(Applause.)

Ms. Regenhard.

MS. SALLY REGENHARD: Good morning, Chairman Kean, Vice Chairman Hamilton
and commissioners. It is an honor to address the 9/11 Commission today.
My name is Sally Regenhard and I am the founder and chairperson of the
Skyscraper Safety Campaign.

The Skyscraper Safety Campaign was created in December 2001 by the
Regenhard family, in memory of my beloved son, Christian Michael Otto
Regenhard, a 28-year-old probationary firefighter, who remains missing
at the World Trade Center, along with his entire engine company, 279, to
this date. He is one of 17 probationary firefighters lost at the World
Trade Center and is one of the 45 percent of victims whose remains were
never found. I brought a picture of him today because pictures of the
victims I know inspired this wonderful commission. And I brought his
picture today to represent all the victims, whether uniformed or
civilian, and I know that you will keep them in mind as you go about
your most important work.

The goals of the Skyscraper Safety Campaign are: first, to have a
federal comprehensive investigation with subpoena power into the
collapse of the World Trade Center, this investigation is currently
going on; secondly, to encourage better compliance with building and
fire codes in New York City and nationwide; third, to educate codes
groups to allow the fire service to have more input into the writing of
building codes which now, sadly, is not the case; fourth, to ensure that
all future World Trade Center development by the Port Authority of New
York and New Jersey will be characterized by safety, quality, security
and will be under the legal jurisdiction of New York City building and
fire codes.

My remarks today will focus on the skyscraper safety issues of 9/11/01.
On 9/11, the cloak of competence was pulled off the city of New York. On
that dreadful day, we found out how ill-prepared we really were, and
this knowledge came at an awful price: the needless death of nearly
3,000 people, 343 of them firefighters, including my beautiful son,
Christian.

On 9/11, the city of New York and the Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey had no plan for terrorism, despite the fact that the World Trade
Center was previously attacked in 93 with deadly consequences. At that
time, the terrorists vowed to return to, quote, "finish the job," and
they kept that promise on 9/11.

The widespread failures in evacuation procedures, building code issues
and emergency communications became a prescription for disaster at the
World Trade Center. Despite propaganda to the contrary, the Port
Authority, a bi-state agency which built the World Trade Center and is
totally immune from all local building and fire codes, really had no
evacuation procedures in place at all. They said they did training, but
the fact is that evacuation was left up to the individual tenants, not
to the Port Authority.

The majority of the occupants who survived felt that they were
improperly trained or not trained at all. If they were trained, they
would never have gone up to the roof to try to escape. All those who
made that crucial mistake paid dearly with their lives. If they were
properly trained, they would have known that access to the roof was
impossible because of two locked doors that were only accessible to
maintenance workers with keys. The inadequacy of codes to ensure safety
of persons in high-rise buildings became glaringly apparent on 9/11.

In 2001, the New York City building codes, as well as all model codes
throughout this country, treated a 100-story building with the same
guidelines as a 10-story building. No fire drills with full building
evacuations were ever mandated, and the World Trade Center occupants
were just as totally unprepared for a mass evacuation as they were
during the 1993 attack. New York City codes allowed a building designed
to house 25,000 people to have only three staircases for emergency
escape. It allowed gypsum board walls in stairways, which at the World
Trade Center collapsed under impact and pressure, trapping fleeing
victims.

New York City codes allowed many or all of the high-rise buildings
stairwells doors to be locked, trapping fleeing victims when stairs
collapsed and preventing firefighters from gaining timely access to
floors where people needed to be rescued. The unfortunate truth is that
today, very little has changed in the area of building code reform
throughout this country, including few extra safety measures for
high-rise buildings.

But any discussion of the New York City code is completely irrelevant to
the World Trade Center because these buildings were and remain above the
law. The Port Authority's buildings were totally immune from every
single New York City building and fire code and were subject to, quote,
"the Port Authority's own codes," which remain a mystery to this day
because no one has ever seen them. The Port Authority repeatedly claims
that they, quote, "meet or exceed New York City codes;" however, history
has shown that this is a falsehood. No high-rise building of 100 percent
bar joist floor construction before or since the World Trade Center has
ever been allowed under New York City standards and practices.

According to the NIST WTC collapse investigation, there is no evidence
that fire tests were ever done on the fireproofing of the World Trade
Center. This is a glaring example of lack of code compliance, to say the
very least. Finally, the untested fireproofing was grossly inadequate, a
clear violation of New York City codes. However, since no FDNY
violations can be issued to such a, quote, "immune building," no codes
violations were ever served on these dangerous buildings. Indeed, the
FDNY had no jurisdiction in the World Trade Center, but paradoxically
they were required to risk and eventually lose their lives in these
buildings.

One of the most tragic and abominable failures of 9/11 was the total
breakdown of emergency communication and coordination in the World Trade
Center. Lacking any real plan for terrorism and lacking a unified
command structure, the Port Authority, NYPD and the FDNY operated
basically separately on 9/11. For the most part they did not and could
not communicate with one another.

The FDNY generally could not even communicate among their fellow
firefighters. Numerous newspaper articles, interviews and 9/11 tapes
have evidenced this fact. The fact that my son and his FDNY brothers
were sent into the World Trade Center with radios that did not work in
1993 and were no more capable of working in 2001 resulted in evacuation
orders which were unheard and therefore unheeded, a fact that surely
contributed to their deaths.

In an effort to minimize the atrocity of the deaths of 343 firefighters,
heroic urban legends were promulgated by leaders, such as the former
mayor of New York, and others who still claim to this day that, quote,
"25,000 people were rescued by the FDNY in the largest rescue effort in
world history." To the contrary, evacuation specialists and researchers
have determined that the true number of occupants who escaped that day
was closer to 7,000 people per tower, a total of 14,000 people.

The sad truth is that whoever could get out, did get out. And while the
FDNY valiantly entered these buildings to save lives, it was an
impossible and deadly situation. They were essentially sent in to an
inevitable death, with radios which did not work. To this day, no one
has been held accountable or responsible for these massive failures of
the public trust.

Since 9/11, we are moving in the direction of change, but far too
slowly. Generally, we are crawling, instead of running, towards change.
One outstanding exception to this situation is the New York City
Department of Buildings and its World Trade Center Building Code Task
Force, which is effecting sweeping changes and reform for New York
City's building code.

In February of 2003, this proactive department of the Bloomberg
administration approved comprehensive safety measures, such as the
temporary outlawing of bar joist floor assembly, commonly known as truss
construction, which characterized the World Trade Center, in high-rise
buildings. They are also calling for the hardening of cores of stair
cases and elevator banks, the retrofitting of sprinklers in older
buildings, and other safeguards which will be incorporated into the New
York City building code. As the Skyscraper Safety Campaign praises such
actions, however, we are greatly dismayed that there is still
unbelievably widespread resistance to national reform.

One example of this is the fact that all model codes still treat a
100-story building with the same guidelines as a 10-story building.
Another example is evidenced in the recent failures of a codes group to
initiate basic fire safety reform through the widening of staircases in
new high-rise buildings.

For example, the National Fire Protection Association, the NFPA,
recently had the opportunity to effect a code change of widening
staircases in newly constructed skyscrapers by just 1 foot, yet failed
to do so. Who can forget the stories of narrow congested stairwells in
the World Trade Center, where it was impossible for firefighters to go
up while people were fleeing for their lives, and vice versa?

Scores of still photos of persons evacuating demonstrate that occupants
had to stop and turn sideways every time firefighters passed them on the
way up because the stairways were so narrow. How many of those deadly
110 stories did my beautiful son climb up on that dreadful day, against
the tide of frantic desperate people, fleeing for their lives. Whose
child, husband, parent or sibling could have escaped by fleeing more
quickly down a wider staircase? Did my son somehow get word of the order
to evacuate but could not because he, like the other desperate people,
was jammed into a too narrow staircase with a frantic sea of humanity
trying to run for their lives? What unspeakable horrors led to the
brutal deaths of nearly 3,000 people in those buildings that day?

The cruel reality is that I will never know the answers to these
devastating questions, but I do know that a staircase that is 1 foot
wider can save a life. Most regrettably, the NFPA yielded to special
interest groups and did not pass this most basic building code reform.

The Skyscraper Safety Campaign now requests that the leadership of this
fine commission becomes a catalyst for most needed code change
throughout this country. The recent fires in Rhode Island and Chicago
illustrate that disasters which happen locally should have national
implications for change and reform, yet they nearly always remain a
local issue.

One example of this is the Seton Hall New Jersey dorm fire disaster,
which resulted in widespread reform in fire safety and sprinkler
installation for college dorms in New Jersey, but not across the
country. I appeal to this commission to further the cause of the
skyscraper safety by doing the following.

First, closely monitor the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, NIST, investigations, findings and recommendations, and
encourage new coalitions of public-private partnerships with a goal of
adopting these changes for the purpose of code reform and enhancement of
fire safety and evacuation procedures for all buildings.

Secondly, make sure that the NIST recommendations for code changes are
quickly adopted. It now can take from three to six years to change codes
and practices. We cannot wait that long to safeguard the American
public. There must be a national perspective from all disasters like the
World Trade Center, the Rhode Island fire and the Chicago fire. We need
the shepherding of this 9/11 Commission to effect timely code change,
led by the International Code Council and the National Fire Protection
Association.

Third, invite the two key organizations which control public safety in
buildings in this country, the NFPA and the International Codes Council,
to testify at your commission as to specifically how they are
positioning themselves to quickly move forward on anticipated NIST
proposed code changes. The Skyscraper Safety Campaign has established a
relationship with the International Codes Council and we look forward to
working with both the NFPA and the ICC with the goal of widening
staircases and incorporating many other safety reforms into these codes.

Fourth, invite the General Services Administration, the GSA, and the
Building Owners and Managers Association, BOMA, to testify as to why
they oppose the widening of staircases in new high-rise buildings, under
the proposed NFPA code changes which were defeated.

Fifth, encourage reform and codes groups to allow greater participation
from the fire service and fire professionals in the field of codes and
practices. Allow the profession of fire protection engineering to have
responsibility for fire proofing and fire safety issues in building
construction. At present, architects, who are not fire experts, have
this obligation.

Sixth and last, require that the Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey rebuild the new World Trade Center under the legal jurisdiction
of New York City building and fire codes. We need a set of national
codes and standards with input from the fire safety professionals for
all buildings, including governmental agencies. There should be no
exemptions for any agency or authority, and the Port Authority of New
York and New Jersey should not be allowed to rebuild the new World Trade
Center under their immunities from local building and fire codes. No
building should be above the law when fire safety is the issue.

To conclude, please keep in mind that no reform codes and no method of
enforcement will be of any value to safeguard the American public unless
there is a system of accountability and responsibility in place. We need
this for the effective safeguarding of human life in all buildings and
especially for the failures of 9/11 in New York City. There was a
wholesale betrayal of all those in the World Trade Center and all the
rescue workers who ran into a hopeless situation with radios that did
not work.

The former mayor, fire commissioner and police commissioner of New York,
as well as the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, are just some
of the individuals who must be questioned by this commission regarding
what happened to New York City on 9/11 and why the greatest city in the
world was so totally unprepared for this terrorist attack, despite
warnings. Accountability and responsibility are the hallmarks of a
democratic society. Without a system of accountability and
responsibility for all public and private officials, there will be no
real impetus to change an irresponsible system like the one that
characterized the city of New York and the World Trade Center on 9/11.

In closing, I would like to tell you that the writer, Gertrude Stein,
once said that, "the dead speak to us." Members of the 9/11 Commission,
the dead are speaking to us today. They are asking you, by your work, to
give others the gift of life through accountability, responsibility,
change and reform. The dead are speaking to us. I hope that you will
listen to them. Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you both very much for that factual and very moving
presentation.

Secretary Lehman?

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you, Ms. Gabrielle, Ms. Regenhard. Thank you very much
for all you've done, first in being very key in bringing this commission
into existence, and as importantly, guiding us from the very first day
and assisting our staff and us in understanding these issues and guiding
the inquiry so that it will, indeed, we are confident, make the kind of
difference that you and your efforts deserve.

I have a number of questions, but since my colleague Tim Roemer was one
of the principal authors of this commission, I'd like to ask him to
begin with a question.

MR. KEAN: Congressman Roemer?

REP. TIMOTHY J. ROEMER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Thank you, John, for that courtesy.

Although very difficult to follow up on what you both have said, if I
may, Sally and Monica, thank you so much. I know how difficult -- I can
maybe imagine how difficult it is for you to get before the commission
and tear open the wounds that you continue to feel so often with respect
to Rich and Christian, and we very much appreciate you being here today.

Gail Sheehy has written this book about 9/11 and in it she talks about
the heroic acts, the courage and the bravery of people in the towers and
those people that assisted others in coming down, despite the
un-preparedness of some of the companies involved in not having
evacuation plans properly in place, despite not enough planning after
the Trade Towers were attacked in 1993, we saw real acts of courage and
bravery. And I put your testimony and the families that are here today
in the same category. Thank you so much for helping us create the 9/11
Commission. Thank you so much for helping us in having the Joint Inquiry
be successful in making certain recommendations to hopefully make the
country safer, and thank you for what you are doing for this 9/11
Commission.

My children asked me why I was coming up here today, and what we hope to
accomplish in a hearing like this, and as the Chairman has said in his
eloquence in his opening statement, when 85 percent of the critical
infrastructure is controlled by the private sector, the people in those
buildings are the targets for the next terrorist attack. What do we do
about this? How do we try to do some things to make this country safer
from the terrorist attack that we know is coming next? And you are here
today to talk about that, to advise us, to show us through your
knowledge and your frustration and your anger what this 9/11 Commission
might be able to do in the future, and we're very grateful for that
advice.

I want to ask you specifically with respect to the tragedy on 9/11. You
travel the country. You have gone to Indianapolis, Indiana, my home
state, and you have made presentations there not just about what
terrorism's threat might be to us but what inadequacy there is in the
uniformity of our building codes, how no building should be exempt from
those codes, whether it's in New York City or Indianapolis, and how we
need a better set of standards and code enforcement today in America.
While our intelligence communities are trying to get better in
coordinating and communicating information, they're not nearly there
yet. We haven't seen some of the same progress in this area.

You are very frustrated by that. Could you tell me, Sally and Monica,
just very briefly in my first question, what did you say to the people
in Indianapolis at this conference? What recommendations will you make
in the future and are we making any kind of significant progress if you
continue to do those kind of conferences across the country, even before
we make our recommendations on the 9/11 Commission?

MS. REGENHARD: Well, one of the conferences I attended was the FDIC
conference, which is the Fire Instructors Conference which is held
yearly in Indianapolis, Indiana. This serves thousands of firefighters,
both professional and volunteer, and their instructors, and it's really
a place to showcase the latest innovations in firefighting techniques
and fire safety. When I addressed this large, large group, I asked them
first of all to take a stronger role in advocating for fire safety and
the strengthening of fire codes.

The fire service has really been the last group to be -- to have a
voice. They are a stakeholder in the area of fire safety and in codes,
but they're the last group to have a voice. I asked them to stand up, to
insist at their unions, that their national and international
organizations which purport to represent firefighters throughout this
nation and even throughout the world that the firefighters need to
contact these people and tell them, get involved in strengthening
building codes, get involved in firefighter safety. Because a
firefighter will not be able to save the public unless they have the
training, technology, equipment and they are backed by stronger fire
codes.

I also appealed to them to recognize that without accountability and
responsibility, we're not going to make progress. That has to be the
overriding situation. I would appeal to you and to all groups that there
has to be a public-private partnership, but it can't be on a basis where
if a company feels like being safe, they will be safe. We have to have
this commission, which -- I look at this commission as really the last
chance for the families of the victims and for the future of the safety
of many people in this country on many levels. But when it comes to code
change, no one has been able to do it. I spoke to firefighters from
Indianapolis to California, and they all shared the same information
with Monica and myself, and that is, please help us, we're counting on
you.

I get so shocked when I am told that firefighters, fire departments are
counting on us and the Skyscraper Safety Campaign. And just to
illustrate this, I want to briefly read you a brief email that I
received in the aftermath of the Chicago fire from a lieutenant in the
Chicago Fire Department. "I am a lieutenant in the Chicago Fire
Department. I came across this site, your Skyscraper Safety Campaign
site, and I would like to know more about your organization and how it
might help the firefighters and the citizens in Chicago." This is a
lieutenant on the Chicago Fire Department asking me how I can help them.
This shows you the state -- (tape change) -- such as yours, because in
the past codes groups are so diverse, there's no standardization --

MS. REGENHARD: (In progress) -- but it's dialogue. But please don't
forget it's accountability and responsibility, whether that's of
governmental elected officials, governmental agencies, the private
sector. Without that, there will be no impetus for real change.

MR. ROEMER: Thank you, Sally.

Monica, if I could ask you a question. Today we're talking about code
enforcement and code recommendations as they affect buildings, and
trying to make sure that we have certain codes that protect our
buildings, and buildings and organizations are not exempt. And we're
talking about the width of stairwells and fire code safety and
sprinklers. On standards, we're talking about evacuation plans.

I got on a plane to fly from Washington DC up to Newark last night, and
it's standard for them to tell us how to get out of that airplane if
something should happen. Some people listen, some people don't. And we
were given this today about how to get out of this building, should
something happen.

In the World Trade Center, in a 100-story building, there was in some
instances little or no preparedness for those workers to have an
evacuation plan to get out of that 100-story building. What can we do
about this standards issue in the future? And especially I want to ask
you, if the NIST study comes out in August of '04 and we're supposed to
be done, if we can get done, by May of '04, and we make our
recommendations in the spring or the summer but the NIST study is after
that, I would hope that we would continue to work with you, even
anticipating what NIST may say in making recommendations on the
standards side. But if you could speak to that in terms of the timing
and in terms of what recommendations you all may make to us, I would
appreciate that as well.

MS. GABRIELLE: The NIST investigation I think is going to probably come
up with pretty much what is already obvious, but I don't think there are
any smoking guns. It's obvious that you can't get people out of a
110-story building quickly, it's obvious that there was no preparedness
training. It was an optional event that you could participate in or not
participate. I think going forward, we have to make evacuation drills
mandatory, no questions asked. There are no more options. The only way
that you get out of a building or you know what to do is by practicing,
so in the case of a panic situation, you're going to do things
automatically, and that's, you know, I think a given.

And we have to draw from all sectors. I think it goes -- it's got to
flow from top down, starting with the CEO setting an example, and bottom
up with the employees taking some initiative for their own safety, and
somewhere in the middle come up with the perfect plan. What it is, I
don't know. I just know that it's a very critical thing that needs to be
looked at.

MS. REGENHARD: I'd like to add also I'd like to see a change in building
codes, which now allow stairways of skyscrapers and all other buildings
to be locked. There are different guidelines and certainly later on
today you will be speaking to some experts, such as our eminent
Professor Glenn Corbett, a resident of New Jersey I might add, and
someone who has brought the excellent practices and fire code issues of
New Jersey really to the table in New York, and I want to thank you for
him. I want to thank New Jersey for giving us Professor Glenn Corbett
and many others of our New Jersey-based advisors.

But right now, in building codes throughout this country, you can lock
all the stairways' doors of a high-rise building if you have a sprinkler
system and if you have some other systems in place. That should be
eliminated immediately. Industry says you have to lock the stairway
doors because of theft and so on. I say put closed-circuit cameras in
those staircases, leave those doors open. Observe what's going on with
closed-circuit cameras. And that's even an enhancement to fire safety,
because if you're in a high-rise building and you have closed-circuit,
you can see what's going on up there on the upper floors. Locking doors
is an abomination.

Right now in the city of New York, we can -- only every fifth door I
believe needs to be unlocked. In the World Trade Center, that was -- it
was a disaster, but the -- when the flames hit the buildings, the
buildings shifted and all those doors which were locked and supposedly
could have been unlocked through a central system were not able to be
opened. Locking doors is deadly. And I must tell you, recently I was at
a meeting concerning -- the Columbia Evacuation Study -- concerning
concerns of the World Trade Center in a very older solid landmark
building in New York City on Fifth Avenue. It was a five-story building.
I like to take the stairs, so I just ran down to try to get down to
where I needed to be, and I was locked in the staircase. I was locked. I
went to every floor and then I saw the sign saying, no reentry. You
can't get back.

You know, that is a glaring example of the fact that we need to change
our codes. We need to change them immediately. We have to prohibit the
locking of stairwells. I can't think of anything worse than being locked
in a stairwell. In my own example, it was a very large stairwell, it was
very well lit. It was not during a fire, a panic, the lights were not
out. My goodness. You know, I try not to think about what happened in
those buildings because it devastates the families of the victims. But,
you know, one of the things we have to do is stop the locking of
stairwell doors.

MR. ROEMER: Sally, from that personal experience, it just continues to
bring up factually that we have not made enough progress in these areas
over the last two years. And when Professor Corbett testifies or talks
to our commission later on today, having read his testimony, he looks at
standards and he looks at code enforcement as kind of a ruler, and says,
here's how we measure our progress in these areas. And too often times,
that measurement is absolutely insignificant and insufficient today. And
we are very grateful for your continuing to go out there on a daily
basis and try to make the code enforcement and the standards for
evacuation plans right, front and center, in every city in the country.

Monica, let me ask my last question for you, and it goes to what you
said in your testimony. On these ways to measure our standards and our
effectiveness in these standards, you mentioned Morgan Stanley as
somebody -- as a company who did do some things right. After 1993 and
the World Trade bombing there that killed -- or wounded 1,000 people,
and some things were done properly then for evacuation plans. What kinds
of things did Morgan Stanley do that we would like to see in a measure
of better standards set forward for more companies to achieve in the
future?

MS. GABRIELLE: Well, I think it's clear that the defend-in-place
strategy doesn't work, it doesn't exist, not when you have a high-rise
because you just can't get people out. Morgan Stanley practiced
evacuation, and I think what we need to do going forward is you have to
have an assessment of the building. I mean, everything is going to be
different from another -- depending on how big the building is and where
you are in relation. And as Sally said, stairwell size is critical
because you have that flow of bodies moving into the stairwell, and the
further down you go, the more people, and it's going to bottleneck. And
we were also in an evacuation, and that was horrifying.

We have to come to the table with all the people that are responsible,
the architects, the structural engineers, and address these things
before a building is built, and put the safety factors and be innovative
and see what's out there. There are elevators that are supposed to be
able to be used in fires. These are areas that we need to look at and,
you know, bring everybody in to look at these things before a building
goes up and put the value on the safety issues, on the structural
integrity of the buildings and not the economic gains. I mean, those
will come. If everyone does the right thing, the economic gain will be a
byproduct.

MR. ROEMER: I just want to thank you again as I hand the questions back
over to Secretary Lehman for all your help through the last several
years in all our efforts to try to improve not only this but the
intelligence and the policymaking and a better response from our country
to 9/11 type activities and future terrorist attacks. Thank you again so
much.

MR. LEHMAN: I have lots of questions but I know we'll be working closely
together, so I'll save most of them for then. I would just like to ask
both of you if you would -- now you have a large public forum, you
certainly have our very close attention this minute, and I think you
have a very large television audience across the nation today. Would
you, for the nation, give a report card briefly on a number of important
organizations and people that you're talking with? And I'd like you to
give it in one of three categories: they're obstructing, they're
ignoring, or they're helping.

First, let's start with the federal government, and particular OSHA. The
Occupational Safety Hazard Agency is supposed to be in charge of these
kinds of issues. Obstructing -- I'm talking about today, not before
9/11. Today, in working with you and as you observe, obstructing,
ignoring or helping?

MS. GABRIELLE: It's interesting. OSHA, as we've learned, or come to find
out, is reactionary. They respond to complaints, which you wonder why
they're there. It's ineffective. They don't do a good job, if anything.
What I have here, as a matter of fact, are letters that were sent by the
families to OSHA after 9/11. Under normal circumstances, there should be
an investigation. What we were told was that because the buildings are
no longer there, there won't be one. You know, the companies are still
there, the practices can be researched. So, you know, we can do away
with OSHA.

MR. LEHMAN: Sally, you agree with that?

MS. REGENHARD: Well, I must say that, you know, keeping in mind that
nearly 100 families of the victims felt strongly enough, were outraged
enough by what they felt was the flagrant safety violations under which
their loved ones worked in those buildings. They wrote these complaints
to OSHA will full faith that they would be looked into and either fines
or criminal penalties would be issued. And in a startling break with
precedence, OSHA announced that in the case of the World Trade Center,
there would be no investigation, there would be no inquiries and there
would be no fines or criminal penalties. So we are aghast really.

Since that time, the only interaction we've had with OSHA is trying to
get copies of these letters. I'm very happy to say after two years we
got the copy. I think Monica Gabrielle received the copy the day before
yesterday. So I'm really perplexed. I don't have enough information. I'm
just not sure what to say about that setup. I would say, however, that
any agency that doesn't have enforcement to back it up, I'm just -- I
don't know the value of it. I'm not sure.

MR. LEHMAN: So you give them -- you both give them an F for their
current effort. Let's go onto the mayor of New York. Obstruct, ignoring
your efforts or helping your efforts?

MS. REGENHARD: Well, you know, if we're talking about the present mayor
--

MR. LEHMAN: The present mayor. I'm talking about present in all cases.

MS. REGENHARD: Okay. If we're talking about the present mayor, I have to
say that I'm known -- most people realize that I'm not a person who
gives gratuitous compliments to elected officials -- (laughter) -- to
say the least. However, I have to say that the Department of Buildings,
under the Bloomberg administration has taken a leadership role and has
been, in my opinion, one of the only departments of city government
that's taken a leadership role in responding to these terrible failures
of 9/11.

The Department of Buildings, Mayor Bloomberg's Building Code Review Task
Force was open enough to allow the Skyscraper Safety Campaign and our
wonderful advisors and professors of fire protection, fire science
engineering, to come in to address their group, to help -- to give input
into their reforms. And some of our advisors are still on the technical
committees. To me, who was been banging on the door of the government
for two years, to me that's the only agency under the Bloomberg
administration that's really -- locally, that's ever opened the door.
Certainly, you know, this commission has to a great degree. So I would
give the Bloomberg administration, regarding their building code work, I
have to give them a --

MR. LEHMAN: Helpful?

MS. REGENHARD: I have to give them -- because they're the only ones that
have done anything proactive. I'm going to give them an A.

MR. LEHMAN: Monica, do you agree with that assessment?

MS. GABRIELLE: I'm not -- you know what, there's no room for
improvement, and I'll give them a C plus, you can try harder.

(Laughter.)

MR. LEHMAN: Okay. I'd like to then -- in the interest of time, because I
have eight more agencies I want you to rate, if you could just answer
fail, pass or an A, okay, because I'd really like to get your views on
them. The Port Authority?

MS. GABRIELLE: Fail.

MS. REGENHARD: Fail.

(Laughter, applause.)

MR. LEHMAN: One of the more powerful groups in New York City, the
commercial real estate owners?

MS. REGENHARD: I'd like to give them an incomplete actually, because
after years of resisting codes improvements and safety improvements, I
see that they are slowly coming to the table and expressing interest in
this new field of safe buildings. So I really -- I'd like to give them
an incomplete. I'm cautiously optimistic. It remains to be seen.

MR. LEHMAN: Building managers?

MS. REGENHARD: I'd have to say the same thing. You know, I know that
they are slowly coming to the table. However, this national BOMA,
Building Owners and Managers Association, is one of the groups that
effectively derailed the opportunity to have a staircase 12 inches
wider. So I have to say for that I'd have to fail them, but hopefully
for their willingness to come to the table and change their opinion on
that, I'll give them an incomplete.

MR. LEHMAN: The Architects Governing Group?

MS. REGENHARD: Well, architects, I have great respect for architects.
The Department of Buildings is top-heavy with architects in the city of
New York. I think in general they are on a higher level, they want to do
the right thing, they are very talented people, but they don't -- they
know very little about building safety -- fire safety, rather.
Architects want to learn how to build a safe building, but you know, the
way it stands now, they really don't know.

So I will give them -- I'm going to give them, you know, an A for
effort, but we have to change the system. Fire protection engineers need
to have the responsibility for fireproofing and putting safety into
buildings. So I'll give them A for willingness, but as far as their
ability to build, you know, a safe building that's very well fire
protected, I'm going to have to give them a C because they just don't
know how to do it. It's not their fault.

MR. LEHMAN: Overall the business community that would make up the
tenants, the large corporations, are they helping or --

MS. REGENHARD: Until we have accountability and responsibility, you
know, for their fire safety plan, for the responsibility for the people
in buildings, you know, I'm just going to have to give them somewhere
between a C and a D. I guess I'm a good grader. I'm going to give them
really a D. A D.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you very much. That's very helpful and hopefully we'll
move everybody back into the passing at least before this effort is
over.

MR. KEAN: Okay.

Last question, Commissioner Fielding.

MR. FRED FIELDING: Mr. Chairman -- first of all, thank you, Monica and
Sally, very much, not just for today, but for all you've done, as has
been spoken here before.

Mr. Chairman, in the sake of time, I would ask that we direct the staff
to talk to the International Codes Council and to the NFPA. It seems as
though they are the leading people, I've heard the testimony of that,
the leading organizations. I would suggest that we interview them,
hopefully bring them to the table together and find out what the problem
is so we can solve it.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, Commissioner.

MS. REGENHARD: Great idea.

MR. KEAN: Sally, Monica, I thank you more than I can say, you know. You
are such an example of somebody who has taken your own personal tragedy
and have used it to help other people in a most wonderful way, so thank
you very, very much for that.

MS. REGENHARD: Thank you very much.

(Applause.)

PANEL: PUBLIC/PRIVATE INITIATIVES SINCE 9-11

MR. KEAN: If I could ask the next panel, please, to take their seats. We
are running considerably behind, so I would ask this panel, if they can,
to limit their remarks as much as you possibly can. I know Mr. Andrews
will do that because he has to catch a plane, but I'd ask the rest of
you also to limit your remarks to the best of your ability.

First of all, we have Richard Andrews, who is senior director of
homeland security projects at the National Center for Crisis and
Continuing Coordination, and they're about advancing crisis management
and business continuity readiness through public-private sector
collaboration. He served on the president's Homeland Security Advisory
Council and served as director in California of their council.

Next will be Michael Byrne. Michael Byrne is from the Department of
Homeland Security. He has a wealth of experience in emergency
preparedness, first response, and public sector/private sector
cooperation and coordination. He was, by the way, a first responder to
the 1993 bombing at the World Trade Center.

And finally General Reimer, director of the National Memorial Institute
for the Prevention of Terrorism in Oklahoma City in April 2000. They're
doing a database to find the best practices, and it's important that we
include the Oklahoma experience in our deliberations today.

So Mr. Andrews.

MR. RICHARD A. ANDREWS: Thank you, Chairman Kean, Vice Chairman
Hamilton, members of the Commission. I thank you very much for the
opportunity to appear before you today and to assist in a small way in
furthering your important work. As requested, I provided the staff with
written testimony, and today I would like to highlight several issues
and respond to the specific topics that the staff have asked me to
address.

The National Center for Crisis and Continuity Coordination, or NC4, is a
division of Candle Corporation, an El Segundo, California-based
technology company. Candle initially became interested in public-private
collaboration during the preparations for Y2K. When we noted that while
government and companies were paying a great deal of attention to issues
within their organization at the national or state level, little was
being done to ensure that local coordination occurred.

Following September 11th, when many of Candle's clients within the
financial services sector were directly impacted by the attacks, Candle
formed a new corporate division, or NC4, specifically focused on
enhancing the coordination between the public and private sectors on
issues related to prevention, preparedness, response and recovery for
natural and man-made disasters. Over the past 18 months, NC4 has
centered its attention in New York City and Los Angeles, working with
the business communities and local governments.

While there is much focus on homeland security coordination across
federal agencies and from the federal to the state level, our objective
is to address the gaps in local coordination between the public and
private sectors. The important word here is local. The private sector
has their offices and processing facilities and their manufacturing
plants in local communities. Our view is that it is imperative that
efforts to build partnerships between the public and private sectors be
rooted in local communities. Unless solutions are forged at the local
level, it is our experience that partnerships between the public and
private sectors are unlikely either to be achieved or, even more
importantly, sustained.

There are many obvious challenges in working at the local level. For
businesses, the jurisdictional complexities of local governments,
especially in metropolitan regions like New York or Los Angeles, can be
overwhelming. For local government, the private sector can be equally
mysterious. Organizational structures are often poorly understood. The
distinct functions of corporate security, business continuity,
facilities operation or emergency management within the private sector
may not be clearly recognized by public agencies.

The initial role that NC4 has played is to facilitate the process of
bringing business and government together to initiate a dialogue
regarding what steps need to be taken to develop workable relationships
that are mutually beneficial. We have found that there's a need for very
basic discussions to occur. What information is available from
government, from what government agency, and in what format? Can that
information be shared with business, and if so, under what
circumstances?

What are the cultural, procedural, policy or legal barriers to
information sharing? What information does the private sector have that
it can share in turn with government, and what information would
government like to receive from the private sector? These exchanges have
been carried out through facilitated discussions and tabletop exercises
that focus on specific public policy problems that have the potential to
impact both sectors.

In late October, for example, we conducted a three hour simultaneous
bi-coastal exercise in New York and Los Angeles that centered on a
simulated anthrax attack that impacted corporate offices and local
governments in both cities. Because neither government nor business are
able to have full-time staff dedicated to promoting the interaction
between the two sectors, NC4 has served, in effect, as an intermediary
or program manager to bring the groups together to initiate this
exchange.

In New York our efforts have centered on the financial services sector,
while in Los Angeles we've been working with a range of businesses,
including aerospace and entertainment firms, as well as representatives
of the banking and utility sectors. In New York we have worked with the
city's Office of Emergency Management to develop an application that
refines the processes used by OEM's watch command, which is a 24/7
operational arm of the Office of Emergency Management responsible for
monitoring events throughout the city that have the potential to impact
public safety. By using the NC4 application, OEM is able to rapidly and
consistently enter, log, update, and as appropriate, disseminate
information to the private sector.

An essential element of this effort involves the daily use of the
information processes. And I think particularly in the previous
testimony, one of the things that is, I think, a hallmark of emergency
preparedness is the need to have as close as possible daily practice.
When extraordinary events like September 11 occur, or extraordinary
events like the fires that occurred in California several weeks ago,
unless there's been systems of daily practices -- and you've heard about
Merrill Lynch and their practices. Unless you build those daily
practices into the routines of both public and private organizations,
it's extremely unlikely that under the stress of unique and terrible
circumstances that people are going to be able to form the way that they
need to perform.

Even minor events like a water main break may have the potential to
impact business operation. By providing reports to businesses of
seemingly routine events, processes are steadily being developed whereby
accessing the NC4 system becomes a regular part of both business and
government routine. Additionally, the information flow is
bi-directional, business can in turn advise the Office of Emergency
Management of the status of their facilities and personnel or advise
them of activities that might impact a specific area of a city.

The staff has asked me to address the question, what are the areas where
the public and private sector partnership should be developed? And I
think there are several areas that we should focus on as at least entry
point for this dialogue to begin. One involves corporate security and
local law enforcement. Strong informal networks generally exist among
corporate security officers, many of whom themselves are former law
enforcement officials. They represent in the corporate security
community a significant force multiplier of eyes and ears to support
prevention efforts.

By formalizing the processes by which corporate security officers can
provide information to law enforcement, we believe both public and
private sector security can be enhanced. A renewed effort should be
undertaken to expand participation in programs like InfraGaurd. In turn,
law enforcement should consider providing law enforcement sensitive
information to properly vetted representatives from the private sector.
A secondary involves bringing business continuity professionals into an
overall public safety system.

Once centered largely on ensuring the integrity of corporate data
systems and networks, business continuity professionals need to work
more closely with local economic development and public safety officials
to develop a shared understanding of what is needed by each sector to
ensure that the impacts of emergencies and disasters on local businesses
are minimized. A third area involves closer coordination between
emergency management officials in both sectors. Exercises involving both
sectors need to be promoted. For example, currently the TOPOFF exercises
that are held nationally focus entirely on public agencies. Private
agencies are really not brought into these major exercises that test the
overall national capability.

A business incident command system should be developed that is
compatible with the National Incident Command System that's under
development by the Department of Homeland Security. And crisis
management plans need to be developed from each critical infrastructure
sector and those plans need to be tested and evaluated with local, state
and federal planning efforts. What are the key private sector
responsibilities of Homeland Security in working with the public sector?

Let me add just a few comments to my earlier remarks. If we want the
private sector to be a partner in government prevention, preparedness
and emergency response, there needs to be a simple interface to
government that is viable and efficient for business to use. The
multiplicity of government interfaces, as mentioned earlier, is a
problem for business. For example, one of the most common requests from
the financial services firms that we worked with in New York City is for
assistance in facilitating coordination with public agencies in New
Jersey as well as in New York, for example, with the previously
mentioned Port Authority. Bridging these state lines becomes a very
significant problem for businesses, particularly business that have
operations that cross state lines.

In turn, the private sector needs to recognize that their interests
extend beyond the boundaries of their company and the protection of
their physical facilities and their employees is dependent upon
developing and maintaining close working relationships with local public
safety authorities. These efforts will be enhanced if government can
consider providing incentives to defray the additional expenses to
strengthen the resiliency of the nation's critical infrastructure.

What are the key pillars or building blocks that support public-private
partnerships? The first is the developing systems that deliver accurate,
timely and --

MR. KEAN: If you could sum up now, Mr. Andrews. We're running out of
time.

MR. RICHARD A. ANDREWS: Okay. I think the most challenging part of the
process to develop workable networks between the public and private
sector is simply beginning the dialogue. Where there are examples of
private-public partnerships, there usually has been an intermediary. In
Dallas, for example, the FBI has taken the leadership in bringing the
business community together in north Texas. The challenge is to sustain
the effort and to develop the institutional knowledge and accumulate a
library of best practices and move from information sharing to more
formalized structured and commonly understood methods of interaction.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much.

Mr. Byrne?

MR. MICHAEL F. BYRNE: Good morning, Chairman Kean and members of the
Commission. Thank you for calling this important public hearing on
emergency preparedness.

MR. KEAN: Move closer to the microphone.

MR. BYRNE: I'm sorry. I'm pleased to represent Secretary Ridge and the
Department of Homeland Security today to discuss the state of
public-private sector initiatives in this vital area. The department's
commitment to partnering with the private sector is reflected in the
organization of the department. Within the Office of the Secretary is a
team of talented people solely dedicated to working with the private
sector to improve coordination, communication and cooperation.

Often when discussing the public and private sectors, the focus is on
the differences between the two. However, I see one very strong
similarity that has become especially evident since the September 11th
attack. Among the highest priorities, if not the highest priority, of
both sectors is the protection and safety of their workers and
customers, particularly against terrorism. Toward that end, the
Department of Homeland Security is working to expand the very successful
ready.gov campaign to target the private sector.

The goal of the effort is to develop guidelines with businesses on how
they can best protect their employees and business processes in today's
threat environment. The guidance focuses on planning, communication and
training for employees so that they are familiar with and practice then,
the full range of protective measures that may be necessary. It is also
-- it also addresses the importance of business continuity planning.
These efforts can and do pay off.

Business continuity and contingency planning has taken on a new urgency
and importance in both the public and private sectors. Developing the
capability to recover quickly from any form of disruption, natural or
man-made, ensures that essential government services and vital business
activities continue. This ability to continue functioning in the face of
adversity provides not only the practical benefit of continuing
business, it also provides a significant psychological benefit by
demonstrating success of our preparedness activities and planning
efforts and by allowing essential goods and services to continue to be
available during times of crisis.

One area in which the Department is leading significant efforts that
will shape the guidance we develop for our workers and the plans we
create for all contingencies is in the area of standards and guidelines.
This effort represents one of the three significant trends developing in
public safety that will shape public-private sector involvement and
cooperation in preparedness, response and recovery as we move into the
future.

The major trend areas are, first, developing a nationwide system for
public safety, or the National Incident Management System. Two, the
regionalization of public safety assets, both public and private. And
third, the enhanced information sharing.

As called for by the National Strategy for Homeland Security and in
Homeland Security Presidential Directive, or HSPD-5, the Department of
Homeland Security is currently leading an effort to develop a national
incident management system. This will provide a systematic framework
that will allow us as a nation to better respond to incidents of
national significance, as well as in day-to-day incidents around the
country.

Building on the principles of the Incident Command System, NIMS will
provide a common method of responding, including common terms, common
command and control, scalability to fit any incident, and uniformity and
standard. It will support and make easier mutual aid across and among
jurisdictions at the local, regional and national levels. For the
private sector, this means that the public sector will be better
organized and will operate in largely the same fashion across the
nation.

This will provide a significant benefit to the private sector in
planning for their own activities during an event, and also in knowing
how, where and when to plug into a response and to offer the most
effective and needed support.

We will accomplish this by implementing NIMS in our planning, training
and exercise together on a regional basis. The private sector's role in
this regionalization will be realized by becoming part of the system of
public safety in the region and integrating their assets and resources
into the public safety system there. We are becoming one team, one
fight, and this is the collaboration that the world we now live in
requires. We train together -- we need to train together, exercise
together and build plans together. Unity of effort will be the key to
success.

As you know, much has happened since the tragic events of September 11th
that make our country stronger, safer and more secure. In particular,
significant collaboration between the public and private sectors has and
continues to lead to better preparedness. I'd like to address a few of
the key initiatives that highlight the collaboration. One is the
initiative in the public-private sector collaboration, is in the
Homeland Security Advanced Research Project Agency to guide private
sector efforts in developing technologies most needed to prevent,
respond to and recover from terrorism.

Through the Science and Technology Directorate, the Department of
Homeland Security is harnessing the nation's scientific knowledge to
protect America and our way of life. Private industry is a key partner
in this effort, and the directorate is working with large and small
firms in the following ways. Contracting tools that simplify
interactions with the private industry. HSARPA is leading the
Department's efforts to attract private industry to homeland security
research and development. Implementing the Safety Act, a tool to
encourage development and deployment of qualified anti-terrorism
technologies. And working with private industry on interoperability of
communications.

In May of 2003, HSARPA and the Technical Supporting Working Group, or
TSWG, released a joint broad agency announcement for near-term
technologies that can be rapidly prototyped and deployed to the field.
More than 3,340 responses were received in the following broad
PPE, or personal protective equipment; explosive detection;
infrastructure protection; physical security; and investigative support
and forensics. Responses are currently being reviewed and contract
awards are beginning.

Another important initiative is the establishment of the Private Sector
Senior Advisory Council, as part of the Homeland Security Advisory
Council, which I'm pleased to be here with one of the members of that
council. The PSSAC is comprised of senior private sector leaders from
across the country who will meet regularly to advise the Department on
homeland security issues and concerns, especially as they impact the
private sector. They will also review relevant national policy and
operational documents to ensure that the private sector requirements and
concerns are adequately addressed.

Another initiative has been the creation of the Critical Emergency
Operations Communications Link, known as the CEO COM Link by the
Business Roundtable. CEO COM Link provides a secure telephone
communications system to connect businesses and government to exchange
threat and crisis information in a timely manner. The capability to
communicate with private sector leaders around the country and to
provide critical information regarding potential threats is vital to
protecting our critical infrastructure and maintaining homeland
security.

As the Director of the Office of National Capital Region Coordination, I
have seen the efforts and priorities of the private sector being shaped
at the regional level. Through close coordination with the Greater
Washington Board of Trade, the private sector in the National Capital
Region is developing a regional recovery resource catalog of private
sector assets and an accompanying implementation strategy for use of the
assets in the case of an emergency. They are also organizing a volunteer
regional private sector leadership team to help the private sector speak
with a collective voice to aid economic recovery in the National Capital
Region.

Finally, they are developing a baseline assessment of the potential
economic impacts of possible risk and scenarios that may serve as a
basis of additional or incident-specific federal, state and local
support.

Secretary Ridge recently stated, every citizen, family and business
owner and employee can and must be empowered in their own protection. We
cannot wait and let others act for us. Businesses must take ownership of
homeland security. You must be ready. Those words speak not only to the
need for each and every one of us to be ready but also for us to be
ready collectively. We must continue to develop the communication and
coordination between public and private sectors so that we are prepared
for all threats, so that we can quickly respond and more easily recover,
should something happen. We must build on the public-private initiatives
developed since 9/11 and continue our efforts to make our country
better, safer and stronger. Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Mr. Byrne, thank you very much.

General Reimer.

MR. DENNIS J. REIMER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman and members
of the Commission, I want to start off first of all by saying it's an
honor to be here and to appear before this commission to share some
thoughts on this critical issue. And I thank each of you individually
for your distinguished service to our nation and collectively for once
again answering the call to take on a critical challenge.

I firmly believe that America faces the most serious external threat to
our homeland since 1812. I believe that it's important that we recognize
this and recognize also that although a national concept of operation is
being developed, it is far from understood and implemented. The freedoms
that make this country great, freedom of movement, rights to privacy and
others, also make it more challenging to defend our people and protect
our property. I think we must think about this anew and figure out how
we go about approaching this in a different manner.

I believe the foundation of this new effort is partnership. There has to
be a partnership amongst the federal, state and local level to the
extent that does not exist now. There has to be a partnership amongst
the civilian first responders, emergency responders in the military to
the extent that does not exist now. And, of course, the subject you were
addressing, private and public sector partnership is absolutely critical
in this particular area.

And so let me focus a few remarks on that last partnership. I believe
that this is more of a cultural challenge than a technological
challenge. The military has considerable experience in protecting
critical assets. And, as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, in your opening
remarks, 85 percent of those assets belong to the private sector. We
know how to apply techniques to protect those assets. It's a matter of
making up our mind to do it. We're not starting with a clean sheet of
paper. We must recognize that PDD 63 and HSPD-5 represent the basis of
an initial effort, but they need to be refined and meshed.

Information sharing is absolutely key to our efforts in this area. If we
want to prevent attacks like 9/11, we must have proper intelligence. But
as everybody here knows, domestic intelligence is tricky business. If we
want to maximize the return on our investment, we must be able to share
honest information on lessons learned from previous incidents and
exercises in both the public and private sector.

There are a number of obstacles associated with this information
sharing. Handling of classified information does not move smoothly.
There are liability issues associated with committee mistakes and
training exercises. There's the protection of sensitive information that
may assist potential terrorists themselves if we make too much of that
public. And finally, there's the disclosure of competitive information
in the private sector that bothers many of the private companies.

We've made some progress in each of these areas and we should leverage
this progress. I think the information sharing and analysis centers that
are set up seems to me to be a step in the right direction. They're not
robust enough now and we need to figure out how to make them more
robust. I think the partnership program that was highlighted here
between the state of New Jersey and the Business Executives for National
Security is probably as good as I've seen, and it needs to serve as a
pilot program for all of the states.

And from a broader perspective, I think there are a lot of good efforts
going on around the country, and I think we have to pull them together.
The organization that I represent, the National Memorial Institute for
the Prevention of Terrorism, has been in this business for some time. We
actually came out of the Murrah Building bombing in 1995 and our charter
is really to do everything we can to prevent what happened in Oklahoma
City from happening again. We are supported by the family members and
survivors there in Oklahoma and I can assure you that that charter is
very meaningful to us.

One of the first things we did is to try to get organized and pull
together the emergency responder community. We recognize as we traveled
around the country and visited first responders that there were pockets
of excellence. And if we could share that information on the good
practices that were occurring, that everybody would have a model. And we
felt by doing that, we would also be able to get into an honest exchange
of information on accurate lessons learned that were taking place. The
nation cannot afford to have everybody go through every training
exercise, so we have to share information concerning these training
exercises, and that's what we've been primarily doing.

Congress has supported us with four different appropriations and we've
mainly focused those on science and technology that we think the first
responder community needs, but we've also been involved in a number of
exercises like Dark Winter and Silent Vector that have helped educate us
and form our opinions about what needs to be done in this partnership
role that I mentioned. I think there are a lot of issues to be
addressed. They're not easy but they're solvable and every one of them
is critical.

The fundamental issue, however, is how do we provide security for our
citizens, while still protecting the individual rights and liberties
that have made this nation great? How do we continue to have a free
movement of goods and people, while making sure that we know that those
goods and people are not intent upon destroying us. Definitely there is
a productivity issue associated -- homeland. Just-in-time logistics is
dependent upon free access and free movement.

But it's more than a productivity issue. What we're talking about I
think was highlighted by the panel before us. This is a moral issue.
While we can never provide a risk-free environment to all of our people,
we must do everything possible to reduce that risk. Really, when you
stop and think about it, the first responders, or the people the
previous panel talked about, they're people just like you and me, but
those who were caught in the impact zone of the Murrah Building bombing,
the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.

We need to do everything we can to protect them, and experience has
shown us that without a plan to protect our people, both in the public
and private sector, we will lose too many. We must organize and
strengthen the public and private sector efforts to ensure we do
everything possible to take care of those wonderful people. Thank you
very much for your kind attention and I look forward to answering any
questions you might have.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much, General.

Commissioner Gorton.

SEN. GORTON: Mr. Byrne, according to the Washington Post, you're about
to leave the Department of Homeland Security and go to work for
Microsoft, an enterprise with which I have some familiarity. Will you,
in working for Microsoft, be working on the other side of the coin that
you're working on today in the Department of Homeland Security in some
kind of public-private partnership with respect to security, at least
for that company? And assuming that the answer to that question is yes,
will the work that you're doing for that single corporation be of value
to other significant private sector firms or individuals?

MR. BYRNE: I would hope so, sir. The opportunity I'm going to Microsoft
to work on is in the area of public safety and justice. That's the
position I'm going to be holding. And what I'm hoping to do is to take a
lot of the policy and the concepts that I've had the honor of working on
in the last two years and to start making them real and to do -- as my
colleagues here have said, take some best practices and institutionalize
them, and to leverage technology in such a way that it can make us
safer, because I truly believe it can and that's why I plan on trying to
help them do that.

SEN. GORTON: And will you be working with DHS from that private sector
and advising it on its practices?

MR. BYRNE: Haven't worked that out yet, sir. This is -- the Post coming
out, this has all just happened very quickly. It's just -- actually, a
lot of the details we're just still working out at this point in time.

SEN. GORTON: But you will be working in the same field that you're
working in now --

MR. BYRNE: Yes.

SEN. GORTON: -- except that you will be working in the private sector?

MR. BYRNE: Yes, sir.

SEN. GORTON: General Reimer, you have the honor of working in a very
typical medium-sized American city that suffered a terrorist attack
considerably before 9/11. Is it your observation that Oklahoma City, the
public-private partnerships there, are far more aware of and far more
sensitive to and now far more successful in putting together an
appropriate plan that would be the case in many cities like Oklahoma
City that didn't suffer such a tragedy?

MR. REIMER: I think, Senator, in answer to that question, I'd say that
the real lesson of Oklahoma City was that terrorism can take place
anyplace. We did not expect it on the 18th of April, 1995, and when it
happened, people reacted and they reacted very well. I think there was
an initial surge to move out and to try to do everything possible first
of all to take care of the family members and survivors and ensure that
as many people as possible survive that. That is still ongoing. And I
certainly can identify with the previous panel because we deal with
those people in Oklahoma City even eight years after the tragedy, and
there's tremendous emotion associated with that.

The efforts, I think, had not expanded to the point that you direct in
your question, and we hadn't gone to the point of private-public
partnership at that particular point in time. There's movement afoot to
do that. But I think as everybody here knows, the issue here is
resources and being able to address some of those issues that I
identified. The private sector is a little reluctant to come forward
with concerns about Freedom of Information Act, open records, open
meetings. And so we have to overcome some of those obstacles. I think
the --

SEN. GORTON: And so that's true even in Oklahoma City?

MR. REIMER: In Oklahoma it is, yes, sir. And the willingness is there,
but I can't say that they're better off than anybody else for the
reasons I just mentioned.

SEN. GORTON: Mr. Andrews -- and the other two can comment on this as
well -- when you speak of these public-private sector partnerships, I at
least get the implication that the overwhelming number of your
associations are with relatively large corporations, and perhaps, you
know, most where there's a real fear or apprehension of terrorism. What,
in the views of any of you, can be done to broaden the concept of
preparedness, and especially of responses, particularly responses maybe
of people who weren't the immediate victims of terrorism, but those who
helped them afterwards.

So smaller and medium-sized companies to smaller and medium-sized
communities like Oklahoma City. And even to get some of this knowledge
and awareness through to people in their individual lives. When we talk
about public-private partnerships now, are we really talking mostly
about New York City, Washington DC, Los Angeles and San Francisco and
big companies, or do we have some kind of ideas of spreading these
concepts more broadly?

MR. ANDREWS: Well, first of all, I think particularly with regard to the
critical infrastructure and key assets, we are largely talking about
large companies and firms that have what may be considered to be a
likely potential terrorist target. But I think one of the challenges,
not only just in preparedness for a terrorist event but for any kind of
emergency has always been what you've identified, how do you involve the
small businesses and how do you involve the individuals?

One of the programs that really started in the city of Los Angeles has
now spread nationally, is used by many companies, is used by the
Department of Homeland Security, is something called CERT, Civilian
Emergency Response Teams. And this is a very basic kind of training
program in first aid and search and rescue and how to organize
volunteers in the immediate period after a disaster. And that program
has really spread on a nationwide basis.

And preparedness is a constant process. It's the constant exercising of
it by Merrill Lynch that made the difference. It wasn't simply having
the plan. And so I think it is institutionalizing things, like the CERT
program, and again, that's had, I think, very, very significant success
and something we need -- it's one of those best practices that we need
to continue to propagate across the country.

MR. REIMER: Senator, can I also comment on that, because I think this is
an important point? I think there's a lot that can be done. I think,
first of all, it's an educational process that this could affect all of
us. I think you all talked earlier about corporate governance, and that
is an important issue, I think. But, again, as I say, it goes beyond
corporate governance. It goes beyond -- it goes to protecting our
citizens. I attended a seminar a little while back, run by Marsh
Consulting in the USA, and they took a half day seminar where they
brought companies there to talk about a scenario in which there was a
chemical attack and how you would go about reacting to it. The bottom
line was, if you didn't have a plan, then you weren't going to be able
to do a lot about the line of scrimmage.

And so we have to do the educational process, we have to have the plan.
The plans are not that difficult. Those plans then have to be integrated
in with the community, local police, the firemen, that type of thing, so
we know floor plans, we know the vulnerability of those particular
assets, we know the threat that exists. This is not laser brain surgery
in terms of getting prepared. It's a matter of making up our mind to do
it.

A good example in our home state, Tulsa has done a good job, I think, of
bringing the public and private sector together, bringing the volunteers
together, and it's basically done on the force of personality. Mayors
who care, people who run project impacts, those people make a
difference. And I think that's the point I would make, it's the
individuals who will make a difference here.

SEN. GORTON But you were -- I should have picked up more quickly on a
rather surprising commentary you made. I expected you to answer my
question, yes, everybody in Oklahoma City knows what's going on, they're
really prepared for it the second time around, and you didn't answer me
in that fashion. But you did mention what I think may be one difficulty
that you could comment on or the others could comment on, the fear of
some in the private sector, that when they get too close to the public
sector, they're subject to Open Meetings Act and they have to give up
information that they consider to be improprietary and that could be of
advantage to a competitor and the like. How much of an obstacle is that
and is there anything that we can do about it?

MR. REIMER: It's huge, Senator. It is huge. And I think it is the
primary stumbling block for these private sector personnel in terms of
being able to overcome these obstacles that exist. The intent there in
Oklahoma City is there. You don't have to fire up the intent, they know
what happened in '95, and they're willing to do everything they can.

But when they do the risk benefit analysis of it, they're not sure that
they're going to be able to do it and still protect that information,
still be able to do what they have to do, and I think we have to address
those valid concerns. They may be perceptions but that's what they're
dealing with out there. So I think it's a huge issue that has to be
addressed.

MR. ANDREWS: And I think someone had reference earlier, the differences
across the states of regulations as they relate to insurance, the same
thing relates to the Freedom of Information Act. For companies that
operate across state boundaries, the regulations in different states are
different. I think there's an exemption under the law that established
the Department of Homeland Security that information that's provided
regarding the critical infrastructure to DHS is exempt from disclosure,
and some states have passed laws to that effect. But the absence of that
on a nationwide basis is very definitely a deterrent to particularly the
owners and operators of critical infrastructure sectors to providing
that information.

SEN. GORTON: Mr. Byrne, is that last comment true and do the private
sector people that you deal with believe it and are they willing to do
more than they otherwise would be willing to do?

MR. BYRNE: I do find that in the National Capital Region, but it is
something that we have to nurture. It's something that is new, it is
something that everybody's getting used to, but I do find good
cooperation, especially with the power companies in the National Capital
Region. We're doing a critical infrastructure analysis, not just of each
individual asset, but its cross-dependencies, and then working together.
And they're at the table doing this and willingly coming up with a list
of what steps should be the ones we take first to protect the
infrastructure.

SEN. GORTON: Well Mr. Byrne, you're going to private sector company that
has an awful lot of trade secrets, and I hope that you're going to be
able to work with them and with others in a way that will make any
lessons that you have applicable beyond a single company and perhaps an
example to others.

MR. BYRNE: I sure we'll work on it, sir. I'm not changing who I am or my
goals, I was very moved by the testimony of the previous panel, as I am
sure all of us were. I knew two of the firefighters they mentioned, they
were friends and colleagues of mine. It's too important to be
proprietary.

MR. KEAN: Commissioner.

MS. GORELICK: One brief question for General Reimer. When I last worked
with you, General Reimer, you were head of FORCECOM, and so that is the
capacity, and I find it very interesting to see how your career has
segued.

My question to you is this. We have a challenge to our nation that we
are currently meeting with good folks like the people in Homeland
Security who are amalgams of various agencies that already had
preexisting missions when they were brought together at the Department
of Homeland Security, and to a certain extent law enforcement outside of
the Department of Homeland Security.

And just taking, for example, the FBI. The FBI has approximately 11,000
agents for the whole country, and they are given primary responsibility
for defending us, if you will, against domestic attack, with some
additional resources at the Department of Homeland Security. Whereas the
Combatant Commander or CINC for say, the Pacific might have 300,000
personnel to defend U.S. interests in the Pacific. And this is a
question to you. Looking across your career, wearing all the hats you've
ever worn, have we right sized, and designated the right people in our
government to defend us domestically?

MR. REIMER: Commissioner Gorelick, first of all, let me just say that I
remember you well from the Department of Defense and I would be remiss
if I didn't say thank you for keeping me out of jail. You went on to do
bigger and better things, but --

MS. GORELICK: It wasn't hard. For the national audience, it was not hard
to keep this gentleman out of jail.

MR. REIMER: The question is a very good one, and I give you my personal
view on this right now. I truly believe that the Department of Defense
needs to be more involved in an assist mode. The first responders in
terms of -- or the emergency responders are going to be the firemen, the
policemen, the emergency medical personnel, those people that are on the
front lines. They're civilians.

MS. GORELICK: As they were in Oklahoma City, they were the first people
there.

MR. REIMER: Exactly right, as they were in the World Trade Center and
the Pentagon. And there's been a fire chief who's been the Incident
Commander in all three of those that you mentioned. So I don't think the
issue is that the military is going to come in and take control. The
military though has a number of things that I think lend themselves very
well to the issue we're talking about. I'm a big proponent of the
National Guard pulling a greater role. First of all they have the dual
status of both the state and federal status. They are readily accessible
to the Governor, they have a Title 32 responsibility which you know
well, but they're allowed to operate inside the posse comitatus
limitations that the federal force is not allowed to operate with.

So I think they provide a great role. I think also the experience that
Defense has gained, just the idea of sharing lessons, the lessons
learned that we're trying to put together is patterned after the Center
for Army Lessons Learned. We have experience that tells us that people
will not share honest information on this, and if they're going to feel
like their heads are going to get cut off, are you're going to come down
hard on them. So you have to kind of figure out how you're going to do
this so that people will talk honestly about the mistakes they made.

There are big issues associated with this in the civilian world, with
liability issues, bosses who might come down and say, well, you made
that mistake, we don't need you in this department any longer. So I
think there's a lot that the military can do in terms of things that we
have benefited from over time. We have to find a way to civilianize
those. We can't just take the military model and superimpose it upon
what we're trying to do in the homeland. But I think the military can
assist, and particularly the National Guard can assist.

MS. GORELICK: If you were looking at rough orders of magnitude of the
numbers of personnel, of people in the government who would need to be
deployed to adequately assess the vulnerabilities of our infrastructure,
make plans for protecting the-- and activate such protective mechanisms
when an area of our country is under threat, rough order of magnitude,
how many people would you -- wearing your FORCECOM hat, how many people
would you allocate to that job domestically?

MR. REIMER: Are you talking about military personnel?

MS. GORELICK: No, forget the hat they're wearing. I'm talking about are
we right-sized for the job that we're discussing today?

MR. REIMER: Well, I think it's got to be more of an interagency approach
to this thing, and I think as we talked about, I believe the military
can assist. I think the military can assist primarily through the
National Guard, and I don't think it will require additional force
structure or troops to do that type of thing, it'll require some fine
tuning.

It makes no sense in my mind to take people who are emergency
responders, firemen and policemen, mobilize them and send them to
Germany to protect an airbase. That's not very smart. And I think we
have to figure out how we use the Department of Homeland Security and
the Department of Defense to merge together in a better way.

I would be very hesitant to give you a number except to say that I think
the numbers exist. That's not the issue. The issue is trying to get the
police to coincide and make a decision that we're going to do it. I
think the numbers are there to bring them together.

MS. GORELICK: We're quite short of time today, but I for one would like
to make more extensive use of the expertise that is on this panel today,
and I hope you will all agree to help us in our private sessions.

MR. REIMER: Glad to assist.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, Commissioner. All right. If there are no further
questions, General Reimer, Mr. Byrne, Mr. Andrews, thank you very much
for your help today, we, as Commissioner Gorelick said, we hope to be
able to call in some of the expertise later on, particularly as we get
to writing our report, we've got a lot of information for us.

We are going to try and get as fast as -- a eat fast lunch, and be back
here as close to 2:00 as we can. We're going to aim for 2:00. For those
in the audience who want to get something to eat, there is a student
cafeteria, that's just -- walk that way and you'll hit it.

Thank you.

AFTERNOON SESSION OF THE FIFTH PUBLIC HEARING OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION
ON TERRORIST ATTACKS UPON THE UNITED STATES

MULTIMEDIA PRESENTATIONS OF INITIATIVES ACROSS THE UNITED STATES

MR. KEAN: The first thing I'd like to do is announce that the
Commission's next hearing will be called "Security and Liberty." It will
take place on December the 8th in Washington, D.C. Now, in addition --
rather to into a lot on the next hearing, there's material available on
our website, www.9-11commission.gov, and you can get any materials if
you want to find out about that hearing there. The prepared testimony
and transcripts, by the way, of today's hearing, will also be posted on
our website as soon as we have them available.

I'd also like to note that Senator Jon Corzine has submitted a statement
to the Commission for the record, and I'd like to acknowledge the
presence of his staff member today's hearing, Elizabeth Mattson, and
thank her for coming.

Let me say, by the way, as long as I'm mentioning Senator Corzine, that
he has been one of the most helpful members of the Senate to this
commission from its very beginning. He's been very helpful to the
Commission as a whole, and frankly very helpful to me as chairman, and
so I'd publicly like to say that, and thank Senator Corzine for all his
help.

Now this morning, we heard about the many private-public sector
initiatives that are under way. There are grassroots efforts underway
across the country, and the Commission has learned about many of these
efforts in New York City in the course of staff discussions with the
private sector, and during our investigation. Though it's not possible
to highlight everything that's going on across the country, we wanted to
hear testimony on some of these important efforts. In this regard, we
have asked the King County Office of Emergency Management in the state
of Washington and the International Association of Assembly Managers in
Texas to tell us what they're doing in their public-private sector
partnerships to promote preparedness. IAAM representatives here today
are Mr. Joseph Floreano of the Rochester Convention Center and Turner
Madden.

And now I think we'll start by viewing a couple of videos.

BEGIN VIDEOTAPE

VOICE ON VIDEO: The regional disaster plans for public-private and
non-profit organizations in King County, Washington began its process in
October of 1998. King County is made up of 1.8 million people. We have
the 12th populous county in the United States. Additionally, we have
over 160 agencies that make up King County, with over 700 elected
officials.

This plan is an effort that involves cooperation between local
governments as well as the private sector to effectively respond to
disasters. The plan at this point is a response plan that consists of
eight documents. We are following the guidelines of the National
Response Plan, which in effect has emergency support functions, ESF,
that address the roles and responsibilities of the signatory agencies.
It's a cooperative plan that's going to pull together all the agencies
that exist within King County. We are not immune to disasters here in
King County. We have had 18 presidential declarations, so we are very
versed in our abilities to collaborate with one another, but understand
that we need to be in the preparedness mode and develop those
relationships ahead of time. So, we see the relationships that have with
the public and private sector very critical to our capabilities to
respond and get our communities up to normal after a disaster.

So far, we have 114 signatory agencies to the regional disaster plan. Of
that, we've got seven large corporations that have signed on, such as
Microsoft Corporation and Puget Sound Energy. Additionally, we have the
Boeing Company as well as Bank of America and Washington Mutual. We
continue to pursue other large corporations in King County, but
additionally, we have 19 hospitals in King County, and of those 19, 18
are signatories to this plan, and many of them are privately owned
hospitals.

Additionally, we are working with the Chamber of Commerce to engage the
middle and small sized businesses in King County. So again, we're a
collaborative effort trying to pull all of these partners together
because we know we need to have those relationships in place ahead of
time, and we need to have this response plan in place to do that.

VOICE ON VIDEO: We decided to become a member of the regional disaster
plan because we recognized that having relationships in place prior to
the disaster and being able to share information at the time of disaster
was extremely important. We built our plan internally to be
self-sufficient as a company as much as possible, and to make Microsoft
a disaster resilient company, but we find that becoming a member of the
regional disaster plan allows us to share information, resources, and to
know folks that will, as a community, allow us to recover and to respond
to the disaster in a more efficient way.

VOICE ON VIDEO: Puget Sound Energy had a strong motivation to become a
partner in the King County regional disaster plan. We are a combined
electric and gas utility that provide energy services to 39 different
cities within the county. We also serve 10 other counties in the state
of Washington. The regional disaster plan provides us an opportunity to
coordinate our communications for all 39 jurisdictions from one central
point at the King County Emergency Coordination Center, that's a great
benefit to us, rather than trying to communicate with 39 different
jurisdictions in an emergency event. We also have the mechanism now to
provide resources back and forth. Puget Sound Energy has a number of
qualified employees and resources that we can share, as well as we may
need the resources that the King County agencies and other businesses
might share with us.

BEGIN PRESENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ASSEMBLY MANAGERS.

(MUSIC.)

VOICE ON VIDEO: Following the terrorist attacks of September 11th,
managers of sports, entertainment and convention facilities across North
America organized a speedy and practical industry response to the new
security concerns. Their professional association, the International
Association of Assembly Managers, immediately formed a task force, led
by Frank Poe, past president of the association, and CEO of the
Birmingham-Jefferson Convention Complex in Alabama.

Public assembly facilities such as arenas, stadiums, convention centers,
and performing arts venues always have placed the highest priority on
making a safe environment for their guests. After 9/11, the industry
faced new challenges in a new security environment that emphasizes
control of terrorists or criminals who might enter a building. Facility
executives managed spaces designed to ingress and egress large crowds
quickly. Admissions staff have been selected and trained to provide
excellent customer service, not to help manage a rigorous security
programs.

In forming their response, IAAM's leadership knew it was important to
gather a working team representing all the various interests who work in
and use the facilities. The new safety and security task force included
representatives from the various venue types, security staffing firms,
major leagues, such as Major League Baseball and the National Basketball
Association, the NCAA, touring entertainment companies, and exhibition
managers. Using this expert group, as well as IAAM volunteer committees
for various facility types, the SSTF created a series of best practices
planning guides.

VOICE ON VIDEO: One of the first key decisions that we made was to look
at very carefully what had been developed at a federal level, color
coding of various alert levels as a need that we should embrace as far
as the development of our best practices for public venues. Then a venue
manager had a series of action steps that could be taken for their
particular venue based upon their assessment of threat, based upon their
security and safety needs. They gave venue managers a full spectrum of
flexible steps that they could employ based upon what the federal level
assessment was for a threat that might be imminent to our country.

The SSTF utilized a series of audio Internet conferences during the
first year of its existence. Principally, those conferences were used as
a forum to share information with our membership as we developed
segments of the best practices for a particular venue type. As an
example, our first audio Internet conference really looked at the best
practices for arenas, stadiums and amphitheaters. And from that, the --
bringing in obviously venue managers in those areas but also reaching
out and bringing in representatives of the local law enforcement team in
a respective community, or emergency personnel, to ensure that the
information we were sharing was cutting across a broad spectrum of
individuals that would be involved in the safety and security
preparation as well as response.

VOICE ON VIDEO: Training and information dissemination also has occurred
through a wide range of IAAM activities, including conferences and
seminars, magazines, audio and videotape programs, and the Internet. A
key annual activity of updates on post-9/11 security is IAAM's
International Crowd Management Conference. The 21st annual ICMC just
concluded this week in Baltimore. The program included numerous sessions
led by government officials and regulatory agencies. IAAM is now
planning a week-long intensive training program tentatively set for the
summer of 2004 in Salt Lake City. The curriculum will include
comprehensive training in the areas of security planning, emergency
preparedness, crowd management, crisis communication, and life safety
planning.

VOICE ON VIDEO: The National Safety Training Academy -- or Safety and
Security Training Academy, which is in its formative stages right now,
is basically going to be a tool to give more in depth and detailed
training and professional development for venue managers, directors of
security, operation managers, not only for public venues, but also for
the major professional sports operations.

VOICE ON VIDEO: Sports, entertainment and convention facilities, like so
many commercial entities that make up our national economy and
infrastructure, face enormous challenges in the post-9/11 era. Our
economic health is dependent in part on the public's perception that
attending events is safe. Through efforts such as those of the
International Association of Assembly Managers, America's citizens can
be confident in the vigilance and preparedness of those responsible for
their safety at public events.

END OF VIDEOTAPES.

MR. KEAN: Thank you for those two informative videos.

PANEL: PRIVATE SECTOR EXPERIENCE ON 9-11

MR. KEAN: I'm going to ask Mr. Yun, please, to join us.

You know, the experience of 9/11 resonates with many of us as an attack
on our country, for indeed this was the case, the physical attack,
occurred directly to individuals and the companies that were residing in
the World Trade Center. The experience was undoubtedly the most
challenging a corporate executive could face, both personally and
professionally. Our next panelists faced that directly. William Y. Yun
is president of Fiduciary Trust Corporation -- Company International.
Mr. Yun was responsible for the personnel and the organization of
departments following the 9/11 event. He works closely with chairman and
CEO Ann Tetloch, as well as Fiduciary's management committee and its
emergency management team on emergency preparedness and disaster
recovery issues since that time. We appreciate very much the fact that
you took the time to be here with us today and spoke about what I know
was the most difficult day for your company, for your colleagues, and
that you're willing to share with us some of the lessons that have been
learned. Mr. Yun.

MR. WILLIAM Y. YUN: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
members of the 9/11 Commission. I'm very pleased to have the opportunity
to speak with you today and to answer any questions you may have
regarding 9/11 and our response and our continue preparedness for other
types of disaster scenarios.

Just in terms of background, Fiduciary Trust was located and
headquartered in the South Tower, World Trade Center Two, on the 90th
and 94th through 97th floors. We tragically lost 87 employees that day,
and seven business partners who were also on our premises on 9/11. I was
there earlier in the morning but had left by 7:30 to go see a client, so
I was one of the fortunate ones who was out of the building at that
time.

We are an investment management company, and we are also a subsidiary of
Franklin Templeton Investments, which is a large mutual fund company
based out in San Mateo, and that was -- I'll get to that later, but
that's an important part of the whole story of our 9/11 recovery.

In terms of just our background for 9/11, we did have a disaster
recovery plan, in part due to our concerns about potential power outages
being -- affecting our business, and being up in the World Trade Center.
So, we had conceived a disaster recovery plan in the -- in the mid-'80s
under the leadership of our former chairman. And again, the concern
there was a power outage.

After the '93 bombing on the Center, we were able to take advantage of
this disaster recovery plan by being able to use facilities outside of
New York City in New Jersey. We had established and off-site disaster
recovery facility through an agreement with Sun Guard, which was a
company that is involved in this business on a national basis. We were
outside of our premises for approximately five weeks, but in that time,
we did learn a number of lessons in terms of our preparedness, not only
for employees, but also for running our business overall. And one of the
key things was, obviously, data back-up. And in terms of what we did to
improve our systems, at that point was not to have it stored in our
current headquarters but to move that data facility outside of our
headquarters, and we in fact moved that to a Sun Guard facility where we
used our -- their premises for any types of business continuity.

We also created business plans, business continuity plans in terms of
how we would run our business. Fortunately, that -- and those types of
items were critical in terms of our recovery in 9/11.

You asked in your letter to me several issues you'd like me to address,
and I'll go through each one of those and I'll just start with the first
one: "What were the key issues that we faced as an organization on
9/11?" And obviously the first one was employees, employee safety, who
was -- who was where, who was accounted for, who was missing, and
certainly communication with families, clients, and any types of
associates with our business. That was our number one priority and
number one concern.

And we were fortunate in having a parent that was based out in
California that acted as an off-site command center for us, which was
able to effectively put together information for us and be able to help
on communication lines on a constant basis. In fact, we had hourly calls
where we described -- first, update situations on who was missing, who
was accounted for, and that was -- ultimately enabled us to make plans
for how we would move forward as an operating entity.

So, we used many types of communication, and I would emphasize that that
was probably one of the key elements that we took away from the 9/11
disaster was safety of our employees, but then communication on what was
happening with the business and the employees overall.

We had a 24-hour hotline with messages updated to keep people informed,
families informed of the business of what was happening in terms of our
organization, our people -- our recorded telephone updates, conference
calls, regional office assistance, websites -- we lost our website as a
company, where we had our server based in New York, but again, our
parent company was able to reestablish that quickly. That became our
message board and for many families to be able to communicate to one
another in terms of what was happening in terms of any information we
could provide with -- for our families overall.

In terms of, again, other issues, obviously employee safety is first. We
were really following the directions of the Port Authority and following
their guidance in terms of what we should do as an organization in terms
of our evacuation of the building.

Just other points, in terms of -- ultimately, we needed to restart the
business, and that was done out of our disaster recovery center out in
New Jersey. As Mr. Chairman indicated, I was responsible for our
personnel but also in terms of reestablishing our business. One of the
first things we look at as a financial organization is our core systems,
our critical system. We had over 30 systems that we needed to establish
as a business to get up and running again so we could operate going
forward. We had tremendous support, not only from our employees, people
who were doing everything humanly possible and beyond to reestablish our
business, and for that I'm truly grateful for all the efforts shown on
that day, with tremendous support from our parent company and from
outside vendors such as Sun Guard and IBM in terms of helping us get
back to running our company.

We were able -- as a bank, we needed liquidity -- we were able to
establish a Fed-wire on Wednesday. We were able to establish our bond
trading capabilities on Thursday. And then over the weekend, we were
able to get our office and our business back for the opening of the
equity markets on that following Monday. We established -- while we were
out of New York, we did soon, quickly thereafter, sign an office lease
in Midtown Manhattan at Rockefeller Center. We're located there
permanently, but we felt that was an important sign for our employees to
show that we were not only back in business but we were committed to New
York and to show stability for our clients overall.

So, we learned -- we had many key issues facing us on 9/11. Obviously,
the emotional ones, the personal ones were the hardest ones to work
through. But, again, it was something that we as an organization pulled
together, not only with the families but employees and, again, I thank
everyone for their incredible efforts there.

The next question you asked was: "What have we changed in terms of our
emergency preparedness, crisis management, and continuity of our
business since 9/11?" And one of the things that we did as a business
was we accelerated our integration with our parent company. We had sold
our company in April of 2001, so integration efforts were beginning, but
quickly after 9/11 we accelerated our business and vastly transformed
many of our operating and technology systems.

One of the key things was relocating our data center. What we felt was
important was not to have it regionally located, so we moved our data
center out to California, which we felt mitigated further risks to our
business by having it outside the region. And that facility is since
backed-up outside of California in Colorado. So, we have redundancy of
our business and off-site data center storage.

In terms of our local business, all of our business units have developed
business continuity plans, in effect, how to run our business if we are
out of the office. These are inclusive of call trees, personnel reports,
contact numbers, et cetera. This was very effective in the blackout of
earlier this year, and it continues to be something that we test on a
regular basis. You mentioned our emergency management team, which I am a
member of. We also review, and I think I heard earlier today, tabletop
exercises -- we do that on a frequent basis as well.

And we also have a very good partnership with the building management at
Rockefeller Center, and I feel that that is something that we benefit
from as an organization in working with our property manager in terms of
safety, evacuation drills, fire drills, et cetera.

And then finally, obviously our employees have gone through a
considerable amount, so there is a heightened awareness in terms of
safety, evacuation procedures, et cetera, so this is on the forefront of
everyone's mind in our organization. We did move to -- as a conscious
decision, moved to lower floors instead of being up of the 90th and 94th
floors, we are now located on floors 2 and 4 through 7, and I think
people take a great comfort from that from an employee standpoint as to
how we are located in New York in today's environment.

So, we feel like we've done quite a bit in terms of our disaster
preparedness. In fact, we also do twice annually disaster recovery
preparation or testing in our off-site facility, bringing up our systems
from scratch. We, again, have the same number of critical systems, but
we are able, in fact, we are able to bring up all our systems within two
hours. So, the improvements in technology, improvements over the past
several years have increased our ability to recover our business and we
feel we're very prepared from that perspective.

We continue to learn by various training exercises, and that's one of
the things I would recommend for corporations in the private sector,
continual training, because every time you go through an exercise you
learn something different. One of the things we learned just recently
was that some of our critical storage files, e-mail files, bringing up
those applications, we decided that we had so much in terms of our
storage of e-mails, something like 600 gigabytes, that we decided that
takes time to bring up. What we wanted to do, and what we are going to
do is have our employees have a specially designed DR files, critical
files that they need to bring up, or e-mails that they need to bring up
going forward, that will save time ultimately, and bring up the less
critical ones at a later point in time.

The next question you asked is: "What is the role of, as president and
that of senior management, in setting the tone in leadership for
emergency preparedness?" This is absolutely critical. I don't -- I think
that if it doesn't come from the top, then the rest of the organization
will not be sensitized to it and will not take it seriously. So, all of
our senior management is involved in terms of emergency preparedness and
really sets the tone. We report this to our board of directors and give
updates in terms of our disaster recovery plans for recent exercises
that we've gone through. The board is very interested in this. I think
it's something that many organizations have adopted, wanting to know
what preparedness efforts are underway. It's critical, again, for the
employees, but also for an ability to run a business, what is the
planning process here. And as board members, as directors, they
ultimately have, you know, the governance and the oversight for the
business and the shareholders and the interest of the overall concerns.

The next question you asked is: "What would be some of the key
recommendations that we would give to other companies that may have not
faced our situation on 9/11?" And again, it goes back to having a plan,
a detailed plan, and to practice these plans, and to have regular
exercises going through this. You learn continually through it. And even
the best plans require ad hoc decision-making and that is the importance
of having a good call tree, a good communication center, one that is
regular, one where you have special dialing numbers, and one that is
effective and practiced frequently.

The other thing I would recommend to companies is that to manage the
risk of the business and of a disaster happening, you have to have key,
critical information in your data centers off-site, off-location,
outside the region perhaps. And you also have to have personnel that can
make decisions outside the region. Our senior management is based in New
York, but after 9/11 we decided that we needed to have managers or other
individuals located outside of New York that could make decisions in the
event that somehow the senior management in New York was not able to, or
was traveling, et cetera. So, we have a much more diversified approach
to a disaster that is outside of New York and that encompasses several
regions.

I'd also emphasize the business continuity efforts of organizations. In
fact, we're going through one right now in our Miami office where we're
expecting to see quite a bit of protests and demonstrations, so we have
people from that office operating out of a Ft. Lauderdale location, out
of their homes, out of New York today. And again, we are able to conduct
our business and be able to effectively communicate to employees,
clients, and to manage the business outside of the regional location.

Those are some of the recommendations I have. But again, the most
important one is employee safety, and that cannot be underscored enough
in terms of sensitizing the employees to what is important in terms of
their overall safety.

And then lastly you asked: "What is the role of the public sector in
helping your company in this area, and what else could be done?" Well,
again, we feel, and we want to be partners -- I think that's the best
way it works for private companies is to have good chains of
information, of any types of communication, broader networks. I would
love to see more available from web access, other types of communication
forms so that we can make our decisions quickly. Once decisions have
been made from a top-down level, a city or governmental level, we as a
private concern or business entity can make our decisions based on those
top-down concerns, or, you know, in fact pass those down to our building
management, and then they can pass that on to us. But it's timeliness,
it's information, it's accuracy. And all those things play into what I
think is a successful communication chain of command or linkage so that
we can effectively make decisions and take care of our employees and our
business.

I'll end my formal comments there, and I'm very pleased to answer any
questions you may have regarding 9/11 or our continued preparedness.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, Mr. Yun.

Commissioner Ben-Veniste.

MR. RICHARD BEN-VENISTE: Thank you very much, Mr. Yun, for coming today
and being so responsive to the questions that were put previously by the
staff and working together with the staff. So, on behalf of all of my
colleagues on the Commission, I want to thank you very much for your
presence here today and sharing your experience with us.

The public should know that the husband of Kristen Breitwieser, an
employee of your company, and that Ms. Breitwieser has been tireless in
her efforts, not only in the creation of this commission but as we have
moved forward, to assist us in all kinds of important ways.

We are obviously very mindful of the business continuation precautions
and preparations that your company took in advance of 9/11 and the
importance of those precautions and level of preparedness in the
continuity of your business upon which so many others rely in connection
with their investments and their personal sense of well-being and
continuity.

I would like to focus more directly on the human element of the 9/11
disaster and ask you, sir, whether, prior to 9/11, you coordinated in
any way with other tenants at the World Trade Center or in some way with
management in terms of preparedness for emergencies.

MR. YUN: We did not coordinate with other tenants. We again were working
under the auspices of the Port Authority. In fact, that's one of the
lessons we learned. Today, in fact, we are coordinating with one of our
other tenants in the building that we currently occupy. I mentioned
we're on two; the tenant above us on three. And we have had discussions
on how we can partner better in terms of a potential disaster.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: And in that regard, it seems to me that it would be
useful on a much broader level for you to be able to share your
experiences with other companies, but also for you to continue to learn
from the experience of other companies.

And my question is whether there is any facility or organization to
which you are a member or you are aware which coordinates simply on a
community basis, if you will, the lessons and applications which may be
useful in times of emergency.

MR. YUN: Well, that's a good point. We are members and involved with
many different types of forums or organizations, whether it be the
Investment Company Institute or the Institute for Institutional
Investors, things like that, that are forums for our peers in the
business.

But we -- specifically there's not, that I know of, an organization that
focuses on preparedness or disaster recovery. I think we have shared our
story in many forums with our peer group, but we've not made it or not
seen it as an official type of sharing of information or networking,
focusing on continuity or recovery. I think it's a good idea, actually.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: And so it would make sense, from your point of view, if
someone would take the lead in organizing some way of sharing
information and perhaps organize some level of seminars or face-to-face
meetings where your representatives could meet with other companies'
representatives and share information and know-how.

MR. YUN: Yeah, I think that's a good point. I know, just from what I was
seeing here on the video, of trade groups such as that. I know in New
York City, property managers or building owners have meetings where they
do discuss preparedness. And I think that would be very useful for
representatives of the private enterprises, the lessees, to take
advantage of those types of --

MR. BEN-VENISTE: I think it would make sense for our commission to hear
from companies like yours and others around the country with some ideas
about essentially providing some framework for meeting together and
sharing that information outside of government, within your own
organizations. It sounds to me like that might be quite a useful thing
to do and something which companies would wish to participate in.

Let me ask you about the experience on the tragic day of September 11th,
2001. We have heard a lot about Morgan Stanley and the precautions
Morgan Stanley took in preparation, as well as what occurred on that day
in terms of their security director essentially directing Morgan Stanley
employees to evacuate the South Tower after the North Tower had been
hit, despite what was perhaps at best the ambiguous information coming
over the loudspeaker from the Port Authority people. What was your
experience at your company with respect to evacuation?

MR. YUN: We had individuals make the decision to leave as soon as the
first tower was hit. Our director of HR was helping to assist in that.
But again, under those ambiguous comments or directions, some of our
employees -- and this is again from what I hear -- turned back and went
back or stayed in the building, based on some of the information they
were hearing.

Certainly after the second building was hit, where we were located, then
it became a full evacuation. And, again, many of the people in our HR
department had heroic efforts to get people down as quickly as possible,
but in doing so, lost their own lives by taking the time to look for
others.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Do you have any sort of estimate of how many lives were
saved by the level of preparation that your company had made in advance
of 9/11?

MR. YUN: No, I don't know off-hand, off the top of my head. We had at
that point had about 650 people located in our New York office. We lost
87. The time of the day had an influence in terms of how many people
were in the building, the travel schedules, et cetera. But I can't say
with any accuracy how many people were saved due to preparedness in
terms of the evacuation of the building.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: From the standpoint of just the arithmetic, it sounds
like a substantial number were able to get out.

MR. YUN: Or had not been at the building. I don't know the exact
numbers.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: In the aftermath of 9/11, we have heard anecdotal
information about both the utility of conducting full-building
evacuations and some of the hurdles that companies have faced. Have you
at Rockefeller Center gone to full-building evacuations?

MR. YUN: Yes, we have.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: And we had heard that there was -- and again, this is
anecdotal, and I'm sure it's building by building -- but we had heard
that in the case of one large company, it took them something like four
or five months to get through all the red tape associated with doing a
full-building evacuation of their employees because, at the end of the
day, the building management required waivers to be signed and
assumptions of liability by the company in the event of any mishap
during the evacuation.

Have you faced any sort of hurdles? And do you have any recommendations
about standardizing full-building evacuation procedures?

MR. YUN: I don't have any specific recommendations. But what we
experienced in the recent blackout earlier this year was that while
people were out of the building, it was a more dangerous situation, or
potentially dangerous situation, out on the street.

So it was actually potentially safer and actually safer in the building,
and that was an issue of getting people back in. So once we realized
that there was very little transportation available, it was almost
better to stay in the building rather than try to wander the streets to
get home.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: In the event of a calamity that makes the building
itself unsafe, as compared with a simple outage, which makes it
uncomfortable for staying in a building, at the least -- I don't
minimize that -- but having a full-building evacuation seems to me,
without any particular expertise on the subject, a much different
proposition than having individual evacuations of a floor or two floors,
because the real questions -- as we have heard, the real problems
associated, putting aside all of the impediments from smoke and darkness
and so forth, but the real impediments are in the large numbers of
people who must evacuate a large building simultaneously.

Do you have some feeling with respect to the difference between a full
building evacuation and one which is more limited in scope?

MR. YUN: We are currently in a smaller building with fewer occupants and
a fewer number of floors, so our type of evacuation would be easier. We
have experienced that. And, again, we're on a lower floors, so that, by
design, makes it easier for us as an organization. But, again, I
couldn't comment on the technical aspect of an evacuation.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Well, let me finish up with two more general questions,
and they are directed to what could be done better on a local level,
from the standpoint of cooperation from city or local authorities, in
your view, and where you might look to the federal government or more
regional, at least, governmental approach.

MR. YUN: Again, I would reiterate the communication links are key. If we
can have quicker access or more direct access to any top-down decisions
made by either the federal or local governments, that would assist us in
being able to make quicker decisions on our own and to evaluate what we
need to do as an organization.

MR. BEN-VENISTE: Thank you very much.

MR. KEAN: No other questions?

Mr. Yun, thank you very, very much --

MR. YUN: Thank you very much.

MR. KEAN: -- for taking the time to share your thoughts with us.

MR. YUN: Thank you.

PANEL: STANDARDS FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND BUSINESS CONTINUITY

MR. KEAN: If I could ask Professor Glenn Corbett and Randolph Yim,
please, to join us.

In our investigation of the current state of preparedness in the private
sector, we've become woefully aware of the many standards, regulations
and codes that are in the public arena. In this panel, Professor Corbett
will discuss the myriad standards that exist and make recommendations
about this situation.

Professor Corbett is an assistant professor of fire safety at John Jay
College in New York. He's on the distinguished advisory panel of the
Skyscraper Safety Campaign. He's also importantly captain of the Bergen
County, New Jersey volunteer fire department. He's currently appointed
to the federal advisory committee which will oversee the NIST
investigation of the collapse of the World Trade Center.

Randolph Yim in 2003 had the report, "Potential Terrorist Attacks: More
Action Is Needed to Better Prepare Critical Financial Markets," which
makes several recommendations regarding markets' ability to deal with
future disasters. GAO has also been concerned about the sustainability
of our homeland security activities as well as the need for standards to
address these concerns.

The leader of all these discussions has been our panelist today.
Randolph Yim, a managing director in homeland security and justice at
GAO, leading the national preparedness team. He draws on his private and
public-sector experience with ISA rules on environmental issues.

I don't know which of you would like to go first. Professor Corbett?

MR. GLENN CORBETT: Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Kean, Vice
Chairman Hamilton and members of the National Commission on Terrorist
Attacks. Thank you for inviting me to speak on the very important issue
of standards for disaster, emergency management and business continuity.

I'd like to begin my testimony today with a brief overview of where
national building codes are related to emergency preparedness standards.
Codes of standards establish the minimum level of acceptable
performance. They also can be used as a ruler to see how specific
facilities' emergency procedures measure up.

Generally, codes deal with the built environments, the design of the
buildings themselves. Standards typically establish procedural protocol,
such as how and when to evacuate a building. While this description
generally holds true, emergency procedures have, in fact, found a way
into codes, however.

The design of buildings and the emergency procedures used within them
are critically linked; for example, the ability to quickly and safely
evacuate a building is based upon the relationship between the
structure's design and its adopted evacuation procedures. The
effectiveness and success are dependent upon the articulation between
these two areas that are covered by the codes and standards.

Despite the importance of life safety in buildings, we have no single
code or standard to follow. Instead we have a myriad of organizations
preparing these documents, some of which are in the public sector, while
others are in the private sector. Some are guidelines without the force
of law, while others are statutes that must be followed. Several codes
and standards overlap, while some are completely duplicative.

Unbelievably, when it comes to terrorism-resistant building designs, we
have no comprehensive national codes for building designers to follow.
Despite the fact that a certain number of buildings or many buildings
within our country are potential terrorist targets, we have yet to
develop a single set of comprehensive and detailed terrorism-resistant
building regulations that provide a nationally accepted base line.

Generally speaking, building codes are enacted at the state and local
levels of government. Cities and states typically adopt a model building
and fire code, a set of nationally-developed regulations, which can then
be amended to meet local needs. There isn't any federal regulation that
requires adoption of a building or fire code at the state or local
level. Some jurisdictions have not adopted any construction or safety
codes at all.

States and cities can choose from two sets of model building and fire
codes, one prepared by the NFPA, that was mentioned earlier, the other
by the International Code Council, also mentioned. While these two sets
of codes broadly cover the same topics, they are different in format,
and their specific requirements do vary. States and cities adopt one of
these two sets of model codes and typically add their local amendments,
making building safety uniformity difficult to achieve across the United
States.

Neither of these two -- issue of terrorism resistant building design. If
a building designer or building owner wishes to have their building made
terrorism resistant, they cannot simply look to their locally adopted
model building and fire codes for guidance. They are forced to wade
through a variety of narrowly focused terrorism guidelines that address
specific issues, such as glazing, or air handling system design. Often
the building designer or owner is forced to retain the services of a
consultant, who conducts a risk assessment, and to advise them as to how
to deal with the problem without the benefit again of a single
comprehensive and detailed national code to measure themselves against.

The strength or weakness of the consultant's assessment and his
recommendations are solely based upon the consultant's expertise, not
the baseline of a national code.

Obviously most buildings do not need to be rendered terrorism resistant.
However, many communities have potential targets within their
boundaries. Willing designers, the owners and community leaders should
have the ability to assess a particular structure's vulnerability to a
terrorist attack.

It appears that the Department of Defense has made the only attempt at a
broad set of terrorism resistant design guidelines in their minimum
anti-terrorism stance for buildings, U.S.C. 4-010-01. It's very broad in
nature, but it's primarily explosion driven and lacks any real detail
for either biological or chemical attacks.

When it comes to national emergency preparedness protocols for
evacuations and the like, the situation is a bit brighter. There are a
variety of emergency planning tools, both stand-alone documents, or text
imbedded within larger safety-related documents. For example, OSHA
requires that entities under its jurisdiction comply with specific
regulations that mandate emergency action plans, specifically fires and
what they term "other emergencies." They don't specifically address
terrorism specifically, and the regulations themselves are very, very
light in detail.

Getting back to the NFP and the ICC, they recently upgraded both of
their fire codes to include more extensive emergency planning
requirements. These codes, however, again, must be adopted and enacted
for them to have the force of law within a jurisdiction. For example,
the state of New Jersey is in the process of adopting a new fire code
which will likely be in the 2003 edition of the International Fire Code.
Until that time of adoption, however, the requirements contained within
these regulations cannot be enforced by the state.

New York City has taken a different route. As a result of the attacks on
the World Trade Center, they established a World Trade Center Building
Code Task Force within the City's department of buildings to review the
need for updating the city's building regulations. The task force issued
a report including 21 recommendations, which included recommending full
building evacuation plans to be developed for non-fire events in
high-rise structures, and also another one that deals specifically with
biological and chemical attacks by requiring heating ventilation air
systems fresh air intakes to be at least 20 feet above grade, and away
from any loading docks or loading bays. New York City Mayor Bloomberg
subsequently reviewed these 21 recommendations and is now in the process
of moving forward immediately with 13 of them, including those two I
just mentioned.

As mentioned earlier about full building evacuation, they are of grave
concern nationally to life safety specialists. Our model regulation
codes do not anticipate full high-rise building evacuations. Stairwells
are designed to handle the evacuation of only a few floors, leaving most
occupants in the building to stay where they are located. The experience
of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing and the events of 9/11 certainly
contradict this what we call "defend in place" strategy that's common to
nearly all high-rise buildings across the country. I'll mention briefly
there is an NFP-8 document, NFP-1600, which the next panel will discuss
in detail and I won't take up time talking about, but it is an important
document for emergency planning procedures.

In light of what was talked about basically, there is a lot of work that
we do, and obviously this whole code and code situation is very complex
and confusing, and you can imagine what it's like for the private sector
to attempt to deal with these kind of issues. The private sector
entities must first establish what local laws apply to them, if any, and
determine whether or not these codes or standards include provisions for
emergency planning. If they are constructing a new building and desire
that it be terrorism resistant, they will need to retain a consultant,
as I mentioned earlier.

A related issue that I would just like to briefly mention is the role of
local and state government approval of specific buildings and emergency
procedures within them as it relates to terrorism preparedness. While
emergency procedures used within a given building will typically fall
within the jurisdiction of a local fire code enforcement official, the
building design features are a different story. Should local governments
dictate which buildings are terrorist targets and require specific
anti-terrorism building features, or should the building owners make
that decision themselves?

I would suggest that the answer lies somewhere in between for that
particular question. State and local governments must take an active
role in conducting terrorism risk assessments within their communities
and identifying their vulnerabilities. Building owners whose facilities
are identified within that assessment should be encouraged to expand
their emergency preparedness plans to include issues specifically of
terrorism, if they do not already, and develop a list of
terrorism-resistant building design upgrades to address the threat.

A useful model that would help move this forward quickly would be one
that is used currently within the public sector, called the Emergency
Management Accreditation Program, or EMAPs, developed by several
entities including FEMA, the International Association of Emergency
Managers and the National Emergency Management Association. This program
accredits individual communities for disaster mitigation preparedness
and response and recovery programs. So here's something that is out
there in the public sector right now that accredits specific communities
across the United States that perhaps could be redefined or remolded for
specific buildings within a community.

In light of the situation, I've got some recommendations for the
Commission to consider. The first one is that the Department of Homeland
Security should take a very proactive role in beginning the initiation
of a code for terrorism-resistant building design. The code should
provide detailed and specific requirements that establish a minimum
level of acceptable protection against terrorist attacks.

The next recommendation would be that an accreditation program for
private sector facilities to evaluate their emergency preparedness. Both
the physical plant and the emergency planning aspects should be
established. Such an accreditation program would not only be useful for
building owners, but for local governments as well, because if you have
an accreditation program like that, local communities can then make
decisions on response plans of their own, concerning how many people
they are going to send to a particular facility and what they should
expect to find there if there's a terrorist attack.

The model code groups that I mentioned earlier, the NFPA and ICC, should
be encouraged to coordinate their emergency planning criteria. This will
make it easier for multi-site private sector businesses with operations
in many states to have a better chance of achieving uniformity. The fact
that we have two model code groups both competing for cities and states
to adopt them, is a major issue I think that you probably should be
looking into.

And finally the "defend-in-place" strategy that I mentioned earlier and
the issue of full building evacuation needs to be fully studied and
assessed. Today's reality is that building occupants do not follow
orders to remain in place during emergencies. It's very possible they
will self-evacuate into stairwells that are not designed to handle the
crush of people, and we have seen that time and time again, especially
we saw what happened in the Chicago high-rise fire about a month and a
half ago, which I was disappointed to learn that NIST in fact is not
going to be investigating that, because that is such a landmark fire
with this specific issue of concern.

On that note, I would like to thank you again for inviting me to speak,
and be glad to answer any questions.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, Mr. Corbett.

Mr. Yim?

MR. RANDALL YIM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman Hamilton,
distinguished commission members, September 11th family members, ladies
and gentlemen. On behalf of the comptroller general of the United
States, David Walker, thank you all for your very important and
dedicated efforts to improve homeland security for our nation and its
people. We at GAO hope that our efforts have been of assistance to you,
and we pledge our continued support.

What I'd like to do is to highlight and illustrate some of the key
points of my written testimony, and then be so presumptuous as to
suggest some additional actions that could be taken along the lines of
setting standards, national standards, to improve homeland security.

Are we better prepared to counter the threats of terrorism since
September 11th, and as a result of the start-up of the Department of
Homeland Security? The answer is certainly yes. Unfortunately, many
believe that this is an inadequate standard by which to judge our
success today. Judging our success will depend to a large extent upon
what we identify instead as our homeland security goals. As a nation we
are unlikely to definitively, quote, "win the war against terrorism,"
since terrorist threats are subject to constant change, resources are
finite, and it is simply impossible to be 100 percent secure in such an
environment. Nor could our nation definitively say that we are doing
enough for homeland security, since although much progress has been
made, much more needs to be done. And like many of our complex issues
facing our nation, always more could be done.

Success for homeland security may be better measured in terms of
continued progress for becoming better prepared. And since homeland
security relies upon the coordinated actions of federal, state, local
governments, and the private sector, and in many cases upon layers of
defenses, progress has to be measured across numerous dimensions.
Standards, particularly systems standards, management standards, hold
great potential to both improve coordination across such dimensions and
enhance measurement of continued preparedness. Such standards addressing
performance and design and what an organization does to manage its
processes and related activities could help identify interdependencies;
define roles and responsibilities; assign those responsibilities; and
link federal, state, local governments, not-for-profits and the private
sector in a measurable, dependable and reliable manner.

We are not just talking about connecting the dots; we are talking about
connecting players and connecting their capabilities to make our nation
safer.

The private sector already sets standards within various business chains
such as in the design, raw materials, supply, manufacture, sales,
delivery and customer support chain. Should we continue homeland
security really as this type of business chain, where standards would be
essential to measure and assure the stability and reliability of all
links in this interdependent chain?

And let me make clear, Dr. Corbett talks, and previous witnesses talked
about he importance of building standards, product standards, et cetera.
There's another family of standards: systems standards, a systems
engineering type of approach that is equally important to talk about. So
not only must be increase for example the bandwidth of our radios so
that our first responders can talk to each other; we must have some sort
of systems standards that when they are able to communicate they are
acting in a coordinated, effective, efficient manner that does not put
them at risk and enhances their effectiveness.

I think we have much to learn, members of the Commission, to how we have
approached other crises in the past, and some disturbing ways in which
we've approached crisis mode management.

I'll take you back to the late 1970s when we first began to experience
exploding automobiles, if I could use an example. You all recall the
exploding Pintos -- when people would have automobile accidents. And
what was the government's response, industry response initially? It was
to bolt on big bumpers to our automobiles. If you will recall, we all
owned tremendously ugly cars. But the theory was that if I bolt on this
big bumper, and of course if I only got hit in the rear in a
vertical-type of collision that I would survive that crash. And over
time people began to realize that was probably not the most efficient
way to handle it. We should have perhaps been designing automobiles to
avoid accidents -- to talk about more rigid body structure, better
tires, better instrument panels that would not only fundamentally make
the car safer, but also more efficient at the same time.

To a large extent, we are at a big bumper stage in homeland security.
How can we incorporate standards, print homeland security principles to
make not only the country safer but the agency missions and the
important business processes that we wish to make more secure
fundamentally more efficient also? One of the greatest concerns at the
GAO is for homeland security how will we address the sustainability of
the efforts, integration of the efforts, so that we can incorporate
homeland security principles into these agency missions and business
processes without destroying the viability of those business processes
themselves?

How can we strike the proper balances between security and add the word
"security" to economic security, financial market security, health care
system market, environmental security, many other important priorities
that this government must fulfill? And how do we hold people
accountable? -- not only for the significant amount of funds that are
being reprioritized for homeland security, but if we begin to assign
responsibilities in some sort of systems approach, how can we hold these
sectors accountable, that if a crisis occurs they will have the ability,
they are sufficiently prepared to fulfill their assigned
responsibilities.

Moving away from this big bumper type approach allows us to
systematically address the core issues necessary to become better
prepared, to help us set priorities, be able to continue to measure
progress toward improving homeland security, to be able to address a key
problem identified by our comptroller general who notes, quote, "At the
present time the federal government is flying either blind, or with
inadequate instruments in many areas." We need a government-wide
strategic plan and annual performance and accountability plans that are
linked in some way to key national indicators and integrated into agency
and individual plans.

Where do we start? There are so many things that can be done, and it is
unlikely given the fiscal position of our government, that we can do
them all. And certainly no one entity -- federal, state, local,
not-for-profit, private sector can do everything. Instead, it is
increasingly apparent that homeland security will require strategic and
shared capabilities and investments among these federal, state and local
governments and the non-profit and private sectors.

These investments should emphasize the development, augmentation,
maintenance and linkage of capacity to respond to the three central
missions of homeland security -- prevent terrorism, reduce
vulnerability, and respond and recover quickly in the event of an
attack. The development of this type of capacity to counter a
broad-range or potential threat, an all-hazards approach if you will, is
critical due to the uncertainty as to the nature of the specific
terrorist tactics to be deployed and questions about sustainability of
any other approach.

It also will allow us to address the central core questions of what are
these likely threat scenarios that we must address? Who is in charge,
and who should be in charge under these various scenarios? What should
be done and what sector is in the best position to do that? Who pays for
it and how are we going to pay for it? How much is it going to cost?
And, again, how do we ensure accountability, again both for the use of
the funds as well as fulfilling the assigned responsibilities. We
believe that one promising methodology is the adoption of national
standards, both product and individual service standards, as Dr. Corbett
mentioned, but also systems integration type standards.

We've heard testimony today about various methods in which we could go
about adopting some of the standards, the national strategies, set some
goals and milestones. The GAO has been critical of the ability of those
national strategies to both horizontally and vertically integrate --
horizontal in the sense of coordinating the activities across the
diverse federal agencies, and most importantly vertical integration
between the federal government, state and locals, private sector,
not-for-profit.

We've heard some testimony about ISACs, these Information Sharing and
Analysis Centers. GAO's past work has found that there are currently 16
ISACs, and although DHS has formal agreements with most of them,
additional efforts are needed. Not all sectors have fully established
ISACs. And even for those sectors that do, our recent work has shown
that participation is mixed, and the amount of information being shared
between the federal government and private sector organizations vary.

For examples, efforts were still in progress to establish baseline
statistics and sectors do not or always coordinate among other sectors.
It is absolutely crucial that if we are going to have a shared
investment, shared responsibility strategy that we have shared input
into what that strategy should be. And if we are going to, as Chairman
Kean indicated, involve the private sector in the protection of the 85
percent of the critical infrastructure that is owned by them, it is
absolutely important they have an input into the development of types of
standards that the federal government and state and locals will need to
employ.

Certainly, it also will have an impact on the type of federal stimulus
programs that need to be designed. We're not just talking about grant
programs for state and locals, focusing today on the private sector.
There are many ways, going through Commissioner Gorelick's question: How
do we incent the private sector? We had testimony from insurance
industry representatives. It's very interesting to look at some of the
standards for environmental management that were adopted -- the ISO
14,000 series for environmental management, that set protocols for the
handling of potentially toxic materials.

Not only did those standards originally just evolve as best practice
voluntary, but when they began to become standards of care in the
industry, because many of our environmental statutes allowed private
rights of actions, when they became standards of care and potentially a
negligent standard for the private sector, then the insurance industry,
as a precondition to providing environmental liability insurance, or in
the case of terrorism insurance, could impose additional auditing
protocols that drove -- that provided an incentive.

So, again, we could have manufacture investment credits, we could have
certainly positive incentives. But there may need to be employed some
carrot and stick approach also, and I think the insurance industry plans
a very, very critical role. But without some sort of capacity type or
performance goal it will be increasingly difficult to measure and answer
the question: Are we continuing to become better prepared? We're not
just talking again just about the thickness of the Kevlar vest, but the
capacity of, for example our hospital infrastructures to be able to
triage and isolate X number of patients for X amount of time until
additional resources can be brought to bear: push backs can arrive, or
other units can arrive from other sources.

The ability of our water purveyors to be able to continue to provide
water in the event of a widespread power outage for X numbers of time.
We have a capacity standards like this that have been created in the
crash and fire for example at airports. There are standards for being
able to respond to an event at an airport within X amount of time, a
performance goal that dictates where the fire stations should be located
and how many people should be there. It is not just about equipment.

The lack of performance standards tends to drive federal stimulus
programs to countable things: How many pieces of equipment can we buy?
How many people are employed in particular sectors? -- as opposed to,
What are the fundamental capabilities of those sectors to respond? And
it's also important to note that we don't want people to have the
capability to do the same things. To have a layered type of defense
approach, we should be looking at the commonalities of our private
sector, state and local to respond to certain all-hazards emergencies.
And what are the variants as a result of terrorism that cause you to
have to develop additional types of capabilities? That's what the
approaches are.

Some suggestions, if I could, Mr. Chairman. We need to begin a very
effective dialogue on how we would go about setting these types of
national standards. What is a -- to use perhaps an impolitic term -- a
safe environment --

MR. KEAN: If you'd sum up now.

MR. YIM: Yes, yes. A safe environment to discuss the creation of
standards because of the difficult policy choices involved. A body like
this can lay out the playbooks or various scenarios in which standards
would provide the most benefits, to talk about what are the common
capabilities that must be addressed and what are the variants that need
to be done on a national level, to talk about incentives and also to
talk about emerging technology. If we are going to set standards that
are capabilities based and we are going to have many vendors talk about
their ability to meet those capabilities, we need the ability within
government to assess the viability of those emerging technologies. How
we do that I think will be problematic, but we hope that this commission
could provide guidance on this.

Thank you, sir.

MR. KEAN: Thank you very much -- very interesting and important
testimony. Questions from the Commission? Which one of you would like to
go first?

Secretary Lehman?

MR. JOHN F. LEHMAN: Yes, thank you. That very helpfully augments and
elaborates some of the earlier testimony we had today on this issue.
There's no question there needs to be a process for establishing
standards in these areas. So far we have heard no consensus about how
this is to be done. Both of you have had extensive experience in
governmental and in dealing with private sector environments. We need
some specific recommendations with regard to where do you recommend the
leadership reside in establishing an environment? We heard explanations
that are quite valid that there are real restrictions for companies,
particularly in the insurance industry, getting together and setting
standards. There are competitive -- there are Sherman Act kinds of
problems. We heard these same things when the ISO standards were begun
in the engineering world, that this was some kind of constraint of
competition and so forth.

But we have precedence where the ISO 9,000, ISO 14,000 standards have
been set without really government leadership in doing it, but in
government encouragement and a kind of willingness on the government's
part not to pursue antitrust and anti-competitive kinds of enforcement
where these things make common sense. In fact, in the case of insurance
services office, it was the specific exemption under McCarran-Ferguson
to allow the pooling of this kind of information, which has led to
tremendous benefits in setting of standards for instance in rating local
code enforcement for building codes and fire codes and so forth. That
exists.

Do you believe -- I would really like to get specific recommendations
from each of you on what we at the Commission with this rare opportunity
of the total focus of both Congress and the Executive Branch, ready to
willingly or unwillingly act on what our recommendations are. What
should we recommend? There's no question we need a standards process to
set standards in these areas. Should it be mandated from Congress?
Should there be a new kind of non-governmental organization like ISO set
up specifically to do these standards with a mandate to do it? Obviously
it can't be done purely at the federal level, because every local
jurisdiction has its own unique set of issues and requirements. You
can't impose what you'd want for the Empire State Building on a
two-story garden apartment complex in Florida. So could you get down to
specifics in recommending a program for what this commission in your
judgment could do in its report to see that real action is taken?

MR. CORBETT: To answer your question directly, as far as building design
goes there are standards-making organizations already. I mean they
exist. The NFP and the ICC are the two recognized code-writing bodies
here in the United States. The problem is of course is that there are
private sector entity that doesn't report to anyone other than their
membership. So, as far as the federal government is involve, I think the
only solution to that is to strongly encourage through DHS a meeting of
the minds. They do have a relations -- ICC and the NFP both have
relationships existing within FEMA, and within the U.S. Fire
Administration, and I think that can certainly be an area that you could
explore specifically to move it forward.

I think if DHS was for example to hold a conference on this or some type
of, again, meeting of the minds, to move it forward, I think that could
happen. As far as the emergency response protocols within the private
sector, again, there's a bunch of them out there right now. The problem
is that there's, again, there's no single one that it's followed
everywhere. And that's one of the issues here. I mean, this, and this is
a fundamentally a, as I mentioned earlier, that you know, code
enforcement is considered to be a local and state function, and the fact
that these are national issues makes it very difficult to try to massage
this into a way that we can have some kind of uniformity across the
United States.

I would have hoped that, you know, there was a chance five, six years
ago that the NFPA and the ICC actually were in partnership to develop a
single national building code, and it fell apart, and the fact is that
we have two of them now, right here. We've got two codes that are used
nationally, and they're competing with each other, trying to see which
jurisdictions will adopt them. So, that's a -- again, the only thing
that I can suggest is strong encouragement from DHS.

MR. LEHMAN: Well, is there a certification process with teeth that could
be used in this case? I mean, Congress could mandate that if -- that
there are these say, two certification agencies, and if one or the other
is acceptable, if they meet the standards, but that if there -- if a
building is not certified to it, then there are real penalties.

MR. CORBETT: There isn't any, to my knowledge, any certification
specific for buildings. That's the problem. And of course, these code
writing bodies only write the codes. They don't go out and look at
buildings. They have them there -- you know, they develop them, and then
they're adopted by the cities and states. So there is no existing
certification process for buildings.

I can say that, you know, my experience is that when there were NIST
hearings, or I should say, House Science Committee hearings a year an a
half ago, when the issue came of up of should there be federalization,
for example, of building codes, you could feel the room shake when that
was brought up. And so this a very sensitive issue, and again, it's a
states rights versus federal authority. And again, it's one that I don't
know the simple answer to that. I mean, like I said, I think as far as
moving the codes forward, DHS is your best route. As far as, you know,
having a certification process, I think it's -- as I mentioned earlier,
it's certainly an important thing to have, and perhaps some third party
could organize something like that along the EMAPs route as a model,
basically.

MR. YIM: I wonder if I could add, Mr. Secretary, that I think that
perhaps we should be looking at a -- not just a role for DHS, but
Congress obviously plays a very, very important role, and perhaps there
should be a two-step type of process on that. That the Congress and the
Administration should not be, in all likelihood, setting the standards
themselves. The standards to have a widespread support and buy in need
to be scientifically based, and have a great deal of involvement from
the private sector, and the federal, state and local governments also,
but the private sector really has to buy into those adoption of
standards.

What the federal governments could do, Congress and the Administration
could do is begin to set the priority areas. What are the areas that
would most benefit from standards? Design certain types of play books.
What are the common scenarios that we as a nation must really begin to
become better prepared. Is that a bio attack in a major urban areas? An
attack on the power grid. It is a weapon of mass destruction in a port
that would have significant supply-chain ramifications and really lay
out, story-book out, design with playbooks that we must be concerned
about. And, secondly, identify the points of intercession that may be
non-obvious to begin adopting standards. One of the best ways as we have
heard testimony before is standards should not come after the fact. They
should be incorporated upfront into the design of a building, into the
design of a system process.

There are opportunities as we discussed, important recapitalization of
infrastructure in the United States over the coming years, to identify
points of inception in which homeland security standards could be
interjected into, for example, the reauthorization of the Surface
Transportation Act as we are fundamentally thinking about recapitalizing
our mass transit infrastructure, our highway infrastructure, building in
homeland security principles; as we are debating energy policy, how we
can make the power grids and the supply side more secure; as we are
debating recapitalization of emergency rooms, how we can augment the
capabilities to deal with a bioterrorism attack. And then have the
executive branch and legislative branch inventory and identify the
entities that have the ability to do scientifically based consensus
standards setting themselves. Is that ISO, is that ANSI -- many other
bodies that have been talked about. But I would suggest a two-step type
approach along those lines.

MR. LEHMAN: Well, I agree with that, but isn't it time to cut to the
chase and name a specific, like they did in the case of ISO, a specific
organization that has the certification authority, even though it's a
non-governmental? Otherwise it's more meetings and bureaucracy without
real standards being established. And it doesn't have to be done by the
government. It should be done on a more decentralized basis, but with a
certifying authority like ISO.

MR. CORBETT: I think there's a great deal of support on that. The ISO
certifications were sometimes criticized by industry as being very, very
complicated to actually obtain. But even an interim approach of a
self-certification would be a great advancement on our current
standards.

MR. LEHMAN: But, see, that's exactly the right precedent, because
everybody moaned about ISO, and oh, how can you comply? Now most big
OEMs will not buy from a supplier that is not ISO-certified, because in
fact it turned out to be a very valid set of standards, and is
constantly being evolved. And it's not the government doing it. Yet it
has all the full effectiveness or more effectiveness than a government
mandate.

MR. YIM: And I think history has shown that the increased cost of
complying with the standards can be offset by the stability and
reliability in the business chain that is created by the adoption of
those standards.

I think that we do have to adopt more than a voluntary approach, that it
may require legislation to begin to adopt a carrot-and-stick type
approach, because there also needs to be some review of the statutory
authorities available to centralized agencies. If we are going to adopt
a standard approach, there may be a requirement to begin to direct
resources from the federal agency to actually begin to direct the
resources of the federal, state, private sectors in an emergency
situation, and we should do a comprehensive review of whether or not
sufficient authorities do exist or under what circumstances could those
authorities be executed. I believe it will take some concerted and
legislative action, as well as some budget reallocation to have
management attention being paid from the Administration.

MR. LEHMAN: Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Congressman Roemer?

REP. TIM ROEMER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's always difficult
following Secretary Lehman. He does such a great job getting right at
the heart of some of these questions.

Dr. Corbett, thank you for your time. You come very highly recommended
by the families. Dr. Yim, thank you. And I want to just take 10 seconds
to thank the General Accounting Office for all their excellent
nonpartisan work. As a former member of Congress I used the General
Accounting Office many, many times, and you put out an excellent
product. And I also want to say that the Joint Inquiry that I served on,
the General Accounting Office provided us with one of our most valuable
employees, Raoul Gouta, who I think is here today. And we appreciate you
being here. Take our appreciation back to Mr. Walker for his leadership
there at the General Accounting Office.

Let me be very blunt with you. The first time I read through your
testimony, Dr. Yim, I thought: this is pretty confusing, complex, and
how do we get at this? How do we better understand it? And I thought
about maybe too simple of an analogy, but let's say I represented the
University of Notre Dame's basketball Team, and Secretary Lehman
represented Navy's basketball team.

MR. LEHMAN: You'd be in trouble.

REP. ROEMER: And besides being up against a formidable opponent who we'd
probably beat by 12 points, but we would want to assess our
vulnerabilities and Navy's vulnerabilities. We would want to know what
we're doing right, what plays would work, what plays would specifically
work against his team. We would probably have some films and some
scouting, and we would have a priority of plays that we would want to
run in certain situations against his defense.

I think that what you are saying in standards, and developing a set of
standards for the government, is that two years -- two years after 9/11,
in many ways with our critical infrastructure needs and our priority for
spending in Congress and in the Administration, we still don't have a
good way to measure our progress and our priorities and our results in
this. And let me try to get more firmly at this by asking you some
questions.

Let's say Congress decides to prioritize first responders, and spend
billions of dollars on them. Who has set the first responders as one of
the highest priorities, and how do we determine what to spend money on?
Is it walkie-talkies? Is it HAZMAT suits? Is it a watch list for
terrorists? And how do we measure what communities are getting those
types of equipment to best make sure that we are best prepared for the
terrorist attack that is going to happen in a year or two years?

MR. YIM: I think that the priority setting should focus on capacity and
capabilities, and leave the actual solution, how to meet those
capabilities, to the individual sector or region variations. One of the
great mistakes I think in reflecting my past in the Department of
Defense, responsible for our military installations infrastructure, was
when we dictated to the private sector or to others how to do things for
the Department of Defense, as opposed to saying we needed certain types
of performance goals or things done for us according to certain
standards. I think the great role that the federal government could play
is saying we need first responders to be able to meet these types of
performance goals, these performance standards, these capacities,
certain types of capacities.

We are going to leave them up to you because the maturity of their
existing infrastructure varies by sector, by regions. We are going to
leave it up to you on how you are going to finance this, how you are
actually going to meet these type of performance goals specific to your
particular region. But we are going to measure you against your ability
to be able to perform to that certain level over time, and we are going
to judge the efficacy of our federal grant programs, our federal
stimulus programs in raising you closer to the performance capacity
levels, rather than a mil specification type approach, a more
performance approach that the military has adopted I think holds great
promise.

REP. ROEMER: Well, with respect to the different priorities that we
should be spending money on in fighting the war on terrorism and better
preparing our critical infrastructure out in the country, let's say, you
know, according to these reports there are 104 nuclear power plants in
the United States. Who determines that that should be a priority to
protect those, and then how do we measure the best way to protect those,
and how many of them are protected currently?

MR. YIM: That fundamental policy decision must I think reside both in
the Congress and the Executive Branch. I don't think either entity could
do that by itself. There are certainly budget implications. They should,
again, set the priorities. So both the administration must propose that
budget, Congress must consent and approve. There is going to be regional
variations, there's going to be statutory changes that are likely to be
necessary. I think there has to be some sort of joint effort, so not
just to reside in DHS.

REP. ROEMER: Okay, you're too nice a guy here. Let me push you a little
bit harder. Has Congress or the Administration proposed which ones of
those plants are more vulnerable or more important than others? How many
can we currently ascertain how many of those we have protected, if any?

MR. YIM: I think that we are lax in completing our threat vulnerability
assessment.

REP. ROEMER: Two years after 9/11 we have not adequately prepared our
threat vulnerability assessment on even nuclear power plants?

MR. YIM: I think that we have examples of this moving forward -- for
example, the maritime safety statutes require vulnerability assessments
to be completed. I understand they are on track by the end of this year,
first part of next year, for our major ports -- that type of activities
that must be completed.

REP. ROEMER: Now, Dr. Yim, when you say that too, let's say we complete
it, and we say that the following plants are more important than others,
and this is a top-secret document, and we're also assessing how many
we've protected. You're also saying that it shouldn't be dependent upon
Congress to fund that, because Congress may have certain people on
certain committees that are more interested in getting money to one
state or members on the Appropriations Committee to another particular
region or state than others. How do we make sure that those monies would
currently reflect the standards and the strategy of that document,
whether it was a document assessing the number of power plants, nuclear
power plants, or where nuclear power plants were in line of comparison
and priority to the power grids, the seaport containers, the HAZMAT
suits, the cyber security needs of this country?

MR. YIM: It's obviously not an easy question to answer. But if we
consider this as purely a program that's funded by the federal
government, then I think we would have those difficult problems of
dealing with individual jurisdictions. But it's clear that the federal
government doesn't have enough money to do it that way. If we think of
the federal programs as stimulus programs, a combination of tax policy
with direct grants, with liability standards or provisions that are
imposed, to provide a series of drivers for people to become better
prepared -- either financial incentives or liability incentives or both
-- then I think perhaps we can generate more than just political
momentum for that.

There's a business self-interest for the private sector to adopt some of
these standards, just to assure the viability, the stability of their
own business model. In many ways in the environmental arena, despite the
initial aversion to adoption of environmental management standards over
time, not only did people incorporate green sources to minimize their
liabilities, they incorporated waste minimization, energy conservation,
that improved their bottom line. If we could devise federal stimulus
programs to provide both carrots and sticks, incentives that are
economically driven, stability or reliability driven, rather than just
give people money, then I think we'll have the opportunity to --

REP. ROEMER: Theoretically let's say we do that. Let's say we devise a
system of carrots and sticks and we come up with a pot of federal and
state and local monies to incentivize that. And let's say furthermore,
hypothetically, you're on a commission that the Congress and the
Executive Branch puts together to try to determine what priorities
should be first in place for this incentivizing structure, for priority
standards that are implemented. What recommendations would you make in
terms of such important things as nuclear power plants, our water
systems, our electrical grids and cyber security? How would you rank
those four things in terms of their importance for standards?

MR. YIM: That is virtually impossible for particularly the GAO to be
able to rank --

REP. ROEMER: I'm asking you to get out of your GAO hat and not
officially put it on a GAO letterhead -- you are a personal member of
this commission now: How would you try to ascertain the best way to
prioritize?

MR. YIM: And even when I think of it personally, Congressman, it's very
difficult because you cannot compare the value of the safety of citizens
of Oklahoma versus citizens of New York or citizens of New Jersey. It's
inherently such a difficult policy decision to begin to rank those
priorities. I think that the better approach would be to tie it to
threat risks analysis, a risk management approach: Can we link the
priorities to the anticipated threats? It's not a question of is one
sector more important or another. What are the anticipated threats that
may occur? Can we link the priorities? You're good at getting away from
my question.

Let me try to conclude here and ask Dr. Corbett this based upon maybe
threat assessments then. Let's say hypothetically that the intelligence
that comes in since 9/11, and what this commission puts out, says that
in terms of monuments or historic buildings or skyscrapers -- some of
your areas of expertise -- the terrorists had prioritized or thought
about attacking the following sites, and you've seen some of that in the
press. We can put together some lists of priorities. As Dr. Yim has
said, you can't do everything -- you have to begin somewhere. That's
what standards do for you. In terms of the list of 460 skyscrapers in
this country, how would you assess the progress we've made in the last
two years on better protecting the top 25 of those skyscrapers from a
catastrophic terrorist attack, and improving on the problems and the
difficulties in the errors in the World Trade Center?

MR. CORBETT: Well, I think, you know, if you look at just for example
high-rises, the level of risk for each one of these buildings, either in
New York or around the country, is really assessed by the building
owners themselves. I really don't think that we've done a very good job
from a city, county and state perspective of identifying target hazards
within the communities. Let me illustrate it with an example here. I am
a captain in a small fire department, Bergen County, about 10,000
people. We're a volunteer department. There are 69 fire departments in
Bergen County, so we have an extensive mutual aid system that works
pretty well. I mean, we've used it for many, many years. The county did
receive some funding for purchase of HAZMAT suits. We did buy apparently
five -- what are called level -- and you've probably heard this before
-- level B protective sets of clothing for each piece of fire apparatus
in our county.

The problem for me is that -- and, again, I'm a mid-level officer in one
of these departments -- is that it's not clear to me what my
responsibility is, what risk assessment has been done within our county
-- I am sure our county OEM, county fire marshal has done some of that
work. But I think we have done a very poor job of communicating if in
fact there has been a risk assessment done within these communities of
what our responsibilities are. Because again, as a local responder, we
potentially could go to surrounding communities where the large amounts
of shopping malls -- for example Paramus, New Jersey is a very large
center around New York that has a lot of shopping malls -- not seen
that. And I would suspect that, just anecdotally, I've talked to other
fire people across the country. I think you may have heard that here,
that the first responders are still in a murky area. In some cases
equipment is being bought. But where it fits into the big picture, and
again, has that risk assessment been conducted? Nobody can say or no.

I don't think there's any one entity that's in charge of doing this. I
mean, there's money being thrown around, but tying money to risk and
that kind of thing, I don't think really we've done a good job at that.
I would suggest that there is a model out there through our EPA
regulations; Title III, for example, where local communities have to set
up committees basically to respond to hazardous-materials incidents.
This is from several years ago.

And maybe that's the kind of approach we need on the county level,
typically, across the country to have a committee like that, a terrorism
committee if you want to call it that, that is responsible for
identifying the top 20 target hazards within their county and then
develop a plan to respond to those, because a lot of the risk
assessment, in my opinion, again, has been done within the private
sector with their own facilities, not any that I could see visible
public-sector entity.

REP. ROEMER: Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that's just a key
question, is if you get $100,000 in your local community and you have no
risk assessment plan, and we're two years after 9/11, are you going to
buy five HAZMAT suits or are you going to put more patrols around your
nuclear power plant? Nobody knows two years after. We don't have that
kind of direction out there at this point, even for something as basic
as what the local responders might do.

Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KEAN: Thank you, Congressman.

Last question from Commissioner Gorelick.

MS. GORELICK: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

I would just -- I do have just one question. I would like to follow on
Commissioner Lehman's and Commissioner Roemer's sense of urgency on the
issues you two have presented to us today. And I look at your
background, Mr. Yim. We worked together at the Defense Department. You
operated at the intersection of the public sector and the private sector
and leading the effort on privatization. So you know how difficult this
is.

And I was struck with respect to both of you that you have a sense --
you have a comprehensive and astute perception of what needs to be done
and isn't being done. You now both sit outside the Executive Branch of
government. And I would put, just for convenience sake, this question to
Mr. Yim.

You know, it is striking to me that the Department of Homeland Security,
whom we invited to come here at a very senior level but who declined to
provide someone at a very senior level, that's the department you would
think would be doing the things that the two of you have been talking
about today, whether it is setting priorities, whether it is doing these
community-based assessments, whether it is creating a standard-setting
process.

So I'm going to do what Secretary Lehman did with another panel this
morning, because we've been asked to hold people responsible. And I'm
going to ask you this question. If you look at what the Department of
Homeland Security has done to date on the subject of risk assessment,
setting standards for physical security, setting standards for systems,
if I asked you, are they very helpful, are they not helpful but not
harmful, or are they an obstacle, which would you say?

MR. YIM: I think in terms of requiring that the risk
assessment/vulnerability assessment be completed that they certainly are
not trying to do any harm, but they could be much more aggressive about
requiring that those be provided, and by sector, be completed and
provided to policymakers.

In terms of setting standards, there's been a great deal of attention in
the Department of Homeland Security setting individual product
standards. They've created a Homeland Security Standards Panel. It has
paid less attention to the systems-type approach, the vertical
integration that I've talked about.

Again, I don't believe that people are trying to do harm or trying to do
a bad job. They should be much more aggressive, in my opinion.

MS. GORELICK: Mr. Corbett?

MR. CORBETT: I would agree with Dr. Yim that they're not -- they could
be considered harmful from the standpoint that they're not doing
anything about it, perhaps. I think the ball is in their court to take
the lead role here, both in terms of developing county -- it seems to me
counties are the best level for a county-based terrorism committee that
makes that risk assessment. There's the plans; make sure it's
communicated to all the emergency responders, the equipment is purchased
that relates specifically to that level of performance that Dr. Yim is
talking about. That needs to happen and it's not.

The codes, again, as I mentioned earlier, FEMA has probably the closest,
and within them, the U.S. (Fireman's Industry ?) has the closest
relationship with ICC and NFPA. And they need to take that leadership
role of prodding the NFPA and ICC into moving forward with the
development of those documents, because, again, there's no standards out
there, you know. And if we're attacked again, we're going to see where
our vulnerabilities are.

And this is a very complex issue. I mean, at John Jay we spent an entire
day talking about glass. We just talked about glass. The only thing we
discussed was glass. And there was no consensus even then of what
exactly we should be doing in terms of glazing within buildings, because
we know glazing kills a lot of people, not just here in the United
States but around the world, during terrorist attacks.

So, again, I think it's harmful from the standpoint that we're not
moving forward on it. That's definitely something that should be said.

MS. GORELICK: Thank you.

MR. KEAN: Thank you both very much; very valuable and important
information.

Thank you.

PANEL: FUTURE STRATEGIES FOR PRIVATE SECTOR PREPAREDNESS

MR. KEAN: May I have the final panel, please?

In order to begin the discussion of strategies for the private-sector
preparedness, we decided to have this last panel in the form of a
roundtable format. The panel will be facilitated by William Raisch, who
has chaired three roundtables for us this fall in preparation for this
hearing. He serves as founder and director of the Emergency Corps
Program, a nationwide initiative sponsored by the Greater New York
Safety Council. His past experience at Salomon Smith Barney, coupled
with his expertise in emergency management, provides an excellent
background for our panel.

The Commission, sir, is deeply indebted to you for your service to our
work. He will introduce the panel, by the way, which includes our third
New Jersey attorney general to participate today in one way or another,
I noticed. If you'd like to introduce the panel, sir, we'll --

MR. WILLIAM G. RAISCH: Thank you, Chairman Kean, Vice Chairman Hamilton,
distinguished members of the Commission itself, and fellow citizens
gathered here today.

I will take the opportunity to briefly put you in context, if I could --
in fact, I'm going to pause just a moment, prior to introducing our
panel, to set a historical parallel that may be of some value. I'd also
ask the folks on the A/V side to swing over to this slide projection
here.

And if you'll bear with me for one moment, we will be able to, I think,
outline perhaps a positive element that comes back from some history
that might invigorate us after what has, I think, been a bit of a
frustrating period of time here.

I can sense from the Commission members themselves that this is clearly
a complex area, one with not a lot of easy answers or silver bullets, if
you will, and perhaps one that lends itself to a format that we're about
to undertake here with respect to a panel that includes a diversity of
perspectives, the stakeholders, if you will, that are critical in making
any sort of final result a reality.

What I'd like to do just for a moment, though -- and this will take me
probably about two minutes in total -- is to put you in context. I
appreciate the reference to the Emergency Corps Program. I would note
that there are some positive elements. Some of them we've seen earlier
today. And they reflected the positive side of public-private
partnerships.

I can tell you that within the New York area, our efforts really have
been cooperatively supported by FEMA, FBI, OSHA, New York State's
Emergency Management Office, New York City's Emergency Management
Office, as well as FDNY and NYPD.

And our particular focus has been in the area of emergency management
plans, as well as also looking at the issues of workplace response
teams. Earlier today there was reference to the CERT team, a FEMA
initiative. That actually grows out of the Los Angeles Fire Department's
initiatives in that regard. And we've been very successful in
generating, I think, both interest as well as outcome in terms of the
private sector.

For a moment, a parallel, and perhaps a challenge. And this speaks to an
issue of a situation where there was a dramatic catastrophe that
impacted everyone, when fire rained down on one of America's greatest
cities. The death and destruction that resulted were certainly
heartbreaking. Many asked, and, in fact, could only ask why at that
point in time.

There were some, perhaps like we have today, that took it upon
themselves to make sure, if disaster struck again, they would be
prepared. These were a collection of business and government individuals
who stepped forward and basically looked at it, a simple, if we can aim
for that, but effective response of organized people, technology and, if
you will, the raw American spirit.

They were led by a man named Benjamin Franklin. The year was 1736. The
city was Philadelphia. And the tragedy was a series of deadly fires that
impacted large areas of the city, resulting in the dramatic loss of both
life and property.

The initiative that they started there, simple but effective, was the
first community-based volunteer fire department. And if you look forward
in terms of what its impact was, we created a model there that today is
reflected in hundreds of volunteer fire departments across the United
States and thousands of volunteer firefighters themselves.

That being said, we might really look at the impact of just a few
individuals. Again, the parallels to my mind are very much here in both
the collection of the Commissioners as well as the public and private
representation, both on this panel and more generally what we've seen
today.

But to a great extent, we have a similar choice or similar opportunity
today to try to do something about a consequence that perhaps in the
1700s seemed like a relatively small event. Clearly we have national
scale in this case, but I think it can be something that these models
can continue well into the future and have dramatic impacts.

If we could just look at where we've been today, there's clearly been a
diversity of conversation on a number of topics, many of them both
perspectives from private sector and public sector. We've looked at
issues of actual experience as well as proposals for the future.

And finally, we are really at the stage now of more or less reflecting
what had been at least gleaned by some of the earlier roundtables that
the Governor just mentioned before. These roundtables were held with the
support of the 9/11 Commission, but they were held outside of its direct
activities. And there was a rationale behind that. But it did set, to a
great extent, really the tone for at least some of the elements that
we've addressed today.

Roundtables -- I'll just mention them briefly, what the ground rules
were, because we're going to more or less apply some of them here, and
some of them may hold promise for how we will proceed forward. These
roundtables involved stakeholders from a diversity of areas. The next
slide will give you some of that flavor.

We encourage the free flow of ideas, and that was the focus really on
prospective solutions through a ground rule that we set, which was
essentially off the record, not for attribution, and it facilitated
discussions on a diversity of areas that might not have ever happened in
a public format.

We found -- the findings, I think, were a little bit more perhaps to the
mark than those that are sometimes created in the public environment,
where one must be cognizant of either representing one's firm and/or
one's industry.

Finally, what we've been able to successfully do is evolve some of these
discussions, both through facilitations on-site as well as afterwards
through various communications. And you'll see some of these individuals
present here on the table, but also it's a much wider group that
participated in the roundtables.

I guess I want to mention this in context, that some of the things we're
going to address right now are really a distillation of what were dozens
of individual organizational presences as well as just individuals
themselves with their perspectives. And they range the gamut of private
sector and public sector, as you can see there, incorporating both
different industries as well as also looking at specifics of government
involvement as well.

What did we learn? We learned, in terms of foundation, that while the
governor mentioned earlier, too, that the initial focus, if you will,
was on the public sector, the private sector really has the most
infrastructure employees. That's been mentioned several times.

But also I think it's worthwhile reflecting on the fact that purely from
an impact on private sector, that all of us pay, if you will, and it may
be specific to a corporation or an industry, but in the end it is a
public cost, if you will, that's borne more generically as well as also
directly, if only through payments via such entities as FEMA and the
like.

We learned also through the various discussions -- and these individuals
included safety security directors as well as senior management on
various levels, a realization that obviously preparedness minimizes
impact and that there's, from a purely efficiency perspective, there's a
weakness sometimes in defining what everything other than the government
is.

And I hear this -- in fact, if I could paraphrase it -- a close friend
of mine is very active in emergency management and holds an official
position in that regard. He says we tend to look at everything
non-government as the general public, and oftentimes we lose the
opportunity of addressing organizations that are, in fact, what the
private sector is about and the ability to impact perhaps hundreds,
certainly sometimes thousands, through a single relationship as opposed
to the attempt to deal with it in a more generic, more public awareness
type campaign. So there's a clear efficiency opportunity in that regard.

In speaking with many of these firms, and even though these are folks
which arguably by their job title are focused on this area, it was
concurred that there was a dramatic amount of lack of perceived risk.
And clearly if you're in the Empire State Building or if you're in a
signature building, that was not the case. But as we emanate both in
terms of distance and time from 9/11, distance from signature buildings,
time since the attacks themselves, there is a low perception of risk
many times.

And even those that do see some opportunity there for undertaking some
preparedness, the lack relatively of any significant incentives or
motivating benefits for preparedness, it's very amorphous out there for
many of the entities that were involved.

Those that do want to do something, I think we see it by the prior panel
here, which are arguably experts in their area, and look at this on a
day-to-day basis. There's confusion as to what is preparedness.

That is not only on a firm-wide basis, but I think we see it reflected
in our presence by insurance industry members, who essentially said,
"Listen, we're willing to look at the issues of giving incentives and
impacting both our underwriting and pricing standards, but we're not
sure what a prepared entity is. And if there's a consensus in that
regard, then you know what? I think we're likely to step forward and do
something about it. But right now we're not sure."

So a clear need in that regard to look at some specific incentives, but
also all of that based upon the existence of some sort of general
consensus standard.

And I think, in essence, if we were to distill down the three various
functions, various activities that we have in terms of roundtables,
there was a need for three elements: Guidance and/or standards, some
place to go. Where is the private sector to head? There clearly is not
going to be one size fits all in that regard. It'll likely be focused on
specific industries and organization size, but the general direction is
very important.

Secondly, incentives, both positive and negative, an acknowledgement of
the need for both of those.

And then, finally, some level of education that communicates both the
standards and the incentives and puts it in the context where there's an
opportunity to then undertake some level of training.

So those were the three key elements. This particular effort will be
continued in the form of a working group on American private-sector
preparedness. A tremendous amount of effort went into putting all those
individuals together. We found that it was an effective forum. And we
will be continuing that in a working group in that regard.

And I think this sets the context really within which we should really
welcome the panel, because I think the panel -- if you look at the
slides there themselves, we have representatives from the various
perspectives, I think areas that will be critical for any final result
to have any impact.

We have Thomas Susman. Mr. Susman is a partner with Ropes & Gray and a
chief author of the Business Roundtable report on "Terrorism: Real
Threats, Real Costs, Joint Solutions." He and the Business Roundtable
itself, I should say -- I should preface this -- is an organization; I
believe it's 160 CEOs, high-level CEOs throughout the United States.

And we're really looking to Mr. Susman not only for his topical
expertise in this regard, having been the chief author on this paper,
but also to reflect the corporate management perspective that I think is
critical in all of this; the ground to all of our desires to do
important things in short order, but at the same time, clearly with the
need to reflect those individuals that are going to be involved in
implementing any of it.

We also have James Haviaris. We look at Mr. Susman to a great extent as
the general corporate representative or proxy, if you will. Mr.
Haviaris, as vice president for the Rockefeller Group, is a strong
representative, if you will, of the building side, the physical building
owners and managers.

Rockefeller Center is clearly one of the signature buildings, signature
complexes in the United States. It's high-profile, both economic as well
as arguably a symbolic target. And we're looking really for Mr. Haviaris
to reflect the building owners' and managers' perspective as we look at
issues such as codes.

We have Mr. Harvey, Peter Harvey; again, attorney general of New Jersey,
chairman of the New Jersey Domestic Preparedness Task Force, and
bringing with him not only just a general government perspective but
also the opportunity here in this respect to reflect on his experience
in recently undertaking a statewide program that involved working on an
industry-by-industry basis on a set of security standards that were
cooperatively developed.

Finally we have Peter Orszag, who's a senior fellow in economic studies
at the Brookings Institution. We have through Peter the opportunity to
have, if you will, a neutral, independent, nonpartisan perspective that
hopefully will give us the opportunity to look at all these issues from
a more generic and, as I mentioned, independent perspective.

That being said, we're going to briefly go through three rounds. We're
going to talk about standards and guidance. We're going to talk about
incentives, and we're going to talk about education and other
initiatives. I'm going to ask each one of the panelists really to lead
with the existing, because I sense there's clearly an understanding and
a desire to get something done in short order.

As we talk about proposals of items that should be undertaken, we're
going to try to take a look at what's existing out there right now and
capitalize on that, and then move to the more developmental and
prospective in each of their remarks.

With that being said, I'd like to be able to move initially to the issue
of standards. We see two types of standards discussed today, essentially
those that are building or fiscal plant-oriented, those reflected really
in the life safety, fire and building codes that were discussed just in
the panel prior, but also process-oriented standards, the more generic
elements that include questions of what is a well-prepared organization
functionally.

I think, in our distillation, we saw a dramatic focus on one particular
standard, NFPA 1600, which was grown -- which grew, in fact, out of the
development or experience with FEMA over many years and with strong
influence in creating that standard.

And what I'd like to initially lead with, starting really with Peter
Orszag, is a reflection on 1600 as a starting point; a straw man in
terms of what might be an overall process standard from his perspective,
and going from there, given the freedom to really evolve as to what else
he would see out there in terms of the emergency management standard,
having done the research he's done.

With that, Peter, I welcome you and I turn the mike over.

MR. PETER ORSZAG: Okay, thank you. I do think that that standard
provides a broad set of guidelines that are sensible. It's comprehensive
enough to cover -- it covers the bases.

But what I really want to talk about -- and I sensed from the previous
panel a sense of frustration, which I think is entirely warranted. It's
been two years now, as has been noted, more than two years since
September 11th. Governor Kean, you mentioned Senator Corzine; I heard
several panels ago. He is one of the leaders on chemical facilities.
Let's just take that as one example, one out of many, but one example.

More than two years since September 11th, more than a year since the
current Secretary of Homeland Security wrote in the Washington Post, and
I'll quote, "Chemical facilities must be required to take the steps the
industry leaders are taking at their facilities. Voluntary efforts alone
are not sufficient to provide the level of assurance Americans deserve."
That was more than a year ago. Nothing mandatory has happened.

"60 Minutes" had a dramatic expose within the last week to 10 days in
which camera crews were able to enter chemical facilities, open gates
unguarded, walk up to dangerous chloride, ammonia, other tanks. If they
had been wearing explosives, one can imagine what would have happened.
And, again, it's two years since September 11th, a year since this
statement. Nothing has occurred.

I think one of the most important things that this commission could do
is issue a very clear call that that's just unacceptable. And leadership
needs to be exerted both from the Executive Branch and from the Congress
to move forward.

I'd be happy to talk about the specific of how I think, for example, in
chemical facilities or other areas we can move forward. I think there
are ways of doing this in a market-friendly way so that we are using
market forces rather than just assuming that markets will work. We're
instead guiding them and harnessing the power of markets to provide
better security.

So that, I guess, took me a little bit off the immediate topic, but I
think it's so important that I wanted to get it in. I have nothing
against the standard that was being discussed. I think it is a good
start, but it's not enough.

And I think one of the most important things that this commission could
do is to provide clear guidance that we have not done enough on
strengthening market incentives for protecting potentially catastrophic
attacks against private-sector entities.

MR. RAISCH: I'm going to segue over to Thomas Susman at this point in
time to look at the private sector persepective in particular in mind
and, if you will, the management viewpoint in terms of looking at an
overall standard, again, to keep us at least initially focused on NFPA
1600 as a good starting point, and then more generically where you'd
like to see things go from there.

MR. THOMAS SUSMAN: Thank you. It's always easy to be comfortable with
process standards. Even as Mr. Orszag said, it's useful to have
market-friendly standards. I wish that it were so, and therein lies the
problem of what I've heard today is basically a rush to standards.

I don't want to suggest that those standards are a problem or standards
should not be imposed or adopted by the business community, but I do
want to suggest that standards carry with them historically, whether
building standards or product standards or process standards, they carry
with them certain caveats.

They are often used to suppress competition. They often result in
freezing technology. They often burden businesses more than the expected
return. They're often used by one sector or segment against another
within an industry. That's why we have two building codes still.

And so this notion that part of the problem is the top-down standard,
which the public generally would like to see -- that is, government set
standards, Congress give us standards, Department of Homeland Security
give us standards -- there is another way.

And I think the collaborative standard-setting that involves the
stakeholders, which will take a longer time -- and I would share the
frustration of "You mean we were going to wait longer to have this
happen?" And the answer is yes. If it's going to be done in a way that
the affected sector or geographic area of the business community
understands, buys in, doesn't oppose the standards process, doesn't try
to undercut it, doesn't try to use it or abuse it, then it's going to
take time.

But the key to all of this is cooperation and collaboration. And if done
really from the bottom up rather than the top down, these standards
processes can succeed.

MR. RAISCH: Thank you. In fact, Peter -- a good follow-up -- Peter
Harvey, as I alluded to earlier, you've just undertaken an effort really
within the state of New Jersey that involved the diversity of joint
efforts between both the governmental side and the private-sector side.
Could you reflect on that and tell me whether or not there's a relevance
there?

MR. PETER HARVEY: Sure. What we did in New Jersey is, shortly after
September 11th, in October of 2001, our legislature enacted a statute
that created the Domestic Security Preparedness Task Force. It is made
up of governmental heads. It is now chaired by the attorney general. It
includes the heads of the Department of Health & Senior Services, the
Department of Environmental Protection, Transportation.

What we did was first identify 110 critical infrastructure sites in the
state of New Jersey that required protection. The second thing that we
did was identified 23 industry sectors with which we would work. Now,
the act that creates the task force also creates the infrastructure
advisory committee.

I think it was the legislature's understanding that government and
business have to be interdependent in this task. We cannot get into, at
least in our view, a series of governmental mandates, because I don't
think we'll get uniform cooperation. I think it'll ultimately produce
more conflict than it does harmony.

But through these 23 industry sector chairs, the task force issued an
order that required that these industries, number one, conform to any
existing federal standard; secondly, that they also go beyond that in
protecting their own industry facilities by implementing either
industry-mandated or offered standards or by implementing best security
standards developed by the infrastructure advisory committee, or, if
those two didn't exist, by the task force standards.

I think what we've had with our best security practices is layers of
security. And let me suggest that I think that ultimately where we'll
end up nationally is with layers of protection and layers of security.
Here's what I mean.

I think that the national government, certainly in collaboration between
the Congress and the Executive Branch, can set certain minimum
standards. But I think that's all that the national government can do. I
think after that you have to almost go industry by industry.

For example, nuclear power facilities are almost invariably by water. So
while the NRC controls the internal workings of those facilities, what
do you do about water approaches? That's invariably going to require
that you have standards and it's going to require equipment and
protection from the Coast Guard. In our state, we have the New Jersey
State Police. They have marine patrol units. But some states don't have
them. So what is going to be your standard of protection for those
facilities?

And I would always ask the question, as I think the task force does,
what are we protecting against? When you look at these standards, the
National Fire Protection Association standards, let's keep in mind that
they were designed to protect against fire.

Let's think about the kinds of risks to which we are now exposed. We're
exposed to chemical hazards, biological hazards, nuclear hazards,
incendiary devices. So as we look at standards, we're going to have to
identify standards that address these several types of hazards. And
that's what we tried to do through working seamlessly with industry.

The goal here is to make sure -- and by the way, the standards that
apply to one industry, it's stating the obvious, don't apply to other
industries. There may be standards that apply to the chemical industry
that really don't apply to the pharmaceutical industry or don't apply to
the hospital sector.

So I think as we go sector by sector and also as we work with the
national government, we will come up with layers of protection. There
will be a minimum level of protection. And then we will go industry by
industry and add more layers on, depending upon the kind of protection
that that particular industry needs.

MR. RAISCH: Peter, only because this is a potential model, could you
just briefly elaborate on -- let's take an industry, chemical perhaps.
How did that happen? You identify it. You know where it is in your state
itself.

MR. HARVEY: Yeah.

MR. RAISCH: As a regulatory entity, presumably you're environmental
protection, among others.

MR. HARVEY: Well, I think what we tried to do and what we, in fact,
implemented was a relationship between that state governmental entity
that had jurisdiction or supervision for a natural match with that
particular industry. So in the case of a chemical facility, the
Department of Environmental Protection is the most likely state
department that has some regulatory authority over that industry.

We have an infrastructure -- excuse me, a domestic security preparedness
planning group that is essentially the staff of the task force. That
planning group sat down with representatives of the chemical industry
sector and they began to identify all of the known perceptible risks.
And they also began to identify the kinds of hazards from which each was
seeking protection.

Now, what came out of that was a best security practices protocol that
incorporated governmental ideas about what ought to be good security
practice, but also industry ideas.

Let me caution us. I do not believe that simply because we are in
government, it makes us smarter. I happen to think that sometimes,
because we don't come out of certain industries, there are nuances about
that industry that we simply don't know and you have to learn them.
That, by definition, requires the input of people who work in those
industries, who can tell you about nuances that you would simply
overlook.

Some of the kinds of security practices that we looked at are which
employees have access to which portions of the plant? What kind of
security badges do you have? What kind of background checks do you do on
your employees? What kind of chemical storage do you have? And, by the
way, how much of that information do you put in the public domain?

So these are the kinds of issues that we had to explore. Our committees
worked on these plans very carefully, and what we came up with were best
security practices that we are now about the business of implementing.
And we're going to come back and monitor the implementation. The task
force will come back and monitor the implementation of the security
practices to assure that they're not simply written and that they don't
just sit on the shelf, but they're actually being performed by the
industry.

But I think we will get more cooperation and compliance because this is
the industry's program as much as it is government's.

MR. RAISCH: Both you and Peter Orszag mentioned, if you will, a mixed
approach with some minimum standards, coupled by arguably what might be
some voluntary standards. What would you see as base minimum, though, to
more or less move across a number of different industries relative to
preparedness? I'd ask Peter Orszag first.

MR. ORSZAG: Well, I think it is difficult to define even a minimum
across a wide variety of sectors. But I would make two or three points
with regard to the generic approach. I guess we're morphing a little bit
into incentives, but that's inevitable.

I think, in a lot of settings, the kind of approach that makes the most
sense is one similar to the rules that apply when you drive your car.
There's a regulatory approach. You need to take a driver's test in order
to be allowed to drive your car.

But there also are incentives for you to be safer than just, you know,
the average person. So, for example, if you're a particularly safe
driver, you will get an insurance break, at least if your insurance
company is like some insurance companies. And that gives you an
incentive to drive more safely than just sort of a minimum regulatory
standard would otherwise suggest.

Similarly, within the homeland security arena, setting some minimum
standard -- and we can talk about specifically what that is; I have some
ideas for chemical facilities, for buildings and others -- but a
relatively low minimum standard provides a sort of base level of
security which should only apply in areas where there's a potential for
catastrophic harm.

I don't think we should be setting homeland security standards for
corner supermarkets. But for athletic arenas, that's a different story.
So a minimum standard. It also provides guidance -- this came up on the
earlier panel -- it provides some guidance for negligence and for
liability -- if there would be an attack -- for the legal system.

And then you go beyond that in various different ways. One area that I
want to commend the Administration on, an article in the New York Times
this morning about incentives for shippers to go put more secure devices
on the containers that are coming into the United States, the so-called
smart boxes.

And the incentives are very simple. You do this; you come through
customs very quickly. You don't do it, you go into the red zone and it's
going to take a lot longer for your shipment to clear customs. It makes
total sense, in my opinion.

There are a whole variety of dimensions in which we can provide that
kind of incentive to go beyond some minimum and to become a lot safer
that are not overly intrusive government regulations that provide
incentives for innovation and that will allow us to address this problem
at least cost over time.

MR. RAISCH: Mr. Susman from the private-sector perspective about minimal
regulations.

MR. SUSMAN: Well, I think minimal standards can be useful. As we suggest
as an approach to regulation generally is let's first see whether the
private sector responds on its own through incentives of the marketplace
-- insurance, liability, good citizenship, corporate board management.

In cases where years have gone by, government has said, "You should do
something," industry gets together and no progress occurs -- and we've
heard some examples of that -- then government appropriately can step in
at the time. Alright, what does government do when it steps in? These
standards don't come sort of like magically out of the head of Zeus.
They have to be developed by someone. And that's a process.

I don't have the answer about where it should be said, but I can suggest
that we have processes for going about regulating business that include
public participation, public notice, cooperation, sometimes negotiation,
studies, research, so that we do have some level of confidence that we
set the standard in the right place, because one of the problems, of
course, is if we miss by a lot in either direction, we either have done
nothing or we're going to have widespread avoidance activities, and we'd
be better off not having a standard.

MR. RAISCH: This might be a worthwhile opportunity to maybe segue to the
other, if you will, private-sector perspective, James Haviaris. Clearly
there's a lot of, on the building side of the house, of buildings and
owners, a lot of clear baseline standards that reflect themselves in
life safety codes, fire codes, building codes and so forth. And I guess
I would pose to you the question of do you see a need for evolution in
that regard in the post-9/11 environment? And how would you see that
happening?

MR. HAVIARIS: Well, it's very funny. I got your NFPA 1600 and I actually
had to read it, because that's not what building always follow. They
follow Local Law 5 in New York City. That's what everybody considers
their emergency preparedness. And it is predominantly for fire and
evacuation on just two floors -- the floor of the fire and the floor
below. That is it.

Full evacuations, I heard many people ask about liabilities and
questions, you know. It is a liability issue. Does a building owner have
a trophy property, having 9,000 to 10,000 people in the building at one
time, you want to evacuate in Manhattan? We saw it happen on 9/11. We
saw it happen the day after. And in the Rockefeller Center area, we had
upwards of 125,000 people on the street. We had to shut down streets.
Sixth Avenue, which almost never gets shut down, became total chaos. We
do not follow that code.

We would like to see a code now that does involve bombs, lethal gas,
radiation, water contamination. The Local Law 5 needs to evolve into a
bigger code that consists part of your NFPA 1600. But in New York City,
your major cities like Chicago, I think I agree with my panelists here
that there probably will need to be layers, depending on where you are.

The Rockefeller Group owns trophy properties in midtown Manhattan. We
also own properties on Exit 8-A in Cranberry, New Jersey that don't have
the same threat. We have property in buildings in Orlando, West Palm
Beach. There's no threat.

When we had all these threats and we had all these problems and I
conferred with my counterparts in these locations, they were going, "I'm
going home; I'll talk to you tomorrow." Meanwhile, I'm in Manhattan;
everybody was locked down. You couldn't get out or in, whether you liked
it or not.

I totally agree, there needs to be different levels. There needs to be
some cooperation between local, federal and state officials, though, and
all the parties involved in some kind of national code. You see this
right now with the electrical code. There's New York City code, there's
fire department code, and there's a national code.

And they've worked very hard now to comprise one code nationally. It
hasn't been approved and ratified by everybody yet, and it's two years
in the making. But if we could get to a point where we all have a code
and understand very literalistically that there's got to be different
levels, I think that's a very significant improvement for everyone at
this point.

MR. RAISCH: Actually, you echoed a number of things that came up in the
actual roundtables themselves, and they did reflect the frustration even
by those folks that were, if you will, internal code enforcement in the
firms themselves, saying, "Listen, I've got this on this side saying
this; I've got a federal code on that side; I've got city codes, state
codes," and clearly confusion, to a great extent, as to which is
predominant.

Question: In particular, New York State had an evolution -- it was
mentioned in New York City -- but an evolution of its code that was
referenced earlier today relative to Local Law 5 and the post-9/11
situation. We didn't really get into too great a detail in the prior
panel on that.

Are you familiar with those? I think it was 13 that were essentially
approved by the mayor. And what is your perspective on those, as to how
they are, their relevance in how they impact your operation?

MR. HAVIARIS: The 13 approved out of 22 will not have a major overall
impact as far as cost or manpower or anything like that goes. Some of
the bigger issues, you know -- the biggest issue right now is most
people do have their fresh-air intakes that supply your HVAC systems at
the street level, and they're very vulnerable. And a couple of my
buildings are that way. And the impact to change that would be in the
millions of dollars category, and lost revenue because of rental and
just trying to reconfigure the building.

The other codes that he's proposing changes, most of the building owners
were part of the committee are for it. And we'll make every effort to do
it quickly rather than wait for maybe or possibly his five-year rollout,
like there was with Local Law 5.

MR. RAISCH: Can you bullet-point two or three of what they were?

MR. HAVIARIS: The major one is we noticed that because you have fire
department electrical code, your staircases have to have lighting on a
four-hour battery backup. They don't have to run forever. And in a major
event, it's going take more than four hours to get everybody down the
staircase in a high-rise office building. So they're talking -- the
proposal was to put photo luminescent paint or tape or something like
that on the staircases.

The proposal to do full-building evacuations is great. It creates a code
that we have to follow and there's no more liability issues. We did it
in several buildings. People having health conditions couldn't make it
down the staircases. We had to call an ambulance. But if there's a code
in effect, everybody will follow and you can plan much better.

Those are two major ones that I see everybody complying with quickly.
The HVAC issue could be a nightmare for a lot of the bigger buildings,
especially the older ones, the vintage 1950s, much like Time & Life, the
old Rockefeller Center, the landmark properties, the Empire State
Building. They will have major issues trying to configure their building
and their systems to meet those codes.

MR. RAISCH: If we're to more or less kind of develop some sort of
relative consensus -- at least maybe to echo some of the comments, I
think on both private and public sector, there's a concurrence that some
level of standards or common directions are out there, a need clearly
for them out there, a desire perhaps in the private sector to lead with
voluntary and industry-oriented perspectives; to paraphrase, I think,
Mr. Susman, to essentially let us deal with our own issues to start
with, and if not, allow government to step in; the question being really
at what point in time do you think that would be appropriate?

But if we're looking -- just, again, to reflect that that is one of the
issues at least I heard on your end, a consensus that there's a need out
there for some directions, but a concern, if you will, relative to
government stepping in too soon. What type of timetable would you put on
that?

MR. SUSMAN: Actually, I'm glad you re-raised the issue, because it
sounds as if, when you repeat it -- and it's probably accurate -- that I
suggested that government ought not be involved from the start. The
interdependence of all of the businesses and business and government --
you mentioned sectors, technology and communications, transportation. I
mean, there are no clear lines.

And so the notion that government shouldn't be engaged and involved
early on is not what I was advancing. It was the notion that government
shouldn't start with the theory, with the approach "We need to regulate
this," that Congress and the agencies shouldn't begin with a regulatory
mentality, but government should participate in the development. And if
government is participating in the development of the standards, then
the government agencies involved will know when the time has come to
step in with the regulatory approach -- and if they're not, if they are
just sort of standing back, then they won't have an idea of how
difficult some of these issues can be to resolve. For example, they may
think that moving HVAC entries is a relatively easy thing to do. And
unless the people from the various responsible government agencies are a
part of that process, they wouldn't understand that you would have to
reconfigure a building to accomplish that goal.

MR. RAISCH: Peter?

MR. ORSZAG: I just wanted -- I guess I have a slightly different
perspective. I agree that the government should not approach, frankly,
any homeland security problem with the thought that a regulatory
approach especially an old command and control type regulatory approach,
is the initial way to go. But I think it is equally dangerous, and
perhaps frankly even more so given what we've observed over the past two
years, to assume that market forces alone will develop the security
that's needed. I just don't think that will happen. The incentives are
there, but they are not strong enough to provide an adequate level of
security, like Secretary Ridge himself emphasized. And to return to the
example of chemical facilities again, I think it's clear we've waited
too long. And I don't see why we continue to wait. It doesn't make any
sense to me. So while I agree that we should not assume that we're going
to regulate our way out of this problem, that would, A, be excessively
costly; and, B, not be particularly well attuned to the problem that we
face. Terrorism, unlike many other problems that government has tried to
tackle in the past, is an evolving threat in which the people that
commit the acts of terrorism can respond to what you've done. So you go
and regulate A, fix A, terrorists respond and just don't attack A --
they attack B. And that's a fundamental difference. You know, natural
catastrophes don't think that way, for example -- terrorists do. So a
regulatory approach is one that should be avoided and used as only a
last resort. I agree I think with Tom perhaps on that note. But I think
we should not approach this as thinking that the government can, not
exactly sit back, but at least just observe and interact without
worrying about how market incentives are aligned. You can't just let
markets work; you need to make markets work in homeland security. They
will not work by themselves.

MR. RAISCH: You've actually opened up the issue of incentives. And if we
presume for a moment on the standards side that there's a relative
consensus that whatever is done standard-wise should be joint in nature,
how soon the regulatory element comes to play is an issue of discussion
here. And perhaps some of those regulations, there's a clear
acknowledgement, at least on the standards side I should say, that
whatever standards are developed should be specific most likely where
possible to both industry as well as probably location and/or
organization size.

But if we move to really what is the second element of really what was
distilled down by the round table, and we look at the issue of
incentives, the question becomes given that for a moment that we have a
set of standards that arguably may be specifically developed in
cooperation on an industry basis, what is going to motivate their
application? And I've taken the liberty to throw up some existing
incentives if you will that are up there. I don't want to bound the
discussion by that, this mention of the OSHA emergency action plan
requirement which is a very fundamental simple requirement, really
requiring an evacuation plan -- really no description per se beyond that
other than the fact that it needs to be in writing if there are more
than 11 employees. Life-safety code compliances. Clearly we mentioned
earlier that those challenges still exist in terms of both sometimes
conflicting but also issues of jurisdiction. The legal liability issue
that was referenced earlier with respect to concern about liability for
suit -- we saw the federal judge, his ruling most recently in September
relative to the liability of the airlines themselves, and that as a
motivating factor. Certainly importance of general social commitment by
an organization to both its employees and its community business
survivability, hopefully a bottom-line oriented desire to make some
investments in that regard. And also some issues relative to insurance,
but that need for having some level of standard to define whether or not
an entity is prepared. Other incentives as well. But if we could start
at least initially discussing what the existing incentives that were out
there. So hold back if you will for a moment on what might be developed.
But what do you see, each of you, in terms of what's most effective out
there right now that is motivating at least some level, and maybe
perhaps could offer more prospect and more potential if it was
spotlighted? Peter Harvey?

MR. HARVEY: Well, I suppose a possible answer that I'll share with the
committee is one that I learned on a trip that Attorney General Sampson
and I took to London to meet with New Scotland Yard, and ultimately with
representatives of MI5, as we were trying to better understand
terrorism. As many of you know, London has gone through 30 years of
bombing, and so there are things that we take for granted here in the
United States that just don't exist here -- like garbage cans -- they
don't have them in train stations -- they're out in public -- because
they've had too many experiences of bombs being placed in garbage cans
and people walking away and it detonates.

But we got a presentation from a fellow who had been I think a colonel
in the British army, a bomb expert, and he gave a presentation on what
bombs can do to buildings -- how they shred glass, how buildings that
don't have proper support simply collapse. And we asked the question --
he made the observation that before businesses build buildings in London
or throughout England they come to check with these experts to get their
impression of the security procedures and technologies that are being
implemented with the construction design. And I said, "Well, what
happens if they don't do that?" He looked at me oddly and said, "Well,
that's the unthinkable." I said, "Well, what do you mean?" And he says,
"Well, they won't get insurance." He says first of all nobody will build
it because of legal liability, and, number two, nobody will insure it.

I think that there are some market forces out there that will help us
get to this goal of security. One is lawyers and lawsuits. They are a
very effective tool.

MS. GORELICK: Nobody has said that in the course of our hearings --
(laughter) -- nobody has thanked us lawyers at all. So thank you very
much for that. (Laughter.)

MR. HARVEY: You're welcome. Lawyers will help you get there, because
they will simply commence suits and they'll fight about it, and sooner
or later somebody will write a huge check, and they won't do it anymore.

The second is insurance companies. I have been for a long time, and
members of my staff, have been looking for a bomb expert here in New
Jersey, because I want to have the capability in the Office of
Counterterrorism that is in the attorney general's office -- and I've
said this to the 23 industry sectors, and I've said it to business
groups when I've had the opportunity to talk to them. I want to have the
capability of having engineers and bomb experts on my staff that can
tell a business and make suggestions to a business how a building ought
to be constructed or not constructed -- everything from having pylons
embedded in the roadway at a sufficient distance from the structure so
that if somebody is driving in a truck they can't penetrate the
building, to what kind of glass to use, what kind of brick to use, what
kind of reinforcements to use. I think it's a service the government can
provide.

Ultimately I believe that from a national standpoint it would be very
helpful, I think, to have some kind of national organization study these
kinds of issues and make recommendations. And you could almost set up
committees that can address various industries. These committees can
issue guidelines that address those committees. The committees can be
made up of persons from government as well as the private sector. And
the insurance companies that are looking for guidance can use those
kinds of guidelines to measure whether or not they are going to insure
or not insure a particular industry. And if the industry says we are not
going to abide by national organization guidelines number 63 or whatever
it is, the insurance company can say, fine, if you don't want to abide
by those guidelines, we are going to charge you 200 percent more than
we'll charge somebody who does abide by them.

MR. RAISCH: And in fact we had that alluded to in the roundtable.
Cognizant of the fact that we have both the opportunity of summarizing
at the end of the day, and also unfortunately we are the buffer for any
overages prior to that, I am going to ask each of you perhaps to address
both existing as well as prospective incentives in your comments. And we
want to give an opportunity for the Commissioners themselves to ask
questions of you. So with that being said, Tom, could you give a
perspective?

MR. SUSMAN: Let me mention three incentives. One is I think it's really
perhaps the most important that General Harvey mentioned, and that is
the role of government in assisting the development of best practices,
guidance, things of that sort. I also work with a number of small
businesses, and they haven't got the foggiest idea. They are not part of
a critical infrastructure sector. They probably need to do something.
They are very uneasy about the notion of OSHA regulating security. We
had this discussion earlier. OSHA may in fact be ubiquitous when it
comes to small businesses, but they are not viewed as a friend and ally,
and so they would hardly be the ones that would be looked to for
guidance. But I think that the Department of Homeland Security along
with whatever agency works with the industry, if any, or with local
government for small businesses could provide tremendous assistance in
that regard.

Secondly, if you have a regulatory incentive, that's the stick. If it's
going to be regulatory, I'll go along with the Orszag - market-friendly,
I like that -- I'm going to use that term -- performance standards, not
command and control standards, maximum flexibility. Agencies are doing
that now. I just went through a process with the Coast Guard under the
Maritime Security Act, and they allowed industries to develop
alternative plans, and they accommodated industry needs as part of those
alternative plans. And the alternative plans didn't meet the
international standards that were first produced in the Federal Register
a year ago, but they accommodated in a lot of special cases. And so that
approach to regulation can be done.

And, thirdly, incentives -- I mean, there is money. I mean, resources
are limited in local government, state government, the federal
government and the private sector. And I think all of these so-called
solutions that people are coming up with have costs. And we have to
remember there are trade-offs in each instance, and it doesn't work for
government to say, Oh, that's a good idea -- let's impose a mandate on
business and let them come up with the money for it, because that kind
of an approach then makes government unaccountable for what it's
requiring ultimately the public to pay. So, sure, tax incentives,
grants, loan programs -- there are a lot of good ideas of how you can
spend money to increase private sector preparedness. I think priority
setting is probably the most important element of that. We talked about
that some. It was talked about earlier in the day. All states are not
created equal. All ports are not equal, all buildings are not equal, all
chemical facilities are not equal. And so we have to set our priorities
before we start allocating resources.

MR. RAISCH: Thank you, Tom. James?

MR. HAVIARIS: Well, currently for a building owner, a manager incentive
for preparedness is pure rent. If you could say I installed -- I have
K-9 bomb detection dogs on my facilities, I have safety ballards, I have
X-ray machines, card access, CCTV, turnstiles -- just to name a few of
what some of the owners are going through, hopefully you could drive
your rent roll. You get a perspective tenant, the financial institutions
are probably the people that drive this right now, and they're willing
to pay a premium to have that at your facility. So that's probably the
biggest driving force for incentive, as well as most of the big property
managers and owners, and we feel it's a social responsibility to keep
Manhattan safe. And also it's an asset, they are a billion dollar assets
to everybody. Nobody wants to see them fall, nobody wants to see them
have a terrible accident which you couldn't recover from and probably
kill your company.

The future incentives? Everybody would love to see us meet some kind of
standard and get a lower premium for terrorism insurance. There's no
question about that -- and rebate on real estate taxes maybe. Or New
York City has or New York State has NYSERDA rebates, where you can get
electrical money spent as long as you increase your capacity or you do
some kind of savings of kilowatts. If there's something out there like
that, where people could put money into a building because I met a
certain criteria. People are very willing to do that.

MR. RAISCH: Thank you, James. Peter?

MR. ORSZAG: First, with regard to current incentives, I would join my
co-panelists in noting that legal liability and lawyers do provide
incentives. But I think that's actually a good example in which there
are inherent limits. Take an example where you have a firm worth -- you
know, make up whatever number you want -- a billion dollars. That firm
has an incentive to avoid a catastrophic attack. But it has no extra
incentive to avoid an attack that would impose costs of $10 billion,
$100 billion, $2 trillion -- because of the great thing of limited
liability attached to corporations. So that illustrates that there is an
incentive, but it's not sufficient. It doesn't do everything that we
need to do, because there's no incentive for the firm to avoid the
really catastrophic attacks as opposed to the somewhat catastrophic
attacks.

Forward looking, again, I think market-based regulations will play some
role. By market-based or performance-based I mean we don't specify the
number of exit doors you need and the number of this thing and that
thing you need. Instead you set a target. For example, you need to be
able to show if you've got more than X thousand people in your building
that you can evacuate them within Y period of time. And whatever way you
want to come up with achieving that goal, that's fine, but you have to
show us that you can do it.

And I would agree, I think the Coast Guard, the recent regulatory
rule-making was actually a fairly good example of what could be done.

Also forward looking, we need to avoid creating a massive government
bureaucracy in these areas. We can't afford that, and it wouldn't make
good sense anyway. There are promising examples at the state level in
which you don't need such a large bureaucracy. Let me give you one
example. In Delaware and Pennsylvania, in order to conform with Section
112(r), which applies to the safety instead of security, but the safety
of chemical plants, the state level EPAs have allowed -- have basically
said, insurance firms, you can go out and hire third-party auditors to
go in and inspect the firms. That then feeds back into the insurance
premiums and provides a guidance to the insurance firms and to the
chemical facilities themselves. But the third-party auditors are then
playing a very important role, because you don't need as many EPA
officials. Furthermore, they are becoming centers of best practices.
They can go into -- after visiting plants A, B, and C, they can go into
plant D and say, well, you guys really didn't do so well here, and you
should know what other firms in the industry are doing -- you could do
this, you could do that -- to help get the security up to a sufficient
level. I think that kind of model is the right one in many sectors.

Finally, on tax incentives, while they may have a role in the portfolio,
I would just remind the panel that we do face a very significant fiscal
gap at the federal level, and so there are inherent limits to the degree
to which we can unfortunately take advantage of that tool without
passing more costs on in terms of future national income.

MR. RAISCH: Peter, thank you. A final point, very briefly. In terms of
education, it was distilled down in terms of the commentary given to us
by the various roundtables, was essentially threefold: Number one, give
us some sort of standard what to do in terms of private sector. Number
two, publicize those and give us some sort of sense of what the
incentives are to do it. Tell us why we should do it. And, finally,
promote in your efforts one way or another some sort of level of
training so that we know how to do it. And that I think perhaps most
succinctly really reflects what the comments were in terms of the actual
roundtable discussions that we held prior to this.

That being said, I would certainly defer to the Commission and whoever
would care to speak.

MR. HAMILTON: Commissioners Gorelick and Fielding? Mr. Fielding,
Commissioner Fielding?

MR. FIELDING: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman. First of all, I
would like to thank, and I know the Commission would like to thank you
all for this presentation. It's been very helpful, it's been very
lively, and it's been insightful. And we appreciate that. And I also
would be remiss if I didn't make comment about how impressed we are with
the work of the state of New Jersey. It certainly seems to be at the
front end of meeting this challenge.

In respect to the hour, I will just have one question. Our task at the
end of the day is that we have to make recommendations. So if you sense
some frustration on our part, it's because we are in areas where we are
on uncharted water and we are trying to figure out what recommendations
we should make. I mean, our basic task is to understand what happened on
9/11, what might have been done to protect it and prevent it, and what
recommendations we have to make to ensure as best one can that the
mistakes of the past are not repeated.

In making recommendations, we obviously have to make them that are
realistic and practical and workable. There are a lot of recommendations
you could make, but they're not going to go anywhere. These have to be
workable recommendations.

And we are studying the federal government and how it reacted and how it
was prepared for terrorist attacks. But as you heard many times today,
the private sector controls 85 percent of the crucial infrastructure of
the nation. So the national preparedness can't be separated from the
preparedness in the private sector. It can't be.

So I guess what I'd like you each to do is join our commission for the
moment, and you have the opportunity to make one recommendation in this
area. I'd be appreciative if each of you would try. Peter?

MR. HARVEY: One of the things I looked at before coming here, I think
there was Presidential Decisional Directive 63 that sets up a kind of
model that there are interesting parallels between that model and New
Jersey statutes that created the domestic security preparedness task
force, in that it matched governmental entities that had responsibility
for certain industry sectors with those industries to work collectively
on procedures, security procedures. Now, whether you follow that by
using all the breadth of the existing agencies, or whether you take that
model and house it in a particular agency, like Homeland Security, I
would leave to you. But I do think that in order for you to develop
workable, intelligent standards that will be followed by the industry, I
think you need a collection of governmental persons that have expertise
in that area, and industry representatives who have expertise in this
area. And I don't mean industry figureheads. I mean the technical people
who really know what their business is, who can sit down and help you
work through these issues about security, what's workable, what's not
workable. And I think secondly there ought to be some national body that
promulgates these regulations and then helps private industry and
government exercise to test a lot of these security procedures.

One of the things that has been most beneficial to us in New Jersey is
that we conduct exercises. We conduct tabletop exercises. And we just
this past weekend did a full-scale one out at the Port Authority that
involved several municipalities, the Port Authority, federal agencies
and several state agencies. Because we have to see if these things will
work. Our goal is not to pat ourselves on the back and prove how smart
we are. Our goal is to find flaws in what our practices are so we can
change them. We know that there's going to be another attack here --
it's just a matter of when. We also know that that attack is going to
occur to private industry, because that is how you hurt America. You
cripple our economy and you frighten us. So we are always thinking the
private sector. Nobody is going to hit downtown Trenton, New Jersey or
Newark, New Jersey or the city hall in New York City. That's a worthless
target. They're going to hit an office building or some kind of plant
that disrupts that industry.

So I would suggest that you follow the model that we have in New Jersey,
and I think that is reflected in Presidential Decisional Directive 63.
And whether you do it by using multiple entities and agencies in the
federal government or whether you house it in a single agency, I think
you need to do it, and I think you need to make that expertise available
to states that really want to do this but don't have the resources to do
it economically, don't have the structure to do it governmentally. And I
think you have to make some of this available on the Internet and by
software, CD-ROM, so that you can essentially train people to farm,
rather than farming for them.

MR. FIELDING: Mr. Susman?

MR. SUSMAN: Great question, and I do have one answer. You're limiting
the answer to one, right?

MR. FIELDING: One. We'll accept others later.

MR. SUSMAN: I don't know how to do this, but I want to think about it,
and we should all think about it. But I think probably we would move the
fastest and farthest towards security and preparedness if every business
entity, government institution, et cetera would be required -- here's
where I step back -- I'm not wearing anybody's hat -- required to think
about security and preparedness and write down your assessment of how
your institution or business is doing. Okay?

Now, I don't follow this up by saying some government agency, a homeland
security czar ought to swoop down and read it and tell you where you're
going wrong. I don't know the answer there. I think employees,
shareholders, insurers, would all be very interested in what you had to
say. And I do see with large and small businesses that there is -- many
of them are doing a great job of assessment and planning. But, many,
many are not. And so just maybe thinking about security would lead to a
great deal of action in boards of directors and among senior managers
who have left this to their security and risk staffs so far.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you.

Mr. Haviaris?

MR. HAVIARIS: I think the building managers and owners would just like
to see one governing body that takes the lead in developing, mandating
and enforcing the code and not have, like we have in New York City, the
fire department superceding the building department and the building
department superceding the national electrical code, and the electrical
code superseding somebody else. We would like to see one governing body
that we have some input with. And not to berate anybody here, but not
with the CEOs -- with the technical people, the meat-and-potato people,
or the people in the trenches, for lack of a better word. I think that
would all do us justice as an owner or a manager of a building.

MR. ORSZAG: Mr. Fielding, I'm going to give you one answer with two
parts. (Laughter.) The two things that I think would be most effective.
First, I think that you should recommend, and I would have the
Department of Homeland Security take the lead here with deference to
industry groups as appropriate, but ultimate responsibility rests with
the Department of Homeland Security, to set standards by a date certain
in the top -- you can truncate it however you like -- the top ten
sectors, and we can go down the list -- chemicals, transportation,
telecom, et cetera -- it's not hard to make the list -- by a date
certain. And if you want -- if the Department of Homeland Security wants
to defer to one of the ISACs or an industry group to set the standards,
fine, but by X. There has to be a standard.

Part B is -- and this goes beyond what might be immediately feasible,
but I think that in areas in which a terrorist attack would involve the
loss of thousands of lives or the substantial interruption of millions
of lives, that mandating anti-terrorism insurance would provide the kind
of market-based pricing incentive that would be effective. And I think
-- my own personal thing is it has to be mandated to avoid the problems
that otherwise occur in insurance markets with collection effects and
the greatest risk not taking up the insurance.

MR. FIELDING: Mr. Moderator, do you want to join us too?

MR. RAISCH: I would love to. Briefly, I'd say if you could do one single
focus it would be to spotlight a particular, albeit it high level
standard, process-based standard. And FPA 1,600 was started in 1992.
It's had dozens and dozens of organizations. It's build upon the
experience of decades of FEMA's involvement. It yet has nonetheless been
signed off by private sector entities. It is clearly not the detailed
level or with the specificity that one would like to have down the road
with one for chemical, one for transportation, et cetera. But it is a
functional base standard that I think on the whole could be a very
effective voluntary standard paralleling I believe it was Mr. Gorton
earlier today when he focused on ISO -- parallel the ISO experience
where in fact entities would look to embrace this as part of their -- if
you will two-fold, their marketing perspective. They are in fact an FPA
1,600 compliant organization. And, secondly, once that's in place, it
would allow the insurance companies themselves to give that price and
underwriting perspective that they discussed. It would also allow
market-driven approaches, just as we heard from the Rockefeller Center
experience. If an entity was in fact complying with an FTA 1,600, it
would be the possibility that whether it be a tenant situation or
whether it be an individual that might even be an employee, they could
decide whether or not they wanted to work for or do business with a
particular entity if it had this accreditation. So I think that's
doable. The standard is out there, it's existent. It's already
reflective of over 10 years of evolution, and I think that's doable in
the short run.

MR. FIELDING: Thank you all very much.

MS. GORELICK: It's been a long day, but I think all us have learned
quite a bit from it, and actually as the day has evolved each panel has
built on the one before in a very interesting way, at least for this
commissioner. And because Bill has asked the questions, which is
normally our role, I'm going to make a statement or summary, which is
normally your role. (Laughter.)

First of all, I learned a lot from the written material. I think Peter
Orszag's piece is very interesting, and I commend everyone on the
roundtable piece that Tom Susman did is terrific. And, substantively,
you all have provided us with lots of grist for the mill.

What is interesting to me is at the end of this day there is in fact
something emerging like a consensus. And here's what I'm hearing: First
of all, we have to have a standard-setting process, and it has to
involve a tremendous amount of industry input and ownership, if you can
get it. Sometimes you can't always get it. It's true, Peter Harvey, that
the ISAC process established in PDD 63 looks great -- not happening, in
my personal view. Could, but they are not standing up and saying we are
going to set standards for our industry. They're just not where they
need to be. And therefore government's role is in establishing a
timetable and sense of urgency with the ultimate notion that if the
private sector can't come together or won't come together there will be
a standard set for it, which is a pretty good incentive from my
perspective in counseling industry. So that's number one.

Number two, if you do have standards, it seems to me all of you are
saying they have to be performance based, that command and control,
micromanaging by government doesn't work. And a corollary of that is
agility. I think one of you -- it may have been Peter -- made the
observation that you can't just solve for the last attack and the last
challenge. And therefore we have to figure out a way to be agile in a
way that we haven't been before. Agility and government regulation are
not two words, two concepts that you generally hear in the same breath.
At the same time they need to be cohesive so that, James, so that the
private sector is not responding to six different inconsistent
requirements.

And then we talked about incentives -- the carrot that flows from lower
insurance premiums, for example; or the stick that comes from legal
liability, if you don't do what is reasonable, what the industry has set
as a standard. And I liked very much Tom Susman's point about the other
stakeholders, that just giving transparency to what a company is doing
or not will unleash all kinds of pressures that are really not there
right now, because there is not that transparency. So the board members,
the shareholders, the community members I think would be good pressure
on industry to step up to the plate.

And then one thing I would add of my own, which we haven't really heard
today, but which I think is true, is that if you have a standard, and it
becomes the way in which an industry addresses a particular problem,
then the one company that would otherwise be the leader and be perhaps
out there all by itself doesn't bear the cost that puts it at a
competitive disadvantage. And that's where this sort of regulation, if
you will, is pro-business, because right now if you expend the money to
make yourself hardened against the attack and to do the right thing for
your employees, you are incurring a layer of costs which your
competitors may not be. And that's something that business understands
and appreciates, and is fearful of.

So that I saw as your pupil this afternoon is what I have taken from
your lessons, and I want to say I think it's been an enormously valuable
experience.

Thank you very much.

MR. KEAN: I want to thank the panel very, very much. You have
contributed greatly to our knowledge and our work, and I suspect to our
recommendations. I want to thank members of the families of 9/11. I
think we probably had more families here than at any other event we
probably held on this commission. And I want to thank them for their
continuing help, for the work of this commission. I want to thank Drew
University in the person of its board chair, Barbara Caspersen, who I
think has been here for almost the entire day I think. And thank you
very much, and thank the university.

For me, we take from today's hearing perhaps three principal lessons.
First, that the 9/11 catastrophe was not just about government choices,
but it was also about private sector choices, and whatever is true 9/11
is certainly true today: businesses own 85 percent of America's critical
infrastructure. Second, that private sector preparedness and our
evaluation of it is hampered because there is no generally accepted
standards for companies to aim at or against so they can then be judged.

Third, even if such standards did exist, there would still be a need
somehow to develop incentives -- financial or regulatory or both, so
that the private sector could improve its preparedness.

The centrality of the private sector to any national security strategy
was underscored, I think, early in the day by John Degnan from Chubb,
who outlined tremendous exposure faced by the industry and the private
sector generally from future attack.

When preparedness fails, people die. We saw that human cost first hand
in the moving testimony of Sally Regenhard and Monica Gabrielle, two
people who have turned their private tragedies into tremendous public
service.

We learned that there are some good public-private partnerships that are
now underway. They are working in tandem for preparedness at the local,
regional and national level, including those sponsored by the federal
government's Department of Homeland Security. But there are some
critical areas that really need a lot more focus.

We learned that a multitude of codes and standards exist for fire safety
in buildings and evacuation plans, but no one standard is either
enforceable or operative nationally. And this confusion makes life
harder for firms that indeed perfect preparedness.

Finally, we had a frank discussion of the need for better incentives to
spur private sector actions. Although there is no current consensus on
whether regulatory, insurance or corporate governance would be most
effective in providing incentives for private sector preparedness, it
seems to me the overriding message of today's hearing is clear: we
ignore the absence of proper standards and incentives for private sector
preparedness at our own peril. Many of the lessons from 9/11, bought at
such a terrible price, are becoming very apparent, but they have not yet
been learned.

Thank you all very much for today's hearing.

Congressman Hamilton and I will be available for a press availability
right after this session.

Thank you all very, very much.

(Sounds gavel.)

(Applause.)

PRESS AVAILABILITY FOLLOWING PUBLIC HEARING, 5:00 P.M.

STAFF: Would members of the media please come forward now? I would
appreciate it very much. And would the public extend the media the
courtesy of asking the questions. And we ask the media please to state
your name and your affiliation.

Thank you very much.

MR. KEAN: Mike? Oh, I'm sorry. You don't have a question.

Q Governor Kean, could you just outline the terms of the agreement with
the White House -- (inaudible) -- out?

MR. KEAN: We probably will be releasing the terms I suspect tomorrow,
provided that we -- what we want to do tonight and maybe tomorrow is to
discuss who our representatives should be for the special panel who's
going to review all the documents. And I think it might be appropriate
really to release the terms at the time we release the members' names
and all that. Does that make sense?

Q Are some of the members going to be -- (off mike)?

MR. KEAN: Well, if we told you, that wouldn't be releasing it tomorrow.
(Laughter.)

Q (Off mike)?

MR. KEAN: Yeah, but then that might get modified.

MR. HAMILTON: Well, the Commission has not actually acted yet with
regard to the representatives, and we will be doing that this evening
and tomorrow, and I think our plan at the moment is not only to release
the names of the so-called "gang of two" and "gang of four," but also to
give you a fairly precise outline of what the agreement is. We will do
that tomorrow.

Q Any word on the FAA and the --

STAFF: State your affiliation.

Q Oh, Robert Hennelly, WNYC Public Radio. Any response from the FAA or
NORAD?

MR. KEAN: What is the --

MR. HAMILTON: Well, we have -- yes, we have had a response from them and
a good bit of information delivered to the Commission since the
subpoena. We have not evaluated that completely, so we don't know if
there's a complete response. But there's certainly after our meeting
with Secretary Rumsfeld, and then that was followed by the subpoena to
NORAD, we have had a response which supplied us with a lot of additional
material.

Q -- Free Press. You talked a little about building codes -- (off mike)
-- I am (still missing ?) an investigation to Building 7. I would like
to hear three answers on why they are not looking to inspect that
Building 7 was -- (off mike) -

Thanks.

MR. KEAN: I don't have the answers to any of those, but I would suggest
that you submit them in writing and give them to our staff and we'll try
to get you an answer.

Q (Off mike) -- Port Authority and officials for the City of New York --
(inaudible) -- ? What's your reaction to that

MR. KEAN: We have -- that's one of our task forces, really very much
into the whole response in the area of New York City. We are already
investigating that area. We'll probably --

Q You will be bringing them?

MR. KEAN: We will probably have a public hearing in that area, and we'll
certainly have the officials of the City of New York at that public
hearing.

MR. HAMILTON: There's been a lot of emphasis in the Commission so far
about getting access to federal documents and papers. But in order to
tell the story of 9/11 and to make recommendations we need information
from New York City as well, and I think we are in the process of getting
it, and there certainly will be a lot of attention to not just the
federal response, but state and local response as well.

Q What about the Port Authority? Bob Hennelly, WNYC -- the Port
Authority, have they already complied fully?

MR. HAMILTON: I don't want to comment on that. I don't know actually.
But they certainly are on our radar screen.

MR. KEAN: All the document requests are out there. The papers are coming
in. It may be just a touch early to evaluate totally the response. If
the response is not adequate, we will tell you.

Q Randall Pinkston, CBS News. With respect to the agreement with the
Executive Branch, do you anticipate that this agreement will eliminate
the need for subpoena of executive branch documents going forward?

MR. HAMILTON: We make no judgment about the entire executive branch.
There's still many agencies in the Executive Branch to consider, and we
certainly hold open the possibility of additional subpoenas. So the
agreement that we have reached with the White House does not preclude
action on other executive branch agencies.

Q Mr. Chairman, Peter -- (inaudible) -- CBS Radio. A lot of
commissioners asked panel members to give grades and assessments. How
would you assess overall the cooperation of the federal government, the
city of New York and the Port Authority individually?

MR. HAMILTON: Well, I thought the answer given this morning was pretty
good -- incomplete. I say that somewhat facetiously. It's a serious
question. But we still are very much in mid process here, and I think
enormous amounts of documentation has been presented to us. We don't
frankly know the answer to the question whether everything the agencies
and departments have have been presented, but enormous amounts of
material have been. Now, that varies somewhat from department to
department, but overall they have been quite responsive.

But we are now at a point in the investigation where we have a lot of
very specific questions on our mind, and we have a lot of very specific
documents we want to see. And I'm not able to answer whether we have all
of those documents yet. I don't think anybody on the staff can answer
that yet, but we are certainly narrowing the focus of our investigation.

MR. KEAN: We are. It is massive. The staff tells me we have access to
over two million documents right now.

Q With so much stuff out -- Hennelly, WYNC -- with so much time spent on
document production, how are you feeling about your overarching timeline
in terms of your deadline?

MR. KEAN: Pressed. (Laughter.) There's no question we have a staff that
is working long hours, well beyond the normal working day, a number of
them working weekends, and --

(Tape change)

MR. HAMILTON: -- the commission and the media. But it's important to
recognize that while that effort for access has gone forward, a lot of
staff work -- a lot of staff work has been done on the subsequent
questions, so that staff for the last several months have been, number
one, writing the narrative of what happened and what did not happen on
September 11th. And, number two, they have begun to shape for us the
broad policy questions that we'll have to address. So, you're right, a
lot of attention on access. But that is only a part of what the
Commission has been doing.

Q Larry Arnold from AP. You've maintained your practice of not asking
witnesses at the public hearings to take oaths. Are you all taking oaths
in your private interviews of people?

MR. HAMILTON: The Commission is moving into a stage of interviewing a
very large number of officials. Some of that has been done, but not most
of it, and the Commission will be discussing the question of
administration of oaths. No final judgment has been made about that.

Q And then none has been issued -- it hasn't happened yet?

MR. HAMILTON: No, I -- in some instances it has been done. I'm not going
to identify those instances for you, but it is a future question for us,
immediately before us.

Q As I remember this morning, you said in your opening remarks that no
one could have anticipated the events of 9/11. Isn't that a question
that the Commission is charged with determining?

MR. KEAN: No one could have anticipated what actually happened. Whether
or not there should have been some things done that would have lessened
the chances of happening, or even prevented it in some cases, is
certainly a question for the Commission. To say that anybody out there
anticipated the 9/11 attacks --

Q Have you reached the conclusion that no one could have anticipated the
events of 9/11?

MR. KEAN: If we -- at the end of our work we will reach conclusions, not
now.

Q Governor, just clarify something -- the documents that will be given
to you by the White House, will they be redacted or not?

MR. KEAN: No.

Q They will not be redacted?

MR. KEAN: No.

Q Are they selected portions -- 9/11 Citizens Watch -- are they selected
portions? They're not the whole PDB?

MR. HAMILTON: They are fully responsive to our requests.

Q Let me follow up with my other question. There have been complaints by
family members that what you are going to see will not have the context
of say, for example, if it were a daily briefly, will not be the fully
briefing in context rather, paragraphs that meet the requirements, or
refer directly to 9/11.

MR. HAMILTON: Look, we have a mandate. That mandate is specific. It's
not open-ended. We cannot request information and materials that are not
pursuant to the mandate. We have made requests that we think are
necessary to fulfill our mandate.

Now, there are many things that happened in the national security area
that are not within our mandate, and we have not asked for them. But we
believe that we will have access to all of the materials that are
responsive to our requests, and that will enable us to fulfill our
mandate.

MR. KEAN: I might say the requests that went out to the White House were
no different in that regard than the requests that went out to any other
government agency. They're always specific as to our mandate.

Q Let me just say if there is a document, a free document and it has
about your mandate -- the things that occurred that produced the 9/11
event, and also other things in them, those other things in them will be
redacted?

MR. KEAN: If half the document is on 9/11 and half the document is on
China, we will not see the half on China.

Q Tom Flocco, from the TomFlocco.com. Governor, I'll ask you this
question: Following up on that, regarding the readers and the selection
of the readers once they are selected, will there be presidential
minder-lawyers with them, sitting with you as these documents are being
read, and you're only allowed to take notes -- is that correct? You are
not allowed to make carbon photocopies -- you're only allowed to take
notes from what you read? Is that correct?

MR. HAMILTON: I don't think we should go into the details yet, the
details to that extent, at this point. But the question of minders has
come up, however not in this context. And so the answer to your question
is no, minders will not be present. The question of minders has come up
in the context of interviews.

Q Who would supervise the notes that you take if you're not making
photocopies?

MR. HAMILTON: I think we should go into that in more detail tomorrow
probably.

Q Kyle Hence, 9/11 Citizens Watch. It has come to light there is a
discrepancy between what Condoleezza Rice represented to the nation on
May 18th in the wake of releasing certain details in the presidential
daily brief when she said that it was outside the box to think that
planes could be used as weapons. I understand in the Joint Inquiry there
were some people who came forward who indicated that indeed there was
understanding or knowledge or awareness of that potential threat, that
method of attack. How would you go about, or how are you going about
resolving the differences between what Condoleezza Rice represented to
the nation -- this is completely outside the box -- when clearly there
were inferences in which it was well established that there was this
kind of method had been contemplated by terrorists? So --

MR. HAMILTON: We will of course look carefully at any statement made by
the National Security Advisor, but that is not the only source of our
information. So we will be looking at a variety of sources of
information. The question on everybody's mind, I guess, is what did the
Presidents Clinton and Bush know, and when did they know it, with regard
to terrorism, and I am not going to venture a guess to answer that now,
except to say that I think we will have available to us information
which will permit us to make a judgment on the crucial questions that
are confronting the country on 9/11.

Q But that specific conflict in terms of witnessings and accounts,
things that you've heard, or on one hand someone saying it was outside
the box, we didn't know about it?

MR. HAMILTON: I just don't want to try to make a judgment as to whether
or not there was a specific contradiction. We will certainly be looking
at the statements of the National Security Advisor. We'll be looking at
a lot of other information that flows to the president and to other
top-level officials. And if there are in fact differences in that, we
will note them.

Q NSC documents and briefings would be part of that process?

(Cross talk.)

MR. KEAN: Let's go to somebody who hasn't asked a question yet.

(Cross talk.)

Q When news came out about the settlement it appeared there was some
controversy within the Commission itself -- some members were not too
happy with the settlement as it was announced. Have you resolved those
differences with them, or are there still some disagreement in the
Commission?

MR. KEAN: We've had some honest differences in the Commission, not only
on this question, but other questions as well. We have had a number of
votes where there majority of the Commission has not been -- where the
majority of the Commission is decided but all the commissioners haven't
been of the same mind. And that's going to be true on a number of
issues. On this particular issue, the original position of all of us was
that every commissioner should be able to see every document. That was
what we all believed. That was the position we took into the
negotiation. We made a compromise in which the majority of the
Commission believed will enable us to see all the materials that we need
to do our job.

Some members of the Commission still would have been happy and think
that maybe we should have stuck to the original position, and I guess
they believe somehow that may have prevailed. So it's an honest
difference, and there will be other honest differences as we go along.
The important thing to me in the kind of Washington that I've run into
in this investigation, what's interesting and valuable I think is that
we have got five Republicans and five Democrats in a city with great
partisan divides, and we've never had five Republicans on one side and
five Democrats on the other in any of the controversial votes we've had
since Day One, and I hope that continues.

Q Continuing up on that, I noticed two of the members were not here
today. Is there any reason for that?

MR. KEAN: They had other business.

MR. HAMILTON: May I say in response to your question, as the Chairman
has stated, the Commission would have been very pleased if all 10
commissioners have seen all the documents. The only problem with that
position is it doesn't take into account the other side here, and you do
have to reach an accommodation. And it is the view of the Chairman and
the Vice Chairman that had we held to the position that all 10
commissioners must see the documents, we would not have access to the
critical documents we need to make crucial judgments. We would have had
no access.

STAFF: Thank you very much.

END

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9/11 Commission Hearing 12/8/2003](120803.md)
