[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ar01)  [Next](ar03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852006/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Apocalypse Revealed*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1766\], tr. by John
Whitehead \[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocalypse Revealed

<span class="margnote"><span id="51.">51.</span></span>

Verse 16. And having in His right hand seven stars, signifies all the
knowledges of good and truth in the Word, which are thence with the
angels of heaven and with the men of the church. Around the angels, when
they are below the heavens, there appear, as it were, little stars in
great abundance; and in like manner, around spirits, who, when they
lived in the world, had acquired to themselves knowledges of good and
truth, or truths of life and doctrine from the Word. These stars appear
fixed, with those who are in genuine truths from the Word; but wandering
with those who are in falsified truths. Concerning those little stars,
as also concerning the stars which appear there in the firmament, I
could relate wonderful things, but it does not belong to this work:
hence it is evident that by "stars" are signified the knowledges of good
and truth from the Word. "The Son of man had them in His right hand,"
signifies, that they are from the Lord alone through the Word. That
"seven" signify all, may be seen above (n. 10). \[2\] That the
knowledges of good and truth from the Word, are signified by "stars,"
may also appear from these passages: I will lay the earth waste; The
stars of the heavens and the constellations thereof shall not give their
light (Isa. 13:9-10). "The earth" which shall be laid waste, is the
church; which being vastated, the knowledges of good and truth in the
Word do not appear: And when I shall extinguish thee, I will cover the
heavens and make the stars thereof dark: All the luminaries of light
will I make dark over thee, and I will set darkness upon the land (Ezek.
32:7-8). "Darkness upon the land," means falsities in the church: The
sun and the moon have been darkened, and the stars have withdrawn their
splendor (Joel 2:10; 3:15). After the affliction of those days shall the
sun be obscured, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars
shall fall from heaven (Matt. 24:29; Mark 13:24). The stars of heaven
fell to the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs (Rev.
6:13). A star fell from heaven to the earth (Rev. 9:1). By "stars
falling from heaven" are not meant stars, but that the knowledges of
good and truth will perish. \[3\] This is still more evident from its
being said, that: The dragon drew down the third part of the stars from
heaven (Rev. 12:4). Also that: The he-goat cast down some of the stars
and trampled them (Dan. 8:9-11). Therefore in the next verse in Daniel
it is also said that: It cast down the truth to the earth (Dan. 8:12).
The knowledges of good and truth are also signified by "stars," in these
passages: Jehovah telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all
by names (Ps. 147:4). Praise Jehovah, all ye stars of light (Ps. 148:3).
The stars fought in their ways (Judges 5:20). From hence it appears what
is meant by these words in Daniel: And the intelligent shall be
resplendent as the splendor of the expanse, justifying many as the stars
for ages of ages (Dan. 12:3). The "intelligent" are those who are in
truths; "justifying" those who are in goods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="52.">52.</span></span>

And out of his mouth a sharp two-edged sword going forth, signifies the
dispersion of falsities by the Word, and by doctrine thence from the
Lord. Mention is very often made in the Word of "sword," "saber," and
"long sword," and by them nothing else is signified but truth fighting
against falsities and destroying them; and, also, in the opposite sense,
the falsity fighting against truths; for by "wars" in the Word, are
signified spiritual wars, which are wars of truth against falsity, and
of falsity against truth; wherefore, by "the arms of war," such things
are signified as are made use of in spiritual wars. That the dispersion
of falsities by the Lord is here meant by sword \[romphoea\] is evident,
because, it was seen "to go out of his mouth;" and to go out of the
mouth of the Lord, is to go out of the Word, for this the Lord spoke
with His mouth; and as the Word is understood by doctrine, thence this
is also signified. It is called "a sharp two-edged sword," because it
penetrates the heart and soul. \[2\] To show that by "sword" is here
meant the dispersion of falsities by the Word from the Lord, some
passages shall be adduced in which sword \[gladius\] is mentioned: A
sword against Babylon, her princes, and her wise ones; O sword against
the liars that they may become foolish; O sword against the mighty, that
they may be dismayed; O sword against her horses, and her chariots; O
sword against her treasures, that they may be despoiled. A drought is
upon her waters, that they may be dried up (Jer. 50:35-38). These things
are said of Babylon, by which those are meant who falsify and adulterate
the Word, therefore by the "liars" who will become foolish, and the
"horses and chariots" upon whom there is a sword, and the "treasures"
which will be despoiled, are signified the falsities of their doctrine.
That the "waters" upon which is a drought that they may be dried up,
signify truths, may be seen above (n. 50). \[3\] Prophesy, and say, A
sword is sharpened, and also furbished, sharpened to make a great
slaughter; and let the sword be repeated the third time; the sword of
the pierced; the sword of a great piercing, penetrating the inner parts,
that stumbling blocks may be multiplied (Ezek. 21:9-20). By "sword" is
here also meant the devastation of truth in the church. Jehovah will
plead by His sword with all flesh, and the pierced of Jehovah shall be
multiplied (Isa. 66:16). They are called "the pierced of Jehovah" here,
and in other parts of the Word, who perish by falsities. The wasters are
come upon all the hills in the wilderness; the sword of Jehovah is
devouring from the end of the earth, even to the end of the earth (Jer.
12:12). We get our bread with the peril of our lives, because of the
sword of the wilderness (Lam. 5:9). Woe to the worthless shepherd that
deserteth the flock; the sword shall be upon his arm and upon his right
eye (Zech. 11:17). The sword upon the right eye of the shepherd is the
falsity of his understanding. The sons of men are inflamed, their tongue
is a sharp sword (Ps. 57:4). Behold they belch out with their mouth; a
sword is in their lips (Ps. 59:7). The workers of iniquity whet their
tongue like a sword (Ps. 64:3). The same is signified by sword in other
places, as in Isa. 13:13, 15; 21:14-15; 27:1; 31:7-8; Jer. 2:30; 5:12;
11:22; 14:13-18; Ezek. 7:15; 32:10-12. \[4\] Hence it may appear what
the Lord meant by "sword" in the following passages: Jesus said, He came
not to send peace on earth, but a sword (Matt. 10:34). Jesus said, He
that hath not a purse and a scrip, let him sell his garments and buy a
sword. The disciples said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And He
said unto them, It is enough (Luke 22:36, 38). All they that take the
sword, shall perish with the sword (Matt. 26:51-52). Jesus says,
concerning the consummation of the age: They shall fall by the edge of
the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations, and at length
Jerusalem shall be trodden down (Luke 21:24). "The consummation of the
age" is the last time of the church; "the sword" is falsity destroying
truth; the "nations" are evils; "Jerusalem" which shall be trodden down,
is the church. \[5\] Hence, then, it is evident, that by "a sharp sword
going out of the mouth of the Son of man," is signified the dispersion
of falsities by the Lord by means of the Word. The same is signified in
the following passages in Revelation: And there was given unto him who
sat upon the red horse a great sword (Rev. 6:4). And out of the mouth of
Him who sat upon the white horse goeth a sharp sword, that with it He
should smite the nations. And the remnant were slain with the sword of
Him that sat upon the horse (Rev. 19:15, 21). By "Him who sat upon the
white horse," the Lord as to the Word, is meant, which is plainly
declared (verses 13, 16). The same is meant in David: Gird thy sword
upon thy thigh, O Mighty One. Ride upon the word of truth. Thine arrows
are sharp (Ps. 45:3-5); speaking of the Lord. And in another place: The
saints shall exult, and the sword of their mouths is in their hand (Ps.
149:5-6). And in Isaiah: Jehovah hath made my mouth a sharp sword (Isa.
49:2).

<span class="margnote"><span id="53.">53.</span></span>

And His face was as the sun shineth in His power, signifies the Divine
love and the Divine wisdom, which are Himself, and proceed from Himself.
That by "the face of Jehovah," or of the Lord, is meant the Divine
Himself in His Essence, which is the Divine love and the Divine wisdom
thus Himself, will be seen in the explanations below, where mention is
made of "the face of God." The same is signified by "the sun shining in
His power." That the Lord is seen as a sun in heaven before the angels,
and that it is His Divine love together with His Divine wisdom, which so
appear, may be seen in the work concerning Heaven and Hell, published in
London, 1758 (n. 116-225); and in The Angelic Wisdom concerning the
Divine Love and Wisdom (n. 83-172). \[2\] It remains here only to be
confirmed from the Word, that the "sun," when mentioned in reference to
the Lord, signifies His Divine love, and at the same time His Divine
wisdom; this may appear from the following places: In that day the light
of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, it shall be sevenfold, as
the light of seven days (Isa. 30:26). "That day" is the advent of the
Lord when the old church is destroyed, and a new one is about to be
established; "the light of the moon" is faith from charity, and "the
light of the sun" is intelligence and wisdom from love, and thus from
the Lord. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw
itself; for Jehovah shall be an everlasting light (Isa. 60:20). The sun
which shall not set, is love and wisdom from the Lord. The rock of
Israel spake unto me, as the light of the morning when the sun ariseth
(2 Sam. 23:3-4). The "rock of Israel" is the Lord: His throne shall be
as a sun (Ps. 89:36-37). This is said of David; but by "David" is there
meant the Lord. They shall fear thee with the sun. In his days shall the
just flourish, and abundance of peace until there is no moon; the name
of the Son shall be before the sun; and all nations shall be blessed in
Him (Ps. 72:5, 7, 17). \[3\] This also is said of the Lord. Because the
Lord appears as a sun in heaven before the angels, therefore: When He
was transfigured, His face did shine as the sun, and His raiment became
as the light (Matt. 17:1-2). And it is said of the strong angel who came
down from heaven, that: He was clothed with a cloud, and His face was as
it were the sun (Rev. 10:1); and of the woman, that: She was seen
clothed with the sun (Rev. 12:1). "The sun" in these passages also
signifies love and wisdom from the Lord; "the woman" is the church,
which is called the New Jerusalem. \[4\] Since, by "the sun," is meant
the Lord as to love and wisdom, it is evident what is signified by "the
sun" in the following places: Behold the fierce day of Jehovah cometh;
the sun shall be darkened in its rising, and the moon shall not make her
light to shine; I will visit upon the world its wickedness, and upon the
impious their iniquity (Isa. 13:9-11; see also Isa. 24:21, 23). And when
I shall have extinguished thee, I will cover the heavens, and I will
make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the
moon shall not cause her light to shine, and I will set darkness upon
thy land (Ezek. 32:7-8). The day of Jehovah cometh, a day of darkness,
the sun and the moon shall not make their light to shine, and the stars
have withdrawn their splendor (Joel 2:10). The sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great day of Jehovah
cometh (Joel 2:31). The day of Jehovah is near in the valley of
decision. The sun and the moon shall be darkened (Joel 3:14-15). The
fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was smitten, the
third part of the stars, and the day shone not for a third part of it
(Rev. 8:12). The sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon
became as blood (Rev. 6:12). The sun was obscured by the smoke of the
pit (Rev. 9:2). In these passages by "sun" is not meant the sun of this
world, but the sun of the angelic heaven, which is the Divine love and
the Divine wisdom of the Lord; these are said to be "obscured,"
"darkened," "covered," and "blackened" when there are evils and
falsities with man. \[5\] Hence it is evident, that similar things are
meant by the Lord's words, where He speaks of the consummation of the
age, which is the last time of the church: Immediately after the
affliction of those days shall the sun be obscured, and the moon shall
not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven (Matt. 24:29;
Mark 13:24-25). And in like manner in the following passages: And the
sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall grow black over
them (Micah 3:5-6). In that day I will cause the sun to set at noon, and
I will darken the earth in the day of light (Amos 8:9). She that hath
borne seven shall breathe out her soul; her sun is set while it is yet
day (Jer. 15:9). This is said of the Jewish church, which was "to
breathe out its soul," that is, would perish; "the sun shall set,"
signifies that there will be no longer any love and charity. \[6\] It is
said in Joshua, that: The sun stood still in Gibeon, and the moon in the
valley of Ajalon (Josh. 10:12-13). This appears as if it was historical,
but it is prophetic, being quoted from the book of Jasher, which was a
prophetic book; for it is said: Is not this written in the book of
Jasher? (Josh. 13). The same book is also mentioned as prophetic by
David (2 Sam. 1:17, 18); something similar is also said in Habakkuk: The
mountains were moved, the sun and moon stood in their seat (Hab.
3:10-11). Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon be
withdrawn (Isa. 60:20). For to make the sun and moon stand still would
be to destroy the universe. \[7\] Since the Lord as to the Divine love
and the Divine wisdom is meant by "the sun," therefore the ancients in
their holy worship turned their face to the rising of the sun; and also
their temples, which custom still continues. That the sun of the world
is not meant in these places by "the sun," is evident from its having
been considered profane and abominable to adore the sun and moon of the
world, as may be seen in Num. 25:1-4; Deut. 4:19; 17:3, 5; Jer. 8:1, 2;
43:10, 13; 44:17-19, 25; Ezek. 8:16; for by "the sun of the world" is
meant the love of self and the pride of one's own intelligence; and the
love of self is diametrically opposite to the Divine love; and the pride
of one's own intelligence is opposite to the Divine wisdom. To adore the
sun of the world is also to acknowledge nature as the creator, and one's
own prudence to be effective of all things, which involves the denial of
God, and the denial of the Divine providence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="54.">54.</span></span>

Verse 17. And when I saw Him, I fell at His feet as dead, signifies that
from such presence of the Lord there was a defect or deprivation of his
own life. A man's own life cannot sustain the presence of the Lord, such
as the Lord is in Himself, yea, such as He is in the inmosts of His
Word; for His Divine love is altogether like the sun, which no one can
bear as it is in itself, without being consumed. This is what is meant
by saying that: No one can see God and live (Exod. 33:29; Judges 13:22).
This being the case, therefore the Lord appears to the angels in heaven
as a sun, at a distance from them, as the sun of this world is from men;
the reason is, because the Lord in Himself is in that sun. But yet the
Lord so moderates and tempers His Divine that man can sustain His
presence. This is effected by veilings. It was so done when He revealed
Himself to many in the Word. Yea, by veilings He is present with
everyone who worships Him; as He Himself says in John: He that doeth My
commandments, with him I will make My abode (John 14:21, 23). That He
will be in them, and they in Him (John 15:4-5). Hence it is evident why
John, when he saw the Lord in such glory, fell at His feet as dead; and
also, why the three disciples, when they saw the Lord in glory, were
heavy with sleep, and a cloud covered them (Luke 9:32, 34).

<span class="margnote"><span id="55.">55.</span></span>

And He laid His right hand upon me, signifies life then inspired from
Him. The reason why the Lord "laid His right hand upon him," is, because
communication is effected by the touch of the hands. The reason is that
the life of the mind, and thence of the body, puts itself forth into the
arms, and through them into the hands. On this account: The Lord touched
with His hands those whom He restored to life and healed (Mark 1:31, 41;
7:32-33; 8:22-26; 10:13, 16; Luke 5:12-13; 7:14; 18:15; 22:51). And in
like manner: After His disciples saw Jesus transfigured, and they fell
on the face (Matt. 17:6-7). The origin of this is, because the presence
of the Lord with man is adjunction, and thus conjunction by contiguity;
and this contiguity is near and fuller in proportion as man loves the
Lord, that is, does His commandments. From these few things it may
appear, that by "laying His right had upon him," is signified inspiring
him with His life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="56.">56.</span></span>

Saying unto me, Fear not, signifies resuscitation, and then adoration
from the deepest humiliation. That it is resuscitation to life, is a
consequence of what went before (n. 55); and that it is adoration from
the deepest humiliation, is evident, for he fell at the Lord's feet. And
as a holy fear seized him, the Lord said, on his being resuscitated,
"Fear not." Holy fear, which sometimes is joined with a sacred tremor of
the interiors of the mind, and sometimes with horripilation, supervenes,
when life enters from the Lord in place of one's own life. One's own
life is to look from one's self to the Lord, but life from the Lord is
to look from the Lord to the Lord and yet as if from himself. When man
is in this latter life, he sees that he himself is not anything, but the
Lord only. Daniel also was in this holy fear, when: He saw the man
clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with gold of Uphaz, his body
like the beryl, his face like lightning, his eyes like torches of fire,
his arms and feet as the splendor of polished brass, upon seeing whom
Daniel also became as dead, and a hand touched him, and it was said,
Fear not, Daniel (Dan. 10:5-12). Something similar occurred to Peter,
James, and John, when the Lord was transfigured, and was seen: As to His
face like the sun, and His garments as the light, upon which they also
fell upon their faces, and feared for themselves greatly, and then Jesus
coming near, touched them, saying, Fear not ye (Matt. 17:2, 6-7). The
Lord also said unto the women who saw Him at the sepulcher, Fear not
(Matt. 28:10). Likewise the angel, whose face appeared like lightning,
and his garment as snow, said unto those women, Fear not ye (Matt.
28:3-5). The angel said to Zechariah also, Fear not (Luke 1:12-13). In
like manner the angel said to Mary, Fear not (Luke 1:30). The angels
said to the shepherds also, when the glory of the Lord shone round about
them, Fear not (Luke 2:9-10). A similar holy fear seized Simon, by
reason of the draught of fishes; therefore he said: Depart from me, for
I am a sinful man, O Lord; but Jesus said unto him, Fear not (Luke
5:8-10; besides other places). These are adduced that it may be known
why the Lord said to John, "Fear not," and that by it is meant
resuscitation, and then adoration from the deepest humiliation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="57.">57.</span></span>

I am the First and the Last, which signifies that He alone is infinite
and eternal, thus the only God, may appear from the explanation above
(n. 13, 29, 38).

<span class="margnote"><span id="58.">58.</span></span>

Verse 18. And am He that liveth, signifies who alone is life, and from
whom alone life is. Jehovah, in the Word of the Old Testament, calls
Himself the living, and He that liveth, because He alone lives; for He
is love itself and wisdom itself, and these are life. That there is one
only life, which is God, and that angels and men are recipients of life
from Him, is abundantly shown in Angelic Wisdom concerning Divine Love
and Wisdom. Jehovah calls Himself "the living" and "He that liveth"
(Isa. 38:18-19; Jer. 5:2; 12:16; 16:14-15; 23:7-8; 46:18; Ezek. 5:11).
The Lord as to His Divine Human also is life, because the Father and He
are one; therefore He says: As the Father hath life in Himself, so hath
He given to the Son to have life in Himself (John 5:26). Jesus said, I
am the resurrection and the life (John 11:25). Jesus said, I am the way,
the truth, and the life (John 14:6). In the beginning was the Word, and
God was the Word; in Him was life; and the Word became flesh (John
1:1-4, 14). Because the Lord is the only life, it follows that from Him
alone life is derived; therefore He says: Because I live, ye shall live
also (John 14:19).

<span class="margnote"><span id="59.">59.</span></span>

And was dead, signifies that He was neglected and His Divine Human not
acknowledged. By "his becoming dead" is not meant that He was crucified,
and so died, but that He was neglected in the church, and His Divine
Human not acknowledged, for so He is dead with men. His Divine from
eternity is indeed acknowledged, but this is Jehovah Himself; but His
human is not acknowledged to be Divine, although the Divine and the
Human in Him are like soul and body, and therefore are not two but one,
yea, one Person, according to the doctrine received throughout the whole
Christian world, which has its name from Athanasius. When, therefore,
the Divine in Him is separated from the Human, by saying that His Human
is not Divine, but like the human of another man, in this case He is
dead with men. But concerning this separation and thus making dead the
Lord, more may be seen in Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the
Lord; and in Angelic Wisdom concerning Divine Providence (n. 262-263).

<span class="margnote"><span id="60.">60.</span></span>

And behold, I am alive for ages of ages, signifies that He is life
eternal. Now as, "Who am living" signifies that He alone is life, and
from Him alone life is (as above, n. 58), it follows that "Behold I am
alive for ages of ages" signifies that He alone is life to eternity, and
consequently that eternal life is from Him alone; for eternal life is in
Him, and consequently from Him. "Ages of ages" signifies eternity. That
eternal life is from the Lord alone is plain from the following
passages: Jesus said, Whosoever believeth in Me shall not perish, but
shall have eternal life (John 3:16). Everyone that believeth in the Son
hath eternal life, but he who believeth not in the Son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abideth on him (John 3:36; 6:40, 47-48).
Verily, I say unto you, he that believeth in Me hath eternal life (John
6:47). I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth in Me,
though he die, shall live; and whosoever believeth in Me, shall not die
to eternity (John 11:25-26; and in other places). Hence, then, the Lord
is called, "He that liveth for ages of ages"; as also in the following
passages: Rev. 4:9-10; 5:14; 10:6; Dan. 4:34.

<span class="margnote"><span id="61.">61.</span></span>

Amen, signifies the Divine confirmation that it is the truth. That
"amen" is the truth, which is the Lord, may be seen above (n. 23).

<span class="margnote"><span id="62.">62.</span></span>

And I have the keys of hell and death, signifies that He alone can save.
By "keys" is signified the power of opening and shutting; here the power
of opening hell, that man may be brought forth, and of shutting, lest,
when he is brought forth, he should enter again. For man is born in
evils of all kinds, thus in hell, for evils are hell; he is brought out
of it by the Lord, to whom belongs the power of opening it. That by
"having the keys of hell and death," is not meant the power of casting
into hell, but the power of saving, is because it immediately follows
after these words: Behold, I am alive for ages of ages; by which is
signified that He alone is eternal life (n. 60); and the Lord never
casts anyone into hell, but man casts himself. By "keys" is signified
the power of opening and shutting, in Revelation also (3:7; 9:1; 20:1;
also in Isa. 22:21, 22; in Matt. 16:19; and in Luke 11:52). The power of
the Lord is not only over heaven, but also over hell; for hell is kept
in order and connection by oppositions against heaven; for which reason,
He who rules the one must necessarily rule the other; otherwise man
could not be saved; to be saved is to be brought out of hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="63.">63.</span></span>

Verse 19. Write the things which thou hath seen, and the things which
are, and the things which shall be hereafter, signifies that all the
things now revealed are for the use of posterity; as may appear without
explanation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="64.">64.</span></span>

Verse 20. The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in My right
hand, and the seven golden lampstands, signifies arcana in visions
concerning the New Heaven and the New Church. That by "seven stars" is
signified the church in the heavens, and by "seven lampstands" the
church on the earth, will be seen in what now follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="65.">65.</span></span>

The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, signifies the New
Church in the heavens, which is the New Heaven. The church is in the
heavens equally as on the earth; for the Word is in the heavens equally
as it is on the earth, and there are doctrines from it, and preachings
from it; on which subject see The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem
concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 70-75, and n. 104-113). That church
is the New Heaven, concerning which something is said in the preface.
The reason why the church in the heavens, or the New Heaven, is meant by
"the seven stars," is, because it is said, that "the seven stars are the
angels of the seven churches," and by "angel" is signified a heavenly
society. In the spiritual world there appears an expanse full of stars,
as in the natural world, and this appearance is from the angelic
societies in heaven. Each society there shines like a star before those
who are below; hence they there know in what situation the angelic
societies are. That "seven" does not signify seven, but all who are of
the church there according to the reception of each, may be seen above
(n. 10, 14, 41); therefore, by "the angels of the seven churches," is
meant the entire church in the heavens, consequently the New Heaven in
the aggregate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="66.">66.</span></span>

And the seven lampstands which thou sawest are the seven churches,
signifies the New Church upon earth, which is the New Jerusalem
descending from the Lord out of the New Heaven. That "the lampstands"
are the church, may be seen above (n. 43); and because "seven" signify
all (n. 10), by "the seven lampstands" are not meant seven churches, but
the church in the aggregate, which in itself is one, but various
according to reception. Those varieties may be compared to the various
diadems in the crown of a king; and they may also be compared to the
various members and organs in a perfect body, which yet make one. The
perfection of every form exists from various things being suitably
arranged in their order. Hence it is, that the whole New Church is
described as to its varieties by "the seven churches," in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="67.">67.</span></span>

THE FAITH OF THE NEW HEAVEN AND THE NEW CHURCH, IN ONE UNIVERSAL IDEA,
is this, that the Lord from eternity, who is Jehovah, came into the
world that He might subjugate the hells, and glorify His Human; and that
without this no mortal could be saved; and that they are saved who
believe in Him. \[2\] It is said, in a universal idea, because this is
the universal of faith, and the universal of faith is what must be in
each and every thing of it. It is a universal of faith, that God is one
in Person and in essence, in whom there is the Trinity, and that the
Lord is that God. It is a universal of faith, that no mortal could be
saved unless the Lord came into the world. It is a universal of faith,
that He came into the world that He might remove hell from man; and that
He did remove it by combats against it and by victories over it; thus He
subjugated it, and reduced it into order, and under obedience to
Himself. It is also a universal of faith, that He came into the world to
glorify the Human, which He assumed in the world, that is, might unite
it with the Divine from which it was; thus having subjugated hell, He
keeps it in order and under obedience to Himself to eternity. Now as
neither of these could have come to pass except by means of temptations,
even to the last of them; and the last of them was the passion of the
cross, therefore He endured that. These are the universals of faith
concerning the Lord. \[3\] The universal of the Christian faith on man's
part, is, to believe in the Lord; for by believing in Him conjunction is
effected with Him, and by conjunction, salvation. To believe in Him is
to have confidence that He saves, and because no one can have confidence
but he who lives well, therefore this also is meant by believing in Him.
\[4\] These two universals of the Christian faith have been specifically
treated of; the first, which relates to the Lord, in The Doctrine of the
New Jerusalem concerning the Lord; and the second, which relates to man,
in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning Charity and Faith, and
in The Doctrine of Life; and both now in the explanations of Revelation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="68.">68.</span></span>

Revelation 2 1. Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write; These
things saith He that holdeth the seven stars in His right hand, who
walketh in the midst of the seven golden lampstands. 2. I know thy
works, and thy labor, and thy endurance, and that thou canst not bear
the evil, and hast tried them that say they are apostles, and are not,
and hast found them liars; 3. And hast borne, and hast endurance, and
for My name's sake hast labored, and hast not fainted. 4. But I have
against thee, that thou hast left thy first charity. 5. Remember
therefore from whence thou hast fallen; and repent, and do the first
works; but if not I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
lampstand out of its place, except thou repent. 6. But this thou hast,
that thou hatest the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. 7. He
that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.
To him that overcometh I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is
in the midst of the paradise of God. 8. And unto the angel of the church
of Smyrna write; These things saith the First and the Last, who was
dead, and is alive. 9. I know thy works, and affliction, and poverty,
and the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews and are not, but are
the synagogue of Satan. 10. Fear none of those things which thou shalt
suffer. Behold, the devil will cast some of you into prison, that ye may
be tried: and ye shall have affliction ten days: be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a crown of life. 11. He that hath an ear,
let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. He that overcometh
shall not be hurt of the second death. 12. And to the angel of the
church in Pergamos write, These things saith He that hath the sharp
two-edged sword. 13. I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, even
where Satan's throne is; and thou holdest fast My name, and hast not
denied My faith, even in those days in which Antipas was My faithful
martyr, who was slain among you where Satan dwelleth. 14. But I have a
few things against thee, that thou hast there them that hold the
doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumblingblock before the
sons of Israel, to eat idol-sacrifices, and to commit whoredom. 15. So
thou hast, even thou, them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans,
which I hate. 16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
will fight with them with the sword of My mouth. 17. He that hath an
ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. To him that
overcometh I will give to eat of the hidden manna; and will give him a
white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no one knoweth
but he that receiveth it. 18. And unto the angel of the church in
Thyatira write; These things saith the Son of God, who hath His eyes
like unto a flame of fire, and His feet like fine brass. 19. I know thy
works, and charity, and ministry, and faith, and thy endurance, and thy
works; and the last to be more than the first. 20. But I have a few
things against thee, that thou permittest that women Jezebel, who
calleth herself a prophetess, to teach, and to seduce My servants to
commit whoredom, and to eat idol-sacrifices. 21. And I gave her time to
repent of her whoredom, and she repented not. 22. Behold, I will cast
her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great
affliction, except they repent of their works. 23. And I will kill her
sons with death. And all the churches shall know that I am He that
searcheth the reins and hearts; and I will give unto each one of you
according to your works. 24. But unto you, I say, and unto the rest in
Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, and who have not known the
depths of Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you none other
burden. <span id="fr_5"></span>[68-1](#fn_5) 25. Nevertheless, that
which ye have, hold fast till I come. 26. And he that overcometh and
keepeth My works unto the end, to him will I give power over the
nations; 27. And he shall rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels
of a potter shall they be broken in pieces; even as I have received from
My Father. 28. And I will give him the morning star. 29. He that hath an
ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. THE SPIRITUAL
SENSE THE CONTENTS OF THE WHOLE CHAPTER. To the churches in the
Christian world: To those there who primarily regard truths of doctrine
and not goods of life, who are meant by the church of Ephesus (n.
73-90). To those there who are in goods as to life and in falsities as
to doctrine, who are meant by the church of Smyrna (n. 91-106). To those
there who place the all of the church in good works, and not anything in
truths, who are meant by the church in Pergamos (n. 107-123). And to
those there who are in faith from charity, as also to those who are in
faith separated from charity, who are meant by the church in Thyatira
(n. 124-152). All these are called to the New Church, which is the New
Jerusalem. The contents of each verse Verse 1. "Unto the angel of the
church of Ephesus write," signifies to those and concerning those who
primarily regard truths of doctrine, and not goods of life (n. 73).
"These things saith He that holdeth the seven stars in His right hand,"
signifies the Lord, from whom through the Word, are all truths (n. 74).
"Who walketh in the midst of the seven golden lampstands," signifies
from whom enlightenment is to those who are of His church (n. 75). Verse
2. "I know thy works," signifies that He sees all the interiors and
exteriors of man at once (n. 76). "And thy labor and thy endurance,"
signifies their study and patience (n. 77). "And that thou canst not
bear the evil," signifies that they cannot bear that evil should be
called goods and the reverse (n. 78). "And hast tried them that say they
are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars," signifies that
they scrutinize those things which are called goods and truths in the
church, which nevertheless are evils and falsities (n. 79). Verse 3.
"And hast borne and hast endurance," signifies patience with them (n.
80). "And for My name's sake hast labored, and hast not fainted,"
signifies their study and endeavor to procure the things which belong to
religion and its doctrine (n. 81). Verse 4. "But I have against thee,
that thou hast left thy first charity," signifies that this is against
them, that they do not hold the goods of life in the first place (n.
82). Verse 5. "Remember therefore from whence thou hast fallen,"
signifies remembrance of their error (n. 83). "And repent, and do the
first works," signifies that they ought to invert the state of their
life (n. 84). "But if not I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove
thy lampstand out of its place, except thou repent," signifies that
otherwise, of a certainty, enlightenment will not be given them to see
truths any longer (n. 85). Verse 6. "But this thou hast, that thou
hatest the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate," signifies that
they know this from their truths, and thence are not willing that works
should be meritorious (n. 86). Verse 7. "He that hath an ear, let him
hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches," signifies that he that
understands, ought to obey what the Divine truth of the Word teaches
those who will be of the New Church, which is the New Jerusalem (n. 87).
"To him that overcometh," signifies he who fights against evils and
falsities, and is reformed (n. 88). "Will I give to eat of the tree of
life," signifies appropriation of the good of love and charity from the
Lord (n. 89). "Which is in the midst of the paradise of God," signifies
interiorly in the truths of wisdom and faith (n. 90). Verse 8. "And unto
the angel of the church of Smyrna write," signifies to those and
concerning those who are in goods as to life, but in falsities as to
doctrine alone (n. 91). "These things saith the First and the Last,"
signifies the Lord, that He alone is God (n. 92). "Who was dead and is
alive," signifies that He is neglected in the church, and His Human not
acknowledged to be Divine, when yet as to that also He alone is life,
and from Him alone is eternal life (n. 93). Verse 9. "I know thy works,"
signifies that the Lord sees all their interiors and exteriors at once
(n. 94). "And affliction and poverty," signifies that they are in
falsities, and thence not in goods (n. 95). "And the blasphemy of them
that say they are Jews, and are not," signifies the false assertion that
they are in the goods of love, when yet they are not (n. 96). "But are
the synagogue of Satan," signifies, because they are in falsities as to
doctrine (n. 97). Verse 10. "Fear none of those things which thou shalt
suffer," signifies, despair not when infested by evils and assaulted by
falsities (n. 98). "Behold the devil will cast some of you into prison,"
signifies that their good of life will be infested by evils from hell
(n. 99). "That ye may be tried," signifies by falsities fighting against
them (n. 100). "And ye shall have affliction ten days," signifies that
it will endure its full time (n. 101). "Be thou faithful unto death,"
signifies reception of truths until falsities are removed (n. 102). "And
I will give thee a crown of life," signifies that they will then have
eternal life, the reward of victory (n. 103). Verse 11. "He that hath an
ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches," signifies
here, as before (n. 104). "He that overcometh," signifies he that fights
against evils and falsities, and is reformed (n. 105). "Shall not be
hurt of the second death," signifies that afterwards they will not
succumb to evils and falsities from hell (n. 106). Verse 12. "And to the
angel of the church in Pergamos write," signifies to those and
concerning those who place the all of the church in good works, and not
anything in truths of doctrine (n. 107). "These things saith He that
hath the sharp two-edged sword," signifies the Lord as to the truths of
doctrine from the Word, by which evils and falsities are dispersed (n.
108). Verse 13. "I know thy works," signifies here, as before (n. 109).
"And where thou dwellest," signifies their life in darkness (n. 110).
"And thou holdest fast My name, and hast not denied My faith," signifies
when yet they have religion and worship according to it (n. 111). "Even
in those days in which Antipas was My faithful martyr, who was slain
among you where Satan dwelleth," signifies when all truth was
extinguished by falsities in the church (n. 112). Verse 14. "But I have
a few things against thee," signifies that the things which follow are
against them (n. 113). "That thou hast there them that hold the doctrine
of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling-block before the sons of
Israel, to eat idol-sacrifices, and to commit whoredom," signifies that
there are some among them who do hypocritical works, by which the
worship of God in the church is defiled and adulterated (n. 114). Verse
15. "So thou hast, even thou, them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which I hate," signifies that there are some among them
also who make works meritorious (n. 115). Verse 16. "Repent" signifies
that they should take heed of such works (n. 116). "Or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will fight with them with the sword of My mouth,"
signifies, if not, that the Lord will contend with them from the Word
(n. 117). Verse 17. "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
saith unto the churches," signifies here, as before (n. 118). "To him
that overcometh," signifies here, the same as before (n. 119). "I will
give to eat of the hidden manna," signifies the appropriation then of
the good of celestial love, and thus conjunction of the Lord with those
who work (n. 120) "And I will give him a white stone," signifies truths
favoring and united to good (n. 121). "And in the stone a new name
written," signifies that thus they will have good of a quality such as
they had not before (n. 122). "Which no one knoweth but he that
receiveth it," signifies that it does not appear to anyone, because it
is inscribed on their life. Verse 18. "And unto the angel of the church
in Thyatira write," signifies to those and concerning those who are in
faith from charity, and thence in good works; and also to those and
concerning those, who are in faith separated from charity, and thence in
evil works (n. 124). "These things saith the Son of God who hath His
eyes like unto a flame of fire," signifies the Lord as to the Divine
wisdom of His Divine love (n. 125). "And His feet like fine brass,"
signifies Divine good natural (n. 126). Verse 19. "I know thy works,"
signifies here, as before (n. 127). "And charity and ministry,"
signifies the spiritual affection which is called charity, and its
operation (n. 128). "And faith, and thy endurance," signifies truth and
the desire of acquiring and teaching it (n. 129). "And <span
id="fr_6"></span>[68-2](#fn_6) the last to be more than the first,"
signifies the increase thereof from the spiritual affection of truth (n.
130). Verse 20. "But I have a few things against thee," signifies what
follows (n. 131). "That thou permittest that woman Jezebel," signifies
that among them there are some in the church who separate faith from
charity (n. 132). "Who calleth herself a prophetess," signifies, and who
make the doctrine of faith alone the doctrine of the church (n. 133).
"To teach and to seduce My servants to commit whoredom," signifies, from
which it comes to pass that the truths of the Word are falsified (n.
134). "And to eat idol-sacrifices," signifies the defilement of worship,
and profanations (n. 135). Verse 21. "And I gave her time to repent of
her whoredom, and she repented not," signifies that they who have
confirmed themselves in that doctrine do not recede, although they see
things contrary to it in the Word (n. 136). Verse 22. "Behold, I will
cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great
affliction," signifies that therefore they will be left in their
doctrine with falsifications, and that they will be grievously infested
by falsities. "Except they repent," <span id="fr_7"></span>[68-3](#fn_7)
signifies if they will not desist from separating faith from charity (n.
138). Verse 23. "And I will kill her sons with death," signifies that
all the truths of the Word will be turned into falsities (n. 139). "And
all the churches shall know that I am He that searcheth the reins and
hearts," signifies that the church may know that the Lord sees the
quality of everyone's truth, and the quality of his good (n. 140). "And
I will give unto each one according to his works," signifies that He
gives unto everyone according to the charity and its faith which is in
the works (n. 141). Verse 24. "But unto you I say, and unto the rest in
Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine," signifies to those with
whom the doctrine of faith is separated from charity, and to those with
whom the doctrine of faith is joined with charity (n. 142). "And who
have not known the depths of Satan," <span
id="fr_8"></span>[68-4](#fn_8) signifies they who do not understand
their interiors, which are mere falsities (n. 143). "I will put upon you
none other burden," signifies only that they should beware of them (n.
144). Verse 25. "Nevertheless, that which ye have, hold fast till I
come," signifies that they should retain the few things which they know
concerning charity, and thence concerning faith from the Word, and live
according to them until the Lord's coming (n. 145). Verse 26. "And he
that overcometh and keepeth My works unto the end," signifies those who
are in charity and thence actually in faith, and remain in them to the
end of their lives (n. 146). "To him will I give power over the
nations," signifies that they shall overcome the evils in themselves
which are from hell (n. 147). Verse 27. "And he shall rule them with a
rod of iron," signifies by truths from the literal sense of the Word,
and at the same time by rational things from natural light (n. 148). "As
the vessels of a potter shall they be broken in pieces," signifies as of
little or no account (n. 149). "Even as I have received from My Father,"
signifies this from the Lord, who, when He was in the world, procured to
Himself all power over the hells, from His Divine which was in Him (n.
150). Verse 28. "And I will give him the morning star," signifies
intelligence and wisdom then (n. 151). Verse 29. "He that hath an ear,
let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches," signifies here,
as before (n. 152).

<span class="margnote"><span id="69.">69.</span></span>

THE EXPLANATION. This and the following chapter treat of the seven
churches, by which are described all those in the Christian church who
have any religion, and out of whom the New Church, which is the New
Jerusalem, can be formed; and this is formed of those who approach the
Lord alone, and at the same time perform repentance from evil works. The
rest, who do not approach the Lord alone, from the confirmed denial of
the Divinity of His human, and who do not perform repentance from evil
works, are indeed in the church, but have nothing of the church in them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="70.">70.</span></span>

Since the Lord alone is acknowledged as the God of heaven and earth by
those who are of His New Church in the heavens, and by those who will be
of His New Church upon earth; therefore, in the first chapter of
Revelation the Lord alone is treated of; and in the two following
chapters, it is He alone who speaks to the churches, and He alone who
will give the happy things of eternal life. That it is He alone who
speaks to the churches is evident from these passages: Unto the angel of
the church of Ephesus write, These things saith He who holdeth the seven
stars in His right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden
lampstands (Rev. 2:1). Unto the angel of the church of Smyrna write,
These things saith the First and the Last (Rev. 2:8). To the angel of
the church of Pergamos write, These things saith He which hath the sharp
two-edged sword (Rev. 2:12). Unto the angel of the church in Thyatira
write, These things saith the Son of God, who hath His eyes like unto a
flame of fire, and His feet like fine brass (Rev. 2:18). Unto the angel
of the church in Sardis write, These things saith He that hath the seven
spirits of God, and the seven stars (Rev. 3:1). To the angel of the
church in Philadelphia write, These things saith He that is holy, He
that is true, He that hath the key of David (Rev. 3:7). And unto the
angel of the church in Laodicea write, These things saith the Amen, the
faithful and true Witness, the Beginning of the creation of God (Rev.
3:14). These are taken from the first chapter, in which the Lord alone
is treated of, and He Himself is there described by all these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="71.">71.</span></span>

That the Lord alone will give the happy things of eternal life to those
who are and will be of His church is evident from these passages: The
Lord said to the church of Ephesus, To him that overcometh will I give
to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God
(Rev. 2:7). Unto the church in Smyrna, I will give thee a crown of life.
He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death (Rev. 2:10-11).
Unto the church in Pergamos, To him that overcometh will I give to eat
of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a
new <span id="fr_9"></span>[71-1](#fn_9) name written, which no man
knoweth but he that receiveth it (Rev. 2:17). Unto the church in
Thyatira, To him will I give power over the nations, and I will give him
the morning star (Rev. 2:26, 28). Unto the church in Philadelphia, Him
that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of My God; and I will
write upon him the name of My God, the name of the New Jerusalem, and My
new name (Rev. 3:12). Unto the church in Laodicea, To him that
overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in my throne (Rev. 3:21). From
these passages it is also evident, that the Lord alone is acknowledged
in the New Church. Hence it is that this church is called the Lamb's
wife (Rev. 19:7, 9; 21:9-10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="72.">72.</span></span>

That the New Church, which is the New Jerusalem, is formed of those who
repent of evil works is also manifest from the Lord's words to the
churches: To Ephesus; I know thy works; I have against thee, that thou
hast left thy first charity. Repent, and do the former works; or else I
will remove thy lampstand out of its place, except thou repent (Rev.
2:2, 4-5). To the church in Pergamos; I know thy works, repent (Rev.
2:13, 16). To the church in Thyatira; I will deliver her into
affliction, except they repent of their works, I will give unto everyone
of you according to his works (Rev. 2:19, 22-23). To the church in
Sardis; I have not found thy works perfect before God, repent (Rev.
3:1-3). To the church in Laodicea; I know thy works, be zealous, and
repent (Rev. 3:15, 19). Now follows the explanation itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="73.">73.</span></span>

Verse 1. Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write, signifies, to
those and concerning those, who primarily regard the truths of doctrine
and not the goods of life. It was shown above (n. 66), that by "the
seven churches" are not meant seven churches, but the church in the
whole complex, which in itself is one, but various according to
reception; and that those varieties may be compared with the various
members and organs in a perfect body, which yet make one. They may also
be compared with the various diadems in a king's crown; and hence it is
that the whole New Church, with its varieties, is described, in what now
follows, by "the seven churches." That by the church of Ephesus, are
meant those in the church who primarily regard the truths of doctrine
and not the goods of life, is clear from the things written to that
church, when understood in the spiritual sense. It is written to "the
angel" of that church, because by an angel is meant an angelic society
which corresponds to a church consisting of such, as above (n. 65).

<span class="margnote"><span id="74.">74.</span></span>

These things saith He that holdeth the seven stars in His right hand,
signifies the Lord, from whom through the Word are all truths. That "He
that holdeth the seven stars in His right hand," is the Lord, and that
"the seven stars in His right hand" are all the knowledges of good and
truth in the Word, which are thence from the Lord, with the angels of
heaven and the men of the church, may be seen above (n. 51). The
knowledges of good and truth from the Word are truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="75.">75.</span></span>

Who walketh in the midst of the seven golden lampstands, signifies, from
whom all those who are of His church have enlightenment. That "the seven
lampstands, in the midst of which was the Son of man," signify the
church, which is in enlightenment from the Lord, may be seen above (n.
43, 66). He is here said "to be walking," because "to walk" signifies to
live (n. 167), and "in the midst," signifies in the inmost and thence in
all (n. 44, 383).

<span class="margnote"><span id="76.">76.</span></span>

Verse 2. I know thy works, signifies that He sees all the interiors and
exteriors of man at once. "Works" are often mentioned in Revelation, but
few know what is meant by works. This is known, that ten men can do
works which externally appear alike, but which yet are dissimilar with
them all; and this because they proceed from different ends and
different causes, the end and the cause rendering the works either good
or evil; for every work is a work of the mind, therefore, such as is the
quality of the mind, such is the work. If the mind is charity, the work
becomes charity; but if the mind is not charity, the work does not
become charity; still, however, they may both appear alike in externals.
Works appear to men in external form, but to angels in internal form;
and to the Lord their quality is apparent from inmost to outmosts. Works
in their external form appear like the outside of fruits, but works in
their internal form appear like the inside of fruits, where there are
innumerable edible parts, and in the midst seeds, in which there are
also things innumerable, which are too minute for the keenest eye to
discern, yea, which are above the intellectual sphere of man. Such are
all works, the internal quality of which the Lord alone sees, and which
the angels also perceive from the Lord, when man is doing them. But on
this subject more may be seen in The Angelic Wisdom concerning the
Divine Love and Wisdom (n. 209-220, and n. 277-281; and also below, n.
141, 641, 688). From these things it may appear, that by "I know thy
works," is signified that the Lord sees all the interiors and exteriors
of man at once.

<span class="margnote"><span id="77.">77.</span></span>

And thy labor and endurance; that this signifies their study and
patience, is evident without explanation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="78.">78.</span></span>

And that thou canst not bear the evil, signifies that they cannot bear
that evils should be called goods, and the reverse, because this is
contrary to the truths of doctrine. That this is the signification of
these words, is evident from what follows, by which is signified that
they scrutinize those things in the church which are called goods and
truths, when yet they are evils and falsities. To know goods, whether
they are goods or evils, is of doctrine, and is among its truths, but to
do goods or evils is of the life; this is said, therefore, of those who
primarily regard the truths of doctrine, and not the goods of life (n.
73). By "the evil" in the spiritual sense, are not meant the evil but
evils, because this sense is abstracted from persons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="79.">79.</span></span>

And has tried them which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast
found them liars, signifies that they scrutinize those things which are
called goods and truths in the church, which nevertheless are evils and
falsities. That this is what is signified, cannot be seen except by the
spiritual sense, and unless it is thence known what is meant by
"apostles" and by "liars": by "apostles" are not meant apostles, but all
who teach the goods and truths of the church, and, in the abstract
sense, the goods and truths themselves of its doctrine. That apostles
are not meant by "apostles," clearly appears from these words addressed
to them: When the Son of man shall sit on the throne of His glory, ye
also shall sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel
(Matt. 19:28; Luke 22:30). Who does not see that the apostles are not to
judge anyone, and cannot, much less the twelve tribes of Israel, but
that the Lord alone will do this according to the goods and truths of
the doctrine of the church from the Word? In like manner from this
passage: The wall of the city New Jerusalem had twelve foundations, and
in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb (Rev. 21:14).
Because by the "New Jerusalem" is signified the New Church (n. 880,
881), and by its "foundations," all the goods and truths of its doctrine
(n. 902, and following numbers). \[2\] And also from this passage: Exult
O heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets (Rev. 18:20). What can the
exultation of the apostles and prophets signify, unless by them are
meant all who are in the goods and truths of doctrine in the church? By
the Lord's disciples are meant those who are instructed by the Lord in
the goods and truths of doctrine; but by apostles they who, after they
are instructed, teach them; for it is said: Jesus sent His twelve
disciples to preach the kingdom of God, and the apostles, when they were
returned, told Him all that they had done (Luke 9:1-2, 10; Mark 6:7,
30). That by "liars" are meant they who are in falsities, and,
abstractly, the falsities themselves, may appear from many places in the
Word, where "liars" and "lies" are mentioned, which, if they were
adduced, would fill pages; "lies" in the spiritual sense, are nothing
else than falsities. From these considerations it may appear, that by
"thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast
found them liars," is signified that they scrutinize those things in the
church which are called goods and truths, but which nevertheless are
evils and falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="80.">80.</span></span>

Verse 3. And hast borne and hast endurance. That it signifies the
patience with them is evident without explanation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="81.">81.</span></span>

And for My name's sake hast labored, and hast not fainted, signifies
their study and endeavor to procure for themselves and also to teach the
things which are of religion and its doctrine. By the "name" of Jehovah
or of the Lord, in the Word is not meant His name, but everything by
which He is worshiped. And because He is worshiped in the church
according to doctrine, by His "name" is meant the all of doctrine, and,
in the universal sense, the all of religion. The reason why these things
are meant by "the name" of Jehovah is because in heaven no other names
are given but what involve the quality of anyone, and the quality of God
is all that by which He is worshiped. He who does not know this
signification of "name" in the Word, can only understand name; and in
this alone there is nothing of worship and religion. \[2\] He that keeps
in mind, therefore, this signification of the "name of Jehovah" wherever
it occurs in the Word, will understand of himself what is signified by
it in the following places: In that day shall ye say, confess Jehovah,
call upon His name (Isa. 12:4). O Jehovah, we have waited for Thee: the
desire of our soul is to Thy name, by Thee only will we make mention of
Thy name (Isa. 26:8, 13). From the rising of the sun shall he call upon
My name (Isa. 41:25). From the rising of the sun even unto its setting,
My name shall be great among the nations; and in every place incense
shall be offered unto My name; for My name shall be great among the
nations; ye have profaned My name, when ye say, the table of Jehovah is
polluted; and ye puff at My name when ye bring that which is torn, and
lame, and sick (Mal. 1:11-13). All people walk in the name of his God,
and we will walk in the name of Jehovah our God (Micah 4:5). Everyone
that is called by My name, I have created him in my glory, I have formed
him (Isa. 43:7). Thou shalt not take the name of thy God in vain; for
Jehovah will not hold him innocent that taketh His name in vain (Deut.
5:11). They shall worship Jehovah in one place where He will put His
name (Deut. 12:5, 11, 13-14, 18; 16:2, 6, 11, 15-16; besides many other
places). Who cannot see that in these, name alone is not meant? \[3\]
The same is signified in the New Testament by the name of the Lord, as
in the following: Jesus said, Ye shall be hated of all for My name's
sake (Matt. 10:22; 24:9-10). Where two or three are gathered together in
My name, there am I in the midst of them (Matt. 18:20). And everyone
that hath forsaken houses, brethren, sisters, for My name's sake, shall
receive an hundred-fold, and eternal life (Matt. 19:29). As many as
received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, to them
that believe on His name (John 1:12). Many believed in His name (John
2:23). He that believeth not is judged already, because he hath not
believed in the name of the only-begotten Son of God (John 3:17-18).
They who believe will have life in His name (John 20:31). Blessed is He
that cometh in the name of the Lord (Matt. 21:9; 23:39; Luke 13:35;
19:38). \[4\] That the Lord as to His Human is the name of the Father,
appears in these places: Father, glorify Thy name (John 12:28). Hallowed
be Thy name, Thy kingdom come (Matt. 6:9; also Exod. 23:20-21; Jer.
23:6; Micah 5:4). That name, applied to others, signifies the quality of
worship, appears in the following passages: The shepherd of the sheep
calleth his own sheep by their name (John 10:3). Thou hast a few names
in Sardis (Rev. 3:4). I will write upon him the name of My God, and the
name of the city of my God, the New Jerusalem, and My new name (Rev.
3:12 and elsewhere). From these passages it may appear, that "for my
name's sake thou hast labored, and hast not fainted" signifies the study
and endeavor to procure for themselves, and also to teach, the things
which are of religion and its doctrine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="82.">82.</span></span>

Verse 4. But I have against thee, that thou hast left thy first charity,
signifies that this is against them, that they do not hold goods of life
in the first place, which, nevertheless, was and is done in the
beginning of every church. This is said to this church, because by it
are meant those in the church who primarily or in the first place regard
the truths of doctrine, and not the goods of life (n. 73); when yet the
goods of life are to be regarded in the first place, that is, primarily;
for in proportion as a man is in the goods of life, in the same
proportion he is really in the truths of doctrine, but not the reverse.
The reason is, that the goods of life open the interiors of the mind,
and these being opened, truths appear in their own light, whence they
are not only understood, but also loved. It is otherwise when doctrinals
are regarded primarily or in the first place. Truths may indeed then be
known, but they are not seen interiorly and loved from spiritual
affection; but this may be seen illustrated above (n. 17). Every church
in its beginning, regards the goods of life in the first place, and the
truths of doctrine in the second; but as the church declines, it begins
to regard the truths of doctrine in the first place, and the goods of
life in the second; and at length in the end it regards faith alone, and
then it not only separates the goods of charity from faith, but also
omits them. From these things it may now appear, that by, "Thou hast
left thy first charity," is signified that they do not hold the goods of
life in the first place, which nevertheless is, and has been done in the
beginning of every church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="83.">83.</span></span>

Verse 5. Remember therefore whence thou hast fallen; that this signifies
remembrance of their error, is plain from what has just been said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="84.">84.</span></span>

And repent, and do the first works, signifies that they ought to invert
the state of their life. Every man regards the truths of doctrine in the
first place, yet so long as he does this, he is like unripe fruit; but
he who is regenerated, after he has imbibed truths, regards the goods of
life in the first place, and in proportion as he does so, he grows ripe
like fruit; and in proportion as he grows ripe, and as far as he grows
ripe, so far the seed in him becomes prolific. These two states have
been seen by me, among men who had become spirits. In the first state,
they appeared turned to the valleys which are above hell; and in the
second, to the paradises which are in heaven. This turning of the state
of life is what is here meant. That this is effected by repentance, and
after it by the good of life, is meant by "Repent, and do the first
works."

<span class="margnote"><span id="85.">85.</span></span>

Or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy lampstand out
of its place, except thou repent, signifies that otherwise of a
certainty enlightenment will not be given them to see truths any longer.
By "quickly" is signified certain (n. 4, 947); and by "lampstand," the
church as to enlightenment (n. 43, 66); hence, by "removing it out of
its place," is signified to remove enlightenment, that they may not see
truths in their light, and at length, that they may not see them any
more. This follows from what was said above (n. 82), namely, that if
truths of doctrine are regarded primarily, or in the first place, they
may indeed be known, but not seen interiorly, and loved from spiritual
affection, therefore they successively perish; for to see truths from
their own light, is to see them from man's interior mind, which is
called the spiritual mind, and this mind is opened by charity; and when
it is opened, light and the affection of understanding truths flow in
out of heaven from the Lord. Thence is enlightenment. The man who is in
this enlightenment, acknowledges truths as soon as he reads or hears
them; but not he whose spiritual mind is not opened, who is one that is
not in the goods of charity, however he may be in the truths of
doctrine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="86.">86.</span></span>

Verse 6. But this thou hast, that thou hatest the works of the
Nicolaitans, which I also hate, signifies that they know this from their
truths, and thence are not willing that works should be meritorious,
because this is contrary to the merit and justice of the Lord. That "the
works of the Nicolaitans" are meritorious works, it has been given to
know from revelation. It is said, that they hate those works, because
the church from the truths of its doctrine knows this, and thence does
not will it; therefore it is said, "this thou hast." Yet all those make
works meritorious who put the truths of faith in the first place, and
the goods of charity in the second; but not those who put the goods of
charity in the first place. The reason is, that genuine charity does not
wish to merit, for it loves to do good, for it is in it and acts from
it; and from good it looks to the Lord; and from truths it knows that
all good is from Him; it therefore has an aversion to merit. Now because
they who regard the truths of faith in the first place, cannot do any
other works than such as are meritorious, and yet know, from their
truths, that these are to be hated, therefore this follows after it was
said, that if they do not hold charity in the first place, they do works
which ought to be held in aversion. It is said that it is contrary to
the merit and justice of the Lord; for they who place merit in works,
ascribe justice to themselves, for they say justice is on their side
because they have merited, when yet it is the greatest injustice,
because the Lord alone has merit, and alone does good in them. That the
Lord alone is justice is taught in Jeremiah: Behold, the days shall
come, when I will raise up a just branch unto David, and this is His
name which they shall call Him, Jehovah our justice (Jer. 23:5-6;
33:15-16).

<span class="margnote"><span id="87.">87.</span></span>

Verse 7. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches, signifies that he who understands, ought to obey what the
Divine truth of the Word teaches those who will be of the New Church,
which is the New Jerusalem. By "hearing" is signified both to perceive
and to obey; because one attends that he may perceive and obey; that
both these are signified by "hearing" is evident from common discourse,
in which one speaks of hearing and of hearkening to anyone; the latter
signifying to obey, and the former to perceive. That "hearing" has these
two significations is from correspondence; for those are in the province
of the ears in heaven, who are in perception and at the same time in
obedience. As both these things are signified by "hearing" therefore the
Lord so often said: He that hath an ear to hear let him hear (Matt.
11:15; 13:43; Mark 4:9, 23; 7:16; Luke 8:8; 14:35). And the same is
likewise said to all the churches, as is evident from verses 11, 17, 29,
of this chapter, and from verses 6, 13, and 22, of the following. But by
the "Spirit" which speaks to the churches is signified the Divine truth
of the Word; and by "the churches" the entire church in the Christian
world. That by "the Spirit of God" which is also the Holy Spirit is
meant the Divine truth proceeding from the Lord, may be seen in Doctrine
of the New Jerusalem concerning the Lord (n. 51); and as the entire
church is meant, it is not said, what the Spirit saith to the church,
but "what the Spirit saith to the churches."

<span class="margnote"><span id="88.">88.</span></span>

To him that overcometh, signifies he that fights against his evils and
falsities, and is reformed. Now since in what is written to the seven
churches is described the state of all in the Christian church who can
receive the doctrine of the New Jerusalem, and live according to it,
thus who by combats against evils and falsities can be reformed;
therefore it is said to each, "He that overcometh" as here: To the
church of Ephesus: to him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree
of life (Rev. 2:7). To the church in Smyrna; he that overcometh shall
not be hurt of the second death (Rev. 2:11). To the church in Pergamos:
to him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna (Rev.
2:17). To the church in Thyatira: to him that overcometh and keepeth My
works unto the end I will give power over the nations (Rev. 2:26). To
the church in Sardis; he that overcometh the same shall be clothed in
white raiment (Rev. 3:5). To the church in Philadelphia; he that
overcometh, I will make him a pillar in the temple of My God (Rev.
3:12). And to the church in Laodicea: to him that overcometh will I
grant to sit with Me in My throne (Rev. 3:21). "He that overcometh" in
these places signifies he who fights against evils and falsities, and
thus is reformed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="89.">89.</span></span>

I will give to eat of the tree of life, signifies appropriation of the
good of love and charity from the Lord. "To eat" in the Word signifies
to appropriate; and "the tree of life" signifies the Lord as to the good
of love; therefore by "eating of the tree of life" is signified the
appropriation of the good of love from the Lord. "To eat" signifies to
appropriate, because as natural food when it is eaten is appropriated to
the life of man's body, so spiritual food when it is received is
appropriated to the life of his soul. "The tree of life" signifies the
Lord as to the good of love, because nothing else is signified by the
tree of life in the garden of Eden; also because man has celestial and
spiritual life from the good of love and charity which is received from
the Lord. "Tree" is mentioned in many places, and by it is meant the man
of the church, and in the universal sense the church itself, and by its
"fruit" the good of life; the reason is, that the Lord is "the tree of
life," from whom comes all good with the man of the church, and in the
church; but of this in its own place. It is said the good of love and
charity, because the good of love is celestial good, which is that of
love to the Lord, and the good of charity is spiritual good, which is
that of love towards the neighbor. What and of what quality the one and
the other good is will be told in what follows. Something may be seen
concerning them in the work concerning Heaven and Hell (n. 13-19).

<span class="margnote"><span id="90.">90.</span></span>

Which is in the midst of the paradise of God, signifies interiorly in
the truths of wisdom and faith. "In the midst" signifies the inmost (n.
44, 383), here, the interior; "the paradise of God" signifies the truths
of wisdom and faith; therefore "the tree of life, which is in the midst
of the paradise of God," signifies the Lord with the good of love and
charity interiorly in the truths of wisdom and faith; good is also
within truths, for good is the esse of life, and truth is the existere
of life thence derived, as is abundantly shown in The Angelic Wisdom
concerning the Divine Love and Wisdom. That the paradise of God is the
truth of wisdom and of faith, is evident from the signification of
"garden" in the Word; "garden" there signifies wisdom and intelligence,
because "trees" signify the men of the church, and their "fruits" the
goods of life; nothing else is signified by "the garden of Eden," for by
it is described the wisdom of Adam. \[2\] The like is meant by "the
garden of God" in Ezekiel: In thy wisdom and intelligence Thou hadst
made for thyself wealth; thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every
precious stone was thy covering (Ezek. 28:4, 13). This is concerning
"Tyre," by which is signified the church as to the knowledges of truth
and good, thus as to intelligence; therefore it is said, "In thy wisdom
and intelligence thou hadst made for thyself wealth." By "the precious
stones which were a covering" are signified the truths of intelligence.
\[3\] In the same: Assyria is a cedar in Lebanon; the cedars in the
garden of God did not hide it; nor was any tree in the garden of God
equal to it in beauty. All the trees of Eden that were in the garden of
God emulated it (Ezek. 31:3, 8-9). This is said of Egypt and Ashur,
because by "Egypt" is signified science, and by "Assyria" rationality,
by which comes intelligence; the like is signified by "cedar." But
because by his rationality he came into the pride of his own
intelligence, therefore it is said of him: To whom art thou thus like in
glory and in greatness among the trees of Eden? Since thou shalt be
brought down with the trees of Eden unto the lower earth; and thou shalt
lie in the midst of the uncircumcised (Ezek. 31:18). "The uncircumcised"
are they who are without the good of charity. \[4\] In Isaiah: Jehovah
shall comfort Zion; and He shall make her wilderness into Eden, and her
desert into the garden of Jehovah (Isa. 51:3). "Zion" there is the
church; "the wilderness" and the "desert" are the defect and ignorance
of truth; "Eden" and "the garden of God" are wisdom and intelligence.
Wisdom and intelligence are also signified by "garden" in Isa. 58:11;
61:11; Jer. 31:12; Amos 9:14; Num. 24:6. \[5\] The man of the church is
also like a garden as to intelligence, when he is in the good of love
from the Lord, because the spiritual heat which vivifies him is love,
and the spiritual light is intelligence therefrom. It is known that
gardens in this world flourish by means of heat and light; it is the
same in heaven. In heaven there appear paradisal gardens, with fruit
trees according to their wisdom from the good of love from the Lord; and
around those who are in intelligence and not in the good of love, there
do not appear gardens, but grass; but around those who are in faith
separated from charity, not even grass, but sand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="91.">91.</span></span>

Verse 8. And unto the angel of the church of Smyrna write, signifies to
those and concerning those, who are in goods as to life, but in
falsities as to doctrine. That these are meant by "the church of
Smyrna," is clear from the things written to it when understood in the
spiritual sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="92.">92.</span></span>

These things saith the First and the Last, signifies the Lord, that He
alone is God. That the Lord calls Himself "the First and the Last," also
"the beginning and the End," and "Alpha and the Omega," and "He Who is,
and Who was, and Who is to come," may be seen (chap. 1:4, 8, 11, 17);
and what they signify above (n. 13, 29-31, 38, 57), where it is evident
that by it is also meant, that He alone is God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="93.">93.</span></span>

Who was dead and is alive, signifies that He is neglected in the church,
and His Human is not acknowledged to be Divine, when yet as to that also
He alone is life, and from Him alone is eternal life. That this is meant
by these words, may be seen above (n. 58-60), where they are explained.
Why these and the preceding things are said, is, because the primary
falsity of those who are described by this church, is, that they do not
acknowledge the Lord's Divine Human, and therefore do not approach Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="94.">94.</span></span>

Verse 9. I know thy works; that this signifies that the Lord sees all
their interiors and exteriors at once, is evident from the things
explained above (n. 76); here that He sees that they are in falsities,
and yet as to life in goods, which they believe to be the goods of life,
when yet they are not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="95.">95.</span></span>

And affliction and poverty, signifies that they are in falsities and
thence not in goods. "To know their affliction" signifies to see that
they are in falsities, and "to know their poverty" signifies to see that
they are not in goods, for in the Word, "affliction" is predicated of
falsities (as above, n. 33); and "poverty" of the lack of goods;
spiritual poverty is nothing else. "The poor and needy" are often
mentioned in the Word, and in the spiritual sense by "poor" is meant one
who is not in truths, and by "needy" one who is not in goods. These
words are also added, "yet thou art rich," but in a parenthesis, and
this because in some codices they are omitted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="96.">96.</span></span>

And the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are not, signifies
the false assertion that the goods of love are with them, when yet they
are not. "Blasphemy" here signifies a false assertion; by "Jews" are not
signified Jews, but they who are in the good of love, and, abstractly,
the goods of love; so by "the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews,
and are not," is signified the false assertion that the goods of love
are with them, when yet they are not. By "Jews" are meant they who are
in the good of love, because in the Word by "Judah," in the supreme
sense, is meant the Lord as to the Divine good of Divine love, and by
"Israel" the Lord as to the Divine truth of Divine wisdom; hence by
"Jews" are signified they who are in the good of love from the Lord, and
by "Israel" they who are in Divine truths from the Lord. That these are
meant by "Jews," may appear from many passages, which will be adduced
below (n. 350); something may also be seen on this subject in The
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture (n.
51). <span id="fr_10"></span>[96-1](#fn_10) In the abstract sense the
goods of love are meant by "Jews," because the spiritual sense is
abstracted from persons, as may be seen above (n. 78, 79). He who does
not know that by "Jews," in the Word, are meant those who are of the
Lord's celestial church, who are they that are in love to Him, may fall
into many mistakes when reading the Word in the prophets; but see below
(n. 350).

<span class="margnote"><span id="97.">97.</span></span>

But are the synagogue of Satan, signifies because they are in falsities
as to doctrine. It is called "synagogue," because the Jews are
mentioned, and as they taught in synagogues, by "synagogue" is signified
doctrine; and because by "Satan" is meant the hell of those who are in
falsities, therefore it is called "the synagogue of Satan." Hell is
called "the Devil" and "Satan," and by the hell which is called "the
Devil," are meant such there as are in evils, properly who are in the
love of self; and by the hell which is called "Satan," are meant such
there as are in falsities, properly who are in the pride of their own
intelligence. The hells are called the "Devil" and "Satan," because all
who are in them are called devils and satans. Hence then it may appear,
that by their being "the synagogue of Satan," is signified that as to
doctrine they are in falsities. \[2\] But as they who are in good as to
life, and in falsities as to doctrine, are here treated of, and as such
know no other than that they are in good, and that their falsities are
truths, something shall be said respecting them. All the good of worship
is formed by truths, and all truth is formed from good, therefore good
without truth is not good, neither is truth, without good, truth; they
appear indeed in external form to be so, but still they are not. The
conjunction of good and truth is called the heavenly marriage; from this
is the church with man, and it is heaven with him. If therefore there
are falsities instead of truths with man, then he does the good of
falsity, which is not good, for it is either pharisaical or meritorious,
or innate natural good. \[3\] But examples will illustrate this. He who
is in this falsity, that he believes he does good from himself, because
he has the faculty of doing good; his good is not good, because he
himself is in it, and not the Lord. He who is in this falsity, that he
can do good which is in itself good, without a knowledge of what evil is
in himself, thus without repentance, although he appears to do good, yet
he does not do good, because without repentance he is in evil. He who is
in this falsity, that good purifies him from evils, and does not know
anything of the evils in which he is, he does no other good than
spurious good, which is inwardly contaminated by his evils. He who is in
this falsity, that there are many gods, and confirms himself in this,
the good which he does is divided good, and divided good is not good. He
who is in this falsity, that he believes the Divine in the Lord's Human
is not like the soul in the body, cannot do good from Him, and good not
from the Lord is not good, for it is contrary to these words of the
Lord: Except one abide in Me and I in Him, he cannot bring forth any
fruit; for without Me ye cannot do anything. Except one abide in Me, he
is cast forth as a dried branch, and is cast into the fire and burned
(John 15:4-6; and in many other passages). For good derives its quality
from truths, and truths derive their esse from good. \[4\] Who does not
know, that the church is not a church without doctrine; and doctrine
must teach how a man shall think of God and from God; and how he shall
act from God and with God; therefore doctrine must be from truths, to
act according to which is called good; whence it follows, that to act
according to falsities is not good. It is believed, that in the good
which a man does, there is not anything from truths or falsities, when
yet the quality of good is from no other source, for they cohere
together like love and wisdom, and also like love and foolishness; it is
the love of the wise which does good, but the love of the foolish does
what is like good in externals, but totally unlike it in internals;
therefore the good of the wise is like pure gold, but the good of the
foolish is like gold covering over dung.

<span class="margnote"><span id="98.">98.</span></span>

Verse 10. Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer, signifies,
despair not when ye are infested by evils and assaulted by falsities,
since with those who are in goods as to life, and in falsities as to
doctrine, it cannot be otherwise. This is plain from what now follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="99.">99.</span></span>

Behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, signifies that
their good of life will be infested by evils which are from hell. That
this is signified by "being cast into custody" or into "prison" by the
devil, is, because by "the devil" is meant the hell where they are who
are in evils, and thus, abstractly, the evil which is there and from
thence (n. 97). To be cast "into custody" or "prison," is to be
infested, because they who are infested by evils from hell are as if
they were bound in prison, for they cannot think anything but evil, when
yet they will good; hence there is combat and interior anxiety, from
which they cannot be released, being scarcely otherwise than like
persons who are in chains; the reason is, that their good is not good so
far as it coheres with falsities, and so far as it coheres with
falsities evil is in it; therefore this is what is infested. \[2\] But
this infestation does not exist in the natural world, but in the
spiritual world, thus after death. It has often been granted me to see
their infestations. They lament, saying that they have done good, and
wish to do good, and yet now they cannot, because of the evils which
surround them. But still they are not all infested alike, but more
severely according as they have confirmed themselves in falsities,
therefore it is said "the devil shall cast some of you into prison."
That the confirmation of what is false is hurtful, may be seen in The
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture (n.
91-97). \[3\] In the Word, by "the bound" the like is signified as here
by those "cast into prison," as in these places: I will give thee for a
covenant of the people, to bring out the bound from the prison, and them
that sit in darkness out of the prison house (Isa. 42:6-7; 49:8-9).
Jehovah hath sent me to preach liberty to the captives, and to the bound
(Isa. 61:1). By the blood of Thy covenant I will send forth the bound
out of the pit (Zech. 9:11). God bringeth out those which are bound with
fetters (Ps. 68:6). Let the groaning of the bound come before thee (Ps.
79:11). To hear the groaning of the bound, to open to the sons of death
(Ps. 102:20). Jehovah who looseth the bound (Ps. 146:7). It is plain
that by "the bound" in these places are not meant those who are bound in
the world, but those who are bound by hell, thus by evils and falsities.
Similar is the signification of these words of the Lord: I was in
prison, and ye came not unto Me (Matt. 25:43). As the Lord "brings out
of prison," or delivers from infestation, those who have been in good as
to life, though in falsities as to doctrine, He says: "Fear none of
those things which thou shalt suffer;" also, "Be thou faithful, and I
will give thee a crown of life."

<span class="margnote"><span id="100.">100.</span></span>

That ye may be tried, signifies by falsities fighting against them. The
reason why this is signified is, because all spiritual temptation is a
combat of the devil and the Lord, which shall have possession of man.
The devil or hell brings out his falsities, and reproaches and condemns
him; but the Lord brings out his truths, and withdraws him from
falsities, and delivers him. It is this combat which appears to man as
in himself, because it is from evil spirits who are with him, and is
called temptation. That spiritual temptation is nothing else, I know
from experience, because in my temptations I have seen the infernals who
induced them, and have perceived the influx from the Lord, who
liberated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[68-1](ar02.htm#fr_5) The original Latin has
"opus" for "onus," evidently a misprint; in n. 144 we read "onus."

<span id="fn_6"></span>[68-2](ar02.htm#fr_6) The original Latin omits
"and thy works."

<span id="fn_7"></span>[68-3](ar02.htm#fr_7) The original Latin omits,
"of their works."

<span id="fn_8"></span>[68-4](ar02.htm#fr_8) The original Latin omits,
"as they speak."

<span id="fn_9"></span>[71-1](ar02.htm#fr_9) The original Latin has
"meum" ("my") for "novum" ("new").

<span id="fn_10"></span>[96-1](ar02.htm#fr_10) The original Latin has
"The Lord."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 101-150](ar03)
