[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ar17)  [Next](ar19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852006/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Apocalypse Revealed*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1766\], tr. by John
Whitehead \[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocalypse Revealed

<span class="margnote"><span id="851.">851.</span></span>

This is the first resurrection, signifies that salvation and life
eternal is primarily to worship the Lord, and live according to His
commandments in the Word, because thereby conjunction is effected with
the Lord and consociation with the angels in heaven. The reason why all
these things are signified by "This is the first resurrection," is
because it follows as a conclusion from what goes before, and therefore
involves them; the preceding things which these words involve, are
contained in verse 4, and partly also in verse 5. In verse 4 are these
things: "I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the testimony of
Jesus and for the Word of God, and who had not adored the beast nor his
image, nor had received his mark upon their forehead and upon their
hand; and they lived and reigned with Christ." That by "the souls of
them that were beheaded for the testimony of Jesus and for the Word of
God," are signified such as were rejected by those who are in falsities
from their own intelligence because they worshiped the Lord, and lived
according to His commandments in the Word, may be seen above (n. 846,
847). That by "they adored not the beast nor his image, neither received
his mark upon their forehead and upon their hand," is signified that
they rejected the heresy of faith alone, may be seen above (n. 848); and
that by "they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years," is
signified that they have conjunction with the Lord and consociation with
the angels of heaven, may be seen above (n. 849). These things therefore
are what are involved in these words, "This is the first resurrection."
By "resurrection" is signified salvation and life eternal, and by "the
first" is not meant the first resurrection, but the very and primary of
resurrection, thus salvation and life eternal; for there is only one
resurrection to life, a second is not given; therefore a second
resurrection is nowhere mentioned; for they who are once conjoined with
the Lord, are conjoined with Him for ever; and this in heaven, for the
Lord says: I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth in Me,
though he were dead, shall live; whosoever liveth and believeth in Me
shall not die to eternity (John 11:25, 26). That this is what is meant
by "the first resurrection" appears also from the following verse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="852.">852.</span></span>

Verse 6. Happy and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection,
signifies that they who come into heaven, have the felicity of life
eternal, and enlightenment by conjunction with the Lord. He is called
"happy" who has the felicity of life eternal (n. 639); and he is called
"holy" who has enlightenment in Divine truths by conjunction with the
Lord, for the Lord alone is holy; and the Divine proceeding from Him,
from which there is enlightenment, is what is called the Holy Spirit (n.
173, 586, 666). By "the first resurrection" is signified elevation into
heaven by the Lord, and thus salvation, as above (n. 851). Hence it is
evident, that by "Happy and holy is he that hath part in the first
resurrection" is signified that they who come into heaven have the
felicity of life eternal, and enlightenment by conjunction with the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="853.">853.</span></span>

Upon these the second death hath no power, signifies that they are not
condemned. By "the second death" nothing else is signified but spiritual
death, which is damnation; for the first death is natural death, which
is the death of the body; but the second death is spiritual death, which
is the death of the soul, and that this is damnation is known. And since
the second death is damnation, and the first death is the decease, and
this latter death is not spiritual, therefore the first death is nowhere
mentioned in the Apocalypse, but the second death spoken of again in
this chapter, verse 14; also in the following (21:8), and likewise
before (2:11). He who does not observe this, may readily believe that
there are two spiritual deaths, because it is said "the second death,"
when nevertheless there is only one spiritual death, which is here meant
by "the second death"; and in like manner that there are two
resurrections, because it is said "the first resurrection," when yet
there is only one resurrection, wherefore neither is there any second
resurrection mentioned, see above (n. 851). Hence it is evident that by
"On these the second death hath no power," is signified that they are
not condemned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="854.">854.</span></span>

But they shall be priests of God and of Christ, signifies because they
are kept by the Lord in the good of love and thence in the truths of
wisdom. By "priests" in the Word are meant they who are in the good of
love, and by "kings" they who are in the truths of wisdom; wherefore it
is said above: Jesus Christ hath made us kings and priests (Rev. 1:6);
and likewise: The Lamb hath made us kings and priests, that we may reign
over the earth (Rev. 5:10). And it may be clearly seen that the Lord
will not make men kings and priests, but that He will make them angels
who are in the truths of wisdom, and in the good of love from Him. That
by "kings" are meant they who are in the truths of wisdom from the Lord,
and that the Lord is called "king" from the Divine truth, may be seen
above (n. 20, 483, 664, 830). The reason why by "priests" are meant
those who are in the good of love from the Lord, is because the Lord is
the Divine love and the Divine wisdom, or what is the same, the Divine
good and the Divine truth; and the Lord from the Divine love or the
Divine good, is called "priest," and from the Divine wisdom or the
Divine truth, is called "king." Hence it is, that there are two
kingdoms, into which the heavens are distinguished, the celestial and
the spiritual; and the celestial kingdom is called the Lord's priestly
kingdom, for the angels there are recipients of the Divine love or the
Divine good from the Lord, and the spiritual kingdom is called the
Lord's royal kingdom, for the angels there are the recipients of the
Divine wisdom or the Divine truth from the Lord; but more may be seen
concerning these two kingdoms above (n. 647, 725). \[2\] It is said that
they are recipients of the Divine good and the Divine truth from the
Lord; but it is to be known that they are perpetually receiving them,
for the Divine good and the Divine truth cannot be appropriated by any
angel or man, so as to be his own, but only that they may appear to be
his, because they are Divine; wherefore no angel or man can produce from
himself anything good or true, which in itself is good and true; from
which it is evident that they are kept in good and truth by the Lord,
and this continually; for which reason, if anyone comes into heaven, and
thinks that good and truth are appropriated to him as his own, he is
immediately let down from heaven and instructed. From these things it
may now appear, that by "they shall be priests of God and of Christ," is
signified because they were kept by the Lord in the good of love, and
thereby in the truths of wisdom. \[3\] That by priests in the Word are
meant such as are in the good of love from the Lord, may appear from
many passages therein, but as they are adduced in the Arcana Coelestia
published at London, I will only quote therefrom the following: "That
priests represented the Lord as to the Divine good (n. 2015, 6148). That
the priesthood was a representative of the Lord as to the work of
salvation, because this was from the Divine good of His Divine love (n.
9809) That the priesthood of Aaron, of his sons, and of the Levites, was
a representative of the Lord's work of salvation in successive order (n.
10,017). That therefore by "priests" and by "the priesthood" is
signified the good of love from the Lord (n. 9806, 9809). That by the
two names, "Jesus" and "Christ," is signified as well the priesthood as
the royalty of the Lord (n. 3004, 3005, 3009). That priests administer
ecclesiastical affairs, and kings civil affairs (n. 10,793). That
priests are to teach truths, and by these lead to good, and thus to the
Lord (n. 10,794). That they are not to claim power to themselves over
the souls of men (n. 10,795). That priests ought to have dignity on
account of holy things, but that they ought not to attribute the dignity
to themselves, but to the Lord, from whom alone are holy things, because
the priesthood is not in the person, but is adjoined to the person (n.
10,796, 10,797). That priests who do not acknowledge the Lord have in
the Word a contrary signification (n. 3670).

<span class="margnote"><span id="855.">855.</span></span>

And shall reign with Him a thousand years, signifies that they were
already in heaven, when the rest, who did not yet live again, that is,
receive heavenly life, were in the world of spirits. "To reign with
Christ" does not signify to reign with Him, but to be in His kingdom, or
in heaven, see above (n. 284, 289). By "a thousand years" is not meant a
thousand years, but it signifies some time, as above (n. 842); that "a
thousand years" signifies nothing else but that space of time which
intervened between the shutting up of the dragon in the abyss and his
release, is evident because it is said that he was cast into the abyss,
shut up, and a seal set upon him for a thousand years, and then that he
was loosed (verses 3, 7). This same space of time is also here
signified; therefore, "they shall reign with Christ a thousand years,"
signifies that they were already in heaven, while the rest of the dead
who did not yet live again were in the world of spirits (of whom verse
5). But these things cannot be comprehended by those who do not know
that by numbers, in Revelation, are not meant numbers, but things. I can
assert that the angels do not understand any number naturally, as men
do, but spiritually; yea, that they do not know what a thousand years
are, except that it is some interval of time, small or great, which
cannot be otherwise expressed than by some time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="856.">856.</span></span>

Verse 7. And when the thousand years are finished, Satan shall be loosed
out of his prison, signifies that after they who had before been
concealed and guarded in the lower earth, were taken up by the Lord into
heaven, and the New Christian Heaven increased by them, all who had
confirmed themselves in the falsities of faith were let loose. "When the
thousand years are finished," signifies after they were taken up by the
Lord into heaven who had hitherto been concealed and guarded in the
lower earth. The reason why "when the thousand years are finished" has
this signification, is because the salvation of those who worshiped the
Lord, and who lived according to His commandments, is alone treated of
in verses 4-6, which precede, and this interval of time is meant by "a
thousand years." It is not said, indeed, that they were taken up from
the lower earth, but yet it is evident from chapter 6:9-11, where they
were seen "under the altar," and "under the altar" means in the lower
earth; wherefore also they are here called "priests of God and of
Christ" (verse 6, see above n. 854). Neither is it here said that the
New Christian Heaven was increased by them, though this appears
evidently from chapter 14, which treats of the New Christian Heaven, as
may be seen from the explanations there given (especially in n. 612,
613, 626, 631, 647, 659, 661). The reason why by "Satan was loosed out
of his prison," is signified that they who had confirmed themselves in
faith alone, as to doctrine, were to be let loose, is because "the
dragon" is here called "Satan" and not at the same time "Devil," as
above (verse 2); and by "the dragon" as "the Devil" are meant those who
were in evils of life, and by "the dragon" as "Satan" are meant those
who were in the falsities of faith (see above n. 841); but the quality
of the one and of the other will be seen in the next article.

<span class="margnote"><span id="857.">857.</span></span>

 <span id="fr_79"></span>[857-1](#fn_79)

<span class="margnote"><span id="858.">858.</span></span>

Verse 8. And shall go forth to seduce the nations which are in the four
corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to war,
signifies that they who are here meant by the dragon, would draw to
their party all those who were from the earths, in the whole world of
spirits, and lived there in external natural worship alone, and in no
internal spiritual worship, and would arouse them against those who
worshiped the Lord, and lived according to His commandments in the Word.
By "going out to seduce the nations which are in the four corners of the
earth," is signified that they who are meant by "the dragon," of whom
above (n. 856, 857), would draw to their party all who were in the whole
world of spirits; by "seducing" is here signified to draw to their
party; by "nations" are signified both the good and the evil (n. 483);
by "the four corners of the earth" is signified the whole spiritual
world (n. 342), here those who were in the whole world of spirits, which
is midway between heaven and hell, and where all after their departure
from the earth first assemble (concerning which n. 784, 791); for those
who were in hell could not come into the sight of the dragon, nor they
who were in the heavens. By "Gog and Magog" are signified they who are
in external natural worship separate from internal spiritual worship, as
will be shown in the next article; by "gathering them together to war"
is signified to arouse those who are meant by "the nations" against
those who worship the Lord and live according to His commandments in the
Word, because all who do not worship the Lord and do not live according
to His commandments, are evil, and the evil act together with the dragon
or the dragonists; that by "war" is meant spiritual war, which is that
of falsity against truth and of truth against falsity, may be seen above
(n. 500, 586).

<span class="margnote"><span id="859.">859.</span></span>

That by "Gog and Magog" are signified they who are in external worship
and not in any internal worship, may appear in Ezekiel from chap.
xxxviii., where it treats of Gog from beginning to end; and from chap.
xxxix. there (vers. 1-16); but that these are signified by "Gog and
Magog" does not clearly appear there, except from the spiritual sense;
which because it has been disclosed to me, shall be opened; first what
those signify which are contained in those two chapters. In the
thirty-eighth chapter of Ezekiel are these things: "It treats of those
who are in the sense of the letter of the Word alone, and thence in
external worship without internal, which Is "Gog" (verses 1, 2); that
each and all things of that worship will perish (verses 3-7); that that
worship will take possession of the church, vastate it, and thus it will
be in externals without internals (verses 8-16); that the state of the
church will thereby be changed (verses 17-19); that thence the truths
and goods of religion will perish, and falsities succeed (verses
20-23)." \[2\] In the thirty-ninth chapter of the same prophet are these
things: "Of those who are in the sense of the letter of the Word alone
and in external worship, that they will come into the church, which is
"Gog," but that they will perish (verses 1-6); that this will come to
pass when the Lord comes and establishes the church (verses 7, 8); that
this church will then disperse all their evils and falsities (verses 9,
10); that it will altogether destroy them (verses 11-16); that the New
Church to be established by the Lord will be informed in truths and
goods of every kind, and be imbued with goods of every kind (verses
17-21); and that the former church will be destroyed on account of evils
and falsities (verses 23, 24); that then the church will be collected by
the Lord from all nations (verses 25-29)." \[3\] But something shall be
said of those who are in external worship without internal spiritual
worship. These are they who frequent temples on sabbaths and festivals,
and then sing psalms and pray, hearken to preachings, and then attend to
the eloquence, and little or nothing to the substance, and are somewhat
moved by prayers uttered with affection, as that they are sinners, but
never reflect upon themselves and their life; who also go to the
Sacrament of the Supper yearly; pour out prayers morning and evening,
and also pray at dinners and suppers and sometimes discourse about God,
heaven, and eternal life, and then also they know how to repeat some
passages from the Word, and simulate Christians, although they are not;
for after they have done these things, they make nothing of adulteries,
and obscenities, revenges and hatreds, clandestine thefts and
depredations, lies and blasphemies, and lusts and intentions of evils of
every kind. They who are such do not believe in any God, much less in
the Lord; if they are asked what the good and truth of religion is, they
know nothing, and think it of no importance to know; in a word, they
live to themselves and the world, thus to their inclinations and bodies,
and not to God and the neighbor, thus not to the spirit and soul; from
which it is plain that their worship is external without internal
worship; these also readily receive the heresy of faith alone,
especially when they hear that man cannot do good of himself, and that
they are not under the yoke of the law; this is the reason why it is
said "the dragon will go forth to seduce the nations, Gog and Magog." By
"Gog and Magog" also, in the Hebrew language, is signified a roof and a
floor, thus what is external.

<span class="margnote"><span id="860.">860.</span></span>

The number of whom, is as the sand of the sea, signifies the multitude
of such. The multitude of them is compared to "the sand of the sea,"
because by "the sea" is signified the external of the church (n. 402,
403, 404, 470), and by "sand" that which is of no use in the sea but to
make the bottom. Because the number of them is so great, therefore it is
called: The valley of their burial, the multitude of Gog, and the name
of the city where they are, multitude (Ezek. 39:15, 16).

<span class="margnote"><span id="861.">861.</span></span>

Verse 9. And they went up upon the breadth of the earth, and encompassed
the camp of the saints, and the beloved city, signifies that being
aroused by the dragonists, they spurned every truth of the church, and
endeavored to destroy all things of the New Church, and its very
doctrine concerning the Lord and concerning life. "To go up upon the
breadth of the earth," signifies to spurn every truth of the church, for
by "going up" is signified to climb over and pass by, thus to spurn; and
by "the breadth of the earth" is signified the truth of the church, as
will be seen presently: "to encompass the camp of the saints," signifies
to besiege and to wish to destroy all things of the New Church, as will
be shown in the next article; and by "the beloved city" is signified the
doctrine of the New Church; that by "a city" is signified the doctrine
of the church, may be seen above (n. 194, 501, 502, 712), which is
called "beloved," because it treats of the Lord and of life, for it is
the doctrine of the New Jerusalem which is here meant. That this is the
signification of these words, no one can perceive except by the
spiritual sense of the Word, for it could never enter into anyone's
thought, that by "the breadth of the earth" is signified the truth of
the church, and that by "the camp of the saints" are signified all
things of the New Church, both its truths and goods, and that by "the
city" is signified its doctrine. Wherefore, lest the mind should remain
in doubt, it is necessary to demonstrate what "the breadth" and what
"the camp of the saints" signify in the spiritual sense, from which it
may afterwards be seen that such is the sense of these words. \[2\] The
reason why the "breadth of the earth" signifies the truth of the church,
is because in the spiritual world there are four quarters, east, west,
south, and north, and the east and west constitute its length, and the
south and north its breadth; and because they dwell in the east and west
who are in the good of love, and thence by "east" and "west" is
signified good, therefore the same is meant by "length;" and because
they dwell in the south and north who are in the truths of wisdom, and
thence by "south" and " north" is signified truth, therefore the same is
meant by "breadth;" but on this more may be seen in the work on Heaven
and Hell, published at London in 1758 (n. 141-153). That by "breadth" is
signified truth, may appear from these passages in the Word: O Jehovah,
Thou hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: thou hast made my
feet to stand in a broad place (Ps. 31:8). I called upon Jah in
straitness, He answered me in a broad place (Ps. 118:5) Jehovah led me
forth also into a broad place, He delivered me (Ps. 18:19). I raise up
the Chaldeans, a nation bitter and swift, that walketh in the breadths
of the earth (Hab. 1:6). Ashur shall pass through Judah, he shall
overflow and go over, and the stretching out of his wings is the
fullness of the breadth (Isa. 8:8). Jehovah shall feed them as a sheep
in a broad place (Hos. 4:16). Besides other passages, as Ps. 4:1; 66:12;
Deut. 33:20. \[3\] Nor is anything else meant by: The breadth of the
city New Jerusalem (Re. 21:16). For when by "the New Jerusalem" is meant
the New Church, by "the breadth and length of it" breadth and length
cannot be signified, but its truth and good; for these are the things of
the church, as also in Zechariah: I said to the angel, Whither goest
thou? He said, To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof
and what is the length thereof (Zech. 2:2). The same by: The breadth and
length of the new temple, and of the new earth (Ezek. 40-47). Also by
"the length and breadth of the altar of burnt-offering, of the
tabernacle, of the table upon which was bread, of the altar of incense,
and of the ark therein;" and also by "the length and breadth" of the
temple at Jerusalem, and of many other things, which are described by
measures.

<span class="margnote"><span id="862.">862.</span></span>

It was said that by "they encompassed the camp of the saints and the
beloved city," is signified that they would endeavor to destroy all
things of the New Church, both its truths and its goods, and the
doctrine itself concerning the Lord and concerning life, as is said in
the preceding article. The reason why these are signified, is, because
by "the camp of the saints" are signified all the truths and goods of
the church which is the New Jerusalem. That "a camp" in the spiritual
sense signifies all things of the church which have relation to its
truths and goods may appear from the following passages: The sun and
moon were blackened, and the stars withdrew their shining; Jehovah
uttered His voice before His army; for His camp is very great, for
numberless are they that do His Word (Joel 2:10, 11). I will encamp
about my house because of the army (Zech. 9:8). God hath scattered the
bones of him that encampeth against thee, because God hath rejected them
(Ps. 53:5). The angel of Jehovah encampeth about them that fear Him, and
delivereth them (Ps. 34:7). The angels of God met Jacob, and Jacob said,
This is God's camp, therefore he called the name of that place Mahanaim
(the two camps) (Gen. 32:2). Besides other places, as Isa. 29:3; Ezek.
1:24; Ps. 27:3. That by "an army" in the Word are signified the truths
and goods of the church, also its falsities and evils, may be seen (n.
447, 826, 833); the same is also signified by "camps." \[2\] Since by
the sons of Israel, and their twelve tribes, is signified the church as
to all its truths and goods (n. 349, 350), they were therefore called
"the army of Jehovah" (Exod. 7:4; 12:41, 51); and when they halted and
were assembled, they were called "the camp" (as in Lev. 4:12; 8:17;
13:46; 14:8; 16:26, 28; 24:14, 23; Num. 1, 2, 3, 4:5,seq.; 5:2-4; 9:17
to the end; 10:2-8; 11:31, 32; 12:14, 15; 21:10-25; 33:1-49; Deut.
23:9-14; Amos 4:10). From these things it is plain, that by "they
encompassed the camp of the saints and the beloved city," is signified
that they would endeavor to destroy all the truths and goods of the New
Church which is the New Jerusalem, and also its doctrine concerning the
Lord and concerning life. The like is signified by this passage in Luke:
When ye shall see Jerusalem encompassed by armies, then know that the
devastation is near; at length Jerusalem shall be trodden down by the
nations until the times of the nations shall be fulfilled (Luke 21:20,
24). This is concerning the consummation of the age, which is the last
time of the church; by "Jerusalem" is here also signified the church.
That "Gog and Magog," that is, they who are in external worship
separated from internal worship, will then invade the church, and
endeavor to destroy it, is also said in Ezekiel 38:8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16;
39:2; and that then there will be a New Church from the Lord (39:17, to
the end).

<span class="margnote"><span id="863.">863.</span></span>

And fire came down from God out of heaven, and consumed them, signifies
that they perished by the lusts of infernal love. By "fire coming down
out of heaven which consumed them," are signified the lusts of evils, or
of infernal love (as above, n. 494, 748), because they who are in
external worship separated from internal worship, are in all kinds of
evils and lusts, because with them evils are not removed by any actual
repentance (n. 859). It is said that "fire came down from God out of
heaven;" this was done in ancient times, when all things of the church
were represented before their eyes, consequently when churches were
representative; but at this day, when representatives have ceased, the
like is said, and the signification is the same as formerly when the
thing was represented. That fire came down out of heaven upon those who
profaned things holy, may be seen above (n. 494, 748). The same is said
of "Gog and Magog" in Ezekiel: I will cause it to rain upon Gog, and
upon his wings, and upon many people that are with him, fire and
brimstone (Ezek. 38:22). I will send fire upon Magog (Ezek. 39:6).

<span class="margnote"><span id="864.">864.</span></span>

Verse 10.And the Devil that seduced them was cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night for ages of ages, signifies that they who were
in evils as to life and in falsities as to doctrine, were cast into
hell, where they will be interiorly infested by the love of their
falsity, and by the lusts of their evil continually forever. By "the
Devil that seduced them" is meant the dragon, as is evident from what
goes before, and by "the dragon" are meant in general those who are in
evils as to life, and in falsities as to doctrine (n. 841). He is called
"the Devil that seduced them," that it might be known that it was the
dragon, because he seduced (as appears from verses 2, 3, 7, 8, of this
chapter). By "the lake of fire" into which he was cast, is signified
hell, where are the loves of falsities and the lusts of evil (n. 835).
By "the beast and the false prophet" are signified they who are in faith
alone, both as to life and doctrine, both the unlearned and the learned;
by "the beast" the unlearned, and by "the false prophet" the learned (n.
834). By "being tormented day and night" is signified to be interiorly
infested continually, and by "for ages and ages" is signified to
eternity. And because it is said that "they were cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone," by which is signified where the loves of falsity
and the lusts of evil are (n. 835), these are what they will be infested
by interiorly; for everyone in hell is tormented by his own love and its
lusts, for these make the life of everyone there, and it is the life
which is tormented; wherefore there are degrees of torment there
according to the degrees of the love of evil and thence of falsity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="865.">865.</span></span>

Verse 11. And I saw a great white throne, and Him that sat upon it, from
whose face the earth and heaven fled away, and no place was found for
them, signifies the universal judgment executed by the Lord upon all the
former heavens in which were those who were in civil and moral good, but
in no spiritual good, thus who simulated Christians in externals, but in
internals were devils; which heavens, with their earth, were totally
dissipated, so that nothing of them appeared any more. Before these
things are explained in their order according to the letter, something
must be premised concerning the universal judgment here treated of. From
the time when the Lord was in the world, when He executed the Last
Judgment in Person, it was permitted that they who were in civil and
moral good, although in no spiritual good, whence in externals they
appeared like Christians, but in internals were devils, should continue
longer than the rest in the world of spirits, which is midway between
heaven and hell; and at length they were allowed to make there for
themselves fixed habitations, and also by the abuse of correspondences,
and by phantasies, to form to themselves as it were heavens, which also
they did form in great abundance. But when these were multiplied to such
a degree as to intercept the spiritual light and spiritual heat in their
descent from the higher heavens to men on earth, then the Lord executed
the Last Judgment, and dissipated those imaginary heavens; which was
effected in such a manner, that the externals, by which they simulated
Christians, were taken away, and the internals, in which they were
devils, were opened; and then they were seen such as they were in
themselves, and they who were seen to be devils, were cast into hell,
everyone according to the evils of his life; this was done in the year
1757. But more concerning this universal judgment may be seen in the
little work on The Last Judgment, published at London in the year 1758,
and in The Continuation of the same, published at Amsterdam in the year
1763. \[2\] Now to the explanation: By "the great white throne, and Him
who sat upon it," is signified the universal judgment executed by the
Lord; by "the throne" is signified heaven, and likewise judgment (n.
229); by "Him who sat upon the throne" is meant the Lord (n. 808 at the
end). The reason why the throne appeared "white," is because judgment
was executed from Divine truths, for "white" is predicated of truths (n.
167, 379). The reason why the throne appeared "great," is because
judgment was likewise executed from Divine good, for "great" is
predicated of good (n. 656, 663). "From whose face the earth and the
heaven fled away," signifies that those heavens, which they had made for
themselves, as described above, together with their earths, were
dissipated; for there are earths in the spiritual world as well as in
the natural world, as may be seen (n. 260, 331); but the earths, like
all other things there, are from a spiritual origin. And "there was not
found a place for them," signifies that those heavens with their earths
were so totally dissipated, that nothing of them appeared any more.
Hence it is evident, that by "I saw a great white throne, and Him who
sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there
was not found a place for them," is signified the universal judgment
executed by the Lord upon all the former <span
id="fr_80"></span>[865-1](#fn_80) heavens that were inhabited by such as
were in civil and moral good, but in no spiritual good, thus who
simulated Christians in externals, but in internals were devils; which
heavens, together with their earth, were totally dissipated, so that
nothing of them appeared any more.

<span class="margnote"><span id="866.">866.</span></span>

Verse 12.And I saw the dead small and great standing before God,
signifies all who had died from the earth, and were now among those who
were in the world of spirits, of whatever condition and quality,
gathered together by the Lord for judgment. By "the dead" are signified
all who had departed from the earth, or who were dead as to the body,
concerning whom more will be said below; by "small and great" are
signified of every condition and quality (as at n. 604); by "standing
before God," that is, before Him who sat upon the throne, is signified
to be present and gathered together to judgment. By "the dead" in the
Word the same thing is signified as by deaths, and "deaths" signify
various things; for "death" not only signifies the extinction of natural
life or decease, but also the extinction of spiritual life, which is
damnation; by "death" is also signified the extinction of the loves of
the body or the lusts of the flesh, after which there is a renewal of
life; in like manner by "death" is signified resurrection, because man
rises again immediately after death; by "death" is also signified
neglect, non-acknowledgment, and rejection by the world, but in the most
general sense by "death" the same is signified as by "the Devil,"
wherefore also the Devil is called "death," and by "the Devil" is meant
hell where they are who are called devils, hence also by "death" the
evil of the will is meant which causes man to be a devil. "Death" is
used in this last sense in the next verse, where it is said that "death
and hell gave up their dead," and that "they were cast into the lake of
fire." From these things it may appear who are meant by "the dead" in
the variety of senses; here are signified all those who had departed out
of the world, or who had died from the earth, and were then in the world
of spirits. \[2\] It is said in the world of spirits, because all come
into that world immediately after their decease, and are there prepared,
the good for heaven, and the evil for hell; and some stay there only a
month or a year, and others from ten to thirty years; and they to whom
it was granted to make as it were heavens to themselves, several
centuries; but at this day not longer than twenty years. There is there
a vast multitude, and societies there as in the heavens and in the
hells, concerning this world see above (n. 784, 791). Upon those who
were in that world, the Last Judgment was executed, and not upon those
who were in heaven, nor upon those who were in hell; for they who were
in heaven were saved before, and they who were in hell were condemned
before. From these considerations it may be seen, how much they are
deceived who believe that the Last Judgment is to take place upon earth,
and that then men are to rise again as to their bodies, for all who have
lived from the first creation of the world are together in the spiritual
world; and all are clothed with a spiritual body, which before the eyes
of those who are spiritual appear as men in a similar form, just as they
who are in the natural world appear before the eyes of those who are
natural.

<span class="margnote"><span id="867.">867.</span></span>

And the books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the
book of life, signifies that the interiors of the minds of them all were
laid open, and by the influx of light and heat from heaven their quality
was seen and perceived, as to the affections which are of the love or
will, and thence as to the thoughts which are of faith or of the
understanding, as well the evil as the good. By "books" are not meant
books, but the interiors of the minds of those who are judged, by "the
books," the interiors of the minds of those who are evil, and are judged
to death, and by "the book of life" such as are good, and are judged to
life. They are called "books," because in the interiors of the mind of
everyone are inscribed all the things that he thought, intended, spoke,
and did in the world from the will or the love, and thence from the
understanding or faith; all these things are inscribed on the life of
everyone, with so much exactness that not one of them is wanting. The
quality of all these things appears to the life, when spiritual light,
which is wisdom from the Lord, and spiritual heat, which is love from
the Lord, flow in through heaven. Spiritual light discloses the thoughts
which are of the understanding and faith, and spiritual heat discloses
the affections which are of the will and love; and spiritual light
together with spiritual heat disclose the intentions and endeavors. That
this is the case, I do not say that the rational man can see from the
light of his own understanding; but he can if he will, provided he be
willing to understand that there is given spiritual light which
enlightens the understanding, and spiritual heat which enkindles the
will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="868.">868.</span></span>

And the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the
books, according to their works, signifies that all were judged
according to their internal life in externals. By "the dead" are
signified all who died from the earth, and were then in the world of
spirits, as above (n. 866). "Out of those things which were written in
the books," signifies out of the interiors of everyone's mind then laid
open, as above (n. 867); "according to their works," signifies,
according to the internal life of everyone in externals. That this is
signified by "works" in the Word, may be seen above (n. 72, 76, 94, 141,
641); to which I will further add, that there are works of the mind and
works of the body, both of them at once internal and external. The works
of the mind are intentions and endeavors, and the works of the body are
words and actions; each of these proceed from the internal life of man,
which is of his will or love. Whatsoever does not close in works, either
internal which relate to the mind, or external which relate to the body,
are not in the life of man, for they inflow from the world of spirits
but are not received, therefore they are like images that strike the
eyes, or as odors that affect the nostrils, from which a man turns away
his face. But more may be seen on this subject in the places cited
above, where also some passages are adduced from the Word to prove that
man is judged according to his works; to which may be added the
following from Paul: In the day of anger and revelation of the just
judgment of God; who will render to everyone according to his deeds
(Rom. 2:5, 6). For we must all be manifested before the judgment-seat of
Christ, that everyone may receive the things done in the body, according
to that he hath done, whether it be good or evil (2 Cor. 5:10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="869.">869.</span></span>

Verse 13. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, signifies the
external and natural men of the church called together to judgment. By
"the sea" is signified the external of the church, which is natural,
therefore by those whom "the sea gave up" are signified the external and
natural men of the church. That "the sea" signifies the external of the
church, which is natural, may be seen above (n. 238, 239 at the end,
402-405, 470, 565b, 567, 659, 661). By "the dead" are meant they who had
died out of the earth, as above (n. 866, 868). The reason why by "the
dead whom the sea gave up" are meant the external men of the church, is
because no others were judged but those who were in some worship, for
all who have spurned the holy things of the church, and have denied God,
the Word, and the life after death, were judged immediately after death,
and conjoined with those who were in hell, whither they were afterwards
cast down. But they who had been external and natural men, and professed
with the mouths that there is a God, that there are a heaven and a hell,
and in a certain way had acknowledged the Word, these are they who were
called together to judgment. Out of these who were from "the sea," many
were saved, for we do not read that all these "were cast into the lake
of fire," as "death and hell" were, but that "if anyone of them was not
found written in the book of life, he was cast therein" (verse 16). Such
of these as were saved, are also meant by "the rest of the dead which
lived not again until the thousand years were finished" (verse 5). From
what has been said it may now appear, that by "the sea gave up the dead
that were in it," are signified the external and natural men of the
church called together to judgment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="870.">870.</span></span>

And death and hell gave up the dead which were in them, signifies the
men of the church who were wicked at heart, and who in themselves were
devils and satans, called together to judgment. By "death and hell" no
others are meant than they who interiorly in themselves were devils and
satans, by "death" they who were inwardly in themselves devils, and by
"hell" they who inwardly in themselves were satans, consequently all the
wicked at heart, who nevertheless in externals appeared like men of the
church; for no others were called together to this universal judgment;
for they who in externals are like men of the church, whether they be of
the laity or clergy, and in internals are devils and satans, are judged,
because in them externals are to be separated from internals, and such
likewise can be judged, because they have known and professed the things
which are of the church. That by "death" are meant the wicked at heart
who in themselves were devils, and by "hell" they who in themselves were
satans, may appear from its being said, that "death and hell were cast
into the lake of fire" (verse 14); for neither death nor hell can be
cast into hell, but they can who as to their interiors are death and
hell, that is, who are in themselves devils and satans. Who are meant by
the Devil and Satan, may be seen above (n. 97, 841, 857); and that they
are death who in themselves are devils, above (n. 866). In other places
also mention is made of "death and hell," as in the following: The Son
of man said, I have the keys of death and hell (Re. 1:18). The name of
him who sat on the pale horse was Death, and hell followed him (Rev.
6:8). In like manner Hos. 13:14; Ps. 18:4, 5; 49:14, 15; 116:3.

<span class="margnote"><span id="871.">871.</span></span>

And they were judged everyone according to their works, signifies that
they were all judged according to their internal life in externals, as
appears from the explanation above (n. 868), where are similar words. To
which I will add this, that everyone is judged according to the quality
of his soul; and the soul of man is his life, for it is the love of his
will, and the love of everyone's will is entirely according to his
reception of the Divine truth proceeding from the Lord; and this
reception is taught by the doctrine of the church which is from the
Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="872.">872.</span></span>

Verse 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, signifies
that the wicked at heart, who in themselves were devils and satans, and
yet in externals like men of the church, were cast into hell among those
who were in the love of evil, and thence in the love of falsity agreeing
with evil. By "death and hell" are signified the wicked at heart, who
interiorly in themselves were devils and satans, and yet in externals
like men of the church, as above (n. 870). By "the lake of fire" is
signified hell, where they are who are in the love of evil, and thus in
the love of the falsity agreeing with evil, thus who love evil, and
confirm it by reasonings from the natural man, and still more they who
confirm it by the sense of the letter of the Word. These cannot
interiorly in themselves do otherwise than deny God, for such denial
lies concealed in evil of life confirmed by falsities. "A lake"
signifies where falsity abounds, and "fire" signifies the love of evil,
as above (n. 835, 864). Its being said that "death and hell were cast
into the lake of fire," is according to angelic speech, in which the
person is not named, but that which is in the person, and makes him;
here that in the person which makes his death and hell; that this is the
case, may be seen from this that hell cannot be cast into hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="873.">873.</span></span>

This is the second death, signifies that with these there is damnation
itself. That by "the second death" is signified spiritual death, which
is damnation, may be seen above (n. 853). This is said, because they who
are wicked at heart, and in themselves devils and satans, and yet appear
like men of the church are condemned beyond all others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="874.">874.</span></span>

Verse 15.And if anyone was not found written in the book of life, he was
cast into the lake of fire, signifies that they who did not live
according to the Lord's commandments in the Word, and did not believe in
the Lord, were condemned. That by "the book of life" is signified the
Word, and by "being judged out of that book," is signified to be judged
according to the truths of the Word, may be seen above (n. 256, 259,
295, 303, 309, 317, 324, 330); and no other is found written in the book
of life but he who has lived according to the Lord's commandments in the
Word, and has believed in the Lord; this therefore is meant. That he who
does not live according to the Lord's commandments in the Word, is
condemned, the Lord teaches in John: And if anyone hear My words and
believe not, I judge him not: he hath one that judgeth him, the Word
that I have spoken, that shall judge him in the last day (John 12:47,
48). And that he who does not believe in the Lord, is condemned, also in
John: He that believeth on the Son hath eternal life, and he that
believeth not the Son, shall not see life, but the anger of God abideth
on him (John 3:36).

<span class="margnote"><span id="875.">875.</span></span>

To the above I will add these Relations. Awaking one morning from sleep,
I saw two angels descending out of heaven, one from the southern quarter
of heaven and the other from the eastern quarter of heaven, both in
chariots to which white horses were harnessed. The chariot in which the
angel from the southern quarter of heaven was conveyed, shone like
silver, and the chariot in which the angel from the eastern quarter of
heaven was conveyed, shone like gold; and the reins which they held in
their hands were refulgent as from the flamy light of the dawn. Thus
these two angels were seen by me at a distance; but when they came
nearer, they did not appear in a chariot, but in their angelic form
which is human. He who came from the eastern quarter of heaven, was clad
in a bright purple garment, and he who came from the southern quarter of
heaven in a garment of hyacinthine blue. When they were below under the
heavens, they ran to meet each other, as if they strove which should be
first, and mutually embraced and kissed each other. I heard that these
two angels, when they lived on earth, had been conjoined in interior
friendship; but now one was in the eastern heaven and the other in the
southern heaven. In the eastern heaven are they who are in love from the
Lord; but in the southern heaven are they who are in wisdom from the
Lord. \[2\] When they had spoken some time about the magnificence of
their heavens, this came up in their discourse, whether heaven in its
essence is love, or whether it is wisdom. They immediately agreed that
one is of the other, but discussed which was the original. The angel who
was from the heaven of wisdom asked the other, what love is; to which he
replied, "That love, originating from the Lord as a sun, is the vital
heat of angels and men, thus their life: that the derivations of love
are called affections; and that by these are produced perceptions and
thus thoughts, whence it follows that wisdom in its origin is love;
consequently that thought in its origin is the affection of that love;
and it is evident from the derivations viewed in their order, that
thought is nothing else but the form of affection; and that this is not
known, because the thoughts are in the light, but the affections in
heat, and that therefore one reflects upon the thoughts, but not on the
affections, in the same manner as takes place with sound and with
speech. That thought is nothing else but the form of affection, may also
be illustrated by speech, which is nothing else but the form of sound;
it is also similar, because sound corresponds to affection, and speech
to thought, wherefore affection sounds, and thought speaks. This may
also be made clear by this, that if you take away sound from speech,
nothing of speech remains, and, in like manner, if you take away
affection from thought, nothing of thought remains. Hence then it is
plain, that love is the all of wisdom, consequently the essence of the
heavens is love, and their existence is wisdom, or what is the same
thing, the heavens are from the Divine love, and they exist from the
Divine love by the Divine wisdom, wherefore, as was said above, the one
is of the other." \[3\] There was with me at that time a novitiate
spirit, who on hearing this, asked, whether it is the same with charity
and faith, since charity is of affection, and faith is of thought. The
angel replied, "It is altogether the same; for faith is nothing else but
the form of charity, just as speech is the form of sound; faith is also
formed by charity as speech is formed by sound; the mode of its
formation we also know in heaven, but there is no leisure to explain it
here." "By faith, however," he added, "I mean spiritual faith, the
spirit and life of which is derived solely from charity, for charity is
spiritual, and by charity, faith; wherefore faith without charity is a
merely natural faith, which is dead, which also conjoins itself with
merely natural affection, which is nothing else but lust." The angels
spake of these things spiritually, and spiritual speech embraces
thousands of things which natural speech cannot express, and what is
wonderful, which cannot even fall within the ideas of natural thought.
Remember this, I pray, and when you come out of natural light into
spiritual light, which is done after death, inquire what faith is and
what charity is, and you will clearly see that faith is charity in form,
and therefore that charity is the all of faith, consequently that it is
the soul, life, and essence of faith, just as the affection is of
thought, and as the sound is of speech; and if you desire it, you will
see the formation of faith from charity like the formation of speech
from sound, because they correspond. After discoursing together for some
time on these and such like subjects, the angels departed, and as they
retired each to his own heaven, their heads appeared encompassed with
stars: and when they were some distance from me, they again seemed to be
borne in chariots as before. \[4\] After these two angels were gone out
of my sight, I saw a certain garden on my right hand, in which were
olive trees, vines, fig trees, laurels, and palm trees, planted in
order, according to correspondence. I looked into the garden, and saw
angels and spirits walking and conversing together among the trees; and
then a certain angelic spirit observed me. They are called angelic
spirits, who in the world of spirits are prepared for heaven, and
afterwards become angels. That spirit came out of the garden towards me,
and said, "Will you come with me into our paradise, and you shall hear
and see wonderful things." And I went with him, and then he said to me,
"Those whom you see (for there were many) are all in the affection of
truth, and thence in the light of wisdom. Here also is a building which
we call the TEMPLE OF WISDOM; but no one sees it who believes himself
very wise, much less he who believes himself wise enough, and still less
he who believes himself wise from himself; the reason is, because such
persons are not in the reception of the light of heaven from the
affection of genuine wisdom. Genuine wisdom consists in a man's seeing
from the light of heaven, that the things which he knows, understands,
and is wise in, are so little respectively to what he does not know,
understand, and is wise in, as a drop to the ocean, consequently
scarcely anything. Everyone who is in this paradisal garden, and
acknowledges in himself from perception and sight that his own wisdom is
so little comparatively, sees that temple of wisdom, for interior light
enables him to see it, but not exterior light without it." \[5\] And
because I had often thought this, both from science, and then from
perception, and lastly from seeing it from interior light, and had
acknowledged that man had so little wisdom, behold, it was given me to
see that temple. As to form it was wonderful. It was elevated above the
ground, quadrangular, with walls of crystal, its roof of translucent
jasper elegantly arched; the foundation consisted of precious stones of
various kinds. The steps leading up to it were of polished alabaster. At
the sides of the steps appeared figures of lions with their whelps. And
I then asked whether it was allowed to enter; and it was said that it
was allowed; therefore I ascended, and when I entered, I saw, as it
were, cherubs flying beneath the roof, and presently vanishing out of
sight; the floor upon which we walked was of cedar, and the whole
temple, from the pellucidity of its roof and walls, seemed in the form
of light. \[6\] The angelic spirit entered with me, to whom I related
what I heard from the two angels concerning love and wisdom, as also
concerning charity and faith. And he then said, "Did they not speak of a
third also?" I said, "What third?" He replied, "It is Use: love and
wisdom without use are not anything: they are only ideal entities; nor
do they become real before they are in use: for love, wisdom, and use,
are three things which cannot be separated. If they are separated,
neither is anything. Love is not anything without wisdom, but in wisdom
it is formed for something. This something for which it is formed, is
use. Therefore, when love through wisdom is in use, it is then
something; yea, it then first exists. They are altogether as the end,
the cause, and the effect. The end is not anything, unless through the
cause it is in the effect. If one of the three is loosed, the whole is
loosed, and becomes as nothing. It is similar with charity, faith, and
works. \[7\] Charity without faith is not anything; nor faith without
charity; nor charity and faith without works; but in works they become
something, of a quality according to the use of the works. It is similar
with affection, thought, and operation; and it is similar with will,
understanding, and action. That it is so may be seen clearly in this
temple, because the light in which we are here is light that enlightens
the interiors of the mind. That there is not given a complete and
perfect thing unless it is a trine, geometry also teaches; for a line is
not anything, unless it becomes an area; and an area is not anything,
unless it becomes a solid; therefore the one must be produced into the
other, that they may exist; and they co-exist in the third. As it is in
this, so it is in each and every created thing; they are terminated in
their third. Hence now it is, that three in the Word, spiritually
understood, signifies complete and altogether. Since it is so, I could
not but wonder, that some profess faith alone, some charity alone, some
works alone; when yet the first without the second, and the first and
second without the third, are not anything." \[8\] But I then asked,
"Cannot a man have charity and faith, and still not works? Cannot a man
be in affection and thought about anything, and yet not in the
performance of it?" The angelic spirit said to me, "He cannot, except
only ideally, but not really. He must still be in the endeavor or the
will to operate; and the will or the endeavor is in itself the act,
because it is in the continual effort to act; which becomes an outward
act when determination is present. On which account the endeavor and
will, as an interior act, is accepted by every wise man, because it is
by God, altogether as an exterior act, provided it does not fail when
opportunity is given." \[9\] After this I descended by the steps from
the temple of wisdom, and walked in the garden, and saw some sitting
under a certain laurel eating figs. I turned aside to them, and asked
them for some figs; which they gave me: and, behold, the figs became
grapes in my hand. When I wondered at this, the angelic spirit, who was
still with me, said to me, "The figs have become grapes in your hand,
because figs, from correspondence, signify the goods of charity and
thence of faith in the natural or external man, but grapes the goods of
charity and faith in the spiritual or internal man; and because you love
spiritual things, therefore it so happened to you: for in our world all
things come to pass and exist, and also are changed, according to
correspondences." And then there came over me the desire of knowing how
man can do good from God, and yet as of himself; therefore I asked them
that were eating the figs how they comprehended it. They said that they
"could not comprehend it otherwise than that God operates it within in
man and through man, when he does not know it; since if man were
conscious of it, and thus should do it as of himself, which is also to
do it of himself, he would not do good, but evil. For all that proceeds
from man, as from himself, proceeds from his proprium; and the proprium
of man is evil from birth. How then can good from God and evil from man
be conjoined, and so proceed conjointly into act? The proprium of man
also, in the things of salvation, continually breathes forth merit; and
as far as it does this, it takes away from the Lord His merit; which is
the highest injustice and impiety. In a word, if the good which God
operates in a man by the Holy Spirit should flow in into man's willing
and thence his doing, that good would be altogether defiled and also
profaned; which, however, God never permits. A man can indeed think that
the good which he does is from God, and call it God's good through
himself, and as if from himself; but still we do not comprehend this."
\[10\] But I then opened my mind, and said, "You do not comprehend,
because you think from the appearance, and the thought from confirmed
appearance is a fallacy. You are in the appearance and the fallacy from
it, because you believe that all the things which a man wills and
thinks, and thence does and speaks, are in him, and consequently from
him; when yet nothing of them is in him except the state of receiving
what flows in. Man is not life in himself, but is an organ receiving
life. The Lord alone is life in Himself, as He also says in John: As the
Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in
Himself (John 5:26). Besides other places (as John 11:25; 14:6, 19).
\[11\] There are two things which make life, love and wisdom; or what is
the same, the good of love and the truth of wisdom. These flow in from
God, and are received by man, and are felt in the man as in him; and
because they are felt by him as in him, they also proceed as from him.
It is given by the Lord, that they should be thus felt by the man, in
order that what flows in may affect him, and so be received and remain.
But because all evil also flows in, not from God, but from hell, and
this is received with enjoyment, because man was born such an organ,
therefore no more of good is received from God, than there is of evil
removed by the man as of himself; which is done by repentance, and at
the same time by faith in the Lord. \[12\] That love and wisdom, charity
and faith, or speaking more generally, the good of love and charity and
the truth of wisdom and faith, flow in; and that the things which flow
in appear in the man as in himself, and thence as from him, may be
manifestly seen from the sight, the hearing, the smell, the taste, and
the touch. All the things which are felt in the organs of those senses
flow in from without, and are felt in them: in like manner in the organs
of the internal senses, with the difference only that into the latter
spiritual things flow in, which do not appear; but into the former
natural things, which do appear. In a word, man is an organ recipient of
life from God; consequently he is a recipient of good so far as he
desists from evil. The Lord gives to every man to be able to desist from
evil, because He gives him to will and understand as of himself: and
whatever the man does from the will, as his own according to the
understanding, as his own, or, what is the same, whatever he does from
freedom which is of the will according to reason which is of the
understanding, this remains. By this the Lord brings man into a state of
conjunction with Himself, and in this reforms, regenerates, and saves
him. \[13\] The life which flows in is the life proceeding from the
Lord, which is also called the Spirit of God, and in the Word the Holy
Spirit; of which it is also said, that it enlightens and vivifies; yea,
that it operates in man: but this life is varied and modified according
to the organization induced upon the man by his love and attitude to it.
You may also know that all the good of love and charity and all the
truth of wisdom and faith flow in, and are not in the man, from the fact
that he who thinks such a thing is in man from creation, cannot think
otherwise, than that God infused Himself into a man, and thus that men
would in part be Gods; and yet they who think this from faith become
devils, and stink like carcasses. \[14\] Besides, what is human action
but the action of the mind? for that which the mind wills and thinks, it
acts through its organ the body: and therefore when the mind is led by
the Lord, the action is also led; and the mind and the action from it
are led by the Lord, when it believes in Him. Unless it were so, say, if
you can, why the Lord has commanded in the Word, in a thousand and a
thousand places, that a man must love his neighbor, must work out the
good of charity, and bear fruit like a tree, and do His precepts, and
all this that he may be saved; also why He has said that man will be
judged according to his deeds or works, he who has done goods to heaven
and life, and he who has done evils to hell and death. How could the
Lord speak such things, if all that proceeds from man were meritorious,
and thence evil? You may know, therefore, that if the mind is charity,
the action is also charity; but if the mind is faith alone, which is
also faith separated from spiritual charity, the action is also that
faith; and this faith is meritorious, because its charity is natural,
and not spiritual. It is otherwise with the faith of charity, because
charity does not wish to merit, and thence neither does its faith."
\[15\] On hearing this, they that sat under the laurel said, "We
comprehend that you have spoken justly; but still we do not comprehend."
To which I replied, "That I have spoken justly, you comprehend from the
common perception which man has from the influx of light from heaven
when he hears any truth; but you do not comprehend from your own
perception, which man has from the influx of light from the world. These
two perceptions, namely, the internal and the external, or the spiritual
and the natural, make one with the wise. You also can make them one, if
you look to the Lord and remove evils." Because they understood these
things also, I took some shoots from the laurel under which we sat, and
held them out, and said, "Do you believe that this is from me, or from
the Lord?" And they said, that they believed it to be through me as from
me; and, behold, the shoots blossomed in their hands. But when I
departed, I saw a cedar table, upon which was a book, under a green
olive-tree, the trunk of which was entwined with a vine. I looked, and
behold, it was a book written by me, called The Angelic Wisdom
concerning the Divine Love and the Divine Wisdom, and also concerning
The Divine Providence; and I said that it was fully shown in that book,
that man is an organ recipient of life, and not life. \[16\] After this
I went home exhilarated from that garden, and the angelic spirit with
me; who said to me on the way, "If you wish to see clearly what faith
and charity are, and thus what faith separate from charity is, and faith
conjoined to charity, I will also show it to the eye." I answered, "Show
it." And he said, "Think of light and heat instead of faith and charity,
and you will see clearly; for faith in its essence is truth, which is of
wisdom, and charity in its essence is affection, which is of love; and
the truth of wisdom in heaven is light, and the affection of love in
heaven is heat; the light and heat in which the angels are is nothing
else. From this you can see clearly, what faith separate from charity
is, and what faith conjoined to charity. Faith separated from charity is
like the light in winter, and faith conjoined to charity is like the
light in the spring. Wintry light, which is light separated from heat,
because it is conjoined to cold, strips the trees entirely of their
leaves, hardens the earth and kills the grass, and likewise congeals the
waters: but the light of spring, which is light conjoined to heat,
quickens the trees, first into leaves, then into blossoms, and at length
into fruits; it opens and softens the earth, that it may produce grass,
herbs, flowers, and shrubs, and likewise dissolves the ice, that the
waters may flow from the springs. \[17\] It is altogether similar with
faith and charity. Faith separate from charity deadens all things; and
faith conjoined to charity vivifies all things. This vivifying and that
deadening can be seen to the life in our spiritual world; because here
faith is light, and charity is heat. For where there is faith conjoined
to charity, there are paradisal gardens, flower beds, and grass plots in
their pleasantness, according to the conjunction; but where there is
faith separate from charity, there is not even grass there; and where it
is green, it is from briers, thorns, and nettles. This the heat and
light proceeding from the Lord as the sun effect in the angels and
spirits, and thence outside of them." There were then not far from us
some of the clergy, whom the angelic spirit called justifiers and
sanctifiers of men by faith alone, and likewise arcanists. We said these
same things to them, and demonstrated them so that they saw that it was
so; and when we asked, "Is it not so?" They turned themselves away, and
said, "We did not hear." But we cried out to them, saying, "Hear now,
therefore." They then put both hands over their ears, and shouted, "We
will not hear."

<span class="margnote"><span id="876.">876.</span></span>

Revelation 21 1. And I saw a New Heaven and a New Earth, for the former
heaven and the former earth were passed away; and the sea was no more.
2. And I John saw the holy city New Jerusalem coming down from God out
of heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband. 3. And I heard a
great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with
men, and He will dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and He
Himself shall be with them their God. 4. And God shall wipe away every
tear from their eyes; and death shall be no more, neither mourning nor
crying, neither shall there be labor \[trouble\] anymore, for the former
things have passed away. 5. And He that sat upon the throne said,
Behold, I make all things new. And He said unto me, Write; for these
words are true and faithful. 6. And He said unto me, It is done. I am
the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End. I will give unto him
that thirsteth of the fountain of the water of life freely. 7. He that
overcometh shall possess as an inheritance all things; and I will be his
God, and he shall be My son. 8. But the fearful, and the unfaithful, and
the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake burning with
fire and brimstone; which is the second death. 9. And there came unto me
one of the seven angels having the seven vials full of the seven last
plagues, and he spoke with me, saying, Come, I will show thee the Bride,
the Lamb's Wife. 10. And he carried me away in the spirit upon a great
and high mountain, and showed me the great city, the holy Jerusalem,
coming down out of heaven from God, 11. Having the glory of God, and her
light was like unto a stone most precious, as it were a jasper stone,
shining like crystal. 12. Having a wall great and high, having twelve
gates, and over the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon,
which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel. 13. On the
east three gates, on the north three gates, on the south three gates,
and on the west three gates. 14. And the wall of the city having twelve
foundations, and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
15. And he that was speaking with me had a golden reed, to measure the
city and the gates thereof and the wall thereof. 16. And the city lieth
foursquare, and the length thereof is as large as the breadth; and he
measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand stadia; the length and
the breadth and the height of it were equal. 17. And he measured the
wall thereof, a hundred forty-four cubits, the measure of a man which is
of an angel. 18. And the structure of the wall thereof was jasper, and
the city was pure gold like pure glass. 19. And the foundations of the
wall of the city were adorned with every precious stone. The first
foundation was jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony, the
fourth emerald, 20. The fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh
chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprasus,
the eleventh jacinth, the twelfth amethyst. 21. And the twelve gates
were twelve pearls; each one of the gates was of one pearl; and the
street of the city was pure gold as it were transparent glass. 22. And I
saw no temple therein; for the Lord God Almighty is the temple of it and
the Lamb. 23. And the city hath no need of the sun and of the moon to
shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the lamp thereof
is the Lamb. 24. And the nations which are saved shall walk in the light
of it, and the kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor into
it. 25. And the gates of it shall not be shut by day; for there shall be
no night there; and they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations
into it. 26. And there shall not enter into it any unclean thing and
that doeth abomination and a lie, but they that are written in the
Lamb's book of life. THE SPIRITUAL SENSE The contents of the whole
chapter In this chapter it treats of the state of heaven and the church
after the Last Judgment; that after this, through the New Heaven, the
New Church will exist on the earth, which will worship the Lord alone
(verses 1-8). Its conjunction with the Lord (verses 9, 10). The
description of it as to intelligence from the Word (verse 11); as to
doctrine thence (verses 12-21); and as to all its quality (verses
22-26). The contents of each verse Verse 1. "And I saw a New Heaven and
a New Earth" signifies that a New Heaven was formed from Christians by
the Lord, which at this day is called the Christian Heaven, where they
are who had worshiped the Lord, and had lived according to His
commandments in the Word, who thence have charity and faith; in which
are also all the infants of Christians (n. 876). "For the former heaven
and the former earth were passed away" signifies the heavens which were
formed not by the Lord, but by those who came out of the Christian world
into the spiritual world, who were all dispersed at the day of the Last
Judgment (n. 877). "And the sea was no more" signifies that the external
of the heavens collected from Christians since the first establishment
of the church was in like manner dispersed, after they who were written
in the Lord's book of life were taken thence and saved (n. 878). Verse
2. "And I John saw the holy city New Jerusalem coming down from God out
of heaven" signifies the New Church to be established by the Lord at the
end of the former church, which will be consociated with the New Heaven
in Divine truths as to doctrine and as to life (n. 879-880). "Prepared
as a bride adorned <span id="fr_81"></span>[876-1](#fn_81) for her
husband" signifies that church conjoined with the Lord through the Word
(n. 881). Verse 3. "And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying,
Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men" signifies the Lord from love
speaking and declaring the glad tidings, that He Himself will now be
present with men in His Divine Human (n. 882). "And He will dwell with
them, and they shall be His people, and He Himself shall be with them
their God" signifies the conjunction of the Lord, which is of such a
nature, that they are in Him, and He in them (n. 883). Verse 4. "And God
shall wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more,
neither mourning nor crying, neither shall there be labor anymore, for
the former things have passed away" signifies that the Lord will take
from them all grief of mind, fear of damnation, of evils and falsities
from hell, and of temptations from them, and they shall not remember
them because the dragon, which had caused them, is cast out (n.
844-845). Verse 5. "And He that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make
all things new. And He said unto me, Write, for these words are true and
faithful" signifies the Lord confirming all concerning the New Heaven
and the New Church after the Last Judgment has been executed (n. 886).
Verse 6. "And He said unto me, It is done" signifies that it is the
Divine truth (n. 887). "I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and
the End" signifies that the Lord is the God of heaven and earth, and
that all things in the heavens and on earth were made by Him, and are
ruled by His Divine Providence, and are done according to it (n. 888).
"I will give unto him that thirsteth of the fountain of the water of
life freely" signifies that to those who desire truths from any
spiritual use, the Lord will give from Himself through the Word all
things that conduce to that use (n. 889). Verse 7. "He that overcometh
shall possess as an inheritance all things; and I will be his God, and
he shall be My son" signifies that they who overcome evils in
themselves, that is, the devil, and do not succumb when they are tempted
by the Babylonians and the dragonists, will come into heaven, and there
live in the Lord and the Lord in them (n. 890). Verse 8. "But the
fearful, and the unfaithful, and the abominable" signifies those who are
in no faith, and in no charity, and thence in all kinds of evils (n.
891). "And murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters,
and liars" signifies all those who make no account of the commandments
of the Decalogue, and do not shun any evils there named as sins, and
therefore live in them (n. 892). "Shall have their part in the lake
burning with fire and brimstone" signifies they have hell where are the
loves of falsity and the lusts of evil (n. 893). "Which is the second
death" signifies damnation (n. 894). Verse 9. "And there came unto me
one of the seven angels having the seven vials full of the seven last
plagues, and he spoke with me, saying, Come, I will show thee the Bride,
the Lamb's Wife" signifies influx and manifestation from the Lord out of
the inmost of heaven, concerning the New Church, which will be conjoined
to the Lord through the Word (n. 895). Verse 10. "And he carried me away
in the spirit upon a great and high mountain, and showed me the great
city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God" signifies
that John was taken up into the third heaven, and his sight there
opened, before whom was made manifest the Lord's New Church as to
doctrine, in the form of a city (n. 896). Verse 11. "Having the glory of
God, and her light was like unto a stone most precious, as it were a
jasper stone, shining like crystal" signifies that in that church the
Word will be understood, because translucent from its spiritual sense
(n. 897). Verse 12. "Having a wall great and high" signifies the Word in
the sense of the letter from which is the doctrine of the New Church (n.
898). "Having twelve gates" signifies all the knowledges of truth and
good therein by which man is introduced into the church (n. 899). "And
over the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are those
of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel" signifies the Divine truths
and goods of heaven, which are also the Divine truths and goods of the
church in those knowledges, and guards lest anyone enter unless he is in
them from the Lord (n. 900). Verse 13. "On the east three gates, on the
north three gates, on the south three gates, and on the west three
gates" signifies that the knowledges of truth and good, in which is
spiritual life from heaven from the Lord, and by which introduction into
the New Church is effected, are for those who are more or less in the
love or the affection of good, and for those who are more or less in
wisdom or the affection of truth (n. 901). Verse 14. "And the wall of
the city having twelve foundations" signifies that the Word in the sense
of the letter contains all things of the doctrine of the New Church (n.
902). "And in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb"
signifies all things of doctrine from the Word concerning the Lord, and
concerning life according to His commandments (n. 903). Verse 15. "And
he that spoke with me had a golden reed, to measure the city, and the
gates thereof, and the wall thereof" signifies that there is given by
the Lord, to those who are in the good of love, the faculty of
understanding and knowing what the quality of the Lord's New Church is
as to doctrine and its introductory truths, and as to the Word from
which they are (n. 904). Verse 16. "And the city lieth foursquare"
signifies justice in it (n. 905). "The length thereof is as large as the
breadth" signifies that good and truth in that church make one, like
essence and form (n. 906). "And he measured the city with the reed
twelve thousand stadia, the length and the breadth and the height of it
were equal" signifies the quality of that church from doctrine shown,
that all things of it were from the good of love (n. 907, 908). Verse
17. "And he measured the wall thereof a hundred forty-four cubits"
signifies that it was shown what the quality of the Word is in that
church, that from it are all its truths and goods (n. 909). "The measure
of a man, that is, of an angel" signifies the quality of that church
that it makes one with heaven (n. 910). Verse 18. "And the structure of
the wall thereof was jasper" signifies that all the Divine truth in the
sense of the letter of the Word, with the men of that church, is
translucent from the Divine truth in the spiritual sense (n. 911). "And
the city was pure gold, like unto pure glass" signifies that thence the
all of that church is the good of love flowing in together with light
out of heaven from the Lord (n. 912). Verse 19. "And the foundations of
the wall of the city were adorned with every precious stone" signifies
that all things of the doctrine of the New Jerusalem taken from the
sense of the letter of the Word, with those who are in it, will appear
in the light according to reception (n. 914). "The first foundation was
jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony, the fourth emerald
(verse 20), the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh
chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprasus,
the eleventh jacinth, the twelfth amethyst" signifies all things of that
doctrine in their order from the sense of the letter of the Word, with
those who immediately approach the Lord, and live according to the
commandments of the Decalogue by shunning evils as sins, for these and
no others are in the doctrine of love to God and love toward the
neighbor, which two are the fundamentals of religion (n. 915). Verse 21.
"And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, everyone of the gates was of
one pearl" signifies that the acknowledgment and knowledge of the Lord
conjoins into one all the knowledges of truth and good, which are from
the Word, and introduces into the church (n. 916). "And the street of
the city was pure gold as it were transparent glass" signifies that
every truth of that church and of its doctrine is in form the good of
love flowing in together with light out of heaven from the Lord (n.
917). Verse 22. "And I saw no temple therein; for the Lord God Almighty
is the temple of it and the Lamb" signifies that in this church there
will not be any external separated from the internal, because the Lord
Himself in His Divine Human, from whom is the all of the church, is
alone approached, worshiped, and adored (n. 918). Verse 23. "And the
city hath no need of the sun and the moon to shine in it, for the glory
of God did lighten it, and the lamp thereof is the Lamb" signifies that
the men of that church will not be in self-love and in their own
intelligence, and thence in natural light alone, but in spiritual light
from the Divine truth of the Word from the Lord alone (n. 919). Verse
24. "And the nations which are saved shall walk in the light of it"
signifies that all who are in the good of life, and believe in the Lord,
will there live according to Divine truths, and will see them inwardly
in themselves, as the eye sees objects (n. 920). "And the kings of the
earth shall bring their glory and honor into it" signifies that all who
are in the truths of wisdom from spiritual good, will there confess the
Lord, and ascribe to Him every truth and every good that is with them
(n. 921). Verse 25. "And the gates of it shall not be shut by day; for
there shall be no night there" signifies that they will be continually
received into the New Jerusalem, who are in truths from the good of love
from the Lord, because there is not any falsity of faith there (n. 922).
"And they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into it"
signifies that they who enter will bring with them the confession,
acknowledgment, and faith, that the Lord is the God of heaven and earth,
and that every truth of the church and every good of religion is from
Him (n. 923). Verse 26. "And there shall not enter into it any unclean
thing and that doeth abomination and a lie" signifies that no one is
received into the Lord's New Church who adulterates the goods and
falsifies the truths of the Word, and who does evils from confirmation
and thus also falsities (n. 924). "But they that are written in the
Lamb's book of life" signifies that no others will be received into the
New Church, which is the New Jerusalem, but they who believe in the
Lord, and live according to His commandments in the Word (n. 925). THE
EXPLANATION Verse 1. And I saw a New Heaven and a New Earth, signifies
that a New Heaven was formed from Christians by the Lord, which at this
day is called the Christian Heaven, where they are who had worshiped the
Lord and had lived according to His commandments in the Word, in whom
therefore there is charity and faith; in which heaven also are all the
infants of Christians. By "a New Heaven and a New Earth" is not meant
the natural heaven visible to the eyes, nor the natural earth inhabited
by men, but the spiritual heaven is meant, and the earth belonging to
that heaven, where the angels are. That this heaven and the earth of
this heaven is meant, everyone may see and acknowledge, if he can in
some measure be withdrawn from a purely natural and material idea, when
he reads the Word. That the angelic heaven is meant is evident, because
it is said in the next verse, that "he saw the holy city Jerusalem
coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her
Husband," by which is not meant any Jerusalem coming down, but the
church, and the church on earth comes down from the Lord out of the
angelic heaven, because the angels of heaven and the men on earth in all
things of the church make one (n. 626). From these things it may be
seen, how naturally and materially they have thought and do think, who,
from these words and those which follow in the same verse, have
fabricated for themselves the dogma about the destruction of the world,
and of the new creation of all things. \[2\] This New Heaven is
occasionally treated of above in Revelation (especially in chapters 14
and 15). It is called the Christian Heaven, because it is distinct from
the ancient heavens, which existed from the men of the church before the
Lord's coming. These ancient heavens are above the Christian Heaven; for
the heavens are like expanses, one above another; it is the same with
each particular heaven; for each heaven by itself is distinguished into
three heavens, an inmost or third, a middle or second, and a lowest or
first, and so it is with this New Heaven; I have seen them and have
spoken with them. In this New Christian Heaven are all those who, from
the first establishment of the Christian Church, worshiped the Lord, and
lived according to His commandments in the Word, and who, therefore,
were in charity, and at the same time in faith from the Lord through the
Word, thus who were not in a dead but in a living faith. Various things
respecting this heaven may be seen above (n. 612, 613, 626, 631, 659,
661, 845, 846, 856). In that heaven likewise are all the infants of
Christians, because they are educated by the angels in those two
essentials of the church, which are the acknowledgment of the Lord as
the God of heaven and earth, and a life according to the commandments of
the Decalogue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="877.">877.</span></span>

For the former heaven and the former earth were passed away, signifies
the heavens which were formed, not by the Lord, but by those who came
out of the Christian world into the spiritual world, who were all
dispersed at the day of the Last Judgment. That these heavens and no
others are meant by "the former heaven and the former earth which passed
away" may be seen above (n. 865), where these words are explained: I saw
a great white throne, and One sitting upon it, from whose face the
heaven and the earth fled away (Rev. 20:11), where it is shown that by
those words is signified the universal judgment executed by the Lord
upon all the former heavens, in which were such as were in civil and
moral good, but in no spiritual good, thus who in externals simulated
Christians, but in internals were devils; which heavens with their earth
were entirely dispersed. For other particulars relating to this subject
see Last Judgment, published at London, 1758, and Continuation of the
Last Judgment, published in Amsterdam; to which it is unnecessary here
to add anything further.

<span class="margnote"><span id="878.">878.</span></span>

And the sea was no more, signifies that the external of the heaven
collected from among Christians, since the first establishment of the
church, was in like manner dispersed, after they who were written in the
Lord's book of life were taken thence and saved. By "the sea" is
signified the external of heaven and of the church, in which are the
simple, who have thought naturally and but little spiritually of things
relating to the church; the heaven in which these are is called external
(see n. 238, 239, 403, 404, 420, 466, 470, 659, 661); by "the sea" here
is meant the external of heaven collected from among Christians from the
first establishment of the church. But the internal heaven of Christians
was not fully formed by the Lord, till a little before the Last
Judgment, and also after it, as may appear from chapters 14 and 15,
where it is treated of, and from chapter 20:4-5; see the explanations of
which. The reason why this was not done before was because the dragon
and his two beasts had dominion in the world of spirits and burned with
the lust of seducing everyone they could, wherefore it was hazardous to
collect them sooner into a heaven. \[2\] The separation of the good from
the dragonists, and the condemnation of the latter, and finally the
casting of them into hell, are treated of in many places, and lastly in
chapter 19:20, and in chapter 20:10; and after this it is said, that
"the sea gave up the dead which were in it" (verse 13), by which are
meant the external and natural men of the church called to judgment (see
above, n. 869), and then the separating and saving of those who were
written in the Lord's book of life, concerning which see the same
article; this is "the sea" which is here meant. It is also said in
another place, where the New Heaven of Christians is treated of, that it
extended itself to "the sea of glass mingled with fire" (chapter 15:2);
by which "sea" is also signified the external of the heaven of
Christians (see the explanation, n. 659, 661). From these things it may
appear that by "the sea was no more" is signified that the external of
heaven collected from among Christians from the first establishment of
the church, after they were taken thence and saved who were written in
the Lord's book of life, was in like manner dispersed. Concerning the
external of heaven collected from among Christians from the first
establishment of the church, it has been granted me to know many
particulars which it would be tedious to adduce in this place; save only
that the former heavens, which passed away at the day of the Last
Judgment, were permitted for the sake of those who were in that external
heaven or sea, because they were conjoined by externals but not by
internals, on which subject something may be seen above (n. 398). The
reason why the heaven, where the men of the external church are, is
called "the sea" is because their habitation in the spiritual world
appears at a distance as if it were in the sea; for the celestial
angels, who are angels of the highest heaven, dwell as it were in an
ethereal atmosphere; the spiritual angels, who are angels of the middle
heaven, dwell as it were in an aerial atmosphere; and the spiritual
natural angels, who are angels of the lowest heaven, dwell as it were in
a watery atmosphere, which, as was said, appears at a distance like the
sea. Hence it is that the external of heaven is meant by "the sea" in
many other places also in the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="879.">879.</span></span>

Verse 2. And I John saw the holy city New Jerusalem coming down from God
out of heaven, signifies the New Church to be established by the Lord at
the end of the former church, which will be consociated with the New
Heaven in Divine truths as to doctrine and as to life. The reason why
John here names himself, saying, "I John" is because by him as an
apostle is signified the good of love to the Lord, and thence the good
of life, therefore he was loved more than the other apostles, and at
supper lay on the Lord's breast (John 13:23; 21:20); and in like manner
this church which is now treated of. That by "Jerusalem" is signified
the church will be seen in the next article; which is called "a city"
and described as a city from doctrine and from a life according to it,
for "a city" in the spiritual sense signifies doctrine (n. 194, 712). It
is called "holy" from the Lord, who alone is holy, and from the Divine
truths which are in it derived from the Word from the Lord, which are
called holy (n. 173, 586, 666, 852); and it is called "new" because he
who sat upon the throne said, "Behold, I make all things new" (verse 5);
and it is said, "to come down from God out of heaven," because it
descends from the Lord through the New Christian Heaven, treated of in
verse 1 of this chapter (n. 876), for the church on earth is formed
through heaven by the Lord, that they may act as one and be consociated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="880.">880.</span></span>

The reason why by "Jerusalem" in the Word is meant the church is because
there, in the land of Canaan, and in no other place, was the temple and
the altar, and sacrifices were offered, thus Divine worship itself,
wherefore also three feasts were celebrated there yearly, and every male
throughout the whole land was commanded to come to them. Hence it is
that "Jerusalem" signifies the church as to worship, and therefore also
the church as to doctrine, for worship is prescribed in doctrine, and
performed according to it; likewise because the Lord was in Jerusalem,
and taught in His temple, and afterwards glorified His Human there. That
by "Jerusalem" is meant the church as to doctrine and thence worship,
appears from many passages in the Word; as from the following in Isaiah:
For Zion's sake will I not be silent, and for Jerusalem's sake I will
not rest, until the justice thereof go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp burneth. Then the Gentiles shall see thy
justice, and all kings thy glory; and thou shalt be called by a new
name, which the mouth of Jehovah shall name; thou shalt also be a crown
of glory in the hand of thy God; for Jehovah is well pleased in thee,
and thy land shall be married. Behold, thy salvation cometh; Behold, His
reward is with Him. And they shall call them, The people of holiness,
the redeemed of Jehovah; and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city
not deserted (Isa. 62:1-4, 11-12). \[2\] The whole of this chapter
treats of the Lord's advent, and of the New Church to be established by
Him. This New Church is meant by "Jerusalem" which shall be called by a
new name which the mouth of Jehovah shall utter, and which shall be a
crown of glory in the hands of Jehovah, and a royal tiara in the hand of
God, in which Jehovah shall be well pleased, and which shall be called a
city sought out and not deserted. These words cannot apply to that
Jerusalem which, when the Lord came into the world, was inhabited by the
Jews, for it was directly opposite in every respect, and was rather to
be called Sodom, as it is also called (in the Rev. 11:8; Isa. 3:9; Jer.
23:14; Ezek. 16:46, 48). \[3\] So in another part of Isaiah: For,
behold, I create a New Heaven and a New Earth; the former shall not be
remembered; be glad and exult to eternity in that which I create; behold
I create Jerusalem an exultation, and her people a joy. And I will exult
over Jerusalem, and rejoice over My people. Then the wolf and the lamb
shall feed together; they shall not do evil in all the mountain of My
holiness (Isa. 65:17-19, 25). This chapter also treats of the Lord's
advent, and of the church to be established by Him, which was not
established with those who were in Jerusalem, but with those who were
out of it; wherefore this church is meant by "Jerusalem" which shall be
unto the Lord "an exultation" and whose people shall be unto Him "a
joy"; also where "the wolf and the lamb shall feed together" and where
"they shall not do evil." It is likewise said in this place, as in
Revelation, that the Lord "will create a New Heaven and a New Earth" and
also that "He will create Jerusalem" which things have a like
signification. \[4\] So in another part of Isaiah: Awake, awake, put on
thy strength, O Zion; put on the garments of thy beauty, O Jerusalem,
the city of holiness; for henceforth there shall no more come into thee
the uncircumcised and the unclean. Shake thyself from the dust; arise,
and sit down, O Jerusalem. My people shall know My name in that day, for
I am He that doth speak; behold it is I, Jehovah hath comforted His
people; He hath redeemed Jerusalem (Isa. 52:1-2, 6, 9). This chapter
also treats of the Lord's advent, and of the church to be established by
Him, therefore by "Jerusalem" into which "the uncircumcised and the
unclean shall no more come" and which "the Lord will redeem" is meant
the church, and by "Jerusalem the city of holiness;" the church as to
doctrine from the Lord and concerning the Lord. \[5\] In Zephaniah:
Shout, O daughter of Zion, be glad with all the heart, O daughter of
Jerusalem; the king of Israel is in the midst of thee; fear not evil
anymore; He will rejoice over thee with joy, He will rest in thy love,
He will exult over thee with shouting; I will give you for a name and a
praise to all the people of the earth (Zeph. 3:14-15, 17, 20). Here in
like manner the Lord and the church from Him are treated of, over which
"the king of Israel" who is the Lord, "will rejoice with joy, will exult
with shouting" and in whose love "He will rest" and who will give them
"for a name and a praise to all the people of the earth." \[6\] In
Isaiah: Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer and thy Former, saying to
Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited, and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall
be built (Isa. 44:24, 26). And in Daniel: Know and perceive that from
the going forth of the Word even to restore and to build Jerusalem, even
unto Messiah the prince shall be seven weeks (Dan. 9:25). That the
church is here also meant by "Jerusalem" is manifest, since this was
restored and built by the Lord, but not Jerusalem the seat of the Jews.
\[7\] By "Jerusalem" is also meant the church from the Lord in the
following passage in Zechariah: Thus saith Jehovah, I will return to
Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; whence Jerusalem shall
be called, the city of truth, and the mountain of Jehovah of hosts, the
mountain of holiness (Zech. 8:3, 20-23). In Joel: Then shall ye know
that I am Jehovah your God, that dwelleth in Zion, the mountain of
holiness; and Jerusalem shall be holiness; and it shall come to pass in
that day, that the mountains shall drop must, and the hills shall flow
with milk, and Jerusalem shall sit to generation and generation (Joel
3:17-18, 20). In Isaiah: In that day the offshoot of Jehovah shall be
beautiful and glorious; and it shall come to pass, that he that is left
in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy;
everyone written for life in Jerusalem (Isa. 4:2-3). In Micah: In the
last days shall the mountain of the house of Jehovah be established on
the head of the mountains; for out of Zion shall go forth doctrine, and
the Word of Jehovah from Jerusalem; to thee shall the former kingdom
come, the kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem (Micah 4:1-2, 8). In
Jeremiah: In that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah,
and all nations shall be gathered together at Jerusalem to the name of
Jehovah; neither shall they walk anymore after the confirmation of their
evil heart (Jer. 3:17). In Isaiah: Look upon Zion, the city of our set
feasts; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle
that shall not be dissipated; the stakes thereof shall not be removed
forever, neither shall any of the cords thereof be torn away (Isa.
33:20). Besides other places also, as Isa. 24:23; 37:32; 66:10-14; Zech.
12:3, 6, 8-10; 14:8, 11-12, 21; Mal. 3:2, 4; Ps. 122:1-7; 137:5-7. \[8\]
That the church is meant by "Jerusalem" in these places, which was to be
established by the Lord, and not the Jerusalem inhabited by the Jews in
the land of Canaan, may also be evident from the places in the Word
where it is said of the latter, that it is altogether destroyed, and
that it is to be destroyed; as Jer. 5:1; 6:6, 7; 7:17, 18 seq.; 8:6-8
seq.; 9:10, 11, 13 seq.; 13:9, 10, 14; 14:16; Lam. 1:8, 9, 17; Ezek. 4:1
to the end; 5:9 to the end; 12:18, 19; 15:6-8; 16:1-63; 23:1-49; Matt.
23:37, 38; Luke 19:41-44; 21:20-22; 23:28-30; and in many other places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="881.">881.</span></span>

Prepared as a Bride adorned <span id="fr_82"></span>[881-1](#fn_82) for
her Husband, signifies that church conjoined with the Lord through the
Word. It is said that John "saw the holy city New Jerusalem coming down
from God out of heaven;" here that he saw that city "prepared as a Bride
adorned for her Husband" from which it is also evident that by
"Jerusalem" is meant the church, and that he saw it first as a city, and
afterwards as a virgin bride; as a city representatively, and as a
virgin bride spiritually, thus in a twofold idea, one within or above
the other; just as the angels do, who, when they see or hear or read in
the Word of "a city" in the idea of the lower thought perceive a city,
but in the idea of the higher thought perceive the church as to
doctrine; and the latter, if they desire it and pray to the Lord, they
see as a virgin in beauty and clothing according to the quality of the
church. Thus also it has been granted me to see the church. \[2\] By
"prepared" is signified clothed for her betrothal, and the church is no
otherwise attired for her betrothal, and afterwards for conjunction or
marriage, than by the Word; for this is the only means of conjunction or
marriage, because the Word is from the Lord and concerning the Lord, and
thus the Lord; for which reason it is also called "a covenant," and "a
covenant" signifies spiritual conjunction; the Word also was given for
this end. That by "Husband" is meant the Lord is plain from verses 9 and
10 of this chapter, where Jerusalem is called "the Bride the Lamb's
wife." That the Lord is called "the Bridegroom" and "Husband," the
church "the Bride" and "Wife," and that this marriage is like the
marriage of good and truth, and is effected through the Word, may be
seen above (n. 797). From these things it may appear, that by "Jerusalem
prepared as a Bride for her Husband" is signified that church conjoined
with the Lord through the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="882.">882.</span></span>

Verse 3. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men signifies the Lord from love speaking and
declaring the glad tidings, that he himself will now be present with men
in His Divine Human. This is the celestial sense of these words. The
celestial angels, who are the angels of the third heaven, understand
them no otherwise, for by "hearing a great voice from heaven saying"
they understand the Lord from love speaking and declaring glad tidings,
because no one else speaks from heaven but the Lord; for heaven is not
heaven from anything proper to the angels, but from the Divine of the
Lord, of which they are recipients; by "a great voice" is meant speech
from love, for "great" is predicated of love (n. 656, 663). "Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men" means that now the Lord is present in His
Divine Human. By "the tabernacle of God" is meant the celestial church,
and, in the universal sense, the Lord's celestial kingdom, and, in the
highest sense, His Divine Human, see above (n. 585). The reason why the
tabernacle, in the highest sense, means the Lord's Divine Human is
because this is signified by "the temple," as may appear from John 2:19,
21; Mal. 3:1; Rev. 21:22; and elsewhere; the same is meant by "the
tabernacle" with this difference, that by "the temple" is meant the
Lord's Divine Human as to the Divine truth or the Divine wisdom, and by
"the tabernacle" is meant the Lord's Divine Human as to the Divine good
or the Divine love. Hence it follows, that by "behold the tabernacle of
God is with men" is meant that the Lord will now be present with men in
His Divine Human.

<span class="margnote"><span id="883.">883.</span></span>

And He will dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and He
Himself shall be with them their God, signifies the conjunction of the
Lord, which is such that they are in Him, and He in them. "He will dwell
with them" signifies the conjunction of the Lord with them, as will be
seen presently; "they shall be His people, and He Himself shall be with
them their God" signifies that they are the Lord's, and the Lord theirs;
and because by "dwelling with them" is signified conjunction, it
signifies that they will be in the Lord and the Lord in them, otherwise
no conjunction is effected; that this is the nature of conjunction
appears clearly from the Lord's words in John: Abide in Me, and I in
you. I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abideth in Me and I in
him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; for without Me ye can do
nothing (John 15:4-5). In that day ye shall know that I am in My Father,
and ye in Me, and I in you (John 14:20). He that eateth My flesh, and
drinketh My blood, dwelleth in Me, and I in him (John 6:56). \[2\] That
the assumption of the Human, and the uniting it with the Divine which
was in Him by birth, and is called the Father, had for its end
conjunction with men, appears also in John: For I sanctify Myself, that
they also may be sanctified in the truth; that they may be one; as We
are one, I in them and Thou in Me (John 17:19, 21-22, 26). From which it
is plain, that there is a conjunction with the Lord's Divine Human, and
that it is reciprocal, and that thus and not otherwise there is a
conjunction with the Divine which is called the Father. \[3\] The Lord
also teaches that conjunction is effected by the truths of the Word, and
a life according to them (John 14:20-24; 15:7). This therefore is what
is meant by "He will dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and
He Himself will be with them their God." In like manner in other places
where the same words occur, as Jer. 7:23; 11:4; Ezek. 14:11; Jer. 24:7;
30:22; Ezek. 11:20; 36:28; 37:23, 27; Zech. 8:8; Exod. 29:45. \[4\] The
reason why "to dwell with them" signifies conjunction with them is
because "to dwell" signifies conjunction from love, as may appear from
many passages in the Word; also from the habitations of the angels in
heaven. Heaven is distinguished into innumerable societies, one from
another according to the differences of the affections which are of love
in general and in particular, each society constituting one species of
affection, and they dwell there distinctly according to the degrees of
relationship and affinities of that species of affection, and they who
are in the closest relationship dwell in the same house; hence
"cohabitation" when spoken of married partners signifies, in the
spiritual sense, conjunction by love. It is known that conjunction with
the Lord is one thing, and His presence another; conjunction with the
Lord is not given except to those who approach Him immediately, and His
presence to the rest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="884.">884.</span></span>

Verse 4. And God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death
shall be no more, neither mourning nor crying, neither shall labor be
anymore, for the former things have passed away, signifies that the Lord
will take from them all grief of mind, fear of damnation on account of
evils and falsities from hell, and of temptations from them, and they
shall not remember them, because the dragon, which had occasioned them,
is cast out. "God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes" signifies
that the Lord will take away from them all grief of mind, for shedding
tears is from grief of mind; by "death" which shall not be anymore is
signified damnation (as n. 325, 765, 853, 873), here the fear of it; by
"mourning" which shall not be anymore is signified the fear of evils
from hell, for "mourning" has various significations, having relation in
all cases to the subject treated of, here the fear of evils from hell;
because the fear of damnation is mentioned just before, and the fear of
falsities from hell, and of temptations from them follows; by "crying"
is signified the fear of falsities from hell, as will be seen in the
next article; by the "labor" which shall be no more, are signified
temptations (n. 640); by "it shall not be anymore because the former
things are passed away" is signified that they shall not remember them
because the dragon, who had occasioned them, is cast out, for these
constitute the former things which had passed away. \[2\] But these
things shall be illustrated. Every man after death first comes into the
world of spirits, which is midway between heaven and hell, and is there
prepared, the good for heaven and the evil for hell, concerning which
world see above (n. 784, 791, 843, 850, 866, 869). And because there are
consociations there as in the natural world, it could not be otherwise
before the Last Judgment, than that they who in externals were civil and
moral, but in internals were evil, should be together, and should hold
converse with those who likewise in externals were civil and moral, but
in internals were good. And since there is inherent in the evil the
continual lust of seducing, therefore the good, who were in consort with
them, were infested in various ways. But they who were in grief by their
infestations, and came into the fear of damnation, and of evils and
falsities from hell, and of grievous temptation, were removed by the
Lord from consort with them, and sent to a certain earth below that,
where also there were societies, and were guarded there, and this until
such time as all the evil were separated from the good, which was
effected by the Last Judgment; and then they who had been guarded in the
lower earth, were taken up by the Lord into heaven. \[3\] These
infestations were induced for the most part by those who are meant by
"the dragon" and his "beasts." Therefore when the dragon and his two
beasts were cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, then, because all
infestation and thence grief and fear on account of damnation and of
hell ceased, it is said to those who had been infested, that "God will
wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more,
neither mourning, nor crying, nor labor, shall be anymore, for the
former things are passed away" by which is signified that the Lord will
take from them all grief of mind, fear of damnation, and of evils and
falsities from hell, and of grievous temptation from them, nor would
they remember them, because the dragon who had induced them was cast
out. That the dragon and his two beasts were ejected, and cast into the
lake of fire and brimstone, may be seen above (Rev. 19:20; 20:10); and
that the dragon infested, appears from many places; for he fought with
Michael, and wished to devour the offspring which the woman brought
forth, and persecuted the woman, and went to make war with the remnant
of her seed (Rev. 12:4-5, 7-9, 13-17; 13:1, also 16:13, 16), and in
other places. That many who were interiorly good, were thus guarded by
the Lord lest they should be infested by the dragon and his beasts,
appears from Rev. 6:9-11; and that they were infested, Rev. 7:13-17, and
that they were afterwards taken up into heaven, Rev. 20:4, 5, and
elsewhere. The same are also meant by "the captives" and by "them that
are bound in the pit" and delivered by the Lord (Isa. 24:22; 61:1; Luke
4:18, 19; Zech. 9:11; Ps. 79:11). This is also signified in the Word,
where it is said that the graves were opened; also where the souls are
spoken of that expect the last judgment, and then the resurrection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="885.">885.</span></span>

That "crying" in the Word is said of grief and fear of falsities from
hell, and thence of devastation by them, appears from the following
passages: The former troubles are forgotten, and they shall be hidden
from Mine eyes; then the voice of weeping shall not be heard in her, nor
the voice of crying (Isa. 65:16, 19); speaking of Jerusalem in like
manner as here in Revelation: They are blackened in the land, and the
cry of Jerusalem is gone up (Jer. 14:2 seq.). Lamentation over the
falsities which devastate the church is treated of: Jehovah looked for
judgment, but behold a scab; for justice, but behold a cry (Isa. 5:7).
The voice of the cry of the shepherds, for Jehovah layeth waste their
pasture (Jer. 25:36). The voice of a cry from the fish gate, because
their wealth is become a booty, and their houses a desolation (Zeph.
1:10, 13). Besides other places (as Isa. 14:31; 15:4-6, 8; 24:11; 30:19;
Jer. 46:12, 14). But it is to be known that "a cry" in the Word is said
in reference to every affection that breaks forth from the heart,
wherefore it is a voice of lamentation, of imploring, of supplication
from grief, of entreaty, of indignation, of confession, yea of
exultation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="886.">886.</span></span>

Verse 5. And He that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things
new. And He said unto me, Write, for these words are true and faithful,
signifies the Lord speaking concerning the Last Judgment to those who
are about to come into the world of spirits, or who would die, from the
time of His being in the world until now, and saying these things, that
the former heaven with the former earth, and the former church, with all
and everything in them, would perish, and that He would create a New
Heaven with a New Earth, and a New Church, which is to be called the New
Jerusalem, and that they may know this of a certainty, and bear it in
remembrance, because the Lord himself has testified and said it. The
contents of this verse and of those which follow, as far as the eighth
inclusive, were said to those who would come out of the Christian world
into the world of spirits, which happens immediately after death, to the
end that they might not suffer themselves to be seduced by the
Babylonians and dragonists; for, as was said above, all after death are
gathered together in the world of spirits, and cherish social
interaction with one another there as in the natural world, where they
are together with the Babylonians and dragonists, who continually burn
with the lust of seducing, and who were also allowed, by imaginary and
delusive arts, to form to themselves heavens, as it were, by which also
they could seduce; to prevent this, these things were said by the Lord,
that they might know of a certainty that those heavens with their earths
would perish, and that the Lord would create a New Heaven and a New
Earth, when they would be saved who did not suffer themselves to be
seduced. But it is to be known, that this was said to those who lived
from the Lord's time even to the Last Judgment, which was executed in
the year 1757, because these could have been seduced; but after this
event, this was no longer possible, because the Babylonians and
dragonists were separated and cast out. \[2\] We will now proceed to the
explanation. By "Him who sat on the throne," is meant the Lord (n. 808,
at the end). The reason why the Lord here spoke "upon a throne" is
because He said, "Behold, I make all things new," by which is signified
that he was about to execute the Last Judgment, and then to create a New
Heaven and a New Earth, and a New Church, with all and everything in
them; that "a throne" means judgment in a representative form, may be
seen (n. 229, 845, 865); and that the former heaven and former church
perished on the day of the Last Judgment (n. 865, 877). "He said unto
me, Write, for these words are true and faithful" signifies that they
might know this for certain, and remember it, because the Lord Himself
testified and said it; the Lord's making use of the word "said" a second
time signifies that they might know it for certain; by "write" is
signified for remembrance or that they might remember (n. 639); and by
"these words are true and faithful" is signified that they ought to be
believed, because the Lord Himself testified and said it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="887.">887.</span></span>

Verse 6. And He said unto me, It is done, signifies that it is the
Divine truth. The reason why by "He said unto me" is signified that it
is the Divine truth is because the Lord said a third time, "He said unto
me"; also because He said "it is done" in the present tense; and what
the Lord says a third time is what ought to be believed, because it is
the Divine truth, as also what He said in the present tense; for "three
signifies what is complete to the end" (n. 505); in like manner when
being about to do a thing, He said, "It is done."

<span class="margnote"><span id="888.">888.</span></span>

I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End, signifies that
they may know that the Lord is the God of heaven and earth, and that all
things in the heavens and earths were made by Him, and are governed by
His Divine Providence, and are done according to it. That the Lord is
"the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End" and that thereby is
meant that by Him all things were made, and are governed and done, and
more may be seen above (n. 13, 29-31, 38, 57, 92). That the Lord is the
God of heaven and earth is evident from His words in John: Power is
given to Me over all flesh (John 17:2). And in Matthew: All power is
given unto Me in heaven and in earth (Matt. 28:18); And that all things
were made by Him, that were made (John 1:3, 14). That all things which
were made or created by Him, are governed by His Divine Providence is
evident.

<span class="margnote"><span id="889.">889.</span></span>

I will give unto him that thirsteth of the fountain of the water of life
freely, signifies that to those who desire truths from any spiritual
use, the Lord will give from Himself through the Word all things that
are conducive to that use. By "him that thirsteth" is signified he who
desires truth from any spiritual use will be seen presently; by "the
fountain of the water of life" is signified the Lord and the Word (n.
384); by "giving freely" is signified from the Lord, and not from man's
own intelligence. The reason why by "thirsting" is signified to desire
for the sake of some spiritual use is because there is given a thirst or
desire for the knowledges of truth from the Word, from natural use, and
also from spiritual use, from natural use with those who have learning
for their end, and by learning, fame, honor, and gain, thus self and the
world; but from spiritual use with those whose end is to serve the
neighbor from love to him, to consult the good of their souls, and that
of their own, thus on account of the Lord, the neighbor, and salvation;
truth is given to these so far as it conduces to that use, "from the
fountain of the water of life," that is, from the Lord through the Word;
to the rest truth is not given from thence; they read the Word, and
every doctrinal truth therein they either do not see, or if they do see
it they turn it into falsity, not so much in speech when it is uttered
from the Word, but in the idea of their thought concerning it. That "to
hunger" signifies to desire good, and "to thirst" to desire truth, may
be seen (n. 323, 381).

<span class="margnote"><span id="890.">890.</span></span>

Verse 7. He that overcometh shall possess as an inheritance all things,
and I will be his God, and he shall be My son, signifies that they who
overcome evils in themselves, that is, the devil, and do not succumb
when they are tempted by the Babylonians and dragonists, will come into
heaven, and there live in the Lord and the Lord in them. By "overcoming"
is here meant to overcome evils in themselves, thus the devil, and not
to succumb when they are tempted by the Babylonians and dragonists. The
reason why to overcome evils in oneself is also to overcome the devil,
is because by the "devil" is meant all evil; by "to possess as an
inheritance all things," is signified to come into heaven, and then to
enjoy the possession of the goods which are there from the Lord,
consequently to enter into the goods which are from the Lord and of the
Lord, as a son and heir, whence heaven is called an inheritance (Matt
19:29; 25:34). "I will be his God and he shall be My son," signifies
that in heaven they will be in the Lord and the Lord in them, as above
(n. 882, 883), where the like words occur, only that it is there said,
that "they shall be His people, and He will be their God." The reason
why they who immediately approach the Lord, are called His sons, is
because they are born anew from Him, that is, regenerated, wherefore He
called His disciples "sons" (John 12:36; 13:33; 21:5).

<span class="margnote"><span id="891.">891.</span></span>

Verse 8. But the fearful, and the unfaithful, and the abominable,
signifies those who are in no faith, and in no charity, and thence in
evils of every kind. By "the fearful" are signified they who are in no
faith, as will be seen presently; by "the unfaithful" are signified they
who are in no charity towards the neighbor, for these are insincere and
fraudulent, consequently unfaithful; by "the abominable" are signified
they who are in all kinds of evils, for "abominations" in the Word
signify in general the evils which are named in the six last
commandments of the Decalogue, as may be seen in Jeremiah: Trust ye not
upon the words of a lie, saying, The temple of Jehovah, the temple of
Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah are these; will ye steal, kill, and
commit adultery, and swear by a lie, and come and stand before Me in
this house, when ye do these abominations? (Jer. 7:2-4, 9-11); and so in
all other places. That by "the fearful" are signified they who are in no
faith, is evident from the following passages: Jesus said to the
disciples, Why are ye fearful, O men of little faith? (Matt. 8:26; Mark
4:39, 40; Luke 8:25) Jesus said unto the ruler of the synagogue, Fear
not; believe only, then thy daughter shall be saved (Luke 8:49, 50; Mark
5:36). Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to
give you the kingdom (Luke 12:32). The same is meant by "fear not"
(Matt. 17:6, 7; 28:3-5, 10; Luke 1:12-13, 30; 2:9-10; 5:8-10, and
elsewhere). From all these things it may appear, that by "the fearful,
and the unfaithful, and the abominable," are signified they who are in
no faith, and in no charity, and thence are in all kinds of evils.

<span class="margnote"><span id="892.">892.</span></span>

And murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all
liars, signifies all those who make no account of the commandments of
the Decalogue, and do not shun any evils therein mentioned as sins, and
therefore live in them. What is signified by these four commandments of
the Decalogue, "Thou shalt not kill," "thou shalt not commit adultery,"
"thou shalt not steal," and "thou shalt not testify falsely," in their
threefold sense, natural, spiritual, and celestial, may be seen in The
Doctrine of Life for the New Jerusalem (n. 62-91); therefore it is
unnecessary to explain them here; but instead of the seventh
commandment, which is, "Thou shalt not steal," are here mentioned
"sorcerers and idolaters;" and by "sorcerers" are signified they who
inquire after truths, which they falsify in order to confirm falsities
and evils, as they do who take up this truth, that no one can do good
from himself, and by it confirm faith alone, for this is a species of
spiritual theft. What "sorcery" further signifies may be seen above (n.
462). By "idolaters" are signified they who establish worship, or are in
worship, not from the Word, thus not from the Lord, but from their own
intelligence (n. 459); as also they have done who, from a single saying
of Paul, falsely understood, and not from any word of the Lord, have
fabricated the universal doctrine of the church, which likewise is a
species of spiritual theft; by "liars" are signified they who are in
falsities from evil (n. 924).

<span class="margnote"><span id="893.">893.</span></span>

Shall have their part in the lake burning with fire and brimstone,
signifies their portion in hell, where are the loves of falsity and the
lusts of evil, as appears from the explanation above (n. 835, 872),
where like words occur.

<span class="margnote"><span id="894.">894.</span></span>

Which is the second death, signifies damnation, as also appears from
what is explained above (n. 853, 873).

<span class="margnote"><span id="895.">895.</span></span>

Verse 9. And there came unto me one of the seven angels, having the
seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and spoke with me, saying,
Come, I will show thee the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, signifies influx and
manifestation from the Lord from the inmost of heaven, concerning the
New Church, which will be conjoined with the Lord through the Word. By
"one of the seven angels having the seven vials full of the seven last
plagues, and he spoke with me" is meant the Lord inflowing from the
inmost of heaven and speaking through the inmost heaven, here
manifesting the things which follow; that by this angel is meant the
Lord, appears from the explanation of chapter 15, where it is written:
And after that I saw, and behold the temple of the tabernacle in heaven
was opened; and the seven angels came out having the seven plagues (Rev.
15:5-6); by which is signified that the inmost of heaven was seen, where
the Lord is in His holiness, and in the Law which is the Decalogue, see
above (n. 669-670); also from the explanation of chapter 17, where it is
said: And there came one of the seven angels having the seven vials, and
he spoke with me, saying, Come, I will show thee the judgment of the
great harlot (Rev. 17:1). That by these words is signified influx and
revelation from the Lord from the inmost of heaven concerning the Roman
Catholic religious persuasion, may be seen above (n. 718, 719); hence it
is evident that by "there came to me one of the seven angels who had the
seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and spoke with me, saying,"
is meant the Lord inflowing from the inmost of heaven, and that by
"Come, I will show thee," is signified manifestation, and that by "the
Bride the Lamb's Wife" is signified the New Church, which will be
conjoined with the Lord through the Word (as in n. 881). That church is
called "the Bride," when it is being established, and "Wife" when it is
established; here "the Bride, the Wife," because it is certain to be
established.

<span class="margnote"><span id="896.">896.</span></span>

Verse 10. And he carried me away in the spirit upon a great and high
mountain, and showed me the great city, the holy Jerusalem coming down
out of heaven from God, signifies that John was carried away into the
third heaven, and his sight there opened, before whom was made manifest
the Lord's New Church as to doctrine in the form of a city. "He carried
me away in the spirit upon a great and high mountain," signifies that
John was carried away into the third heaven, where they are who are in
love to the Lord, and in the genuine doctrine of truth from Him; great
also is predicated of the good of love, and high of truths. The reason
why being taken up "into a mountain" signifies to be taken up into the
third heaven, is, because it is said "in the spirit," and he who is in
the spirit as to his mind and its sight, is in the spiritual world, and
there the angels of the third heaven dwell upon mountains, the angels of
the second heaven upon hills, and the angels of the lowest heaven in
valleys between the hills and mountains. Therefore when anyone in the
spirit is taken up into a mountain, it signifies that he is taken up
into the third heaven; this elevation is effected in a moment, because
it is done by a change in the state of the mind; by "he showed me," is
signified his sight then opened, and manifestation. By "the great city,
the holy Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God is signified the
Lord's New Church as above (n. 878, 880); where also it is explained,
for this reason it is called "holy," and is said "to descend out of
heaven from God;" its being seen in the form of a city, is because "a
city" signifies doctrine (n. 194, 712), and the church is a church from
doctrine, and from a life according to it. It was also seen as a city,
that it might be described as to all its quality, and this is described
by its wall, gates, foundations, and various measures. The church is
described in a similar manner in Ezekiel, where it is also said that the
prophet: In the visions of God was brought upon a very high mountain,
and he saw a city on the south, which the angel also measured as to its
wall and gates, and as to its breadth and height (Ezek. 40:2 seq.). The
like is meant by this passage in Zechariah: I said to the angel, Whither
goest thou? he said, To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth
thereof, and what is the length thereof (Zech. 2:2).

<span class="margnote"><span id="897.">897.</span></span>

Verse 11. Having the glory of God; and her light was like unto a stone
most precious, as it were a jasper stone, shining like crystal,
signifies that in that church the Word will be understood, because
translucent from its spiritual sense. By "the glory of God" is signified
the Word in its Divine light, as will be seen presently; by "its light"
is signified the Divine truth therein, for this is meant by light in the
Word (n. 796, 799); like a stone most precious, like a jasper stone,
"shining like crystal," signifies the same shining and translucent from
its spiritual sense, of which also in what follows. By these words is
described the understanding of the Word with those who are in the
doctrine of the New Jerusalem, and in a life according to it. With these
the Word shines as it were when it is read; it shines from the Lord by
means of the spiritual sense, because the Lord is the Word, and the
spiritual sense is in the light of heaven which proceeds from the Lord
as a sun, and the light which proceeds from the Lord as a sun, is in its
essence the Divine truth of His Divine wisdom. That in every particular
of the Word there is a spiritual sense, in which the angels are, and
from which their wisdom is derived, and that the Word is translucent
from the light of that sense to those who are in genuine truths from the
Lord, is shown in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the
Sacred Scripture. \[2\] That by "the glory of God" is meant the Word in
its Divine light, may appear from the following passages: The Word was
made flesh, and we saw His glory, the glory as of the Only-begotten of
the Father (John 1:14). That by "glory" is meant the glory of the Word
or the Divine truth in Him, is evident, because it is said "the Word was
made flesh"; the same is meant by "glory" in what follows, where it is
said: The glory of God did lighten it, and its lamp is the Lamb (John
1:23). The same is meant by: The glory in which they will see the Son of
man when He shall come in the clouds of heaven (Matt. 24:30; Mark
13:26). See above (n. 22, 642, 820); nor is anything else meant by: The
throne of glory upon which the Lord will sit when He shall come to the
Last Judgment (Mat. 25:31); because He will judge everyone according to
the truths of the Word; wherefore it is also said that "He will come in
His glory." When the Lord was transfigured, it is also said that: Moses
and Elias appeared in glory (Luke 9:30-31). By "Moses and Elias" is
there signified the Word; the Lord also then caused Himself to be seen
by the disciples as the Word in its glory. That "glory" signifies the
Divine truth, may be seen from many passages of the Word above (n. 629).
\[3\] The reason why the Word is compared to "a stone most precious,
like a jasper stone, shining like crystal," is because "a precious
stone" signifies the Divine truth of the Word (n. 231, 540, 726, 823),
and "a jasper stone" signifies the Divine truth of the Word in the sense
of the letter, translucent from the Divine truth in the spiritual sense;
this is the signification of "a jasper stone" (in Exod. 28:20; Ezek.
28:13), and afterwards in this chapter, where it is said that "the
structure of the wall" of the Holy Jerusalem was "jasper" (verse 18);
and since the Word in the sense of the letter is translucent from its
spiritual sense, it is said, "a jasper shining like crystal," all
enlightenment, which they have who are in Divine truths from the Lord,
is thence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="898.">898.</span></span>

Verse 12. Having a wall great and high, signifies the Word in the sense
of the letter from which is the doctrine of the New Church. When the
Lord's New Church as to doctrine is meant by "the holy city Jerusalem,"
nothing else is meant by its "wall" but the Word in the sense of the
letter, from which the doctrine is; for that sense protects the
spiritual sense, which lies hidden within, as the wall does a city and
its inhabitants. That the sense of the letter is the basis, the
containant, and the support of its spiritual sense, may be seen in The
Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 27-36)
And that this sense is the guard, lest the interior Divine truths, which
are those of the spiritual sense, should be injured (n. 97). Also that
the doctrine of the church is to be drawn from the sense of the letter
of the Word, and to be confirmed by it (n. 50-61). It is called "a wall
great and high," because the Word is meant as to the Divine good and the
Divine truth; for "great" is predicated of good, and "high" of truth, as
above (n. 896). \[2\] By "a wall" is signified that which protects; and,
in speaking of the church, the Word in the sense of the letter is
signified in the following passages: I have set watchmen upon thy walls,
O Jerusalem; they shall not be silent day and night, that make mention
of Jehovah (Isa. 62:6). They shall call thee the city of Jehovah, the
Zion of the Holy One of Israel; and thou shalt call thy walls salvation,
and thy gates praise (Isa. 60:14, 18). Jehovah will be a wall of fire
round about, and a glory in the midst of her (Zech. 2:5). The sons of
Arvad were upon thy walls, and the Gammadians hung their shields upon
thy walls round about; they have made thy beauty perfect (Ezek. 27:11).
This is concerning Tyre, by which is signified the church as to
knowledges of truth from the Word. Run to and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, and see if there is any that seeketh truth; go up on her
walls, and cast down (Jer. 5:1, 10). Jehovah hath thought to destroy the
wall of the daughter of Zion, He made the rampart and the wall to mourn,
they languish together, the law and the prophets are no more (Lam. 2:8,
9). They shall run to and fro in the city, they shall run on the wall,
they shall go up into the houses, they shall enter in through the
windows (Joel 2:9). These are concerning the falsifications of truth:
Day and night the wicked go about in the city, upon its walls,
destructions are in the midst of them (Ps. 55:10). Besides other places,
as Isa. 22:5; 56:5; Jer. 1:15; Ezek. 27:11; Lam. 2:7. That the Word in
the sense of the letter is signified by "a wall," is clearly manifest
from what follows in this chapter, where the wall, its gates,
foundations, and measures are much treated of. The reason is, because
the doctrine of the New Church, which is signified by "the city," is
solely from the sense of the letter of the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="899.">899.</span></span>

Having twelve gates, signifies all the knowledges of truth and good
there, by which a man is introduced into the church. By "the gates" are
signified the knowledges of truth and good from the Word, because by
them a man is introduced into the church; for "the wall," in which the
gates were, signifies the Word; as explained just above (n. 898); and it
is said in what follows, that "the twelve gates were twelve pearls, each
one of the gates was one pearl" (verse 21); and by "pearls" the
knowledges of truth and good are signified (n. 727). That a man is
introduced into the church by them, as through the gates into a city, is
manifest. That "twelve" signifies all, may be seen above (n. 348).
Knowledges of truth and good are also signified by "gates" in these
passages: I will lay thy foundations with sapphires, and I will make thy
suns of ruby, and thy gates in stones of carbuncle (Isa. 54:11-12).
Jehovah loveth the gates of Zion more than all the habitations of Jacob,
glorious things are to be declared in thee, O city of God (Ps. 87:2-3).
Enter through His gates with confession, confess unto Him, bless His
name (Ps. 100:4). Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem;
Jerusalem is built as a city that coheres together (Ps. 122:2-3). Praise
Jehovah, O Jerusalem, for He makes firm the bars of thy gates, He
blesseth thy sons in the midst of thee (Ps. 147:12-13). That I may
enumerate all thy praises in the gates of the daughter of Zion (Ps.
9:14). Open ye the gates, that the just nation that keepeth faithfulness
may enter in (Isa. 26:2). Lift up the voice, that they may come into the
gates of the princes (Isa. 13:2). Happy are they that do His
commandments, and enter in through the gates into the city (Rev. 22:14).
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, that the King of glory may come in (Ps.
24:7, 9). The ways of Zion do mourn, all her gates are devastated, her
priests groan (Lam. 1:4). Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish
(Jer. 14:2). Jehovah hath thought to destroy the wall of the daughter of
Zion, her gates have subsided into the earth (Lam. 2:8-9). Who make a
man to sin in a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate
(Isa. 29:21). He chose new gods, then he began to assault the gates
(Judges 5:8). Besides other places (as Isa. 3:25-26; 14:31; 22:7; 24:12;
28:6; 62:10; Jer. 1:15; 15:7; 31:38, 40; Micah 2:13; Nahum 3:13; Judges
5:11). Since "gates" signify introductory truths, which are knowledges
from the Word, therefore the elders of a city sat in the gates, and
judged; as is manifest from Deut. 21:18-21; 22:15; Lam. 5:14; Amos 5:12,
15; Zech. 8:16.

<span class="margnote"><span id="900.">900.</span></span>

And over the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are
those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel, signifies the Divine
truths and goods of heaven, which are also the Divine truths and goods
of the church, in those knowledges, and also guards to prevent anyone
from entering except he be in them from the Lord. By "twelve angels" are
signified here all the, truths and goods of heaven, because by "angels,"
in the highest sense, is signified the Lord, in a general sense the
heaven of angels, and in a particular sense the truths and goods of
heaven from the Lord (see n. 5, 170, 258, 344, 415, 465, 647, 648, 657,
718); here the truths and goods of heaven, because it follows, "and
names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the
sons of Israel," by which are signified all the truths and goods of the
church (n. 349). By "over the gates" is signified in those knowledges,
because "over" in the Word signifies within; the reason is because that
which is highest in successive order becomes the inmost in simultaneous
order; therefore the third heaven is called both the highest and the
inmost heaven; hence it is, that "over the gates" signifies in the
knowledges of truth; by "names written thereon," is signified every
quality of them, thus also in them, for all quality is from internals in
externals. The reason why by the same words are signified guards lest
anyone enter into the church, unless he be in those knowledges from the
Lord, is evident, because the angels were seen standing over the gates,
and also the names of the tribes of Israel were written over them. It is
said that the truths and goods of heaven and the church are in the
knowledges which are from the Word, by which introduction into the
church is effected, because the knowledges of truth and good from the
Word, when there is in them the spiritual from heaven from the Lord, are
not called knowledges, but truths; but if there is not in them the
spiritual from heaven from the Lord, they are nothing but scientifics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[857-1](ar18.htm#fr_79) There is no number 857
in the original Latin. However, it is referred to in n. 550, 858 and
870. It is possible that the printer omitted the paragraph.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[865-1](ar18.htm#fr_80) The original Latin has
"new" for "former."

<span id="fn_81"></span>[876-1](ar18.htm#fr_81) The original Latin omits
"adorned."

<span id="fn_82"></span>[881-1](ar18.htm#fr_82) The original Latin omits
"adorned."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 901-950](ar19)
