[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Esdras Index](es1)  
  [Previous](es1003)  [Next](es1005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Esdras 4

[Apo](../apo/es1004)

1 Then the second, that had spoken of the strength of the king, began to
say,

2 O ye men, do not men excel in strength that bear rule over sea and
land and all things in them?

3 But yet the king is more mighty: for he is lord of all these things,
and hath dominion over them; and whatsoever he commandeth them they do.

4 If he bid them make war the one against the other, they do it: if he
send them out against the enemies, they go, and break down mountains
walls and towers.

5 They slay and are slain, and transgress not the king's commandment: if
they get the victory, they bring all to the king, as well the spoil, as
all things else.

6 Likewise for those that are no soldiers, and have not to do with wars,
but use husbundry, when they have reaped again that which they had sown,
they bring it to the king, and compel one another to pay tribute unto
the king.

7 And yet he is but one man: if he command to kill, they kill; if he
command to spare, they spare;

8 If he command to smite, they smite; if he command to make desolate,
they make desolate; if he command to build, they build;

9 If he command to cut down, they cut down; if he command to plant, they
plant.

10 So all his people and his armies obey him: furthermore he lieth down,
he eateth and drinketh, and taketh his rest:

11 And these keep watch round about him, neither may any one depart, and
do his own business, neither disobey they him in any thing.

12 O ye men, how should not the king be mightiest, when in such sort he
is obeyed? And he held his tongue.

13 Then the third, who had spoken of women, and of the truth, (this was
Zorobabel) began to speak.

14 O ye men, it is not the great king, nor the multitude of men, neither
is it wine, that excelleth; who is it then that ruleth them, or hath the
lordship over them? are they not women?

15 Women have borne the king and all the people that bear rule by sea
and land.

16 Even of them came they: and they nourished them up that planted the
vineyards, from whence the wine cometh.

17 These also make garments for men; these bring glory unto men; and
without women cannot men be.

18 Yea, and if men have gathered together gold and silver, or any other
goodly thing, do they not love a woman which is comely in favour and
beauty?

19 And letting all those things go, do they not gape, and even with open
mouth fix their eyes fast on her; and have not all men more desire unto
her than unto silver or gold, or any goodly thing whatsoever?

20 A man leaveth his own father that brought him up, and his own
country, and cleaveth unto his wife.

21 He sticketh not to spend his life with his wife. and remembereth
neither father, nor mother, nor country.

22 By this also ye must know that women have dominion over you: do ye
not labour and toil, and give and bring all to the woman?

23 Yea, a man taketh his sword, and goeth his way to rob and to steal,
to sail upon the sea and upon rivers;

24 And looketh upon a lion, and goeth in the darkness; and when he hath
stolen, spoiled, and robbed, he bringeth it to his love.

25 Wherefore a man loveth his wife better than father or mother.

26 Yea, many there be that have run out of their wits for women, and
become servants for their sakes.

27 Many also have perished, have erred, and sinned, for women.

28 And now do ye not believe me? is not the king great in his power? do
not all regions fear to touch him?

29 Yet did I see him and Apame the king's concubine, the daughter of the
admirable Bartacus, sitting at the right hand of the king,

30 And taking the crown from the king's head, and setting it upon her
own head; she also struck the king with her left hand.

31 And yet for all this the king gaped and gazed upon her with open
mouth: if she laughed upon him, he laughed also: but if she took any
displeasure at him, the king was fain to flatter, that she might be
reconciled to him again.

32 O ye men, how can it be but women should be strong, seeing they do
thus?

33 Then the king and the princes looked one upon another: so he began to
speak of the truth.

34 O ye men, are not women strong? great is the earth, high is the
heaven, swift is the sun in his course, for he compasseth the heavens
round about, and fetcheth his course again to his own place in one day.

35 Is he not great that maketh these things? therefore great is the
truth, and stronger than all things.

36 All the earth crieth upon the truth, and the heaven blesseth it: all
works shake and tremble at it, and with it is no unrighteous thing.

37 Wine is wicked, the king is wicked, women are wicked, all the
children of men are wicked, and such are all their wicked works; and
there is no truth in them; in their unrighteousness also they shall
perish.

38 As for the truth, it endureth, and is alwaYs strong; it liveth and
conquereth for evermore.

39 With her there is no accepting of persons or rewards; but she doeth
the things that are just, and refraineth from all unjust and wicked
things; and all men do well like of her works.

40 Neither in her judgment is any unrighteousness; and she is the
strength, kingdom, power, and majesty, of all ages. Blessed be the God
of truth.

41 And with that he held his peace. And all the people then shouted, and
said, Great is Truth, and mighty above all things.

42 Then said the king unto him, Ask what thou wilt more than is
appointed in the writing, and we will give it thee, because thou art
found wisest; and thou shalt sit next me, and shalt be called my cousin.

43 Then said he unto the king, Remember thy vow, which thou hast vowed
to build Jerusalem, in the day when thou camest to thy kingdom,

44 And to send away all the vessels that were taken away out of
Jerusalem, which Cyrus set apart, when he vowed to destroy Babylon, and
to send them again thither.

45 Thou also hast vowed to build up the temple, which the Edomites
burned when Judea was made desolate by the Chaldees.

46 And now, O lord the king, this is that which I require, and which I
desire of thee, and this is the princely liberality proceeding from
thyself: I desire therefore that thou make good the vow, the performance
whereof with thine own mouth thou hast vowed to the King of heaven.

47 Then Darius the king stood up, and kissed him, and wrote letters for
him unto all the treasurers and lieutenants and captains and governors,
that they should safely convey on their way both him, and all those that
go up with him to build Jerusalem.

48 He wrote letters also unto the lieutenants that were in Celosyria and
Phenice, and unto them in Libanus, that they should bring cedar wood
from Libanus unto Jerusalem, and that they should build the city with
him.

49 Moreover he wrote for all the Jews that went out of his realm up into
Jewry, concerning their freedom, that no officer, no ruler, no
lieutenant, nor treasurer, should forcibly enter into their doors;

50 And that all the country which they hold should be free without
tribute; and that the Edomites should give over the villages of the Jews
which then they held:

51 Yea, that there should be yearly given twenty talents to the building
of the temple, until the time that it were built;

52 And other ten talents yearly, to maintain the burnt offerings upon
the altar every day, as they had a commandment to offer seventeen:

53 And that all they that went from Babylon to build the city should
have free liberty, as well they as their posterity, and all the priests
that went away.

54 He wrote also concerning. the charges, and the priests' vestments
wherein they minister;

55 And likewise for the charges of the Levites, to be given them until
the day that the house were finished, and Jerusalem builded up.

56 And he commanded to give to all that kept the city pensions and
wages.

57 He sent away also all the vessels from Babylon, that Cyrus had set
apart; and all that Cyrus had given in commandment, the same charged he
also to be done, and sent unto Jerusalem.

58 Now when this young man was gone forth, he lifted up his face to
heaven toward Jerusalem, and praised the King of heaven,

59 And said, From thee cometh victory, from thee cometh wisdom, and
thine is the glory, and I am thy servant.

60 Blessed art thou, who hast given me wisdom: for to thee I give
thanks, O Lord of our fathers.

61 And so he took the letters, and went out, and came unto Babylon, and
told it all his brethren.

62 And they praised the God of their fathers, because he had given them
freedom and liberty

63 To go up, and to build Jerusalem, and the temple which is called by
his name: and they feasted with instruments of musick and gladness seven
days.

[Sep](../sep/es1004)

1 καὶ ἤρξατο ὁ δεύτερος λαλεῖν ὁ εἴπας περὶ τῆς ἰσχύος τοῦ βασιλέως

2 ὦ ἄνδρες οὐχ ὑπερισχύουσιν οἱ ἄνθρωποι τὴν γῆν καὶ τὴν θάλασσαν
κατακρατοῦντες καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐν αὐτοῖς

3 ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς ὑπερισχύει καὶ κυριεύει αὐτῶν καὶ δεσπόζει αὐτῶν καὶ πᾶν
ὃ ἐὰν εἴπῃ αὐτοῖς ἐνακούουσιν

4 ἐὰν εἴπῃ αὐτοῖς ποιῆσαι πόλεμον ἕτερος πρὸς τὸν ἕτερον ποιοῦσιν ἐὰν δὲ
ἐξαποστείλῃ αὐτοὺς πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους βαδίζουσιν καὶ κατεργάζονται τὰ
ὄρη καὶ τὰ τείχη καὶ τοὺς πύργους

5 φονεύουσιν καὶ φονεύονται καὶ τὸν λόγον τοῦ βασιλέως οὐ παραβαίνουσιν
ἐὰν δὲ νικήσωσιν τῷ βασιλεῖ κομίζουσιν πάντα καὶ ὅσα ἐὰν προνομεύσωσιν
καὶ τὰ ἄλλα πάντα

6 καὶ ὅσοι οὐ στρατεύονται οὐδὲ πολεμοῦσιν ἀλλὰ γεωργοῦσιν τὴν γῆν πάλιν
ὅταν σπείρωσι θερίσαντες ἀναφέρουσιν τῷ βασιλεῖ καὶ ἕτερος τὸν ἕτερον
ἀναγκάζοντες ἀναφέρουσι τοὺς φόρους τῷ βασιλεῖ

7 καὶ αὐτὸς εἷς μόνος ἐστίν ἐὰν εἴπῃ ἀποκτεῖναι ἀποκτέννουσιν εἶπεν
ἀφεῖναι ἀφίουσιν

8 εἶπε πατάξαι τύπτουσιν εἶπεν ἐρημῶσαι ἐρημοῦσιν εἶπεν οἰκοδομῆσαι
οἰκοδομοῦσιν

9 εἶπεν ἐκκόψαι ἐκκόπτουσιν εἶπεν φυτεῦσαι φυτεύουσιν

10 καὶ πᾶς ὁ λαὸς αὐτοῦ καὶ αἱ δυνάμεις αὐτοῦ ἐνακούουσιν

11 πρὸς δὲ τούτοις αὐτὸς ἀνάκειται ἐσθίει καὶ πίνει καὶ καθεύδει αὐτοὶ
δὲ τηροῦσιν κύκλῳ περὶ αὐτὸν καὶ οὐ δύνανται ἕκαστος ἀπελθεῖν καὶ ποιεῖν
τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ οὐδὲ παρακούουσιν αὐτοῦ

12 ὦ ἄνδρες πῶς οὐχ ὑπερισχύει ὁ βασιλεύς ὅτι οὕτως ἐπακουστός ἐστιν καὶ
ἐσίγησεν

13 ὁ δὲ τρίτος ὁ εἴπας περὶ τῶν γυναικῶν καὶ τῆς ἀληθείας οὗτός ἐστιν
Ζοροβαβελ ἤρξατο λαλεῖν

14 ἄνδρες οὐ μέγας ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ πολλοὶ οἱ ἄνθρωποι καὶ ὁ οἶνος ἰσχύει
τίς οὖν ὁ δεσπόζων αὐτῶν ἢ τίς ὁ κυριεύων αὐτῶν οὐχ αἱ γυναῖκες

15 αἱ γυναῖκες ἐγέννησαν τὸν βασιλέα καὶ πάντα τὸν λαόν ὃς κυριεύει τῆς
θαλάσσης καὶ τῆς γῆς

16 καὶ ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐγένοντο καὶ αὗται ἐξέθρεψαν αὐτοὺς τοὺς φυτεύοντας τοὺς
ἀμπελῶνας ἐξ ὧν ὁ οἶνος γίνεται

17 καὶ αὗται ποιοῦσιν τὰς στολὰς τῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ αὗται ποιοῦσιν δόξαν
τοῖς ἀνθρώποις καὶ οὐ δύνανται οἱ ἄνθρωποι εἶναι χωρὶς τῶν γυναικῶν

18 ἐὰν δὲ συναγάγωσιν χρυσίον καὶ ἀργύριον καὶ πᾶν πρᾶγμα ὡραῖον καὶ
ἴδωσιν γυναῖκα μίαν καλὴν τῷ εἴδει καὶ τῷ κάλλει

19 καὶ ταῦτα πάντα ἀφέντες εἰς αὐτὴν ἐγκέχηναν καὶ χάσκοντες τὸ στόμα
θεωροῦσιν αὐτήν καὶ πάντες αὐτὴν αἱρετίζουσιν μᾶλλον ἢ τὸ χρυσίον καὶ τὸ
ἀργύριον καὶ πᾶν πρᾶγμα ὡραῖον

20 ἄνθρωπος τὸν ἑαυτοῦ πατέρα ἐγκαταλείπει ὃς ἐξέθρεψεν αὐτόν καὶ τὴν
ἰδίαν χώραν καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἰδίαν γυναῖκα κολλᾶται

21 καὶ μετὰ τῆς γυναικὸς ἀφίησι τὴν ψυχὴν καὶ οὔτε τὸν πατέρα μέμνηται
οὔτε τὴν μητέρα οὔτε τὴν χώραν

22 καὶ ἐντεῦθεν δεῖ ὑμᾶς γνῶναι ὅτι αἱ γυναῖκες κυριεύουσιν ὑμῶν οὐχὶ
πονεῖτε καὶ μοχθεῖτε καὶ πάντα ταῖς γυναιξὶν δίδοτε καὶ φέρετε

23 καὶ λαμβάνει ἄνθρωπος τὴν ῥομφαίαν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐκπορεύεται ἐξοδεύειν
καὶ λῃστεύειν καὶ κλέπτειν καὶ εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν πλεῖν καὶ ποταμούς

24 καὶ τὸν λέοντα θεωρεῖ καὶ ἐν σκότει βαδίζει καὶ ὅταν κλέψῃ καὶ ἁρπάσῃ
καὶ λωποδυτήσῃ τῇ ἐρωμένῃ ἀποφέρει

25 καὶ πλεῖον ἀγαπᾷ ἄνθρωπος τὴν ἰδίαν γυναῖκα μᾶλλον ἢ τὸν πατέρα καὶ
τὴν μητέρα

26 καὶ πολλοὶ ἀπενοήθησαν ταῖς ἰδίαις διανοίαις διὰ τὰς γυναῖκας καὶ
δοῦλοι ἐγένοντο δι᾽ αὐτάς

27 καὶ πολλοὶ ἀπώλοντο καὶ ἐσφάλησαν καὶ ἡμάρτοσαν διὰ τὰς γυναῖκας

28 καὶ νῦν οὐ πιστεύετέ μοι οὐχὶ μέγας ὁ βασιλεὺς τῇ ἐξουσίᾳ αὐτοῦ οὐχὶ
πᾶσαι αἱ χῶραι εὐλαβοῦνται ἅψασθαι αὐτοῦ

29 ἐθεώρουν αὐτὸν καὶ Ἀπάμην τὴν θυγατέρα Βαρτάκου τοῦ θαυμαστοῦ τὴν
παλλακὴν τοῦ βασιλέως καθημένην ἐν δεξιᾷ τοῦ βασιλέως

30 καὶ ἀφαιροῦσαν τὸ διάδημα ἀπὸ τῆς κεφαλῆς τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ
ἐπιτιθοῦσαν ἑαυτῇ καὶ ἐρράπιζεν τὸν βασιλέα τῇ ἀριστερᾷ

31 καὶ πρὸς τούτοις ὁ βασιλεὺς χάσκων τὸ στόμα ἐθεώρει αὐτήν καὶ ἐὰν
προσγελάσῃ αὐτῷ γελᾷ ἐὰν δὲ πικρανθῇ ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν κολακεύει αὐτήν ὅπως
διαλλαγῇ αὐτῷ

32 ὦ ἄνδρες πῶς οὐχὶ ἰσχυραὶ αἱ γυναῖκες ὅτι οὕτως πράσσουσιν

33 καὶ τότε ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ οἱ μεγιστᾶνες ἐνέβλεπον ἕτερος πρὸς τὸν
ἕτερον

34 καὶ ἤρξατο λαλεῖν περὶ τῆς ἀληθείας ἄνδρες οὐχὶ ἰσχυραὶ αἱ γυναῖκες
μεγάλη ἡ γῆ καὶ ὑψηλὸς ὁ οὐρανός καὶ ταχὺς τῷ δρόμῳ ὁ ἥλιος ὅτι
στρέφεται ἐν τῷ κύκλῳ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ πάλιν ἀποτρέχει εἰς τὸν ἑαυτοῦ
τόπον ἐν μιᾷ ἡμέρᾳ

35 οὐχὶ μέγας ὃς ταῦτα ποιεῖ καὶ ἡ ἀλήθεια μεγάλη καὶ ἰσχυροτέρα παρὰ
πάντα

36 πᾶσα ἡ γῆ τὴν ἀλήθειαν καλεῖ καὶ ὁ οὐρανὸς αὐτὴν εὐλογεῖ καὶ πάντα τὰ
ἔργα σείεται καὶ τρέμει καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄδικον οὐθέν

37 ἄδικος ὁ οἶνος ἄδικος ὁ βασιλεύς ἄδικοι αἱ γυναῖκες ἄδικοι πάντες οἱ
υἱοὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ ἄδικα πάντα τὰ ἔργα αὐτῶν πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα καὶ οὐκ
ἔστιν ἐν αὐτοῖς ἀλήθεια καὶ ἐν τῇ ἀδικίᾳ αὐτῶν ἀπολοῦνται

38 ἡ δὲ ἀλήθεια μένει καὶ ἰσχύει εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα καὶ ζῇ καὶ κρατεῖ εἰς τὸν
αἰῶνα τοῦ αἰῶνος

39 καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν παρ᾽ αὐτῇ λαμβάνειν πρόσωπα οὐδὲ διάφορα ἀλλὰ τὰ δίκαια
ποιεῖ ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν ἀδίκων καὶ πονηρῶν καὶ πάντες εὐδοκοῦσι τοῖς ἔργοις
αὐτῆς καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν τῇ κρίσει αὐτῆς οὐθὲν ἄδικον

40 καὶ αὐτῇ ἡ ἰσχὺς καὶ τὸ βασίλειον καὶ ἡ ἐξουσία καὶ ἡ μεγαλειότης τῶν
πάντων αἰώνων εὐλογητὸς ὁ θεὸς τῆς ἀληθείας

41 καὶ ἐσιώπησεν τοῦ λαλεῖν καὶ πᾶς ὁ λαὸς τότε ἐφώνησεν καὶ τότε εἶπον
μεγάλη ἡ ἀλήθεια καὶ ὑπερισχύει

42 τότε ὁ βασιλεὺς εἶπεν αὐτῷ αἴτησαι ὃ θέλεις πλείω τῶν γεγραμμένων καὶ
δώσομέν σοι ὃν τρόπον εὑρέθης σοφώτερος καὶ ἐχόμενός μου καθήσῃ καὶ
συγγενής μου κληθήσῃ

43 τότε εἶπεν τῷ βασιλεῖ μνήσθητι τὴν εὐχήν ἣν ηὔξω οἰκοδομῆσαι τὴν
Ιερουσαλημ ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ᾗ τὸ βασίλειόν σου παρέλαβες

44 καὶ πάντα τὰ σκεύη τὰ λημφθέντα ἐξ Ιερουσαλημ ἐκπέμψαι ἃ ἐξεχώρισεν
Κῦρος ὅτε ηὔξατο ἐκκόψαι Βαβυλῶνα καὶ ηὔξατο ἐξαποστεῖλαι ἐκεῖ

45 καὶ σὺ εὔξω οἰκοδομῆσαι τὸν ναόν ὃν ἐνεπύρισαν οἱ Ιδουμαῖοι ὅτε
ἠρημώθη ἡ Ιουδαία ὑπὸ τῶν Χαλδαίων

46 καὶ νῦν τοῦτό ἐστιν ὅ σε ἀξιῶ κύριε βασιλεῦ καὶ ὃ αἰτοῦμαί σε καὶ
αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ μεγαλωσύνη ἡ παρὰ σοῦ δέομαι οὖν ἵνα ποιήσῃς τὴν εὐχήν ἣν
ηὔξω τῷ βασιλεῖ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ποιῆσαι ἐκ στόματός σου

47 τότε ἀναστὰς Δαρεῖος ὁ βασιλεὺς κατεφίλησεν αὐτὸν καὶ ἔγραψεν αὐτῷ
τὰς ἐπιστολὰς πρὸς πάντας τοὺς οἰκονόμους καὶ τοπάρχας καὶ στρατηγοὺς
καὶ σατράπας ἵνα προπέμψωσιν αὐτὸν καὶ τοὺς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ πάντας
ἀναβαίνοντας οἰκοδομῆσαι τὴν Ιερουσαλημ

48 καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς τοπάρχαις ἐν Κοίλῃ Συρίᾳ καὶ Φοινίκῃ καὶ τοῖς ἐν τῷ
Λιβάνῳ ἔγραψεν ἐπιστολὰς μεταφέρειν ξύλα κέδρινα ἀπὸ τοῦ Λιβάνου εἰς
Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ὅπως οἰκοδομήσωσιν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ τὴν πόλιν

49 καὶ ἔγραψεν πᾶσι τοῖς Ιουδαίοις τοῖς ἀναβαίνουσιν ἀπὸ τῆς βασιλείας
εἰς τὴν Ιουδαίαν ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐλευθερίας πάντα δυνατὸν καὶ σατράπην καὶ
τοπάρχην καὶ οἰκονόμον μὴ ἐπελεύσεσθαι ἐπὶ τὰς θύρας αὐτῶν

50 καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν χώραν ἣν κρατήσουσιν ἀφορολόγητον αὐτοῖς ὑπάρχειν καὶ
ἵνα οἱ Ιδουμαῖοι ἀφιῶσι τὰς κώμας ἃς διακρατοῦσιν τῶν Ιουδαίων

51 καὶ εἰς τὴν οἰκοδομὴν τοῦ ἱεροῦ δοθῆναι κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν τάλαντα εἴκοσι
μέχρι τοῦ οἰκοδομηθῆναι

52 καὶ ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον ὁλοκαυτώματα καρποῦσθαι καθ᾽ ἡμέραν καθὰ
ἔχουσιν ἐντολὴν ἑπτακαίδεκα προσφέρειν ἄλλα τάλαντα δέκα κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτόν

53 καὶ πᾶσιν τοῖς προσβαίνουσιν ἀπὸ τῆς Βαβυλωνίας κτίσαι τὴν πόλιν
ὑπάρχειν τὴν ἐλευθερίαν αὐτοῖς τε καὶ τοῖς τέκνοις αὐτῶν καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς
ἱερεῦσι τοῖς προσβαίνουσιν

54 ἔγραψεν δὲ καὶ τὴν χορηγίαν καὶ τὴν ἱερατικὴν στολήν ἐν τίνι
λατρεύουσιν ἐν αὐτῇ

55 καὶ τοῖς Λευίταις ἔγραψεν δοῦναι τὴν χορηγίαν ἕως ἧς ἡμέρας
ἐπιτελεσθῇ ὁ οἶκος καὶ Ιερουσαλημ οἰκοδομηθῆναι

56 καὶ πᾶσι τοῖς φρουροῦσι τὴν πόλιν ἔγραψε δοῦναι αὐτοῖς κλήρους καὶ
ὀψώνια

57 καὶ ἐξαπέστειλεν πάντα τὰ σκεύη ἃ ἐξεχώρισεν Κῦρος ἀπὸ Βαβυλῶνος καὶ
πάντα ὅσα εἶπεν Κῦρος ποιῆσαι καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπέταξεν ποιῆσαι καὶ
ἐξαποστεῖλαι εἰς Ιερουσαλημ

58 καὶ ὅτε ἐξῆλθεν ὁ νεανίσκος ἄρας τὸ πρόσωπον εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν ἐναντίον
Ιερουσαλημ εὐλόγησεν τῷ βασιλεῖ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ λέγων

59 παρὰ σοῦ ἡ νίκη καὶ παρὰ σοῦ ἡ σοφία καὶ σὴ ἡ δόξα καὶ ἐγὼ σὸς
οἰκέτης

60 εὐλογητὸς εἶ ὃς ἔδωκάς μοι σοφίαν καὶ σοὶ ὁμολογῶ δέσποτα τῶν πατέρων

61 καὶ ἔλαβεν τὰς ἐπιστολὰς καὶ ἐξῆλθεν εἰς Βαβυλῶνα καὶ ἀπήγγειλεν τοῖς
ἀδελφοῖς αὐτοῦ πᾶσιν

62 καὶ εὐλόγησαν τὸν θεὸν τῶν πατέρων αὐτῶν ὅτι ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ἄνεσιν καὶ
ἄφεσιν

63 ἀναβῆναι καὶ οἰκοδομῆσαι Ιερουσαλημ καὶ τὸ ἱερόν οὗ ὠνομάσθη τὸ ὄνομα
αὐτοῦ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ καὶ ἐκωθωνίζοντο μετὰ μουσικῶν καὶ χαρᾶς ἡμέρας ἑπτά

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Esdras 5](es1005)
