[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Esdras Index](es1)  
  [Previous](es1007)  [Next](es1009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Esdras 8

[Apo](../apo/es1008)

1 And after these things, when Artexerxes the king of the Persians
reigned came Esdras the son of Saraias, the son of Ezerias, the son of
Helchiah, the son of Salum,

2 The son of Sadduc, the son of Achitob, the son of Amarias, the son of
Ezias, the son of Meremoth, the son of Zaraias, the son of Savias, the
son of Boccas, the son of Abisum, the son of Phinees, the son of
Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest.

3 This Esdras went up from Babylon, as a scribe, being very ready in the
law of Moses, that was given by the God of Israel.

4 And the king did him honour: for he found grace in his sight in all
his requests.

5 There went up with him also certain of the children of Israel, of the
priest of the Levites, of the holy singers, porters, and ministers of
the temple, unto Jerusalem,

6 In the seventh year of the reign of Artexerxes, in the fifth month,
this was the king's seventh year; for they went from Babylon in the
first day of the first month, and came to Jerusalem, according to the
prosperous journey which the Lord gave them.

7 For Esdras had very great skill, so that he omitted nothing of the law
and commandments of the Lord, but taught all Israel the ordinances and
judgments.

8 Now the copy of the commission, which was written from Artexerxes the
king, and came to Esdras the priest and reader of the law of the Lord,
is this that followeth;

9 King Artexerxes unto Esdras the priest and reader of the law of the
Lord sendeth greeting:

10 Having determined to deal graciously, I have given order, that such
of the nation of the Jews, and of the priests and Levites being within
our realm, as are willing and desirous should go with thee unto
Jerusalem.

11 As many therefore as have a mind thereunto, let them depart with
thee, as it hath seemed good both to me and my seven friends the
counsellors;

12 That they may look unto the affairs of Judea and Jerusalem, agreeably
to that which is in the law of the Lord;

13 And carry the gifts unto the Lord of Israel to Jerusalem, which I and
my friends have vowed, and all the gold and silver that in the country
of Babylon can be found, to the Lord in Jerusalem,

14 With that also which is given of the people for the temple of the
Lord their God at Jerusalem: and that silver and gold may be collected
for bullocks, rams, and lambs, and things thereunto appertaining;

15 To the end that they may offer sacrifices unto the Lord upon the
altar of the Lord their God, which is in Jerusalem.

16 And whatsoever thou and thy brethren will do with the silver and
gold, that do, according to the will of thy God.

17 And the holy vessels of the Lord, which are given thee for the use of
the temple of thy God, which is in Jerusalem, thou shalt set before thy
God in Jerusalem.

18 And whatsoever thing else thou shalt remember for the use of the
temple of thy God, thou shalt give it out of the king's treasury.

19 And I king Artexerxes have also commanded the keepers of the
treasures in Syria and Phenice, that whatsoever Esdras the priest and
the reader of the law of the most high God shall send for, they should
give it him with speed,

20 To the sum of an hundred talents of silver, likewise also of wheat
even to an hundred cors, and an hundred pieces of wine, and other things
in abundance.

21 Let all things be performed after the law of God diligently unto the
most high God, that wrath come not upon the kingdom of the king and his
sons.

22 I command you also, that ye require no tax, nor any other imposition,
of any of the priests, or Levites, or holy singers, or porters, or
ministers of the temple, or of any that have doings in this temple, and
that no man have authority to impose any thing upon them.

23 And thou, Esdras, according to the wisdom of God ordain judges and
justices, that they may judge in all Syria and Phenice all those that
know the law of thy God; and those that know it not thou shalt teach.

24 And whosoever shall transgress the law of thy God, and of the king,
shall be punished diligently, whether it be by death, or other
punishment, by penalty of money, or by imprisonment.

25 Then said Esdras the scribe, Blessed be the only Lord God of my
fathers, who hath put these things into the heart of the king, to
glorify his house that is in Jerusalem:

26 And hath honoured me in the sight of the king, and his counsellors,
and all his friends and nobles.

27 Therefore was I encouraged by the help of the Lord my God, and
gathered together men of Israel to go up with me.

28 And these are the chief according to their families and several
dignities, that went up with me from Babylon in the reign of king
Artexerxes:

29 Of the sons of Phinees, Gerson: of the sons of Ithamar, Gamael: of
the sons of David, Lettus the son of Sechenias:

30 Of the sons of Pharez, Zacharias; and with him were counted an
hundred and fifty men:

31 Of the sons of Pahath Moab, Eliaonias, the son of Zaraias, and with
him two hundred men:

32 Of the sons of Zathoe, Sechenias the son of Jezelus, and with him
three hundred men: of the sons of Adin, Obeth the son of Jonathan, and
with him two hundred and fifty men:

33 Of the sons of Elam, Josias son of Gotholias, and with him seventy
men:

34 Of the sons of Saphatias, Zaraias son of Michael, and with him
threescore and ten men:

35 Of the sons of Joab, Abadias son of Jezelus, and with him two hundred
and twelve men:

36 Of the sons of Banid, Assalimoth son of Josaphias, and with him an
hundred and threescore men:

37 Of the sons of Babi, Zacharias son of Bebai, and with him twenty and
eight men:

38 Of the sons of Astath, Johannes son of Acatan, and with him an
hundred and ten men:

39 Of the sons of Adonikam the last, and these are the names of them,
Eliphalet, Jewel, and Samaias, and with them seventy men:

40 Of the sons of Bago, Uthi the son of Istalcurus, and with him seventy
men.

41 And these I gathered together to the river called Theras, where we
pitched our tents three days: and then I surveyed them.

42 But when I had found there none of the priests and Levites,

43 Then sent I unto Eleazar, and Iduel, and Masman,

44 And Alnathan, and Mamaias, and Joribas, and Nathan, Eunatan,
Zacharias, and Mosollamon, principal men and learned.

45 And I bade them that they should go unto Saddeus the captain, who was
in the place of the treasury:

46 And commanded them that they should speak unto Daddeus, and to his
brethren, and to the treasurers in that place, to send us such men as
might execute the priests' office in the house of the Lord.

47 And by the mighty hand of our Lord they brought unto us skilful men
of the sons of Moli the son of Levi, the son of Israel, Asebebia, and
his sons, and his brethren, who were eighteen.

48 And Asebia, and Annus, and Osaias his brother, of the sons of
Channuneus, and their sons, were twenty men.

49 And of the servants of the temple whom David had ordained, and the
principal men for the service of the Levites to wit, the servants of the
temple two hundred and twenty, the catalogue of whose names were shewed.

50 And there I vowed a fast unto the young men before our Lord, to
desire of him a prosperous journey both for us and them that were with
us, for our children, and for the cattle:

51 For I was ashamed to ask the king footmen, and horsemen, and conduct
for safeguard against our adversaries.

52 For we had said unto the king, that the power of the Lord our God
should be with them that seek him, to support them in all ways.

53 And again we besought our Lord as touching these things, and found
him favourable unto us.

54 Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Esebrias, and
Assanias, and ten men of their brethren with them:

55 And I weighed them the gold, and the silver, and the holy vessels of
the house of our Lord, which the king, and his council, and the princes,
and all Israel, had given.

56 And when I had weighed it, I delivered unto them six hundred and
fifty talents of silver, and silver vessels of an hundred talents, and
an hundred talents of gold,

57 And twenty golden vessels, and twelve vessels of brass, even of fine
brass, glittering like gold.

58 And I said unto them, Both ye are holy unto the Lord, and the vessels
are holy, and the gold and the silver is a vow unto the Lord, the Lord
of our fathers.

59 Watch ye, and keep them till ye deliver them to the chief of the
priests and Levites, and to the principal men of the families of Israel,
in Jerusalem, into the chambers of the house of our God.

60 So the priests and the Levites, who had received the silver and the
gold and the vessels, brought them unto Jerusalem, into the temple of
the Lord.

61 And from the river Theras we departed the twelfth day of the first
month, and came to Jerusalem by the mighty hand of our Lord, which was
with us: and from the beginning of our journey the Lord delivered us
from every enemy, and so we came to Jerusalem.

62 And when we had been there three days, the gold and silver that was
weighed was delivered in the house of our Lord on the fourth day unto
Marmoth the priest the son of Iri.

63 And with him was Eleazar the son of Phinees, and with them were
Josabad the son of Jesu and Moeth the son of Sabban, Levites: all was
delivered them by number and weight.

64 And all the weight of them was written up the same hour.

65 Moreover they that were come out of the captivity offered sacrifice
unto the Lord God of Israel, even twelve bullocks for all Israel,
fourscore and sixteen rams,

66 Threescore and twelve lambs, goats for a peace offering, twelve; all
of them a sacrifice to the Lord.

67 And they delivered the king's commandments unto the king's stewards'
and to the governors of Celosyria and Phenice; and they honoured the
people and the temple of God.

68 Now when these things were done, the rulers came unto me, and said,

69 The nation of Israel, the princes, the priests and Levites, have not
put away from them the strange people of the land, nor the pollutions of
the Gentiles to wit, of the Canaanites, Hittites, Pheresites, Jebusites,
and the Moabites, Egyptians, and Edomites.

70 For both they and their sons have married with their daughters, and
the holy seed is mixed with the strange people of the land; and from the
beginning of this matter the rulers and the great men have been
partakers of this iniquity.

71 And as soon as I had heard these things, I rent my clothes, and the
holy garment, and pulled off the hair from off my head and beard, and
sat me down sad and very heavy.

72 So all they that were then moved at the word of the Lord God of
Israel assembled unto me, whilst I mourned for the iniquity: but I sat
still full of heaviness until the evening sacrifice.

73 Then rising up from the fast with my clothes and the holy garment
rent, and bowing my knees, and stretching forth my hands unto the Lord,

74 I said, O Lord, I am confounded and ashamed before thy face;

75 For our sins are multiplied above our heads, and our ignorances have
reached up unto heaven.

76 For ever since the time of our fathers we have been and are in great
sin, even unto this day.

77 And for our sins and our fathers' we with our brethren and our kings
and our priests were given up unto the kings of the earth, to the sword,
and to captivity, and for a prey with shame, unto this day.

78 And now in some measure hath mercy been shewed unto us from thee, O
Lord, that there should be left us a root and a name in the place of thy
sanctuary;

79 And to discover unto us a light in the house of the Lord our God, and
to give us food in the time of our servitude.

80 Yea, when we were in bondage, we were not forsaken of our Lord; but
he made us gracious before the kings of Persia, so that they gave us
food;

81 Yea, and honoured the temple of our Lord, and raised up the desolate
Sion, that they have given us a sure abiding in Jewry and Jerusalem.

82 And now, O Lord, what shall we say, having these things? for we have
transgressed thy commandments, which thou gavest by the hand of thy
servants the prophets, saying,

83 That the land, which ye enter into to possess as an heritage, is a
land polluted with the pollutions of the strangers of the land, and they
have filled it with their uncleanness.

84 Therefore now shall ye not join your daughters unto their sons,
neither shall ye take their daughters unto your sons.

85 Moreover ye shall never seek to have peace with them, that ye may be
strong, and eat the good things of the land, and that ye may leave the
inheritance of the land unto your children for evermore.

86 And all that is befallen is done unto us for our wicked works and
great sins; for thou, O Lord, didst make our sins light,

87 And didst give unto us such a root: but we have turned back again to
transgress thy law, and to mingle ourselves with the uncleanness of the
nations of the land.

88 Mightest not thou be angry with us to destroy us, till thou hadst
left us neither root, seed, nor name?

89 O Lord of Israel, thou art true: for we are left a root this day.

90 Behold, now are we before thee in our iniquities, for we cannot stand
any longer by reason of these things before thee.

91 And as Esdras in his prayer made his confession, weeping, and lying
flat upon the ground before the temple, there gathered unto him from
Jerusalem a very great multitude of men and women and children: for
there was great weeping among the multitude.

92 Then Jechonias the son of Jeelus, one of the sons of Israel, called
out, and said, O Esdras, we have sinned against the Lord God, we have
married strange women of the nations of the land, and now is all Israel
aloft.

93 Let us make an oath to the Lord, that we will put away all our wives,
which we have taken of the heathen, with their children,

94 Like as thou hast decreed, and as many as do obey the law of the
Lord.

95 Arise and put in execution: for to thee doth this matter appertain,
and we will be with thee: do valiantly.

96 So Esdras arose, and took an oath of the chief of the priests and
Levites of all Israel to do after these things; and so they sware.

[Sep](../sep/es1008)

1 καὶ μεταγενέστερος τούτων βασιλεύοντος Ἀρταξέρξου τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως
προσέβη Εσδρας Σαραιου τοῦ Εζεριου τοῦ Χελκιου τοῦ Σαλημου

2 τοῦ Σαδδουκου τοῦ Αχιτωβ τοῦ Αμαριου τοῦ Οζιου τοῦ Βοκκα τοῦ Αβισουε
τοῦ Φινεες τοῦ Ελεαζαρ τοῦ Ααρων τοῦ πρώτου ἱερέως

3 οὗτος Εσδρας ἀνέβη ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος ὡς γραμματεὺς εὐφυὴς ὢν ἐν τῷ Μωυσέως
νόμῳ τῷ ἐκδεδομένῳ ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ Ισραηλ

4 καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ ὁ βασιλεὺς δόξαν εὑρόντος χάριν ἐναντίον αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ
πάντα τὰ ἀξιώματα αὐτοῦ

5 καὶ συνανέβησαν ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Ισραηλ καὶ τῶν ἱερέων καὶ Λευιτῶν καὶ
ἱεροψαλτῶν καὶ θυρωρῶν καὶ ἱεροδούλων εἰς Ιεροσόλυμα ἔτους ἑβδόμου
βασιλεύοντος Ἀρταξέρξου ἐν τῷ πέμπτῳ μηνί οὗτος ἐνιαυτὸς ἕβδομος τῷ
βασιλεῖ

6 ἐξελθόντες γὰρ ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος τῇ νουμηνίᾳ τοῦ πρώτου μηνὸς ἐν τῇ
νουμηνίᾳ τοῦ πέμπτου μηνὸς παρεγένοντο εἰς Ιεροσόλυμα κατὰ τὴν δοθεῖσαν
αὐτοῖς εὐοδίαν παρὰ τοῦ κυρίου ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ

7 ὁ γὰρ Εσδρας πολλὴν ἐπιστήμην περιεῖχεν εἰς τὸ μηδὲν παραλιπεῖν τῶν ἐκ
τοῦ νόμου κυρίου καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἐντολῶν διδάξαι τὸν πάντα Ισραηλ πάντα τὰ
δικαιώματα καὶ τὰ κρίματα

8 προσπεσόντος δὲ τοῦ γραφέντος προστάγματος παρὰ Ἀρταξέρξου τοῦ
βασιλέως πρὸς Εσδραν τὸν ἱερέα καὶ ἀναγνώστην τοῦ νόμου κυρίου οὗ ἐστιν
ἀντίγραφον τὸ ὑποκείμενον

9 βασιλεὺς Ἀρταξέρξης Εσδρα τῷ ἱερεῖ καὶ ἀναγνώστῃ τοῦ νόμου κυρίου
χαίρειν

10 καὶ τὰ φιλάνθρωπα ἐγὼ κρίνας προσέταξα τοὺς βουλομένους ἐκ τοῦ ἔθνους
τῶν Ιουδαίων αἱρετίζοντας καὶ τῶν ἱερέων καὶ τῶν Λευιτῶν καὶ τῶν δὲ ἐν
τῇ ἡμετέρᾳ βασιλείᾳ συμπορεύεσθαί σοι εἰς Ιερουσαλημ

11 ὅσοι οὖν ἐνθυμοῦνται συνεξορμάτωσαν καθάπερ δέδοκται ἐμοί τε καὶ τοῖς
ἑπτὰ φίλοις συμβουλευταῖς

12 ὅπως ἐπισκέψωνται τὰ κατὰ τὴν Ιουδαίαν καὶ Ιερουσαλημ ἀκολούθως ᾧ
ἔχει ἐν τῷ νόμῳ τοῦ κυρίου

13 καὶ ἀπενεγκεῖν δῶρα τῷ κυρίῳ τοῦ Ισραηλ ἃ ηὐξάμην ἐγώ τε καὶ οἱ φίλοι
εἰς Ιερουσαλημ καὶ πᾶν χρυσίον καὶ ἀργύριον ὃ ἐὰν εὑρεθῇ ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ τῆς
Βαβυλωνίας τῷ κυρίῳ εἰς Ιερουσαλημ σὺν τῷ δεδωρημένῳ ὑπὸ τοῦ ἔθνους εἰς
τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ κυρίου αὐτῶν τὸ ἐν Ιερουσαλημ

14 συναχθῆναι τό τε χρυσίον καὶ ἀργύριον εἰς ταύρους καὶ κριοὺς καὶ
ἄρνας καὶ τὰ τούτοις ἀκόλουθα

15 ὥστε προσενεγκεῖν θυσίας ἐπὶ τὸ θυσιαστήριον τοῦ κυρίου αὐτῶν τὸ ἐν
Ιερουσαλημ

16 καὶ πάντα ὅσα ἂν βούλῃ μετὰ τῶν ἀδελφῶν σου ποιῆσαι χρυσίῳ καὶ
ἀργυρίῳ ἐπιτέλει κατὰ τὸ θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ σου

17 καὶ τὰ ἱερὰ σκεύη τοῦ κυρίου τὰ διδόμενά σοι εἰς τὴν χρείαν τοῦ ἱεροῦ
τοῦ θεοῦ σου τοῦ ἐν Ιερουσαλημ

18 καὶ τὰ λοιπά ὅσα ἂν ὑποπίπτῃ σοι εἰς τὴν χρείαν τοῦ ἱεροῦ τοῦ θεοῦ
σου δώσεις ἐκ τοῦ βασιλικοῦ γαζοφυλακίου

19 κἀγὼ δὲ Ἀρταξέρξης ὁ βασιλεὺς προσέταξα τοῖς γαζοφύλαξι Συρίας καὶ
Φοινίκης ἵνα ὅσα ἂν ἀποστείλῃ Εσδρας ὁ ἱερεὺς καὶ ἀναγνώστης τοῦ νόμου
τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ὑψίστου ἐπιμελῶς διδῶσιν αὐτῷ ἕως ἀργυρίου ταλάντων ἑκατόν

20 ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἕως πυροῦ κόρων ἑκατὸν καὶ οἴνου μετρητῶν ἑκατὸν καὶ
ἅλα ἐκ πλήθους

21 πάντα τὰ κατὰ τὸν τοῦ θεοῦ νόμον ἐπιτελεσθήτω ἐπιμελῶς τῷ θεῷ τῷ
ὑψίστῳ ἕνεκα τοῦ μὴ γενέσθαι ὀργὴν εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ
τῶν υἱῶν

22 καὶ ὑμῖν δὲ λέγεται ὅπως πᾶσι τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν καὶ τοῖς Λευίταις καὶ
ἱεροψάλταις καὶ θυρωροῖς καὶ ἱεροδούλοις καὶ πραγματικοῖς τοῦ ἱεροῦ
τούτου μηδεμία φορολογία μηδὲ ἄλλη ἐπιβολὴ γίγνηται καὶ ἐξουσίαν μηδένα
ἔχειν ἐπιβαλεῖν τι τούτοις

23 καὶ σύ Εσδρα κατὰ τὴν σοφίαν τοῦ θεοῦ ἀνάδειξον κριτὰς καὶ δικαστάς
ὅπως δικάζωσιν ἐν ὅλῃ Συρίᾳ καὶ Φοινίκῃ πάντας τοὺς ἐπισταμένους τὸν
νόμον τοῦ θεοῦ σου καὶ τοὺς μὴ ἐπισταμένους δὲ διδάξεις

24 καὶ πάντες ὅσοι ἐὰν παραβαίνωσι τὸν νόμον τοῦ θεοῦ σου καὶ τὸν
βασιλικόν ἐπιμελῶς κολασθήσονται ἐάν τε καὶ θανάτῳ ἐάν τε καὶ τιμωρίᾳ ἢ
ἀργυρικῇ ζημίᾳ ἢ ἀπαγωγῇ

25 εὐλογητὸς μόνος ὁ κύριος ὁ δοὺς ταῦτα εἰς τὴν καρδίαν τοῦ βασιλέως
δοξάσαι τὸν οἶκον αὐτοῦ τὸν ἐν Ιερουσαλημ

26 καὶ ἐμὲ ἐτίμησεν ἔναντι τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ τῶν συμβουλευόντων καὶ
πάντων τῶν φίλων καὶ μεγιστάνων αὐτοῦ

27 καὶ ἐγὼ εὐθαρσὴς ἐγενόμην κατὰ τὴν ἀντίλημψιν κυρίου τοῦ θεοῦ μου καὶ
συνήγαγον ἐκ τοῦ Ισραηλ ἄνδρας ὥστε συναναβῆναί μοι

28 καὶ οὗτοι οἱ προηγούμενοι κατὰ τὰς πατριὰς αὐτῶν καὶ τὰς μεριδαρχίας
οἱ ἀναβάντες μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ ἐκ Βαβυλῶνος ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ Ἀρταξέρξου τοῦ
βασιλέως

29 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Φινεες Γαρσομος ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Ιεταμαρου Γαμηλος ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν
Δαυιδ Αττους ὁ Σεχενιου

30 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Φορος Ζαχαριας καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀπὸ γραφῆς ἄνδρες ἑκατὸν
πεντήκοντα

31 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Φααθμωαβ Ελιαωνιας Ζαραιου καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες
διακόσιοι

32 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Ζαθοης Σεχενιας Ιεζηλου καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες τριακόσιοι
ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Αδινου Βην-Ιωναθου καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες διακόσιοι
πεντήκοντα

33 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Ηλαμ Ιεσιας Γοθολιου καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες ἑβδομήκοντα

34 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Σαφατιου Ζαραιας Μιχαηλου καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες
ἑβδομήκοντα

35 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Ιωαβ Αβαδιας Ιεζηλου καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες διακόσιοι δέκα
δύο

36 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Βανι Ασσαλιμωθ Ιωσαφιου καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες ἑκατὸν
ἑξήκοντα

37 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Βαβι Ζαχαριας Βηβαι καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες εἴκοσι ὀκτώ

38 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Ασγαθ Ιωανης Ακαταν καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες ἑκατὸν δέκα

39 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Αδωνικαμ οἱ ἔσχατοι καὶ ταῦτα τὰ ὀνόματα αὐτῶν Ελιφαλατος
Ιεουηλ καὶ Σαμαιας καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτῶν ἄνδρες ἑβδομήκοντα

40 ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Βαγο Ουθι ὁ τοῦ Ισταλκουρου καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄνδρες
ἑβδομήκοντα

41 καὶ συνήγαγον αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τὸν λεγόμενον Θεραν ποταμόν καὶ
παρενεβάλομεν αὐτόθι ἡμέρας τρεῖς καὶ κατέμαθον αὐτούς

42 καὶ ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν τῶν ἱερέων καὶ ἐκ τῶν Λευιτῶν οὐχ εὑρὼν ἐκεῖ

43 ἀπέστειλα πρὸς Ελεαζαρον καὶ Ιδουηλον καὶ Μαασμαν καὶ Ελναταν καὶ
Σαμαιαν καὶ Ιωριβον Ναθαν Ενναταν Ζαχαριαν καὶ Μεσολαμον τοὺς ἡγουμένους
καὶ ἐπιστήμονας

44 καὶ εἶπα αὐτοῖς ἐλθεῖν πρὸς Αδδαιον τὸν ἡγούμενον τὸν ἐν τῷ τόπῳ τοῦ
γαζοφυλακίου

45 ἐντειλάμενος αὐτοῖς διαλεγῆναι Αδδαιω καὶ τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς αὐτοῦ καὶ
τοῖς ἐν τῷ τόπῳ γαζοφύλαξιν ἀποστεῖλαι ἡμῖν τοὺς ἱερατεύσοντας ἐν τῷ
οἴκῳ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν

46 καὶ ἤγαγον ἡμῖν κατὰ τὴν κραταιὰν χεῖρα τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ἄνδρας
ἐπιστήμονας τῶν υἱῶν Μοολι τοῦ Λευι τοῦ Ισραηλ Ασεβηβιαν καὶ τοὺς υἱοὺς
καὶ τοὺς ἀδελφούς δέκα ὀκτώ

47 καὶ Ασεβιαν καὶ Αννουνον καὶ Ωσαιαν ἀδελφὸν ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Χανουναιου
καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ αὐτῶν ἄνδρες εἴκοσι

48 καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἱεροδούλων ὧν ἔδωκεν Δαυιδ καὶ οἱ ἡγούμενοι εἰς τὴν
ἐργασίαν τῶν Λευιτῶν ἱερόδουλοι διακόσιοι εἴκοσι πάντων ἐσημάνθη ἡ
ὀνοματογραφία

49 καὶ εὐξάμην ἐκεῖ νηστείαν τοῖς νεανίσκοις ἔναντι τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν

50 ζητῆσαι παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ εὐοδίαν ἡμῖν τε καὶ τοῖς συνοῦσιν ἡμῖν τέκνοις
ἡμῶν καὶ κτήνεσιν

51 ἐνετράπην γὰρ αἰτῆσαι τὸν βασιλέα πεζούς τε καὶ ἱππεῖς καὶ προπομπὴν
ἕνεκεν ἀσφαλείας τῆς πρὸς τοὺς ἐναντιουμένους ἡμῖν

52 εἴπαμεν γὰρ τῷ βασιλεῖ ὅτι ἰσχὺς τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ἔσται μετὰ τῶν
ἐπιζητούντων αὐτὸν εἰς πᾶσαν ἐπανόρθωσιν

53 καὶ πάλιν ἐδεήθημεν τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν κατὰ ταῦτα καὶ εὐιλάτου ἐτύχομεν

54 καὶ ἐχώρισα τῶν φυλάρχων τῶν ἱερέων ἄνδρας δέκα δύο καὶ Σερεβιαν καὶ
Ασαβιαν καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτῶν ἐκ τῶν ἀδελφῶν αὐτῶν ἄνδρας δέκα

55 καὶ ἔστησα αὐτοῖς τὸ ἀργύριον καὶ τὸ χρυσίον καὶ τὰ ἱερὰ σκεύη τοῦ
οἴκου τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ἃ αὐτὸς ἐδωρήσατο ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ οἱ σύμβουλοι
αὐτοῦ καὶ οἱ μεγιστᾶνες καὶ πᾶς Ισραηλ

56 καὶ στήσας παρέδωκα αὐτοῖς ἀργυρίου τάλαντα ἑξακόσια πεντήκοντα καὶ
σκεύη ἀργυρᾶ ταλάντων ἑκατὸν καὶ χρυσίου τάλαντα ἑκατὸν καὶ χρυσώματα
εἴκοσι καὶ σκεύη χαλκᾶ ἀπὸ χρηστοῦ χαλκοῦ στίλβοντα χρυσοειδῆ σκεύη
δώδεκα

57 καὶ εἶπα αὐτοῖς καὶ ὑμεῖς ἅγιοί ἐστε τῷ κυρίῳ καὶ τὰ σκεύη ἅγια καὶ
τὸ ἀργύριον καὶ τὸ χρυσίον εὐχὴ τῷ κυρίῳ κυρίῳ τῶν πατέρων ἡμῶν

58 ἀγρυπνεῖτε καὶ φυλάσσετε ἕως τοῦ παραδοῦναι αὐτὰ ὑμᾶς τοῖς φυλάρχοις
τῶν ἱερέων καὶ τῶν Λευιτῶν καὶ τοῖς ἡγουμένοις τῶν πατριῶν τοῦ Ισραηλ ἐν
Ιερουσαλημ ἐν τοῖς παστοφορίοις τοῦ οἴκου τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν

59 καὶ οἱ παραλαβόντες οἱ ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ Λευῖται τὸ ἀργύριον καὶ τὸ
χρυσίον καὶ τὰ σκεύη τὰ ἐν Ιερουσαλημ εἰσήνεγκαν εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ κυρίου

60 καὶ ἀναζεύξαντες ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ Θερα τῇ δωδεκάτῃ τοῦ πρώτου μηνὸς
εἰσήλθομεν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ κατὰ τὴν κραταιὰν χεῖρα τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν τὴν
ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν καὶ ἐρρύσατο ἡμᾶς ἐπὶ τῆς εἰσόδου ἀπὸ παντὸς ἐχθροῦ καὶ ἤλθομεν
εἰς Ιερουσαλημ

61 καὶ γενομένης αὐτόθι ἡμέρας τρίτης σταθὲν τὸ ἀργύριον καὶ τὸ χρυσίον
παρεδόθη ἐν τῷ οἴκῳ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν Μαρμωθι Ουρια ἱερεῖ

62 καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ Ελεαζαρ ὁ τοῦ Φινεες καὶ ἦσαν μετ᾽ αὐτῶν Ιωσαβδος
Ἰησοῦ καὶ Μωεθ Σαβαννου οἱ Λευῖται πρὸς ἀριθμὸν καὶ ὁλκὴν ἅπαντα καὶ
ἐγράφη πᾶσα ἡ ὁλκὴ αὐτῶν αὐτῇ τῇ ὥρᾳ

63 οἱ δὲ παραγενόμενοι ἐκ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας προσήνεγκαν θυσίας τῷ θεῷ τοῦ
Ισραηλ κυρίῳ ταύρους δώδεκα ὑπὲρ παντὸς Ισραηλ κριοὺς ἐνενήκοντα ἕξ
ἄρνας ἑβδομήκοντα δύο τράγους ὑπὲρ σωτηρίου δέκα δύο ἅπαντα θυσίαν τῷ
κυρίῳ

64 καὶ ἀπέδωκαν τὰ προστάγματα τοῦ βασιλέως τοῖς βασιλικοῖς οἰκονόμοις
καὶ τοῖς ἐπάρχοις Κοίλης Συρίας καὶ Φοινίκης καὶ ἐδόξασαν τὸ ἔθνος καὶ
τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ κυρίου

65 καὶ τούτων τελεσθέντων προσήλθοσάν μοι οἱ ἡγούμενοι λέγοντες

66 οὐκ ἐχώρισαν τὸ ἔθνος τοῦ Ισραηλ καὶ οἱ ἄρχοντες καὶ οἱ ἱερεῖς καὶ οἱ
Λευῖται τὰ ἀλλογενῆ ἔθνη τῆς γῆς καὶ τὰς ἀκαθαρσίας αὐτῶν Χαναναίων καὶ
Χετταίων καὶ Φερεζαίων καὶ Ιεβουσαίων καὶ Μωαβιτῶν καὶ Αἰγυπτίων καὶ
Ιδουμαίων

67 συνῴκησαν γὰρ μετὰ τῶν θυγατέρων αὐτῶν καὶ αὐτοὶ καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ αὐτῶν
καὶ ἐπεμίγη τὸ σπέρμα τὸ ἅγιον εἰς τὰ ἀλλογενῆ ἔθνη τῆς γῆς καὶ μετεῖχον
οἱ προηγούμενοι καὶ οἱ μεγιστᾶνες τῆς ἀνομίας ταύτης ἀπὸ τῆς ἀρχῆς τοῦ
πράγματος

68 καὶ ἅμα τῷ ἀκοῦσαί με ταῦτα διέρρηξα τὰ ἱμάτια καὶ τὴν ἱερὰν ἐσθῆτα
καὶ κατέτιλα τοῦ τριχώματος τῆς κεφαλῆς καὶ τοῦ πώγωνος καὶ ἐκάθισα
σύννους καὶ περίλυπος

69 καὶ ἐπισυνήχθησαν πρός με ὅσοι ποτὲ ἐπεκινοῦντο τῷ ῥήματι κυρίου τοῦ
Ισραηλ ἐμοῦ πενθοῦντος ἐπὶ τῇ ἀνομίᾳ καὶ ἐκαθήμην περίλυπος ἕως τῆς
δειλινῆς θυσίας

70 καὶ ἐξεγερθεὶς ἐκ τῆς νηστείας διερρηγμένα ἔχων τὰ ἱμάτια καὶ τὴν
ἱερὰν ἐσθῆτα κάμψας τὰ γόνατα καὶ ἐκτείνας τὰς χεῖρας πρὸς τὸν κύριον
ἔλεγον

71 κύριε ᾔσχυμμαι ἐντέτραμμαι κατὰ πρόσωπόν σου

72 αἱ γὰρ ἁμαρτίαι ἡμῶν ἐπλεόνασαν ὑπὲρ τὰς κεφαλὰς ἡμῶν αἱ δὲ ἄγνοιαι
ἡμῶν ὑπερήνεγκαν ἕως τοῦ οὐρανοῦ

73 ἀπὸ τῶν χρόνων τῶν πατέρων ἡμῶν καί ἐσμεν ἐν μεγάλῃ ἁμαρτίᾳ ἕως τῆς
ἡμέρας ταύτης

74 καὶ διὰ τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν καὶ τῶν πατέρων ἡμῶν παρεδόθημεν σὺν τοῖς
ἀδελφοῖς ἡμῶν καὶ σὺν τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν ἡμῶν καὶ σὺν τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν ἡμῶν
τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν τῆς γῆς εἰς ῥομφαίαν καὶ αἰχμαλωσίαν καὶ προνομὴν μετὰ
αἰσχύνης μέχρι τῆς σήμερον ἡμέρας

75 καὶ νῦν κατὰ πόσον τι ἐγενήθη ἡμῖν ἔλεος παρὰ σοῦ κύριε καταλειφθῆναι
ἡμῖν ῥίζαν καὶ ὄνομα ἐν τῷ τόπῳ τοῦ ἁγιάσματός σου

76 καὶ τοῦ ἀνακαλύψαι φωστῆρα ἡμῶν ἐν τῷ οἴκῳ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν δοῦναι
ἡμῖν τροφὴν ἐν τῷ καιρῷ τῆς δουλείας ἡμῶν

77 καὶ ἐν τῷ δουλεύειν ἡμᾶς οὐκ ἐγκατελείφθημεν ὑπὸ τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν ἀλλὰ
ἐποίησεν ἡμᾶς ἐν χάριτι ἐνώπιον τῶν βασιλέων Περσῶν

78 δοῦναι ἡμῖν τροφὴν καὶ δοξάσαι τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦ κυρίου ἡμῶν καὶ ἐγεῖραι
τὴν ἔρημον Σιων δοῦναι ἡμῖν στερέωμα ἐν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ καὶ Ιερουσαλημ

79 καὶ νῦν τί ἐροῦμεν κύριε ἔχοντες ταῦτα παρέβημεν γὰρ τὰ προστάγματά
σου ἃ ἔδωκας ἐν χειρὶ τῶν παίδων σου τῶν προφητῶν λέγων ὅτι

80 ἡ γῆ εἰς ἣν εἰσέρχεσθε κληρονομῆσαι ἔστιν γῆ μεμολυσμένη μολυσμῷ τῶν
ἀλλογενῶν τῆς γῆς καὶ τῆς ἀκαθαρσίας αὐτῶν ἐνέπλησαν αὐτήν

81 καὶ νῦν τὰς θυγατέρας ὑμῶν μὴ συνοικίσητε τοῖς υἱοῖς αὐτῶν καὶ τὰς
θυγατέρας αὐτῶν μὴ λάβητε τοῖς υἱοῖς ὑμῶν

82 καὶ οὐ ζητήσετε εἰρηνεῦσαι τὰ πρὸς αὐτοὺς τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον ἵνα
ἰσχύσαντες φάγητε τὰ ἀγαθὰ τῆς γῆς καὶ κατακληρονομήσητε τοῖς υἱοῖς ὑμῶν
ἕως αἰῶνος

83 καὶ τὰ συμβαίνοντα πάντα ἡμῖν γίγνεται διὰ τὰ ἔργα ἡμῶν τὰ πονηρὰ καὶ
τὰς μεγάλας ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν

84 σὺ γάρ κύριε ἐκούφισας τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν καὶ ἔδωκας ἡμῖν τοιαύτην
ῥίζαν πάλιν ἀνεκάμψαμεν παραβῆναι τὸν νόμον σου εἰς τὸ ἐπιμιγῆναι τῇ
ἀκαθαρσίᾳ τῶν ἐθνῶν τῆς γῆς

85 οὐχὶ ὠργίσθης ἡμῖν ἀπολέσαι ἡμᾶς ἕως τοῦ μὴ καταλιπεῖν ῥίζαν καὶ
σπέρμα καὶ ὄνομα ἡμῶν

86 κύριε τοῦ Ισραηλ ἀληθινὸς εἶ κατελείφθημεν γὰρ ῥίζα ἐν τῇ σήμερον

87 ἰδοὺ νῦν ἐσμεν ἐνώπιόν σου ἐν ταῖς ἀνομίαις ἡμῶν οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν στῆναι
ἔτι ἔμπροσθέν σου ἐπὶ τούτοις

88 καὶ ὅτε προσευχόμενος Εσδρας ἀνθωμολογεῖτο κλαίων χαμαιπετὴς
ἔμπροσθεν τοῦ ἱεροῦ ἐπισυνήχθησαν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀπὸ Ιερουσαλημ ὄχλος πολὺς
σφόδρα ἄνδρες καὶ γυναῖκες καὶ νεανίαι κλαυθμὸς γὰρ ἦν μέγας ἐν τῷ
πλήθει

89 καὶ φωνήσας Ιεχονιας Ιεηλου τῶν υἱῶν Ισραηλ εἶπεν Εσδρα ἡμεῖς
ἡμάρτομεν εἰς τὸν κύριον καὶ συνῳκίσαμεν γυναῖκας ἀλλογενεῖς ἐκ τῶν
ἐθνῶν τῆς γῆς καὶ νῦν ἐστιν ἐλπὶς τῷ Ισραηλ

90 ἐν τούτῳ γενέσθω ἡμῖν ὁρκωμοσία πρὸς τὸν κύριον ἐκβαλεῖν πάσας τὰς
γυναῖκας ἡμῶν τὰς ἐκ τῶν ἀλλογενῶν σὺν τοῖς τέκνοις αὐτῶν ὡς ἐκρίθη σοι
καὶ ὅσοι πειθαρχοῦσιν τῷ νόμῳ τοῦ κυρίου

91 ἀναστὰς ἐπιτέλει πρὸς σὲ γὰρ τὸ πρᾶγμα καὶ ἡμεῖς μετὰ σοῦ ἰσχὺν
ποιεῖν

92 καὶ ἀναστὰς Εσδρας ὥρκισεν τοὺς φυλάρχους τῶν ἱερέων καὶ Λευιτῶν
παντὸς τοῦ Ισραηλ ποιῆσαι κατὰ ταῦτα καὶ ὤμοσαν

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Esdras 9](es1009)
