[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Judith Index](jdt)  
  [Previous](jdt006)  [Next](jdt008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Judith 7

[Apo](../apo/jdt007)

1 The next day Holofernes commanded all his army, and all his people
which were come to take his part, that they should remove their camp
against Bethulia, to take aforehand the ascents of the hill country, and
to make war against the children of Israel.

2 Then their strong men removed their camps in that day, and the army of
the men of war was an hundred and seventy thousand footmen, and twelve
thousand horsemen, beside the baggage, and other men that were afoot
among them, a very great multitude.

3 And they camped in the valley near unto Bethulia, by the fountain, and
they spread themselves in breadth over Dothaim even to Belmaim, and in
length from Bethulia unto Cynamon, which is over against Esdraelon.

4 Now the children of Israel, when they saw the multitude of them, were
greatly troubled, and said every one to his neighbour, Now will these
men lick up the face of the earth; for neither the high mountains, nor
the valleys, nor the hills, are able to bear their weight.

5 Then every man took up his weapons of war, and when they had kindled
fires upon their towers, they remained and watched all that night.

6 But in the second day Holofernes brought forth all his horsemen in the
sight of the children of Israel which were in Bethulia,

7 And viewed the passages up to the city, and came to the fountains of
their waters, and took them, and set garrisons of men of war over them,
and he himself removed toward his people.

8 Then came unto him all the chief of the children of Esau, and all the
governors of the people of Moab, and the captains of the sea coast, and
said,

9 Let our lord now hear a word, that there be not an overthrow in thine
army.

10 For this people of the children of Israel do not trust in their
spears, but in the height of the mountains wherein they dwell, because
it is not easy to come up to the tops of their mountains.

11 Now therefore, my lord, fight not against them in battle array, and
there shall not so much as one man of thy people perish.

12 Remain in thy camp, and keep all the men of thine army, and let thy
servants get into their hands the fountain of water, which issueth forth
of the foot of the mountain:

13 For all the inhabitants of Bethulia have their water thence; so shall
thirst kill them, and they shall give up their city, and we and our
people shall go up to the tops of the mountains that are near, and will
camp upon them, to watch that none go out of the city.

14 So they and their wives and their children shall be consumed with
fire, and before the sword come against them, they shall be overthrown
in the streets where they dwell.

15 Thus shalt thou render them an evil reward; because they rebelled,
and met not thy person peaceably.

16 And these words pleased Holofernes and all his servants, and he
appointed to do as they had spoken.

17 So the camp of the children of Ammon departed, and with them five
thousand of the Assyrians, and they pitched in the valley, and took the
waters, and the fountains of the waters of the children of Israel.

18 Then the children of Esau went up with the children of Ammon, and
camped in the hill country over against Dothaim: and they sent some of
them toward the south, and toward the east over against Ekrebel, which
is near unto Chusi, that is upon the brook Mochmur; and the rest of the
army of the Assyrians camped in the plain, and covered the face of the
whole land; and their tents and carriages were pitched to a very great
multitude.

19 Then the children of Israel cried unto the Lord their God, because
their heart failed, for all their enemies had compassed them round
about, and there was no way to escape out from among them.

20 Thus all the company of Assur remained about them, both their
footmen, chariots, and horsemen, four and thirty days, so that all their
vessels of water failed all the inhibitants of Bethulia.

21 And the cisterns were emptied, and they had not water to drink their
fill for one day; for they gave them drink by measure.

22 Therefore their young children were out of heart, and their women and
young men fainted for thirst, and fell down in the streets of the city,
and by the passages of the gates, and there was no longer any strength
in them.

23 Then all the people assembled to Ozias, and to the chief of the city,
both young men, and women, and children, and cried with a loud voice,
and said before all the elders,

24 God be judge between us and you: for ye have done us great injury, in
that ye have not required peace of the children of Assur.

25 For now we have no helper: but God hath sold us into their hands,
that we should be thrown down before them with thirst and great
destruction.

26 Now therefore call them unto you, and deliver the whole city for a
spoil to the people of Holofernes, and to all his army.

27 For it is better for us to be made a spoil unto them, than to die for
thirst: for we will be his servants, that our souls may live, and not
see the death of our infants before our eyes, nor our wives nor our
children to die.

28 We take to witness against you the heaven and the earth, and our God
and Lord of our fathers, which punisheth us according to our sins and
the sins of our fathers, that he do not according as we have said this
day.

29 Then there was great weeping with one consent in the midst of the
assembly; and they cried unto the Lord God with a loud voice.

30 Then said Ozias to them, Brethren, be of good courage, let us yet
endure five days, in the which space the Lord our God may turn his mercy
toward us; for he will not forsake us utterly.

31 And if these days pass, and there come no help unto us, I will do
according to your word.

32 And he dispersed the people, every one to their own charge; and they
went unto the walls and towers of their city, and sent the women and
children into their houses: and they were very low brought in the city.

[Sep](../sep/jdt007)

1 τῇ δὲ ἐπαύριον παρήγγειλεν Ολοφέρνης πάσῃ τῇ στρατιᾷ αὐτοῦ καὶ παντὶ
τῷ λαῷ αὐτοῦ οἳ παρεγένοντο ἐπὶ τὴν συμμαχίαν αὐτοῦ ἀναζευγνύειν ἐπὶ
Βαιτυλουα καὶ τὰς ἀναβάσεις τῆς ὀρεινῆς προκαταλαμβάνεσθαι καὶ ποιεῖν
πόλεμον πρὸς τοὺς υἱοὺς Ισραηλ

2 καὶ ἀνέζευξεν ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ πᾶς ἀνὴρ δυνατὸς αὐτῶν καὶ ἡ δύναμις
αὐτῶν ἀνδρῶν πολεμιστῶν χιλιάδες πεζῶν ἑκατὸν ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ ἱππέων
χιλιάδες δέκα δύο χωρὶς τῆς ἀποσκευῆς καὶ τῶν ἀνδρῶν οἳ ἦσαν πεζοὶ ἐν
αὐτοῖς πλῆθος πολὺ σφόδρα

3 καὶ παρενέβαλον ἐν τῷ αὐλῶνι πλησίον Βαιτυλουα ἐπὶ τῆς πηγῆς καὶ
παρέτειναν εἰς εὖρος ἐπὶ Δωθαϊμ ἕως Βελβαιμ καὶ εἰς μῆκος ἀπὸ Βαιτυλουα
ἕως Κυαμωνος ἥ ἐστιν ἀπέναντι τοῦ Εσδρηλων

4 οἱ δὲ υἱοὶ Ισραηλ ὡς εἶδον αὐτῶν τὸ πλῆθος ἐταράχθησαν σφόδρα καὶ
εἶπαν ἕκαστος πρὸς τὸν πλησίον αὐτοῦ νῦν ἐκλείξουσιν οὗτοι τὸ πρόσωπον
τῆς γῆς πάσης καὶ οὔτε τὰ ὄρη τὰ ὑψηλὰ οὔτε αἱ φάραγγες οὔτε οἱ βουνοὶ
ὑποστήσονται τὸ βάρος αὐτῶν

5 καὶ ἀναλαβόντες ἕκαστος τὰ σκεύη τὰ πολεμικὰ αὐτῶν καὶ ἀνακαύσαντες
πυρὰς ἐπὶ τοὺς πύργους αὐτῶν ἔμενον φυλάσσοντες ὅλην τὴν νύκτα ἐκείνην

6 τῇ δὲ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ δευτέρᾳ ἐξήγαγεν Ολοφέρνης πᾶσαν τὴν ἵππον αὐτοῦ κατὰ
πρόσωπον τῶν υἱῶν Ισραηλ οἳ ἦσαν ἐν Βαιτυλουα

7 καὶ ἐπεσκέψατο τὰς ἀναβάσεις τῆς πόλεως αὐτῶν καὶ τὰς πηγὰς τῶν ὑδάτων
ἐφώδευσεν καὶ προκατελάβετο αὐτὰς καὶ ἐπέστησεν αὐταῖς παρεμβολὰς ἀνδρῶν
πολεμιστῶν καὶ αὐτὸς ἀνέζευξεν εἰς τὸν λαὸν αὐτοῦ

8 καὶ προσελθόντες αὐτῷ πάντες ἄρχοντες υἱῶν Ησαυ καὶ πάντες οἱ
ἡγούμενοι τοῦ λαοῦ Μωαβ καὶ οἱ στρατηγοὶ τῆς παραλίας εἶπαν

9 ἀκουσάτω δὴ λόγον ὁ δεσπότης ἡμῶν ἵνα μὴ γένηται θραῦσμα ἐν τῇ δυνάμει
σου

10 ὁ γὰρ λαὸς οὗτος τῶν υἱῶν Ισραηλ οὐ πέποιθαν ἐπὶ τοῖς δόρασιν αὐτῶν
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῖς ὕψεσι τῶν ὀρέων ἐν οἷς αὐτοὶ ἐνοικοῦσιν ἐν αὐτοῖς οὐ γάρ
ἐστιν εὐχερὲς προσβῆναι ταῖς κορυφαῖς τῶν ὀρέων αὐτῶν

11 καὶ νῦν δέσποτα μὴ πολέμει πρὸς αὐτοὺς καθὼς γίνεται πόλεμος
παρατάξεως καὶ οὐ πεσεῖται ἐκ τοῦ λαοῦ σου ἀνὴρ εἷς

12 ἀνάμεινον ἐπὶ τῆς παρεμβολῆς σου διαφυλάσσων πάντα ἄνδρα ἐκ τῆς
δυνάμεώς σου καὶ ἐπικρατησάτωσαν οἱ παῖδές σου τῆς πηγῆς τοῦ ὕδατος ἣ
ἐκπορεύεται ἐκ τῆς ῥίζης τοῦ ὄρους

13 διότι ἐκεῖθεν ὑδρεύονται πάντες οἱ κατοικοῦντες Βαιτυλουα καὶ ἀνελεῖ
αὐτοὺς ἡ δίψα καὶ ἐκδώσουσι τὴν πόλιν αὐτῶν καὶ ἡμεῖς καὶ ὁ λαὸς ἡμῶν
ἀναβησόμεθα ἐπὶ τὰς πλησίον κορυφὰς τῶν ὀρέων καὶ παρεμβαλοῦμεν ἐπ᾽
αὐταῖς εἰς προφυλακὴν τοῦ μὴ ἐξελθεῖν ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἄνδρα ἕνα

14 καὶ τακήσονται ἐν τῷ λιμῷ αὐτοὶ καὶ αἱ γυναῖκες αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ τέκνα
αὐτῶν καὶ πρὶν ἐλθεῖν τὴν ῥομφαίαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς καταστρωθήσονται ἐν ταῖς
πλατείαις τῆς οἰκήσεως αὐτῶν

15 καὶ ἀνταποδώσεις αὐτοῖς ἀνταπόδομα πονηρὸν ἀνθ᾽ ὧν ἐστασίασαν καὶ οὐκ
ἀπήντησαν τῷ προσώπῳ σου ἐν εἰρήνῃ

16 καὶ ἤρεσαν οἱ λόγοι αὐτῶν ἐνώπιον Ολοφέρνου καὶ ἐνώπιον πάντων τῶν
θεραπόντων αὐτοῦ καὶ συνέταξε ποιεῖν καθὰ ἐλάλησαν

17 καὶ ἀπῆρεν παρεμβολὴ υἱῶν Αμμων καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτῶν χιλιάδες πέντε υἱῶν
Ασσουρ καὶ παρενέβαλον ἐν τῷ αὐλῶνι καὶ προκατελάβοντο τὰ ὕδατα καὶ τὰς
πηγὰς τῶν ὑδάτων τῶν υἱῶν Ισραηλ

18 καὶ ἀνέβησαν οἱ υἱοὶ Ησαυ καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ Αμμων καὶ παρενέβαλον ἐν τῇ
ὀρεινῇ ἀπέναντι Δωθαϊμ καὶ ἀπέστειλαν ἐξ αὐτῶν πρὸς νότον καὶ ἀπηλιώτην
ἀπέναντι Εγρεβηλ ἥ ἐστιν πλησίον Χους ἥ ἐστιν ἐπὶ τοῦ χειμάρρου Μοχμουρ
καὶ ἡ λοιπὴ στρατιὰ τῶν Ἀσσυρίων παρενέβαλον ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ καὶ ἐκάλυψαν
πᾶν τὸ πρόσωπον τῆς γῆς καὶ αἱ σκηναὶ καὶ αἱ ἀπαρτίαι αὐτῶν
κατεστρατοπέδευσαν ἐν ὄχλῳ πολλῷ καὶ ἦσαν εἰς πλῆθος πολὺ σφόδρα

19 καὶ οἱ υἱοὶ Ισραηλ ἀνεβόησαν πρὸς κύριον θεὸν αὐτῶν ὅτι ὠλιγοψύχησεν
τὸ πνεῦμα αὐτῶν ὅτι ἐκύκλωσαν πάντες οἱ ἐχθροὶ αὐτῶν καὶ οὐκ ἦν
διαφυγεῖν ἐκ μέσου αὐτῶν

20 καὶ ἔμεινεν κύκλῳ αὐτῶν πᾶσα παρεμβολὴ Ασσουρ οἱ πεζοὶ καὶ ἅρματα καὶ
οἱ ἱππεῖς αὐτῶν ἡμέρας τριάκοντα τέσσαρας καὶ ἐξέλιπεν πάντας τοὺς
κατοικοῦντας Βαιτυλουα πάντα τὰ ἀγγεῖα αὐτῶν τῶν ὑδάτων

21 καὶ οἱ λάκκοι ἐξεκενοῦντο καὶ οὐκ εἶχον πιεῖν εἰς πλησμονὴν ὕδωρ
ἡμέραν μίαν ὅτι ἐν μέτρῳ ἐδίδοσαν αὐτοῖς πιεῖν

22 καὶ ἠθύμησεν τὰ νήπια αὐτῶν καὶ αἱ γυναῖκες καὶ οἱ νεανίσκοι ἐξέλιπον
ἀπὸ τῆς δίψης καὶ ἔπιπτον ἐν ταῖς πλατείαις τῆς πόλεως καὶ ἐν ταῖς
διόδοις τῶν πυλῶν καὶ οὐκ ἦν κραταίωσις ἔτι ἐν αὐτοῖς

23 καὶ ἐπισυνήχθησαν πᾶς ὁ λαὸς ἐπὶ Οζιαν καὶ τοὺς ἄρχοντας τῆς πόλεως
οἱ νεανίσκοι καὶ αἱ γυναῖκες καὶ τὰ παιδία καὶ ἀνεβόησαν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ καὶ
εἶπαν ἐναντίον πάντων τῶν πρεσβυτέρων

24 κρίναι ὁ θεὸς ἀνὰ μέσον ὑμῶν καὶ ἡμῶν ὅτι ἐποιήσατε ἐν ἡμῖν ἀδικίαν
μεγάλην οὐ λαλήσαντες εἰρηνικὰ μετὰ υἱῶν Ασσουρ

25 καὶ νῦν οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ βοηθὸς ἡμῶν ἀλλὰ πέπρακεν ἡμᾶς ὁ θεὸς εἰς τὰς
χεῖρας αὐτῶν τοῦ καταστρωθῆναι ἐναντίον αὐτῶν ἐν δίψῃ καὶ ἀπωλείᾳ μεγάλῃ

26 καὶ νῦν ἐπικαλέσασθε αὐτοὺς καὶ ἔκδοσθε τὴν πόλιν πᾶσαν εἰς προνομὴν
τῷ λαῷ Ολοφέρνου καὶ πάσῃ τῇ δυνάμει αὐτοῦ

27 κρεῖσσον γὰρ ἡμῖν γενηθῆναι αὐτοῖς εἰς διαρπαγήν ἐσόμεθα γὰρ εἰς
δούλους καὶ ζήσεται ἡ ψυχὴ ἡμῶν καὶ οὐκ ὀψόμεθα τὸν θάνατον τῶν νηπίων
ἡμῶν ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς ἡμῶν καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας καὶ τὰ τέκνα ἡμῶν ἐκλειπούσας
τὰς ψυχὰς αὐτῶν

28 μαρτυρόμεθα ὑμῖν τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν καὶ τὸν θεὸν ἡμῶν καὶ κύριον
τῶν πατέρων ἡμῶν ὃς ἐκδικεῖ ἡμᾶς κατὰ τὰς ἁμαρτίας ἡμῶν καὶ κατὰ τὰ
ἁμαρτήματα τῶν πατέρων ἡμῶν ἵνα μὴ ποιήσῃ κατὰ τὰ ῥήματα ταῦτα ἐν τῇ
ἡμέρᾳ τῇ σήμερον

29 καὶ ἐγένετο κλαυθμὸς μέγας ἐν μέσῳ τῆς ἐκκλησίας πάντων ὁμοθυμαδόν
καὶ ἐβόησαν πρὸς κύριον τὸν θεὸν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ

30 καὶ εἶπεν πρὸς αὐτοὺς Οζιας θαρσεῖτε ἀδελφοί διακαρτερήσωμεν ἔτι
πέντε ἡμέρας ἐν αἷς ἐπιστρέψει κύριος ὁ θεὸς ἡμῶν τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ ἐφ᾽
ἡμᾶς οὐ γὰρ ἐγκαταλείψει ἡμᾶς εἰς τέλος

31 ἐὰν δὲ διέλθωσιν αὗται καὶ μὴ ἔλθῃ ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς βοήθεια ποιήσω κατὰ τὰ
ῥήματα ὑμῶν

32 καὶ ἐσκόρπισεν τὸν λαὸν εἰς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ παρεμβολήν καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ τείχη
καὶ τοὺς πύργους τῆς πόλεως αὐτῶν ἀπῆλθον καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας καὶ τὰ τέκνα
εἰς τοὺς οἴκους αὐτῶν ἀπέστειλαν καὶ ἦσαν ἐν ταπεινώσει πολλῇ ἐν τῇ
πόλει

[Vul](../vul/jdt007)

1 Holofernes autem altera die præcepit exercitibus suis ut ascenderent
contra Bethuliam.

2 Erant autem pedites bellatorum centum viginti millia, et equites
viginti duo millia, præter præparationes virorum illorum quos
occupaverat captivitas, et abducti fuerant de provinciis et urbibus
universæ juventutis.

3 Omnes paraverunt se pariter ad pugnam contra filios Israël, et
venerunt per crepidinem montis usque ad apicem, qui respicit super
Dothain, a loco qui dicitur Belma usque ad Chelmon, qui est contra
Esdrelon.

4 Filii autem Israël, ut viderunt multitudinem illorum, prostraverunt se
super terram, mittentes cinerem super capita sua, unanimes orantes ut
Deus Israël misericordiam suam ostenderet super populum suum.

5 Et assumentes arma sua bellica, sederunt per loca quæ ad angusti
itineris tramitem dirigunt inter montosa, et erant custodientes ea tota
die et nocte.  

6 Porro Holofernes, dum circuit per gyrum, reperit quod fons qui
influebat, aquæductum illorum a parte australi extra civitatem
dirigeret: et incidi præcepit aquæductum illorum.

7 Erant tamen non longe a muris fontes, ex quibus furtim videbantur
haurire aquam ad refocillandum potius quam ad potandum.

8 Sed filii Ammon et Moab accesserunt ad Holofernem, dicentes: Filii
Israël non in lancea nec in sagitta confidunt, sed montes defendunt
illos, et muniunt illos colles in præcipitio constituti.

9 Ut ergo sine congressione pugnæ possis superare eos, pone custodes
fontium, ut non hauriant aquam ex eis, et sine gladio interficies eos,
vel certe fatigati tradent civitatem suam, quam putant in montibus
positam superari non posse.

10 Et placuerunt verba hæc coram Holoferne et coram satellitibus ejus,
et constituit per gyrum centenarios per singulos fontes.

11 Cumque ista custodia per dies viginti fuisset expleta, defecerunt
cisternæ et collectiones aquarum omnibus habitantibus Bethuliam, ita ut
non esset intra civitatem unde satiarentur vel una die, quoniam ad
mensuram dabatur populis aqua quotidie.  

12 Tunc ad Oziam congregati omnes viri feminæque, juvenes et parvuli,
omnes simul una voce

13 dixerunt: Judicet Deus inter nos et te, quoniam fecisti in nos mala,
nolens loqui pacifice cum Assyriis, et propter hoc vendidit nos Deus in
manibus eorum.

14 Et ideo non est qui adjuvet, cum prosternamur ante oculos eorum in
siti, et perditione magna.

15 Et nunc congregate universos qui in civitate sunt, ut sponte tradamus
nos omnes populo Holofernis.

16 Melius est enim ut captivi benedicamus Dominum viventes, quam
moriamur, et simus opprobrium omni carni, cum viderimus uxores nostras
et infantes nostros mori ante oculos nostros.

17 Contestamur hodie cælum et terram, et Deum patrum nostrorum, qui
ulciscitur nos secundum peccata nostra, ut jam tradatis civitatem in
manu militiæ Holofernis, et sit finis noster brevis in ore gladii, qui
longior efficitur in ariditate sitis.

18 Et cum hæc dixissent, factus est fletus et ululatus magnus in
ecclesia ab omnibus, et per multas horas una voce clamaverunt ad Deum,
dicentes:

19 Peccavimus cum patribus nostris: injuste egimus, iniquitatem fecimus.

20 Tu, quia pius es, miserere nostri, aut in tuo flagello vindica
iniquitates nostras, et noli tradere confitentes te populo qui ignorat
te,

21 ut non dicant inter gentes: Ubi est Deus eorum?

22 Et cum fatigati ex his clamoribus et his fletibus lassati siluissent,

23 exsurgens Ozias infusus lacrimis, dixit: Æquo animo estote, fratres,
et hos quinque dies expectemus a Domino misericordiam.

24 Forsitan enim indignationem suam abscindet, et dabit gloriam nomini
suo.

25 Si autem transactis quinque diebus non venerit adjutorium, faciemus
hæc verba quæ locuti estis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith 8](jdt008)
