[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1013)  [Next](ma1015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 14

[Apo](../apo/ma1014)

1 Now in the hundred threescore and twelfth year king Demetrius gathered
his forces together, and went into Media to get him help to fight
against Tryphone.

2 But when Arsaces, the king of Persia and Media, heard that Demetrius
was entered within his borders, he sent one of his princes to take him
alive:

3 Who went and smote the host of Demetrius, and took him, and brought
him to Arsaces, by whom he was put in ward.

4 As for the land of Judea, that was quiet all the days of Simon; for he
sought the good of his nation in such wise, as that evermore his
authority and honour pleased them well.

5 And as he was honourable in all his acts, so in this, that he took
Joppa for an haven, and made an entrance to the isles of the sea,

6 And enlarged the bounds of his nation, and recovered the country,

7 And gathered together a great number of captives, and had the dominion
of Gazera, and Bethsura, and the tower, out of the which he took all
uncleaness, neither was there any that resisted him.

8 Then did they till their ground in peace, and the earth gave her
increase, and the trees of the field their fruit.

9 The ancient men sat all in the streets, communing together of good
things, and the young men put on glorious and warlike apparel.

10 He provided victuals for the cities, and set in them all manner of
munition, so that his honourable name was renowned unto the end of the
world.

11 He made peace in the land, and Israel rejoiced with great joy:

12 For every man sat under his vine and his fig tree, and there was none
to fray them:

13 Neither was there any left in the land to fight against them: yea,
the kings themselves were overthrown in those days.

14 Moreover he strengthened all those of his people that were brought
low: the law he searched out; and every contemner of the law and wicked
person he took away.

15 He beautified the sanctuary, and multiplied vessels of the temple.

16 Now when it was heard at Rome, and as far as Sparta, that Jonathan
was dead, they were very sorry.

17 But as soon as they heard that his brother Simon was made high priest
in his stead, and ruled the country, and the cities therein:

18 They wrote unto him in tables of brass, to renew the friendship and
league which they had made with Judas and Jonathan his brethren:

19 Which writings were read before the congregation at Jerusalem.

20 And this is the copy of the letters that the Lacedemonians sent; The
rulers of the Lacedemonians, with the city, unto Simon the high priest,
and the elders, and priests, and residue of the people of the Jews, our
brethren, send greeting:

21 The ambassadors that were sent unto our people certified us of your
glory and honour: wherefore we were glad of their coming,

22 And did register the things that they spake in the council of the
people in this manner; Numenius son of Antiochus, and Antipater son of
Jason, the Jews' ambassadors, came unto us to renew the friendship they
had with us.

23 And it pleased the people to entertain the men honourably, and to put
the copy of their ambassage in publick records, to the end the people of
the Lacedemonians might have a memorial thereof: furthermore we have
written a copy thereof unto Simon the high priest.

24 After this Simon sent Numenius to Rome with a great shield of gold of
a thousand pound weight to confirm the league with them.

25 Whereof when the people heard, they said, What thanks shall we give
to Simon and his sons?

26 For he and his brethren and the house of his father have established
Israel, and chased away in fight their enemies from them, and confirmed
their liberty.

27 So then they wrote it in tables of brass, which they set upon pillars
in mount Sion: and this is the copy of the writing; The eighteenth day
of the month Elul, in the hundred threescore and twelfth year, being the
third year of Simon the high priest,

28 At Saramel in the great congregation of the priests, and people, and
rulers of the nation, and elders of the country, were these things
notified unto us.

29 Forasmuch as oftentimes there have been wars in the country, wherein
for the maintenance of their sanctuary, and the law, Simon the son of
Mattathias, of the posterity of Jarib, together with his brethren, put
themselves in jeopardy, and resisting the enemies of their nation did
their nation great honour:

30 (For after that Jonathan, having gathered his nation together, and
been their high priest, was added to his people,

31 Their enemies prepared to invade their country, that they might
destroy it, and lay hands on the sanctuary:

32 At which time Simon rose up, and fought for his nation, and spent
much of his own substance, and armed the valiant men of his nation and
gave them wages,

33 And fortified the cities of Judea, together with Bethsura, that lieth
upon the borders of Judea, where the armour of the enemies had been
before; but he set a garrison of Jews there:

34 Moreover he fortified Joppa, which lieth upon the sea, and Gazera,
that bordereth upon Azotus, where the enemies had dwelt before: but he
placed Jews there, and furnished them with all things convenient for the
reparation thereof.)

35 The people therefore sang the acts of Simon, and unto what glory he
thought to bring his nation, made him their governor and chief priest,
because he had done all these things, and for the justice and faith
which he kept to his nation, and for that he sought by all means to
exalt his people.

36 For in his time things prospered in his hands, so that the heathen
were taken out of their country, and they also that were in the city of
David in Jerusalem, who had made themselves a tower, out of which they
issued, and polluted all about the sanctuary, and did much hurt in the
holy place:

37 But he placed Jews therein. and fortified it for the safety of the
country and the city, and raised up the walls of Jerusalem.

38 King Demetrius also confirmed him in the high priesthood according to
those things,

39 And made him one of his friends, and honoured him with great honour.

40 For he had heard say, that the Romans had called the Jews their
friends and confederates and brethren; and that they had entertained the
ambassadors of Simon honourably;

41 Also that the Jews and priests were well pleased that Simon should be
their governor and high priest for ever, until there should arise a
faithful prophet;

42 Moreover that he should be their captain, and should take charge of
the sanctuary, to set them over their works, and over the country, and
over the armour, and over the fortresses, that, I say, he should take
charge of the sanctuary;

43 Beside this, that he should be obeyed of every man, and that all the
writings in the country should be made in his name, and that he should
be clothed in purple, and wear gold:

44 Also that it should be lawful for none of the people or priests to
break any of these things, or to gainsay his words, or to gather an
assembly in the country without him, or to be clothed in purple, or wear
a buckle of gold;

45 And whosoever should do otherwise, or break any of these things, he
should be punished.

46 Thus it liked all the people to deal with Simon, and to do as hath
been said.

47 Then Simon accepted hereof, and was well pleased to be high priest,
and captain and governor of the Jews and priests, and to defend them
all.

48 So they commanded that this writing should be put in tables of brass,
and that they should be set up within the compass of the sanctuary in a
conspicuous place;

49 Also that the copies thereof should be laid up in the treasury, to
the end that Simon and his sons might have them.

[Sep](../sep/ma1014)

1 καὶ ἐν ἔτει δευτέρῳ καὶ ἑβδομηκοστῷ καὶ ἑκατοστῷ συνήγαγεν Δημήτριος ὁ
βασιλεὺς τὰς δυνάμεις αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπορεύθη εἰς Μηδίαν τοῦ ἐπισπάσασθαι
βοήθειαν ἑαυτῷ ὅπως πολεμήσῃ τὸν Τρύφωνα

2 καὶ ἤκουσεν Ἀρσάκης ὁ βασιλεὺς τῆς Περσίδος καὶ Μηδίας ὅτι εἰσῆλθεν
Δημήτριος εἰς τὰ ὅρια αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀπέστειλεν ἕνα τῶν ἀρχόντων αὐτοῦ
συλλαβεῖν αὐτὸν ζῶντα

3 καὶ ἐπορεύθη καὶ ἐπάταξεν τὴν παρεμβολὴν Δημητρίου καὶ συνέλαβεν αὐτὸν
καὶ ἤγαγεν αὐτὸν πρὸς Ἀρσάκην καὶ ἔθετο αὐτὸν ἐν φυλακῇ

4 καὶ ἡσύχασεν ἡ γῆ Ιουδα πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας Σιμωνος καὶ ἐζήτησεν ἀγαθὰ τῷ
ἔθνει αὐτοῦ καὶ ἤρεσεν αὐτοῖς ἡ ἐξουσία αὐτοῦ καὶ ἡ δόξα αὐτοῦ πάσας τὰς
ἡμέρας

5 καὶ μετὰ πάσης τῆς δόξης αὐτοῦ ἔλαβεν τὴν Ιοππην εἰς λιμένα καὶ
ἐποίησεν εἴσοδον ταῖς νήσοις τῆς θαλάσσης

6 καὶ ἐπλάτυνεν τὰ ὅρια τῷ ἔθνει αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐκράτησεν τῆς χώρας

7 καὶ συνήγαγεν αἰχμαλωσίαν πολλὴν καὶ ἐκυρίευσεν Γαζαρων καὶ Βαιθσουρων
καὶ τῆς ἄκρας καὶ ἐξῆρεν τὰς ἀκαθαρσίας ἐξ αὐτῆς καὶ οὐκ ἦν ὁ
ἀντικείμενος αὐτῷ

8 καὶ ἦσαν γεωργοῦντες τὴν γῆν αὐτῶν μετ᾽ εἰρήνης καὶ ἡ γῆ ἐδίδου τὰ
γενήματα αὐτῆς καὶ τὰ ξύλα τῶν πεδίων τὸν καρπὸν αὐτῶν

9 πρεσβύτεροι ἐν ταῖς πλατείαις ἐκάθηντο πάντες περὶ ἀγαθῶν
ἐκοινολογοῦντο καὶ οἱ νεανίσκοι ἐνεδύσαντο δόξας καὶ στολὰς πολέμου

10 ταῖς πόλεσιν ἐχορήγησεν βρώματα καὶ ἔταξεν αὐτὰς ἐν σκεύεσιν
ὀχυρώσεως ἕως ὅτου ὠνομάσθη τὸ ὄνομα τῆς δόξης αὐτοῦ ἕως ἄκρου γῆς

11 ἐποίησεν εἰρήνην ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς καὶ εὐφράνθη Ισραηλ εὐφροσύνην μεγάλην

12 καὶ ἐκάθισεν ἕκαστος ὑπὸ τὴν ἄμπελον αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν συκῆν αὐτοῦ καὶ
οὐκ ἦν ὁ ἐκφοβῶν αὐτούς

13 καὶ ἐξέλιπεν πολεμῶν αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς καὶ οἱ βασιλεῖς συνετρίβησαν
ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις

14 καὶ ἐστήρισεν πάντας τοὺς ταπεινοὺς τοῦ λαοῦ αὐτοῦ τὸν νόμον
ἐξεζήτησεν καὶ ἐξῆρεν πάντα ἄνομον καὶ πονηρόν

15 τὰ ἅγια ἐδόξασεν καὶ ἐπλήθυνεν τὰ σκεύη τῶν ἁγίων

16 καὶ ἠκούσθη ἐν Ῥώμῃ ὅτι ἀπέθανεν Ιωναθαν καὶ ἕως Σπάρτης καὶ
ἐλυπήθησαν σφόδρα

17 ὡς δὲ ἤκουσαν ὅτι Σιμων ὁ ἀδελφὸς αὐτοῦ γέγονεν ἀρχιερεὺς ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ
καὶ αὐτὸς ἐπικρατεῖ τῆς χώρας καὶ τῶν πόλεων τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ

18 ἔγραψαν πρὸς αὐτὸν δέλτοις χαλκαῖς τοῦ ἀνανεώσασθαι πρὸς αὐτὸν φιλίαν
καὶ συμμαχίαν ἣν ἔστησαν πρὸς Ιουδαν καὶ Ιωναθαν τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς αὐτοῦ

19 καὶ ἀνεγνώσθησαν ἐνώπιον τῆς ἐκκλησίας ἐν Ιερουσαλημ

20 καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἀντίγραφον τῶν ἐπιστολῶν ὧν ἀπέστειλαν οἱ Σπαρτιᾶται
Σπαρτιατῶν ἄρχοντες καὶ ἡ πόλις Σιμωνι ἱερεῖ μεγάλῳ καὶ τοῖς
πρεσβυτέροις καὶ τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν καὶ τῷ λοιπῷ δήμῳ τῶν Ιουδαίων ἀδελφοῖς
χαίρειν

21 οἱ πρεσβευταὶ οἱ ἀποσταλέντες πρὸς τὸν δῆμον ἡμῶν ἀπήγγειλαν ἡμῖν
περὶ τῆς δόξης ὑμῶν καὶ τιμῆς καὶ ηὐφράνθημεν ἐπὶ τῇ ἐφόδῳ αὐτῶν

22 καὶ ἀνεγράψαμεν τὰ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν εἰρημένα ἐν ταῖς βουλαῖς τοῦ δήμου οὕτως
Νουμήνιος Ἀντιόχου καὶ Ἀντίπατρος Ἰάσονος πρεσβευταὶ Ιουδαίων ἦλθον πρὸς
ἡμᾶς ἀνανεούμενοι τὴν πρὸς ἡμᾶς φιλίαν

23 καὶ ἤρεσεν τῷ δήμῳ ἐπιδέξασθαι τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐνδόξως καὶ τοῦ θέσθαι τὸ
ἀντίγραφον τῶν λόγων αὐτῶν ἐν τοῖς ἀποδεδειγμένοις τῷ δήμῳ βιβλίοις τοῦ
μνημόσυνον ἔχειν τὸν δῆμον τῶν Σπαρτιατῶν τὸ δὲ ἀντίγραφον τούτων
ἔγραψαν Σιμωνι τῷ ἀρχιερεῖ

24 μετὰ ταῦτα ἀπέστειλεν Σιμων τὸν Νουμήνιον εἰς Ῥώμην ἔχοντα ἀσπίδα
χρυσῆν μεγάλην ὁλκὴν μνῶν χιλίων εἰς τὸ στῆσαι πρὸς αὐτοὺς τὴν συμμαχίαν

25 ὡς δὲ ἤκουσεν ὁ δῆμος τῶν λόγων τούτων εἶπαν τίνα χάριν ἀποδώσομεν
Σιμωνι καὶ τοῖς υἱοῖς αὐτοῦ

26 ἐστήρισεν γὰρ αὐτὸς καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ ὁ οἶκος τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ
καὶ ἐπολέμησεν τοὺς ἐχθροὺς Ισραηλ ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ ἔστησαν αὐτῷ ἐλευθερίαν
καὶ κατέγραψαν ἐν δέλτοις χαλκαῖς καὶ ἔθεντο ἐν στήλαις ἐν ὄρει Σιων

27 καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἀντίγραφον τῆς γραφῆς ὀκτωκαιδεκάτῃ Ελουλ ἔτους δευτέρου
καὶ ἑβδομηκοστοῦ καὶ ἑκατοστοῦ καὶ τοῦτο τρίτον ἔτος ἐπὶ Σιμωνος
ἀρχιερέως μεγάλου ἐν ασαραμελ

28 ἐπὶ συναγωγῆς μεγάλης ἱερέων καὶ λαοῦ καὶ ἀρχόντων ἔθνους καὶ τῶν
πρεσβυτέρων τῆς χώρας ἐγνώρισεν ἡμῖν

29 ἐπεὶ πολλάκις ἐγενήθησαν πόλεμοι ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ Σιμων δὲ υἱὸς Ματταθιου
ἱερεὺς τῶν υἱῶν Ιωαριβ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ ἔδωκαν αὑτοὺς τῷ κινδύνῳ καὶ
ἀντέστησαν τοῖς ὑπεναντίοις τοῦ ἔθνους αὐτῶν ὅπως σταθῇ τὰ ἅγια αὐτῶν
καὶ ὁ νόμος καὶ δόξῃ μεγάλῃ ἐδόξασαν τὸ ἔθνος αὐτῶν

30 καὶ ἤθροισεν Ιωναθαν τὸ ἔθνος αὐτῶν καὶ ἐγενήθη αὐτοῖς ἀρχιερεὺς καὶ
προσετέθη πρὸς τὸν λαὸν αὐτοῦ

31 καὶ ἐβουλήθησαν οἱ ἐχθροὶ αὐτῶν ἐμβατεῦσαι εἰς τὴν χώραν αὐτῶν καὶ
ἐκτεῖναι χεῖρας ἐπὶ τὰ ἅγια αὐτῶν

32 τότε ἀντέστη Σιμων καὶ ἐπολέμησε περὶ τοῦ ἔθνους αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐδαπάνησεν
χρήματα πολλὰ τῶν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ ὁπλοδότησεν τοὺς ἄνδρας τῆς δυνάμεως τοῦ
ἔθνους αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ὀψώνια

33 καὶ ὠχύρωσεν τὰς πόλεις τῆς Ιουδαίας καὶ τὴν Βαιθσουραν τὴν ἐπὶ τῶν
ὁρίων τῆς Ιουδαίας οὗ ἦν τὰ ὅπλα τῶν πολεμίων τὸ πρότερον καὶ ἔθετο ἐκεῖ
φρουρὰν ἄνδρας Ιουδαίους

34 καὶ Ιοππην ὠχύρωσεν τὴν ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης καὶ τὴν Γαζαραν τὴν ἐπὶ τῶν
ὁρίων Ἀζώτου ἐν ᾗ ᾤκουν οἱ πολέμιοι τὸ πρότερον καὶ κατῴκισεν ἐκεῖ
Ιουδαίους καὶ ὅσα ἐπιτήδεια ἦν πρὸς τῇ τούτων ἐπανορθώσει ἔθετο ἐν
αὐτοῖς

35 καὶ εἶδεν ὁ λαὸς τὴν πίστιν τοῦ Σιμωνος καὶ τὴν δόξαν ἣν ἐβουλεύσατο
ποιῆσαι τῷ ἔθνει αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔθεντο αὐτὸν ἡγούμενον αὐτῶν καὶ ἀρχιερέα διὰ
τὸ αὐτὸν πεποιηκέναι πάντα ταῦτα καὶ τὴν δικαιοσύνην καὶ τὴν πίστιν ἣν
συνετήρησεν τῷ ἔθνει αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐξεζήτησεν παντὶ τρόπῳ ὑψῶσαι τὸν λαὸν
αὐτοῦ

36 καὶ ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις αὐτοῦ εὐοδώθη ἐν ταῖς χερσὶν αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἐξαρθῆναι
τὰ ἔθνη ἐκ τῆς χώρας αὐτῶν καὶ τοὺς ἐν τῇ πόλει Δαυιδ τοὺς ἐν Ιερουσαλημ
οἳ ἐποίησαν αὑτοῖς ἄκραν ἐξ ἧς ἐξεπορεύοντο καὶ ἐμίαινον κύκλῳ τῶν ἁγίων
καὶ ἐποίουν πληγὴν μεγάλην ἐν τῇ ἁγνείᾳ

37 καὶ κατῴκισεν ἐν αὐτῇ ἄνδρας Ιουδαίους καὶ ὠχύρωσεν αὐτὴν πρὸς
ἀσφάλειαν τῆς χώρας καὶ τῆς πόλεως καὶ ὕψωσεν τὰ τείχη τῆς Ιερουσαλημ

38 καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς Δημήτριος ἔστησεν αὐτῷ τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην κατὰ ταῦτα

39 καὶ ἐποίησεν αὐτὸν τῶν φίλων αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐδόξασεν αὐτὸν δόξῃ μεγάλῃ

40 ἤκουσεν γὰρ ὅτι προσηγόρευνται οἱ Ιουδαῖοι ὑπὸ Ῥωμαίων φίλοι καὶ
σύμμαχοι καὶ ἀδελφοί καὶ ὅτι ἀπήντησαν τοῖς πρεσβευταῖς Σιμωνος ἐνδόξως

41 καὶ ὅτι οἱ Ιουδαῖοι καὶ οἱ ἱερεῖς εὐδόκησαν τοῦ εἶναι αὐτῶν Σιμωνα
ἡγούμενον καὶ ἀρχιερέα εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα ἕως τοῦ ἀναστῆναι προφήτην πιστὸν

42 καὶ τοῦ εἶναι ἐπ᾽ αὐτῶν στρατηγόν καὶ ὅπως μέλῃ αὐτῷ περὶ τῶν ἁγίων
καθιστάναι δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τῶν ἔργων αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς χώρας καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν
ὅπλων καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ὀχυρωμάτων

43 καὶ ὅπως μέλῃ αὐτῷ περὶ τῶν ἁγίων καὶ ὅπως ἀκούηται ὑπὸ πάντων καὶ
ὅπως γράφωνται ἐπὶ τῷ ὀνόματι αὐτοῦ πᾶσαι συγγραφαὶ ἐν τῇ χώρᾳ καὶ ὅπως
περιβάλληται πορφύραν καὶ χρυσοφορῇ

44 καὶ οὐκ ἐξέσται οὐθενὶ τοῦ λαοῦ καὶ τῶν ἱερέων ἀθετῆσαί τι τούτων καὶ
ἀντειπεῖν τοῖς ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ῥηθησομένοις καὶ ἐπισυστρέψαι συστροφὴν ἐν τῇ
χώρᾳ ἄνευ αὐτοῦ καὶ περιβάλλεσθαι πορφύραν καὶ ἐμπορποῦσθαι πόρπην
χρυσῆν

45 ὃς δ᾽ ἂν παρὰ ταῦτα ποιήσῃ ἢ ἀθετήσῃ τι τούτων ἔνοχος ἔσται

46 καὶ εὐδόκησεν πᾶς ὁ λαὸς θέσθαι Σιμωνι ποιῆσαι κατὰ τοὺς λόγους
τούτους

47 καὶ ἐπεδέξατο Σιμων καὶ εὐδόκησεν ἀρχιερατεύειν καὶ εἶναι στρατηγὸς
καὶ ἐθνάρχης τῶν Ιουδαίων καὶ ἱερέων καὶ τοῦ προστατῆσαι πάντων

48 καὶ τὴν γραφὴν ταύτην εἶπον θέσθαι ἐν δέλτοις χαλκαῖς καὶ στῆσαι
αὐτὰς ἐν περιβόλῳ τῶν ἁγίων ἐν τόπῳ ἐπισήμῳ

49 τὰ δὲ ἀντίγραφα αὐτῶν θέσθαι ἐν τῷ γαζοφυλακίῳ ὅπως ἔχῃ Σιμων καὶ οἱ
υἱοὶ αὐτοῦ

[Vul](../vul/ma1014)

1 Anno centesimo septuagesimo secundo, congregavit rex Demetrius
exercitum suum, et abiit in Mediam ad contrahenda sibi auxilia, ut
expugnaret Tryphonem.

2 Et audivit Arsaces rex Persidis et Mediæ, quia intravit Demetrius
confines suos: et misit unum de principibus suis ut comprehenderet eum
vivum, et adduceret eum ad se.

3 Et abiit, et percussit castra Demetrii: et comprehendit eum, et duxit
eum ad Arsacem, et posuit eum in custodiam.

4 Et siluit omnis terra Juda omnibus diebus Simonis, et quæsivit bona
genti suæ: et placuit illis potestas ejus et gloria ejus omnibus diebus.

5 Et cum omni gloria sua accepit Joppen in portum, et fecit introitum in
insulis maris.

6 Et dilatavit fines gentis suæ, et obtinuit regionem.

7 Et congregavit captivitatem multam, et dominatus est Gazaræ, et
Bethsuræ, et arci: et abstulit immunditias ex ea, et non erat qui
resisteret ei.

8 Et unusquisque colebat terram suam cum pace: et terra Juda dabat
fructus suos, et ligna camporum fructum suum.

9 Seniores in plateis sedebant omnes, et de bonis terræ tractabant, et
juvenes induebant se gloriam, et stolas belli.

10 Et civitatibus tribuebat alimonias, et constituebat eas ut essent
vasa munitionis quoadusque nominatum est nomen gloriæ ejus usque ad
extremum terræ.

11 Fecit pacem super terram, et lætatus est Israël lætitia magna.

12 Et sedit unusquisque sub vite sua, et sub ficulnea sua: et non erat
qui eos terreret.

13 Defecit impugnans eos super terram: reges contriti sunt in diebus
illis.

14 Et confirmavit omnes humiles populi sui, et legem exquisivit, et
abstulit omnem iniquum et malum:

15 sancta glorificavit, et multiplicavit vasa sanctorum.  

16 Et auditum est Romæ quia defunctus esset Jonathas, et usque in
Spartiatas: et contristati sunt valde.

17 Ut audierunt autem quod Simon frater ejus factus esset summus
sacerdos loco ejus, et ipse obtineret omnem regionem, et civitates in
ea,

18 scripserunt ad eum in tabulis æreis, ut renovarent amicitias et
societatem quam fecerant cum Juda et cum Jonatha, fratribus ejus.

19 Et lectæ sunt in conspectu ecclesiæ in Jerusalem. Et hoc exemplum
epistolarum, quas Spartiatæ miserunt:

20 Spartianorum principes et civitates, Simoni sacerdoti magno, et
senioribus, et sacerdotibus, et reliquo populo Judæorum, fratribus,
salutem.

21 Legati, qui missi sunt ad populum nostrum, nuntiaverunt nobis de
vestra gloria, et honore, ac lætitia: et gavisi sumus in introitu eorum.

22 Et scripsimus quæ ab eis erant dicta in conciliis populi, sic:
Numenius Antiochi, et Antipater Jasonis filius, legati Judæorum,
venerunt ad nos, renovantes nobiscum amicitiam pristinam.

23 Et placuit populo excipere viros gloriose, et ponere exemplum
sermonum eorum in segregatis populi libris, ut sit ad memoriam populo
Spartiatarum. Exemplum autem horum scripsimus Simoni magno sacerdoti.

24 Post hæc autem misit Simon Numenium Romam, habentem clypeum aureum
magnum, pondo mnarum mille, ad statuendam cum eis societatem.  
Cum autem audisset populus Romanus

25 sermones istos, dixerunt: Quam gratiarum actionem reddemus Simoni, et
filiis ejus?

26 restituit enim ipse fratres suos, et expugnavit inimicos Israël ab
eis, et statuerunt ei libertatem, et descripserunt in tabulis æreis, et
posuerunt in titulis in monte Sion.

27 Et hoc est exemplum scripturæ: Octavadecima die mensis Elul, anno
centesimo septuagesimo secundo, anno tertio sub Simone sacerdote magno
in Asaramel,

28 in conventu magno sacerdotum, et populi, et principum gentis, et
seniorum regionis, nota facta sunt hæc: quoniam frequenter facta sunt
prælia in regione nostra,

29 Simon autem Mathathiæ filius, ex filiis Jarib, et fratres ejus,
dederunt se periculo, et restiterunt adversariis gentis suæ, ut starent
sancta ipsorum, et lex: et gloria magna glorificaverunt gentem suam.

30 Et congregavit Jonathas gentem suam, et factus est illis sacerdos
magnus, et appositus est ad populum suum.

31 Et voluerunt inimici eorum calcare et atterere regionem ipsorum, et
extendere manus in sancta eorum.

32 Tunc restitit Simon, et pugnavit pro gente sua, et erogavit pecunias
multas, et armavit viros virtutis gentis suæ, et dedit illis stipendia:

33 et munivit civitates Judææ, et Bethsuram, quæ erat in finibus Judææ,
ubi erant arma hostium antea: et posuit illic præsidium viros Judæos.

34 Et Joppen munivit, quæ erat ad mare, et Gazaram, quæ est in finibus
Azoti, in qua hostes antea habitabant: et collocavit illic Judæos, et
quæcumque apta erant ad correptionem eorum, posuit in eis.

35 Et vidit populus actum Simonis, et gloriam quam cogitabat facere
genti suæ, et posuerunt eum ducem suum, et principem sacerdotum, eo quod
ipse fecerat hæc omnia, et justitiam, et fidem, quam conservavit genti
suæ, et exquisivit omni modo exaltare populum suum.

36 Et in diebus ejus prosperatum est in manibus ejus, ut tollerentur
gentes de regione ipsorum, et qui in civitate David erant, in Jerusalem
in arce, de qua procedebant, et contaminabant omnia quæ in circuitu
sanctorum sunt, et inferebant plagam magnam castitati:

37 et collocavit in ea viros Judæos ad tutamentum regionis, et
civitatis, et exaltavit muros Jerusalem.

38 Et rex Demetrius statuit illi summum sacerdotium.

39 Secundum hæc fecit eum amicum suum, et glorificavit eum gloria magna.

40 Audivit enim quod appellati sunt Judæi a Romanis amici, et socii, et
fratres, et quia susceperunt legatos Simonis gloriose,

41 et quia Judæi et sacerdotes eorum consenserunt eum esse ducem suum,
et summum sacerdotem in æternum, donec surgat propheta fidelis:

42 et ut sit super eos dux, et ut cura esset illi pro sanctis, et ut
constitueret præpositos super opera eorum, et super regionem, et super
arma, et super præsidia:

43 et cura sit illi de sanctis: et ut audiatur ab omnibus, et scribantur
in nomine ejus omnes conscriptiones in regione: et ut operiatur purpura
et auro:

44 et ne liceat ulli ex populo et ex sacerdotibus irritum facere aliquid
horum, et contradicere his quæ ab eo dicuntur, aut convocare conventum
in regione sine ipso, et vestiri purpura, et uti fibula aurea:

45 qui autem fecerit extra hæc, aut irritum fecerit aliquid horum, reus
erit.

46 Et complacuit omni populo statuere Simonem, et facere secundum verba
ista.

47 Et suscepit Simon, et placuit ei ut summo sacerdotio fungeretur, et
esset dux et princeps gentis Judæorum, et sacerdotum, et præesset
omnibus.

48 Et scripturam istam dixerunt ponere in tabulis æreis, et ponere eas
in peribolo sanctorum, in loco celebri:

49 exemplum autem eorum ponere in ærario, ut habeat Simon, et filii
ejus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 15](ma1015)
