[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1008)  [Next](ma1010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 9

[Apo](../apo/ma1009)

1 Furthermore, when Demetrius heard the Nicanor and his host were slain
in battle, he sent Bacchides and Alcimus into the land of Judea the
second time, and with them the chief strength of his host:

2 Who went forth by the way that leadeth to Galgala, and pitched their
tents before Masaloth, which is in Arbela, and after they had won it,
they slew much people.

3 Also the first month of the hundred fifty and second year they
encamped before Jerusalem:

4 From whence they removed, and went to Berea, with twenty thousand
footmen and two thousand horsemen.

5 Now Judas had pitched his tents at Eleasa, and three thousand chosen
men with him:

6 Who seeing the multitude of the other army to he so great were sore
afraid; whereupon many conveyed themselves out of the host, insomuch as
abode of them no more but eight hundred men.

7 When Judas therefore saw that his host slipt away, and that the battle
pressed upon him, he was sore troubled in mind, and much distressed, for
that he had no time to gather them together.

8 Nevertheless unto them that remained he said, Let us arise and go up
against our enemies, if peradventure we may be able to fight with them.

9 But they dehorted him, saying, We shall never be able: let us now
rather save our lives, and hereafter we will return with our brethren,
and fight against them: for we are but few.

10 Then Judas said, God forbid that I should do this thing, and flee
away from them: if our time be come, let us die manfully for our
brethren, and let us not stain our honour.

11 With that the host of Bacchides removed out of their tents, and stood
over against them, their horsemen being divided into two troops, and
their slingers and archers going before the host and they that marched
in the foreward were all mighty men.

12 As for Bacchides, he was in the right wing: so the host drew near on
the two parts, and sounded their trumpets.

13 They also of Judas' side, even they sounded their trumpets also, so
that the earth shook at the noise of the armies, and the battle
continued from morning till night.

14 Now when Judas perceived that Bacchides and the strength of his army
were on the right side, he took with him all the hardy men,

15 Who discomfited the right wing, and pursued them unto the mount
Azotus.

16 But when they of the left wing saw that they of the right wing were
discomfited, they followed upon Judas and those that were with him hard
at the heels from behind:

17 Whereupon there was a sore battle, insomuch as many were slain on
both parts.

18 Judas also was killed, and the remnant fled.

19 THen Jonathan and Simon took Judas their brother, and buried him in
the sepulchre of his fathers in Modin.

20 Moreover they bewailed him, and all Israel made great lamentation for
him, and mourned many days, saying,

21 How is the valiant man fallen, that delivered Israel!

22 As for the other things concerning Judas and his wars, and the noble
acts which he did, and his greatness, they are not written: for they
were very many.

23 Now after the death of Judas the wicked began to put forth their
heads in all the coasts of Israel, and there arose up all such as
wrought iniquity.

24 In those days also was there a very great famine, by reason whereof
the country revolted, and went with them.

25 Then Bacchides chose the wicked men, and made them lords of the
country.

26 And they made enquiry and search for Judas' friends, and brought them
unto Bacchides, who took vengeance of them, and used them despitefully.

27 So was there a great affliction in Israel, the like whereof was not
since the time that a prophet was not seen among them.

28 For this cause all Judas' friends came together, and said unto
Jonathan,

29 Since thy brother Judas died, we have no man like him to go forth
against our enemies, and Bacchides, and against them of our nation that
are adversaries to us.

30 Now therefore we have chosen thee this day to be our prince and
captain in his stead, that thou mayest fight our battles.

31 Upon this Jonathan took the governance upon him at that time, and
rose up instead of his brother Judas.

32 But when Bacchides gat knowledge thereof, he sought for to slay him

33 Then Jonathan, and Simon his brother, and all that were with him,
perceiving that, fled into the wilderness of Thecoe, and pitched their
tents by the water of the pool Asphar.

34 Which when Bacchides understood, he came near to Jordan with all his
host upon the sabbath day.

35 Now Jonathan had sent his brother John, a captain of the people, to
pray his friends the Nabathites, that they might leave with them their
carriage, which was much.

36 But the children of Jambri came out of Medaba, and took John, and all
that he had, and went their way with it.

37 After this came word to Jonathan and Simon his brother, that the
children of Jambri made a great marriage, and were bringing the bride
from Nadabatha with a great train, as being the daughter of one of the
great princes of Chanaan.

38 Therefore they remembered John their brother, and went up, and hid
themselves under the covert of the mountain:

39 Where they lifted up their eyes, and looked, and, behold, there was
much ado and great carriage: and the bridegroom came forth, and his
friends and brethren, to meet them with drums, and instruments of
musick, and many weapons.

40 Then Jonathan and they that were with him rose up against them from
the place where they lay in ambush, and made a slaughter of them in such
sort, as many fell down dead, and the remnant fled into the mountain,
and they took all their spoils.

41 Thus was the marriage turned into mourning, and the noise of their
melody into lamentation.

42 So when they had avenged fully the blood of their brother, they
turned again to the marsh of Jordan.

43 Now when Bacchides heard hereof, he came on the sabbath day unto the
banks of Jordan with a great power.

44 Then Jonathan said to his company, Let us go up now and fight for our
lives, for it standeth not with us to day, as in time past:

45 For, behold, the battle is before us and behind us, and the water of
Jordan on this side and that side, the marsh likewise and wood, neither
is there place for us to turn aside.

46 Wherefore cry ye now unto heaven, that ye may be delivered from the
hand of your enemies.

47 With that they joined battle, and Jonathan stretched forth his hand
to smite Bacchides, but he turned back from him.

48 Then Jonathan and they that were with him leapt into Jordan, and swam
over unto the other bank: howbeit the other passed not over Jordan unto
them.

49 So there were slain of Bacchides' side that day about a thousand men.

50 Afterward returned Bacchides to Jerusalem and repaired the strong
cites in Judea; the fort in Jericho, and Emmaus, and Bethhoron, and
Bethel, and Thamnatha, Pharathoni, and Taphon, these did he strengthen
with high walls, with gates and with bars.

51 And in them he set a garrison, that they might work malice upon
Israel.

52 He fortified also the city Bethsura, and Gazera, and the tower, and
put forces in them, and provision of victuals.

53 Besides, he took the chief men's sons in the country for hostages,
and put them into the tower at Jerusalem to be kept.

54 Moreover in the hundred fifty and third year, in the second month,
Alcimus commanded that the wall of the inner court of the sanctuary
should be pulled down; he pulled down also the works of the prophets

55 And as he began to pull down, even at that time was Alcimus plagued,
and his enterprizes hindered: for his mouth was stopped, and he was
taken with a palsy, so that he could no more speak any thing, nor give
order concerning his house.

56 So Alcimus died at that time with great torment.

57 Now when Bacchides saw that Alcimus was dead, he returned to the
king: whereupon the land of Judea was in rest two years.

58 Then all the ungodly men held a council, saying, Behold, Jonathan and
his company are at ease, and dwell without care: now therefore we will
bring Bacchides hither, who shall take them all in one night.

59 So they went and consulted with him.

60 Then removed he, and came with a great host, and sent letters privily
to his adherents in Judea, that they should take Jonathan and those that
were with him: howbeit they could not, because their counsel was known
unto them.

61 Wherefore they took of the men of the country, that were authors of
that mischief, about fifty persons, and slew them.

62 Afterward Jonathan, and Simon, and they that were with him, got them
away to Bethbasi, which is in the wilderness, and they repaired the
decays thereof, and made it strong.

63 Which thing when Bacchides knew, he gathered together all his host,
and sent word to them that were of Judea.

64 Then went he and laid siege against Bethbasi; and they fought against
it a long season and made engines of war.

65 But Jonathan left his brother Simon in the city, and went forth
himself into the country, and with a certain number went he forth.

66 And he smote Odonarkes and his brethren, and the children of Phasiron
in their tent.

67 And when he began to smite them, and came up with his forces, Simon
and his company went out of the city, and burned up the engines of war,

68 And fought against Bacchides, who was discomfited by them, and they
afflicted him sore: for his counsel and travail was in vain.

69 Wherefore he was very wroth at the wicked men that gave him counsel
to come into the country, inasmuch as he slew many of them, and purposed
to return into his own country.

70 Whereof when Jonathan had knowledge, he sent ambassadors unto him, to
the end he should make peace with him, and deliver them the prisoners.

71 Which thing he accepted, and did according to his demands, and sware
unto him that he would never do him harm all the days of his life.

72 When therefore he had restored unto him the prisoners that he had
taken aforetime out of the land of Judea, he returned and went his way
into his own land, neither came he any more into their borders.

73 Thus the sword ceased from Israel: but Jonathan dwelt at Machmas, and
began to govern the people; and he destroyed the ungodly men out of
Israel.

[Sep](../sep/ma1009)

1 καὶ ἤκουσεν Δημήτριος ὅτι ἔπεσεν Νικάνωρ καὶ ἡ δύναμις αὐτοῦ ἐν πολέμῳ
καὶ προσέθετο τὸν Βακχίδην καὶ τὸν Ἄλκιμον ἐκ δευτέρου ἀποστεῖλαι εἰς
γῆν Ιουδα καὶ τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας μετ᾽ αὐτῶν

2 καὶ ἐπορεύθησαν ὁδὸν τὴν εἰς Γαλγαλα καὶ παρενέβαλον ἐπὶ Μαισαλωθ τὴν
ἐν Αρβηλοις καὶ προκατελάβοντο αὐτὴν καὶ ἀπώλεσαν ψυχὰς ἀνθρώπων πολλάς

3 καὶ τοῦ μηνὸς τοῦ πρώτου ἔτους τοῦ δευτέρου καὶ πεντηκοστοῦ καὶ
ἑκατοστοῦ παρενέβαλον ἐπὶ Ιερουσαλημ

4 καὶ ἀπῆραν καὶ ἐπορεύθησαν εἰς Βερεαν ἐν εἴκοσι χιλιάσιν ἀνδρῶν καὶ
δισχιλίᾳ ἵππῳ

5 καὶ Ιουδας ἦν παρεμβεβληκὼς ἐν Ελασα καὶ τρισχίλιοι ἄνδρες μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ
ἐκλεκτοί

6 καὶ εἶδον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν δυνάμεων ὅτι πολλοί εἰσιν καὶ ἐφοβήθησαν
σφόδρα καὶ ἐξερρύησαν πολλοὶ ἀπὸ τῆς παρεμβολῆς οὐ κατελείφθησαν ἐξ
αὐτῶν ἀλλ᾽ ἢ ὀκτακόσιοι ἄνδρες

7 καὶ εἶδεν Ιουδας ὅτι ἀπερρύη ἡ παρεμβολὴ αὐτοῦ καὶ ὁ πόλεμος ἔθλιβεν
αὐτόν καὶ συνετρίβη τῇ καρδίᾳ ὅτι οὐκ εἶχεν καιρὸν συναγαγεῖν αὐτούς

8 καὶ ἐξελύθη καὶ εἶπεν τοῖς καταλειφθεῖσιν ἀναστῶμεν καὶ ἀναβῶμεν ἐπὶ
τοὺς ὑπεναντίους ἡμῶν ἐὰν ἄρα δυνώμεθα πολεμῆσαι πρὸς αὐτούς

9 καὶ ἀπέστρεφον αὐτὸν λέγοντες οὐ μὴ δυνώμεθα ἀλλ᾽ ἢ σῴζωμεν τὰς ἑαυτῶν
ψυχὰς τὸ νῦν ἐπιστρέψωμεν καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ ἡμῶν καὶ πολεμήσωμεν πρὸς
αὐτούς ἡμεῖς δὲ ὀλίγοι

10 καὶ εἶπεν Ιουδας μὴ γένοιτο ποιῆσαι τὸ πρᾶγμα τοῦτο φυγεῖν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν
καὶ εἰ ἤγγικεν ὁ καιρὸς ἡμῶν καὶ ἀποθάνωμεν ἐν ἀνδρείᾳ χάριν τῶν ἀδελφῶν
ἡμῶν καὶ μὴ καταλίπωμεν αἰτίαν τῇ δόξῃ ἡμῶν

11 καὶ ἀπῆρεν ἡ δύναμις ἀπὸ τῆς παρεμβολῆς καὶ ἔστησαν εἰς συνάντησιν
αὐτοῖς καὶ ἐμερίσθη ἡ ἵππος εἰς δύο μέρη καὶ οἱ σφενδονῆται καὶ οἱ
τοξόται προεπορεύοντο τῆς δυνάμεως καὶ οἱ πρωταγωνισταὶ πάντες οἱ
δυνατοί Βακχίδης δὲ ἦν ἐν τῷ δεξιῷ κέρατι

12 καὶ ἤγγισεν ἡ φάλαγξ ἐκ τῶν δύο μερῶν καὶ ἐφώνουν ταῖς σάλπιγξιν καὶ
ἐσάλπισαν οἱ παρὰ Ιουδου καὶ αὐτοὶ ταῖς σάλπιγξιν

13 καὶ ἐσαλεύθη ἡ γῆ ἀπὸ τῆς φωνῆς τῶν παρεμβολῶν καὶ ἐγένετο ὁ πόλεμος
συνημμένος ἀπὸ πρωίθεν ἕως ἑσπέρας

14 καὶ εἶδεν Ιουδας ὅτι Βακχίδης καὶ τὸ στερέωμα τῆς παρεμβολῆς ἐν τοῖς
δεξιοῖς καὶ συνῆλθον αὐτῷ πάντες οἱ εὔψυχοι τῇ καρδίᾳ

15 καὶ συνετρίβη τὸ δεξιὸν μέρος ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ ἐδίωκεν ὀπίσω αὐτῶν ἕως
Αζωτου ὄρους

16 καὶ οἱ εἰς τὸ ἀριστερὸν κέρας εἶδον ὅτι συνετρίβη τὸ δεξιὸν κέρας καὶ
ἐπέστρεψαν κατὰ πόδας Ιουδου καὶ τῶν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐκ τῶν ὄπισθεν

17 καὶ ἐβαρύνθη ὁ πόλεμος καὶ ἔπεσον τραυματίαι πολλοὶ ἐκ τούτων καὶ ἐκ
τούτων

18 καὶ Ιουδας ἔπεσεν καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ ἔφυγον

19 καὶ ἦρεν Ιωναθαν καὶ Σιμων Ιουδαν τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτῶν καὶ ἔθαψαν αὐτὸν
ἐν τῷ τάφῳ τῶν πατέρων αὐτοῦ ἐν Μωδεϊν

20 καὶ ἔκλαυσαν αὐτὸν καὶ ἐκόψαντο αὐτὸν πᾶς Ισραηλ κοπετὸν μέγαν καὶ
ἐπένθουν ἡμέρας πολλὰς καὶ εἶπον

21 πῶς ἔπεσεν δυνατὸς σῴζων τὸν Ισραηλ

22 καὶ τὰ περισσὰ τῶν λόγων Ιουδου καὶ τῶν πολέμων καὶ τῶν ἀνδραγαθιῶν
ὧν ἐποίησεν καὶ τῆς μεγαλωσύνης αὐτοῦ οὐ κατεγράφη πολλὰ γὰρ ἦν σφόδρα

23 καὶ ἐγένετο μετὰ τὴν τελευτὴν Ιουδου ἐξέκυψαν οἱ ἄνομοι ἐν πᾶσιν τοῖς
ὁρίοις Ισραηλ καὶ ἀνέτειλαν πάντες οἱ ἐργαζόμενοι τὴν ἀδικίαν

24 ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις ἐγενήθη λιμὸς μέγας σφόδρα καὶ αὐτομόλησεν ἡ
χώρα μετ᾽ αὐτῶν

25 καὶ ἐξέλεξεν Βακχίδης τοὺς ἀσεβεῖς ἄνδρας καὶ κατέστησεν αὐτοὺς
κυρίους τῆς χώρας

26 καὶ ἐξεζήτουν καὶ ἠρεύνων τοὺς φίλους Ιουδου καὶ ἦγον αὐτοὺς πρὸς
Βακχίδην καὶ ἐξεδίκα αὐτοὺς καὶ ἐνέπαιζεν αὐτοῖς

27 καὶ ἐγένετο θλῖψις μεγάλη ἐν τῷ Ισραηλ ἥτις οὐκ ἐγένετο ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἡμέρας
οὐκ ὤφθη προφήτης αὐτοῖς

28 καὶ ἠθροίσθησαν πάντες οἱ φίλοι Ιουδου καὶ εἶπον τῷ Ιωναθαν

29 ἀφ᾽ οὗ ὁ ἀδελφός σου Ιουδας τετελεύτηκεν καὶ ἀνὴρ ὅμοιος αὐτῷ οὐκ
ἔστιν ἐξελθεῖν καὶ εἰσελθεῖν πρὸς τοὺς ἐχθροὺς καὶ Βακχίδην καὶ ἐν τοῖς
ἐχθραίνουσιν τοῦ ἔθνους ἡμῶν

30 νῦν οὖν σὲ ᾑρετισάμεθα σήμερον τοῦ εἶναι ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἡμῖν εἰς ἄρχοντα
καὶ ἡγούμενον τοῦ πολεμῆσαι τὸν πόλεμον ἡμῶν

31 καὶ ἐπεδέξατο Ιωναθαν ἐν τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ τὴν ἥγησιν καὶ ἀνέστη ἀντὶ
Ιουδου τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ αὐτοῦ

32 καὶ ἔγνω Βακχίδης καὶ ἐζήτει αὐτὸν ἀποκτεῖναι

33 καὶ ἔγνω Ιωναθαν καὶ Σιμων ὁ ἀδελφὸς αὐτοῦ καὶ πάντες οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ
καὶ ἔφυγον εἰς τὴν ἔρημον Θεκωε καὶ παρενέβαλον ἐπὶ τὸ ὕδωρ λάκκου Ασφαρ

34 καὶ ἔγνω Βακχίδης τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν σαββάτων καὶ ἦλθεν αὐτὸς καὶ πᾶν τὸ
στράτευμα αὐτοῦ πέραν τοῦ Ιορδάνου

35 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ ἡγούμενον τοῦ ὄχλου καὶ παρεκάλεσεν
τοὺς Ναβαταίους φίλους αὐτοῦ τοῦ παραθέσθαι αὐτοῖς τὴν ἀποσκευὴν αὐτῶν
τὴν πολλήν

36 καὶ ἐξῆλθον οἱ υἱοὶ Ιαμβρι οἱ ἐκ Μηδαβα καὶ συνέλαβον Ιωαννην καὶ
πάντα ὅσα εἶχεν καὶ ἀπῆλθον ἔχοντες

37 μετὰ τοὺς λόγους τούτους ἀπήγγειλαν Ιωναθαν καὶ Σιμωνι τῷ ἀδελφῷ
αὐτοῦ ὅτι υἱοὶ Ιαμβρι ποιοῦσιν γάμον μέγαν καὶ ἄγουσιν τὴν νύμφην ἀπὸ
Ναδαβαθ θυγατέρα ἑνὸς τῶν μεγάλων μεγιστάνων Χανααν μετὰ παραπομπῆς
μεγάλης

38 καὶ ἐμνήσθησαν τοῦ αἵματος Ιωαννου τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ αὐτῶν καὶ ἀνέβησαν καὶ
ἐκρύβησαν ὑπὸ τὴν σκέπην τοῦ ὄρους

39 καὶ ἦραν τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς αὐτῶν καὶ εἶδον καὶ ἰδοὺ θροῦς καὶ ἀποσκευὴ
πολλή καὶ ὁ νυμφίος ἐξῆλθεν καὶ οἱ φίλοι αὐτοῦ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ εἰς
συνάντησιν αὐτῶν μετὰ τυμπάνων καὶ μουσικῶν καὶ ὅπλων πολλῶν

40 καὶ ἐξανέστησαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἀπὸ τοῦ ἐνέδρου καὶ ἀπέκτειναν αὐτούς καὶ
ἔπεσον τραυματίαι πολλοί καὶ οἱ ἐπίλοιποι ἔφυγον εἰς τὸ ὄρος καὶ ἔλαβον
πάντα τὰ σκῦλα αὐτῶν

41 καὶ μετεστράφη ὁ γάμος εἰς πένθος καὶ φωνὴ μουσικῶν αὐτῶν εἰς θρῆνον

42 καὶ ἐξεδίκησαν τὴν ἐκδίκησιν αἵματος ἀδελφοῦ αὐτῶν καὶ ἀπέστρεψαν εἰς
τὸ ἕλος τοῦ Ιορδάνου

43 καὶ ἤκουσεν Βακχίδης καὶ ἦλθεν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῶν σαββάτων ἕως τῶν κρηπίδων
τοῦ Ιορδάνου ἐν δυνάμει πολλῇ

44 καὶ εἶπεν Ιωναθαν τοῖς παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀναστῶμεν δὴ καὶ πολεμήσωμεν περὶ
τῶν ψυχῶν ἡμῶν οὐ γάρ ἐστιν σήμερον ὡς ἐχθὲς καὶ τρίτην ἡμέραν

45 ἰδοὺ γὰρ ὁ πόλεμος ἐξ ἐναντίας καὶ ἐξόπισθεν ἡμῶν τὸ δὲ ὕδωρ τοῦ
Ιορδάνου ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν καὶ ἕλος καὶ δρυμός οὐκ ἔστιν τόπος τοῦ
ἐκκλῖναι

46 νῦν οὖν κεκράξατε εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν ὅπως διασωθῆτε ἐκ χειρὸς τῶν ἐχθρῶν
ἡμῶν

47 καὶ συνῆψεν ὁ πόλεμος καὶ ἐξέτεινεν Ιωναθαν τὴν χεῖρα αὐτοῦ πατάξαι
τὸν Βακχίδην καὶ ἐξέκλινεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ εἰς τὰ ὀπίσω

48 καὶ ἐνεπήδησεν Ιωναθαν καὶ οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ εἰς τὸν Ιορδάνην καὶ
διεκολύμβησαν εἰς τὸ πέραν καὶ οὐ διέβησαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς τὸν Ιορδάνην

49 ἔπεσον δὲ παρὰ Βακχίδου τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ εἰς χιλίους ἄνδρας

50 καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ᾠκοδόμησαν πόλεις ὀχυρὰς ἐν τῇ
Ιουδαίᾳ τὸ ὀχύρωμα τὸ ἐν Ιεριχω καὶ τὴν Αμμαους καὶ τὴν Βαιθωρων καὶ τὴν
Βαιθηλ καὶ τὴν Θαμναθα Φαραθων καὶ τὴν Τεφων ἐν τείχεσιν ὑψηλοῖς καὶ
πύλαις καὶ μοχλοῖς

51 καὶ ἔθετο φρουρὰν ἐν αὐτοῖς τοῦ ἐχθραίνειν τῷ Ισραηλ

52 καὶ ὠχύρωσεν τὴν πόλιν τὴν Βαιθσουραν καὶ Γαζαρα καὶ τὴν ἄκραν καὶ
ἔθετο ἐν αὐταῖς δυνάμεις καὶ παραθέσεις βρωμάτων

53 καὶ ἔλαβεν τοὺς υἱοὺς τῶν ἡγουμένων τῆς χώρας ὅμηρα καὶ ἔθετο αὐτοὺς
ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ ἐν Ιερουσαλημ ἐν φυλακῇ

54 καὶ ἐν ἔτει τρίτῳ καὶ πεντηκοστῷ καὶ ἑκατοστῷ τῷ μηνὶ τῷ δευτέρῳ
ἐπέταξεν Ἄλκιμος καθαιρεῖν τὸ τεῖχος τῆς αὐλῆς τῶν ἁγίων τῆς ἐσωτέρας
καὶ καθεῖλεν τὰ ἔργα τῶν προφητῶν καὶ ἐνήρξατο τοῦ καθαιρεῖν

55 ἐν τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ ἐπλήγη Ἄλκιμος καὶ ἐνεποδίσθη τὰ ἔργα αὐτοῦ καὶ
ἀπεφράγη τὸ στόμα αὐτοῦ καὶ παρελύθη καὶ οὐκ ἠδύνατο ἔτι λαλῆσαι λόγον
καὶ ἐντείλασθαι περὶ τοῦ οἴκου αὐτοῦ

56 καὶ ἀπέθανεν Ἄλκιμος ἐν τῷ καιρῷ ἐκείνῳ μετὰ βασάνου μεγάλης

57 καὶ εἶδεν Βακχίδης ὅτι ἀπέθανεν Ἄλκιμος καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν πρὸς τὸν
βασιλέα καὶ ἡσύχασεν ἡ γῆ Ιουδα ἔτη δύο

58 καὶ ἐβουλεύσαντο πάντες οἱ ἄνομοι λέγοντες ἰδοὺ Ιωναθαν καὶ οἱ παρ᾽
αὐτοῦ ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ κατοικοῦσιν πεποιθότες νῦν οὖν ἀνάξομεν τὸν Βακχίδην καὶ
συλλήμψεται αὐτοὺς πάντας ἐν νυκτὶ μιᾷ

59 καὶ πορευθέντες συνεβουλεύσαντο αὐτῷ

60 καὶ ἀπῆρεν τοῦ ἐλθεῖν μετὰ δυνάμεως πολλῆς καὶ ἀπέστειλεν λάθρᾳ
ἐπιστολὰς πᾶσιν τοῖς συμμάχοις αὐτοῦ τοῖς ἐν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ ὅπως συλλάβωσιν
τὸν Ιωναθαν καὶ τοὺς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ οὐκ ἠδύναντο ὅτι ἐγνώσθη ἡ βουλὴ
αὐτῶν

61 καὶ συνέλαβον ἀπὸ τῶν ἀνδρῶν τῆς χώρας τῶν ἀρχηγῶν τῆς κακίας εἰς
πεντήκοντα ἄνδρας καὶ ἀπέκτειναν αὐτούς

62 καὶ ἐξεχώρησεν Ιωναθαν καὶ Σιμων καὶ οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ εἰς Βαιθβασι τὴν
ἐν τῇ ἐρήμῳ καὶ ᾠκοδόμησεν τὰ καθῃρημένα αὐτῆς καὶ ἐστερέωσαν αὐτήν

63 καὶ ἔγνω Βακχίδης καὶ συνήγαγεν πᾶν τὸ πλῆθος αὐτοῦ καὶ τοῖς ἐκ τῆς
Ιουδαίας παρήγγειλεν

64 καὶ ἐλθὼν παρενέβαλεν ἐπὶ Βαιθβασι καὶ ἐπολέμησεν αὐτὴν ἡμέρας πολλὰς
καὶ ἐποίησεν μηχανάς

65 καὶ ἀπέλιπεν Ιωναθαν Σιμωνα τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ πόλει καὶ ἐξῆλθεν
εἰς τὴν χώραν καὶ ἦλθεν ἐν ἀριθμῷ

66 καὶ ἐπάταξεν Οδομηρα καὶ τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς αὐτοῦ καὶ τοὺς υἱοὺς Φασιρων
ἐν τῷ σκηνώματι αὐτῶν καὶ ἤρξαντο τύπτειν καὶ ἀνέβαινον ἐν ταῖς
δυνάμεσιν

67 καὶ Σιμων καὶ οἱ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐξῆλθον ἐκ τῆς πόλεως καὶ ἐνεπύρισαν τὰς
μηχανάς

68 καὶ ἐπολέμησαν πρὸς τὸν Βακχίδην καὶ συνετρίβη ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ ἔθλιβον
αὐτὸν σφόδρα ὅτι ἦν ἡ βουλὴ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἡ ἔφοδος αὐτοῦ κενή

69 καὶ ὠργίσθη ἐν θυμῷ τοῖς ἀνδράσιν τοῖς ἀνόμοις τοῖς συμβουλεύσασιν
αὐτῷ ἐλθεῖν εἰς τὴν χώραν καὶ ἀπέκτεινεν ἐξ αὐτῶν πολλοὺς καὶ
ἐβουλεύσατο τοῦ ἀπελθεῖν εἰς τὴν γῆν αὐτοῦ

70 καὶ ἐπέγνω Ιωναθαν καὶ ἀπέστειλεν πρὸς αὐτὸν πρέσβεις τοῦ συνθέσθαι
πρὸς αὐτὸν εἰρήνην καὶ ἀποδοῦναι αὐτοῖς τὴν αἰχμαλωσίαν

71 καὶ ἐπεδέξατο καὶ ἐποίησεν κατὰ τοὺς λόγους αὐτοῦ καὶ ὤμοσεν αὐτῷ μὴ
ἐκζητῆσαι αὐτῷ κακὸν πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας τῆς ζωῆς αὐτοῦ

72 καὶ ἀπέδωκεν αὐτῷ τὴν αἰχμαλωσίαν ἣν ᾐχμαλώτευσεν τὸ πρότερον ἐκ γῆς
Ιουδα καὶ ἀποστρέψας ἀπῆλθεν εἰς τὴν γῆν αὐτοῦ καὶ οὐ προσέθετο ἔτι
ἐλθεῖν εἰς τὰ ὅρια αὐτῶν

73 καὶ κατέπαυσεν ῥομφαία ἐξ Ισραηλ καὶ ᾤκησεν Ιωναθαν ἐν Μαχμας καὶ
ἤρξατο Ιωναθαν κρίνειν τὸν λαὸν καὶ ἠφάνισεν τοὺς ἀσεβεῖς ἐξ Ισραηλ

[Vul](../vul/ma1009)

1 Interea, ut audivit Demetrius quia cecidit Nicanor et exercitus ejus
in prælio, apposuit Bacchidem et Alcimum rursum mittere in Judæam, et
dextrum cornu cum illis.

2 Et abierunt viam quæ ducit in Galgala, et castra posuerunt in
Masaloth, quæ est in Arbellis: et occupaverunt eam, et peremerunt animas
hominum multas.

3 In mense primo anni centesimi et quinquagesimi secundi, applicuerunt
exercitum ad Jerusalem:

4 et surrexerunt, et abierunt in Beream viginti millia virorum, et duo
millia equitum.

5 Et Judas posuerat castra in Laisa, et tria millia viri electi cum eo:

6 et viderunt multitudinem exercitus, quia multi sunt, et timuerunt
valde: et multi subtraxerunt se de castris, et non remanserunt ex eis
nisi octingenti viri.

7 Et vidit Judas quod defluxit exercitus suus, et bellum perurgebat eum,
et confractus est corde, quia non habebat tempus congregandi eos, et
dissolutus est.

8 Et dixit his qui residui erant: Surgamus, et eamus ad adversarios
nostros, si poterimus pugnare adversus eos.

9 Et avertebant eum, dicentes: Non poterimus, sed liberemus animas
nostras modo, et revertamur ad fratres nostros, et tunc pugnabimus
adversus eos: nos autem pauci sumus.

10 Et ait Judas: Absit istam rem facere ut fugiamus ab eis: et si
appropiavit tempus nostrum, moriamur in virtute propter fratres nostros,
et non inferamus crimen gloriæ nostræ.

11 Et movit exercitus de castris, et steterunt illis obviam: et divisi
sunt equites in duas partes, et fundibularii et sagittarii præibant
exercitum, et primi certaminis omnes potentes.

12 Bacchides autem erat in dextro cornu, et proximavit legio ex duabus
partibus, et clamabant tubis:

13 exclamaverunt autem et hi qui erant ex parte Judæ etiam ipsi, et
commota est terra a voce exercituum: et commissum est prælium a mane
usque ad vesperam.  

14 Et vidit Judas quod firmior est pars exercitus Bacchidis in dextris,
et convenerunt cum ipso omnes constantes corde:

15 et contrita est dextera pars ab eis, et persecutus est eos usque ad
montem Azoti.

16 Et qui in sinistro cornu erant, viderunt quod contritum est dextrum
cornu, et secuti sunt post Judam, et eos qui cum ipso erant, a tergo:

17 et ingravatum est prælium, et ceciderunt vulnerati multi ex his et ex
illis.

18 Et Judas cecidit, et ceteri fugerunt.

19 Et Jonathas et Simon tulerunt Judam fratrem suum, et sepelierunt eum
in sepulchro patrum suorum in civitate Modin.

20 Et fleverunt eum omnis populus Israël planctu magno, et lugebant dies
multos,

21 et dixerunt: Quomodo cecidit potens, qui salvum faciebat populum
Israël!

22 Et cetera verba bellorum Judæ, et virtutum, quas fecit, et
magnitudinis ejus, non sunt descripta: multa enim erant valde.  

23 Et factum est: post obitum Judæ emerserunt iniqui in omnibus finibus
Israël, et exorti sunt omnes qui operabantur iniquitatem.

24 In diebus illis facta est fames magna valde, et tradidit se Bacchidi
omnis regio eorum cum ipsis.

25 Et elegit Bacchides viros impios, et constituit eos dominos regionis:

26 et exquirebant, et perscrutabantur amicos Judæ, et adducebant eos ad
Bacchidem, et vindicabat in illos, et illudebat.

27 Et facta est tribulatio magna in Israël, qualis non fuit ex die qua
non est visus propheta in Israël.  

28 Et congregati sunt omnes amici Judæ, et dixerunt Jonathæ:

29 Ex quo frater tuus Judas defunctus est, vir similis ei non est, qui
exeat contra inimicos nostros, Bacchidem et eos qui inimici sunt gentis
nostræ.

30 Nunc itaque, te hodie elegimus esse pro eo nobis in principem, et
ducem ad bellandum bellum nostrum.

31 Et suscepit Jonathas tempore illo principatum, et surrexit loco Judæ
fratris sui.

32 Et cognovit Bacchides, et quærebat eum occidere.

33 Et cognovit Jonathas, et Simon frater ejus, et omnes qui cum eo
erant: et fugerunt in desertum Thecuæ et consederunt ad aquam lacus
Asphar.

34 Et cognovit Bacchides, et die sabbatorum venit ipse et omnis
exercitus ejus trans Jordanem.

35 Et Jonathas misit fratrem suum ducem populi, et rogavit Nabuthæos
amicos suos, ut commodarent illis apparatum suum, qui erat copiosus.

36 Et exierunt filii Jambri ex Madaba, et comprehenderunt Joannem et
omnia quæ habebat, et abierunt habentes ea.

37 Post hæc verba, renuntiatum est Jonathæ et Simoni fratri ejus, quia
filii Jambri faciunt nuptias magnas, et ducunt sponsam ex Madaba filiam
unius de magnis principibus Chanaan cum ambitione magna.

38 Et recordati sunt sanguinis Joannis fratris sui: et ascenderunt, et
absconderunt se sub tegumento montis.

39 Et elevaverunt oculos suos, et viderunt: et ecce tumultus, et
apparatus multus: et sponsus processit, et amici ejus, et fratres ejus
obviam illis cum tympanis, et musicis, et armis multis.

40 Et surrexerunt ad eos ex insidiis, et occiderunt eos, et ceciderunt
vulnerati multi, et residui fugerunt in montes: et acceperunt omnia
spolia eorum:

41 et conversæ sunt nuptiæ in luctum, et vox musicorum ipsorum in
lamentum.

42 Et vindicaverunt vindictam sanguinis fratris sui: et reversi sunt ad
ripam Jordanis.  

43 Et audivit Bacchides, et venit die sabbatorum usque ad oram Jordanis
in virtute magna.

44 Et dixit ad suos Jonathas: Surgamus, et pugnemus contra inimicos
nostros: non est enim hodie sicut heri et nudiustertius:

45 ecce enim bellum ex adverso, aqua vero Jordanis hinc et inde, et
ripæ, et paludes, et saltus: et non est locus divertendi.

46 Nunc ergo, clamate in cælum, ut liberemini de manu inimicorum
vestrorum. Et commissum est bellum.

47 Et extendit Jonathas manum suam percutere Bacchidem, et divertit ab
eo retro:

48 et desiliit Jonathas, et qui cum eo erant, in Jordanem, et
transnataverunt ad eos Jordanem.

49 Et ceciderunt de parte Bacchidis die illa mille viri. Et reversi sunt
in Jerusalem,

50 et ædificaverunt civitates munitas in Judæa, munitionem quæ erat in
Jericho, et in Ammaum, et in Bethoron, et in Bethel, et Thamnata, et
Phara, et Thopo muris excelsis, et portis, et seris.

51 Et posuit custodiam in eis, ut inimicitias exercerent in Israël:

52 et munivit civitatem Bethsuram, et Gazaram, et arcem, et posuit in
eis auxilia, et apparatum escarum:

53 et accepit filios principum regionis obsides, et posuit eos in arce
in Jerusalem in custodiam.

54 Et anno centesimo quinquagesimo tertio, mense secundo, præcepit
Alcimus destrui muros domus sanctæ interioris, et destrui opera
prophetarum: et cœpit destruere.

55 In tempore illo percussus est Alcimus: et impedita sunt opera illius,
et occlusum est os ejus, et dissolutus est paralysi, nec ultra potuit
loqui verbum, et mandare de domo sua.

56 Et mortuus est Alcimus in tempore illo cum tormento magno.

57 Et vidit Bacchides quoniam mortuus est Alcimus, et reversus est ad
regem. Et siluit terra annis duobus.  

58 Et cogitaverunt omnes iniqui, dicentes: Ecce Jonathas, et qui cum eo
sunt, in silentio habitant confidenter: nunc ergo adducamus Bacchidem,
et comprehendet eos omnes una nocte.

59 Et abierunt, et consilium ei dederunt.

60 Et surrexit ut veniret cum exercitu multo: et misit occulte epistolas
sociis suis qui erant in Judæa, ut comprehenderent Jonathan, et eos qui
cum eo erant: sed non potuerunt, quia innotuit eis consilium eorum.

61 Et apprehendit de viris regionis, qui principes erant malitiæ,
quinquaginta viros, et occidit eos:

62 et secessit Jonathas, et Simon, et qui cum eo erant, in Bethbessen,
quæ est in deserto: et exstruxit diruta ejus, et firmaverunt eam.

63 Et cognovit Bacchides, et congregavit universam multitudinem suam: et
his, qui de Judæa erant, denuntiavit.

64 Et venit, et castra posuit desuper Bethbessen: et oppugnavit eam dies
multos, et fecit machinas.

65 Et reliquit Jonathas Simonem fratrem suum in civitate, et exiit in
regionem, et venit cum numero:

66 et percussit Odaren et fratres ejus, et filios Phaseron in
tabernaculis ipsorum: et cœpit cædere, et crescere in virtutibus.

67 Simon vero, et qui cum ipso erant, exierunt de civitate, et
succenderunt machinas,

68 et pugnaverunt contra Bacchidem, et contritus est ab eis: et
afflixerunt eum valde, quoniam consilium ejus et congressus ejus erat
inanis.

69 Et iratus contra viros iniquos, qui ei consilium dederant ut veniret
in regionem ipsorum, multos ex eis occidit: ipse autem cogitavit cum
reliquis abire in regionem suam.  

70 Et cognovit Jonathas: et misit ad eum legatos componere pacem cum
ipso, et reddere ei captivitatem.

71 Et libenter accepit, et fecit secundum verba ejus, et juravit se
nihil facturum ei mali omnibus diebus vitæ ejus.

72 Et reddidit ei captivitatem, quam prius erat prædatus de terra Juda:
et conversus abiit in terram suam, et non apposuit amplius venire in
fines ejus.

73 Et cessavit gladius ex Israël: et habitavit Jonathas in Machmas, et
cœpit Jonathas ibi judicare populum, et exterminavit impios ex Israël.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 10](ma1010)
