[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1010)  [Next](ma1012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 11

[Apo](../apo/ma1011)

1 And the king of Egypt gathered together a great host, like the sand
that lieth upon the sea shore, and many ships, and went about through
deceit to get Alexander's kingdom, and join it to his own.

2 Whereupon he took his journey into Spain in peaceable manner, so as
they of the cities opened unto him, and met him: for king Alexander had
commanded them so to do, because he was his brother in law.

3 Now as Ptolemee entered into the cities, he set in every one of them a
garrison of soldiers to keep it.

4 And when he came near to Azotus, they shewed him the temple of Dagon
that was burnt, and Azotus and the suburbs thereof that were destroyed,
and the bodies that were cast abroad and them that he had burnt in the
battle; for they had made heaps of them by the way where he should pass.

5 Also they told the king whatsoever Jonathan had done, to the intent he
might blame him: but the king held his peace.

6 Then Jonathan met the king with great pomp at Joppa, where they
saluted one another, and lodged.

7 Afterward Jonathan, when he had gone with the king to the river called
Eleutherus, returned again to Jerusalem.

8 King Ptolemee therefore, having gotten the dominion of the cities by
the sea unto Seleucia upon the sea coast, imagined wicked counsels
against Alexander.

9 Whereupon he sent ambasadors unto king Demetrius, saying, Come, let us
make a league betwixt us, and I will give thee my daughter whom
Alexander hath, and thou shalt reign in thy father's kingdom:

10 For I repent that I gave my daughter unto him, for he sought to slay
me.

11 Thus did he slander him, because he was desirous of his kingdom.

12 Wherefore he took his daughter from him, and gave her to Demetrius,
and forsook Alexander, so that their hatred was openly known.

13 Then Ptolemee entered into Antioch, where he set two crowns upon his
head, the crown of Asia, and of Egypt.

14 In the mean season was king Alexander in Cilicia, because those that
dwelt in those parts had revolted from him.

15 But when Alexander heard of this, he came to war against him:
whereupon king Ptolemee brought forth his host, and met him with a
mighty power, and put him to flight.

16 So Alexander fled into Arabia there to be defended; but king Ptolemee
was exalted:

17 For Zabdiel the Arabian took off Alexander's head, and sent it unto
Ptolemee.

18 King Ptolemee also died the third day after, and they that were in
the strong holds were slain one of another.

19 By this means Demetrius reigned in the hundred threescore and seventh
year.

20 At the same time Jonathan gathered together them that were in Judea
to take the tower that was in Jerusalem: and he made many engines of war
against it.

21 Then came ungodly persons, who hated their own people, went unto the
king, and told him that Jonathan besieged the tower,

22 Whereof when he heard, he was angry, and immediately removing, he
came to Ptolemais, and wrote unto Jonathan, that he should not lay siege
to the tower, but come and speak with him at Ptolemais in great haste.

23 Nevertheless Jonathan, when he heard this, commanded to besiege it
still: and he chose certain of the elders of Israel and the priests, and
put himself in peril;

24 And took silver and gold, and raiment, and divers presents besides,
and went to Ptolemais unto the king, where he found favour in his sight.

25 And though certain ungodly men of the people had made complaints
against him,

26 Yet the king entreated him as his predecessors had done before, and
promoted him in the sight of all his friends,

27 And confirmed him in the high priesthood, and in all the honours that
he had before, and gave him preeminence among his chief friends.

28 Then Jonathan desired the king, that he would make Judea free from
tribute, as also the three governments, with the country of Samaria; and
he promised him three hundred talents.

29 So the king consented, and wrote letters unto Jonathan of all these
things after this manner:

30 King Demetrius unto his brother Jonathan, and unto the nation of the
Jews, sendeth greeting:

31 We send you here a copy of the letter which we did write unto our
cousin Lasthenes concerning you, that ye might see it.

32 King Demetrius unto his father Lasthenes sendeth greeting:

33 We are determined to do good to the people of the Jews, who are our
friends, and keep covenants with us, because of their good will toward
us.

34 Wherefore we have ratified unto them the borders of Judea, with the
three governments of Apherema and Lydda and Ramathem, that are added
unto Judea from the country of Samaria, and all things appertaining unto
them, for all such as do sacrifice in Jerusalem, instead of the payments
which the king received of them yearly aforetime out of the fruits of
the earth and of trees.

35 And as for other things that belong unto us, of the tithes and
customs pertaining unto us, as also the saltpits, and the crown taxes,
which are due unto us, we discharge them of them all for their relief.

36 And nothing hereof shall be revoked from this time forth for ever.

37 Now therefore see that thou make a copy of these things, and let it
be delivered unto Jonathan, and set upon the holy mount in a conspicuous
place.

38 After this, when king Demetrius saw that the land was quiet before
him, and that no resistance was made against him, he sent away all his
forces, every one to his own place, except certain bands of strangers,
whom he had gathered from the isles of the heathen: wherefore all the
forces of his fathers hated him.

39 Moreover there was one Tryphon, that had been of Alexander's part
afore, who, seeing that all the host murmured against Demetrius, went to
Simalcue the Arabian that brought up Antiochus the young son of
Alexander,

40 And lay sore upon him to deliver him this young Antiochus, that he
might reign in his father's stead: he told him therefore all that
Demetrius had done, and how his men of war were at enmity with him, and
there he remained a long season.

41 In the mean time Jonathan sent unto king Demetrius, that he would
cast those of the tower out of Jerusalem, and those also in the
fortresses: for they fought against Israel.

42 So Demetrius sent unto Jonathan, saying, I will not only do this for
thee and thy people, but I will greatly honour thee and thy nation, if
opportunity serve.

43 Now therefore thou shalt do well, if thou send me men to help me; for
all my forces are gone from me.

44 Upon this Jonathan sent him three thousand strong men unto Antioch:
and when they came to the king, the king was very glad of their coming.

45 Howbeit they that were of the city gathered themselves together into
the midst of the city, to the number of an hundred and twenty thousand
men, and would have slain the king.

46 Wherefore the king fled into the court, but they of the city kept the
passages of the city, and began to fight.

47 Then the king called to the Jews for help, who came unto him all at
once, and dispersing themselves through the city slew that day in the
city to the number of an hundred thousand.

48 Also they set fire on the city, and gat many spoils that day, and
delivered the king.

49 So when they of the city saw that the Jews had got the city as they
would, their courage was abated: wherefore they made supplication to the
king, and cried, saying,

50 Grant us peace, and let the Jews cease from assaulting us and the
city.

51 With that they cast away their weapons, and made peace; and the Jews
were honoured in the sight of the king, and in the sight of all that
were in his realm; and they returned to Jerusalem, having great spoils.

52 So king Demetrius sat on the throne of his kingdom, and the land was
quiet before him.

53 Nevertheless he dissembled in all that ever he spake, and estranged
himself from Jonathan, neither rewarded he him according to the benefits
which he had received of him, but troubled him very sore.

54 After this returned Tryphon, and with him the young child Antiochus,
who reigned, and was crowned.

55 Then there gathered unto him all the men of war, whom Demetrius had
put away, and they fought against Demetrius, who turned his back and
fled.

56 Moreover Tryphon took the elephants, and won Antioch.

57 At that time young Antiochus wrote unto Jonathan, saying, I confirm
thee in the high priesthood, and appoint thee ruler over the four
governments, and to be one of the king's friends.

58 Upon this he sent him golden vessels to be served in, and gave him
leave to drink in gold, and to be clothed in purple, and to wear a
golden buckle.

59 His brother Simon also he made captain from the place called The
ladder of Tyrus unto the borders of Egypt.

60 Then Jonathan went forth, and passed through the cities beyond the
water, and all the forces of Syria gathered themselves unto him for to
help him: and when he came to Ascalon, they of the city met him
honourably.

61 From whence he went to Gaza, but they of Gaza shut him out; wherefore
he laid siege unto it, and burned the suburbs thereof with fire, and
spoiled them.

62 Afterward, when they of Gaza made supplication unto Jonathan, he made
peace with them, and took the sons of their chief men for hostages, and
sent them to Jerusalem, and passed through the country unto Damascus.

63 Now when Jonathan heard that Demetrius' princes were come to Cades,
which is in Galilee, with a great power, purposing to remove him out of
the country,

64 He went to meet them, and left Simon his brother in the country.

65 Then Simon encamped against Bethsura and fought against it a long
season, and shut it up:

66 But they desired to have peace with him, which he granted them, and
then put them out from thence, and took the city, and set a garrison in
it.

67 As for Jonathan and his host, they pitched at the water of Gennesar,
from whence betimes in the morning they gat them to the plain of Nasor.

68 And, behold, the host of strangers met them in the plain, who, having
laid men in ambush for him in the mountains, came themselves over
against him.

69 So when they that lay in ambush rose out of their places and joined
battle, all that were of Jonathan's side fled;

70 Insomuch as there was not one of them left, except Mattathias the son
of Absalom, and Judas the son of Calphi, the captains of the host.

71 Then Jonathan rent his clothes, and cast earth upon his head, and
prayed.

72 Afterwards turning again to battle, he put them to flight, and so
they ran away.

73 Now when his own men that were fled saw this, they turned again unto
him, and with him pursued them to Cades, even unto their own tents, and
there they camped.

74 So there were slain of the heathen that day about three thousand men:
but Jonathan returned to Jerusalem.

[Sep](../sep/ma1011)

1 καὶ βασιλεὺς Αἰγύπτου ἤθροισεν δυνάμεις πολλὰς ὡς ἡ ἄμμος ἡ παρὰ τὸ
χεῖλος τῆς θαλάσσης καὶ πλοῖα πολλὰ καὶ ἐζήτησε κατακρατῆσαι τῆς
βασιλείας Ἀλεξάνδρου δόλῳ καὶ προσθεῖναι αὐτὴν τῇ βασιλείᾳ αὐτοῦ

2 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν εἰς Συρίαν λόγοις εἰρηνικοῖς καὶ ἤνοιγον αὐτῷ οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν
πόλεων καὶ συνήντων αὐτῷ ὅτι ἐντολὴ ἦν Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ βασιλέως συναντᾶν
αὐτῷ διὰ τὸ πενθερὸν αὐτοῦ εἶναι

3 ὡς δὲ εἰσεπορεύετο εἰς τὰς πόλεις Πτολεμαῖος ἀπέτασσε τὰς δυνάμεις
φρουρὰν ἐν ἑκάστῃ πόλει

4 ὡς δὲ ἤγγισαν Αζώτου ἔδειξαν αὐτῷ τὸ ἱερὸν Δαγων ἐμπεπυρισμένον καὶ
Ἄζωτον καὶ τὰ περιπόλια αὐτῆς καθῃρημένα καὶ τὰ σώματα ἐρριμμένα καὶ
τοὺς ἐμπεπυρισμένους οὓς ἐνεπύρισεν ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ ἐποίησαν γὰρ θιμωνιὰς
αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ αὐτοῦ

5 καὶ διηγήσαντο τῷ βασιλεῖ ἃ ἐποίησεν Ιωναθαν εἰς τὸ ψογίσαι αὐτόν καὶ
ἐσίγησεν ὁ βασιλεύς

6 καὶ συνήντησεν Ιωναθαν τῷ βασιλεῖ εἰς Ιοππην μετὰ δόξης καὶ ἠσπάσαντο
ἀλλήλους καὶ ἐκοιμήθησαν ἐκεῖ

7 καὶ ἐπορεύθη Ιωναθαν μετὰ τοῦ βασιλέως ἕως τοῦ ποταμοῦ τοῦ καλουμένου
Ἐλευθέρου καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ

8 ὁ δὲ βασιλεὺς Πτολεμαῖος ἐκυρίευσεν τῶν πόλεων τῆς παραλίας ἕως
Σελευκείας τῆς παραθαλασσίας καὶ διελογίζετο περὶ Ἀλεξάνδρου λογισμοὺς
πονηρούς

9 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν πρέσβεις πρὸς Δημήτριον τὸν βασιλέα λέγων δεῦρο
συνθώμεθα πρὸς ἑαυτοὺς διαθήκην καὶ δώσω σοι τὴν θυγατέρα μου ἣν εἶχεν
Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ βασιλεύσεις τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ πατρός σου

10 μεταμεμέλημαι γὰρ δοὺς αὐτῷ τὴν θυγατέρα μου ἐζήτησεν γὰρ ἀποκτεῖναί
με

11 καὶ ἐψόγισεν αὐτὸν χάριν τοῦ ἐπιθυμῆσαι αὐτὸν τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοῦ

12 καὶ ἀφελόμενος αὐτοῦ τὴν θυγατέρα ἔδωκεν αὐτὴν τῷ Δημητρίῳ καὶ
ἠλλοιώθη τῷ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ καὶ ἐφάνη ἡ ἔχθρα αὐτῶν

13 καὶ εἰσῆλθεν Πτολεμαῖος εἰς Ἀντιόχειαν καὶ περιέθετο τὸ διάδημα τῆς
Ἀσίας καὶ περιέθετο δύο διαδήματα περὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ τὸ τῆς Αἰγύπτου
καὶ Ἀσίας

14 Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ ὁ βασιλεὺς ἦν ἐν Κιλικίᾳ κατὰ τοὺς καιροὺς ἐκείνους ὅτι
ἀπεστάτουν οἱ ἀπὸ τῶν τόπων ἐκείνων

15 καὶ ἤκουσεν Ἀλέξανδρος καὶ ἦλθεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐν πολέμῳ καὶ ἐξήγαγεν
Πτολεμαῖος καὶ ἀπήντησεν αὐτῷ ἐν χειρὶ ἰσχυρᾷ καὶ ἐτροπώσατο αὐτόν

16 καὶ ἔφυγεν Ἀλέξανδρος εἰς τὴν Ἀραβίαν τοῦ σκεπασθῆναι αὐτὸν ἐκεῖ ὁ δὲ
βασιλεὺς Πτολεμαῖος ὑψώθη

17 καὶ ἀφεῖλεν Ζαβδιηλ ὁ Ἄραψ τὴν κεφαλὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου καὶ ἀπέστειλεν τῷ
Πτολεμαίῳ

18 καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς Πτολεμαῖος ἀπέθανεν ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ τῇ τρίτῃ καὶ οἱ ὄντες
ἐν τοῖς ὀχυρώμασιν αὐτοῦ ἀπώλοντο ὑπὸ τῶν ἐν τοῖς ὀχυρώμασιν

19 καὶ ἐβασίλευσεν Δημήτριος ἔτους ἑβδόμου καὶ ἑξηκοστοῦ καὶ ἑκατοστοῦ

20 ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις συνήγαγεν Ιωναθαν τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Ιουδαίας τοῦ
ἐκπολεμῆσαι τὴν ἄκραν τὴν ἐν Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ἐποίησεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν μηχανὰς
πολλάς

21 καὶ ἐπορεύθησάν τινες μισοῦντες τὸ ἔθνος αὐτῶν ἄνδρες παράνομοι πρὸς
τὸν βασιλέα καὶ ἀπήγγειλαν αὐτῷ ὅτι Ιωναθαν περικάθηται τὴν ἄκραν

22 καὶ ἀκούσας ὠργίσθη ὡς δὲ ἤκουσεν εὐθέως ἀναζεύξας ἦλθεν εἰς
Πτολεμαίδα καὶ ἔγραψεν Ιωναθαν τοῦ μὴ περικαθῆσθαι καὶ τοῦ ἀπαντῆσαι
αὐτὸν αὐτῷ συμμίσγειν εἰς Πτολεμαίδα τὴν ταχίστην

23 ὡς δὲ ἤκουσεν Ιωναθαν ἐκέλευσεν περικαθῆσθαι καὶ ἐπέλεξεν τῶν
πρεσβυτέρων Ισραηλ καὶ τῶν ἱερέων καὶ ἔδωκεν ἑαυτὸν τῷ κινδύνῳ

24 καὶ λαβὼν ἀργύριον καὶ χρυσίον καὶ ἱματισμὸν καὶ ἕτερα ξένια πλείονα
καὶ ἐπορεύθη πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα εἰς Πτολεμαίδα καὶ εὗρεν χάριν ἐναντίον
αὐτοῦ

25 καὶ ἐνετύγχανον κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ τινες ἄνομοι τῶν ἐκ τοῦ ἔθνους

26 καὶ ἐποίησεν αὐτῷ ὁ βασιλεὺς καθὼς ἐποίησαν αὐτῷ οἱ πρὸ αὐτοῦ καὶ
ὕψωσεν αὐτὸν ἐναντίον τῶν φίλων αὐτοῦ πάντων

27 καὶ ἔστησεν αὐτῷ τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα εἶχεν τίμια τὸ
πρότερον καὶ ἐποίησεν αὐτὸν τῶν πρώτων φίλων ἡγεῖσθαι

28 καὶ ἠξίωσεν Ιωναθαν τὸν βασιλέα ποιῆσαι τὴν Ιουδαίαν ἀφορολόγητον καὶ
τὰς τρεῖς τοπαρχίας καὶ τὴν Σαμαρῖτιν καὶ ἐπηγγείλατο αὐτῷ τάλαντα
τριακόσια

29 καὶ εὐδόκησεν ὁ βασιλεὺς καὶ ἔγραψεν τῷ Ιωναθαν ἐπιστολὰς περὶ πάντων
τούτων ἐχούσας τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον

30 βασιλεὺς Δημήτριος Ιωναθαν τῷ ἀδελφῷ χαίρειν καὶ ἔθνει Ιουδαίων

31 τὸ ἀντίγραφον τῆς ἐπιστολῆς ἧς ἐγράψαμεν Λασθένει τῷ συγγενεῖ ἡμῶν
περὶ ὑμῶν γεγράφαμεν καὶ πρὸς ὑμᾶς ὅπως εἰδῆτε

32 βασιλεὺς Δημήτριος Λασθένει τῷ πατρὶ χαίρειν

33 τῷ ἔθνει τῶν Ιουδαίων φίλοις ἡμῶν καὶ συντηροῦσιν τὰ πρὸς ἡμᾶς δίκαια
ἐκρίναμεν ἀγαθὸν ποιῆσαι χάριν τῆς ἐξ αὐτῶν εὐνοίας πρὸς ἡμᾶς

34 ἑστάκαμεν αὐτοῖς τά τε ὅρια τῆς Ιουδαίας καὶ τοὺς τρεῖς νομοὺς
Αφαιρεμα καὶ Λυδδα καὶ Ραθαμιν προσετέθησαν τῇ Ιουδαίᾳ ἀπὸ τῆς
Σαμαρίτιδος καὶ πάντα τὰ συγκυροῦντα αὐτοῖς πᾶσιν τοῖς θυσιάζουσιν εἰς
Ιεροσόλυμα ἀντὶ τῶν βασιλικῶν ὧν ἐλάμβανεν ὁ βασιλεὺς παρ᾽ αὐτῶν τὸ
πρότερον κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ἀπὸ τῶν γενημάτων τῆς γῆς καὶ τῶν ἀκροδρύων

35 καὶ τὰ ἄλλα τὰ ἀνήκοντα ἡμῖν ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν τῶν δεκατῶν καὶ τῶν τελῶν
τῶν ἀνηκόντων ἡμῖν καὶ τὰς τοῦ ἁλὸς λίμνας καὶ τοὺς ἀνήκοντας ἡμῖν
στεφάνους πάντα ἐπαρκέσομεν αὐτοῖς

36 καὶ οὐκ ἀθετηθήσεται οὐδὲ ἓν τούτων ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν εἰς τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον

37 νῦν οὖν ἐπιμέλεσθε τοῦ ποιῆσαι τούτων ἀντίγραφον καὶ δοθήτω Ιωναθαν
καὶ τεθήτω ἐν τῷ ὄρει τῷ ἁγίῳ ἐν τόπῳ ἐπισήμῳ

38 καὶ εἶδεν Δημήτριος ὁ βασιλεὺς ὅτι ἡσύχασεν ἡ γῆ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ καὶ
οὐδὲν αὐτῷ ἀνθειστήκει καὶ ἀπέλυσεν πάσας τὰς δυνάμεις αὐτοῦ ἕκαστον εἰς
τὸν ἴδιον τόπον πλὴν τῶν ξένων δυνάμεων ὧν ἐξενολόγησεν ἀπὸ τῶν νήσων
τῶν ἐθνῶν καὶ ἤχθραναν αὐτῷ πᾶσαι αἱ δυνάμεις αἱ ἀπὸ τῶν πατέρων

39 Τρύφων δὲ ἦν τῶν παρὰ Ἀλεξάνδρου τὸ πρότερον καὶ εἶδεν ὅτι πᾶσαι αἱ
δυνάμεις καταγογγύζουσιν κατὰ τοῦ Δημητρίου καὶ ἐπορεύθη πρὸς Ιμαλκουε
τὸν Ἄραβα ὃς ἔτρεφεν Ἀντίοχον τὸ παιδάριον τὸν τοῦ Ἀλεξάνδρου

40 καὶ προσήδρευεν αὐτῷ ὅπως παραδοῖ αὐτὸν αὐτῷ ὅπως βασιλεύσῃ ἀντὶ τοῦ
πατρὸς αὐτοῦ καὶ ἀπήγγειλεν αὐτῷ ὅσα συνετέλεσεν ὁ Δημήτριος καὶ τὴν
ἔχθραν ἣν ἐχθραίνουσιν αὐτῷ αἱ δυνάμεις αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔμεινεν ἐκεῖ ἡμέρας
πολλάς

41 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Ιωναθαν πρὸς Δημήτριον τὸν βασιλέα ἵνα ἐκβάλῃ τοὺς ἐκ
τῆς ἄκρας ἐξ Ιερουσαλημ καὶ τοὺς ἐν τοῖς ὀχυρώμασιν ἦσαν γὰρ πολεμοῦντες
τὸν Ισραηλ

42 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Δημήτριος πρὸς Ιωναθαν λέγων οὐ ταῦτα μόνον ποιήσω σοι
καὶ τῷ ἔθνει σου ἀλλὰ δόξῃ δοξάσω σε καὶ τὸ ἔθνος σου ἐὰν εὐκαιρίας τύχω

43 νῦν οὖν ὀρθῶς ποιήσεις ἀποστείλας μοι ἄνδρας οἳ συμμαχήσουσίν μοι ὅτι
ἀπέστησαν πᾶσαι αἱ δυνάμεις μου

44 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν Ιωναθαν ἄνδρας τρισχιλίους δυνατοὺς ἰσχύι αὐτῷ εἰς
Ἀντιόχειαν καὶ ἦλθον πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα καὶ ηὐφράνθη ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπὶ τῇ
ἐφόδῳ αὐτῶν

45 καὶ ἐπισυνήχθησαν οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως εἰς μέσον τῆς πόλεως εἰς ἀνδρῶν
δώδεκα μυριάδας καὶ ἠβούλοντο ἀνελεῖν τὸν βασιλέα

46 καὶ ἔφυγεν ὁ βασιλεὺς εἰς τὴν αὐλήν καὶ κατελάβοντο οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως
τὰς διόδους τῆς πόλεως καὶ ἤρξαντο πολεμεῖν

47 καὶ ἐκάλεσεν ὁ βασιλεὺς τοὺς Ιουδαίους ἐπὶ βοήθειαν καὶ ἐπισυνήχθησαν
πρὸς αὐτὸν πάντες ἅμα καὶ διεσπάρησαν ἐν τῇ πόλει καὶ ἀπέκτειναν ἐν τῇ
ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ εἰς μυριάδας δέκα

48 καὶ ἐνεπύρισαν τὴν πόλιν καὶ ἔλαβον σκῦλα πολλὰ ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ
καὶ ἔσωσαν τὸν βασιλέα

49 καὶ εἶδον οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως ὅτι κατεκράτησαν οἱ Ιουδαῖοι τῆς πόλεως
ὡς ἠβούλοντο καὶ ἠσθένησαν ταῖς διανοίαις αὐτῶν καὶ ἐκέκραξαν πρὸς τὸν
βασιλέα μετὰ δεήσεως λέγοντες

50 δὸς ἡμῖν δεξιὰς καὶ παυσάσθωσαν οἱ Ιουδαῖοι πολεμοῦντες ἡμᾶς καὶ τὴν
πόλιν

51 καὶ ἔρριψαν τὰ ὅπλα καὶ ἐποίησαν εἰρήνην καὶ ἐδοξάσθησαν οἱ Ιουδαῖοι
ἐναντίον τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ ἐνώπιον πάντων τῶν ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ αὐτοῦ καὶ
ἐπέστρεψαν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ ἔχοντες σκῦλα πολλά

52 καὶ ἐκάθισεν Δημήτριος ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπὶ θρόνου τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοῦ καὶ
ἡσύχασεν ἡ γῆ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ

53 καὶ ἐψεύσατο πάντα ὅσα εἶπεν καὶ ἠλλοτριώθη τῷ Ιωναθαν καὶ οὐκ
ἀνταπέδωκεν τὰς εὐνοίας ἃς ἀνταπέδωκεν αὐτῷ καὶ ἔθλιβεν αὐτὸν σφόδρα

54 μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἀπέστρεψεν Τρύφων καὶ Ἀντίοχος μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ παιδάριον
νεώτερον καὶ ἐβασίλευσεν καὶ ἐπέθετο διάδημα

55 καὶ ἐπισυνήχθησαν πρὸς αὐτὸν πᾶσαι αἱ δυνάμεις ἃς ἀπεσκοράκισεν
Δημήτριος καὶ ἐπολέμησαν πρὸς αὐτόν καὶ ἔφυγεν καὶ ἐτροπώθη

56 καὶ ἔλαβεν Τρύφων τὰ θηρία καὶ κατεκράτησεν τῆς Ἀντιοχείας

57 καὶ ἔγραψεν Ἀντίοχος ὁ νεώτερος Ιωναθη λέγων ἵστημί σοι τὴν
ἀρχιερωσύνην καὶ καθίστημί σε ἐπὶ τῶν τεσσάρων νομῶν καὶ εἶναί σε τῶν
φίλων τοῦ βασιλέως

58 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν αὐτῷ χρυσώματα καὶ διακονίαν καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ ἐξουσίαν
πίνειν ἐν χρυσώμασιν καὶ εἶναι ἐν πορφύρᾳ καὶ ἔχειν πόρπην χρυσῆν

59 καὶ Σιμωνα τὸν ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ κατέστησεν στρατηγὸν ἀπὸ τῆς κλίμακος
Τύρου ἕως τῶν ὁρίων Αἰγύπτου

60 καὶ ἐξῆλθεν Ιωναθαν καὶ διεπορεύετο πέραν τοῦ ποταμοῦ καὶ ἐν ταῖς
πόλεσιν καὶ ἠθροίσθησαν πρὸς αὐτὸν πᾶσα δύναμις Συρίας εἰς συμμαχίαν καὶ
ἦλθεν εἰς Ἀσκαλῶνα καὶ ἀπήντησαν αὐτῷ οἱ ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἐνδόξως

61 καὶ ἀπῆλθεν ἐκεῖθεν εἰς Γάζαν καὶ ἀπέκλεισαν οἱ ἀπὸ Γάζης καὶ
περιεκάθισεν περὶ αὐτὴν καὶ ἐνεπύρισεν τὰ περιπόλια αὐτῆς ἐν πυρὶ καὶ
ἐσκύλευσεν αὐτά

62 καὶ ἠξίωσαν οἱ ἀπὸ Γάζης Ιωναθαν καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς δεξιὰς καὶ ἔλαβεν
τοὺς υἱοὺς τῶν ἀρχόντων αὐτῶν εἰς ὅμηρα καὶ ἐξαπέστειλεν αὐτοὺς εἰς
Ιερουσαλημ καὶ διῆλθεν τὴν χώραν ἕως Δαμασκοῦ

63 καὶ ἤκουσεν Ιωναθαν ὅτι παρῆσαν οἱ ἄρχοντες Δημητρίου εἰς Κηδες τὴν
ἐν τῇ Γαλιλαίᾳ μετὰ δυνάμεως πολλῆς βουλόμενοι μεταστῆσαι αὐτὸν τῆς
χρείας

64 καὶ συνήντησεν αὐτοῖς τὸν δὲ ἀδελφὸν αὐτοῦ Σιμωνα κατέλιπεν ἐν τῇ
χώρᾳ

65 καὶ παρενέβαλεν Σιμων ἐπὶ Βαιθσουρα καὶ ἐπολέμει αὐτὴν ἡμέρας πολλὰς
καὶ συνέκλεισεν αὐτήν

66 καὶ ἠξίωσαν αὐτὸν τοῦ δεξιὰς λαβεῖν καὶ ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς καὶ ἐξέβαλεν
αὐτοὺς ἐκεῖθεν καὶ κατελάβετο τὴν πόλιν καὶ ἔθετο ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν φρουράν

67 καὶ Ιωναθαν καὶ ἡ παρεμβολὴ αὐτοῦ παρενέβαλον ἐπὶ τὸ ὕδωρ τοῦ
Γεννησαρ καὶ ὤρθρισαν τὸ πρωὶ εἰς τὸ πεδίον Ασωρ

68 καὶ ἰδοὺ ἡ παρεμβολὴ ἀλλοφύλων ἀπήντα αὐτῷ ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ καὶ ἐξέβαλον
ἔνεδρον ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς ὄρεσιν αὐτοὶ δὲ ἀπήντησαν ἐξ ἐναντίας

69 τὰ δὲ ἔνεδρα ἐξανέστησαν ἐκ τῶν τόπων αὐτῶν καὶ συνῆψαν πόλεμον

70 καὶ ἔφυγον οἱ παρὰ Ιωναθου πάντες οὐδὲ εἷς κατελείφθη ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν πλὴν
Ματταθιας ὁ τοῦ Αψαλωμου καὶ Ιουδας ὁ τοῦ Χαλφι ἄρχοντες τῆς στρατιᾶς
τῶν δυνάμεων

71 καὶ διέρρηξεν Ιωναθαν τὰ ἱμάτια αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπέθετο γῆν ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν
αὐτοῦ καὶ προσηύξατο

72 καὶ ὑπέστρεψεν πρὸς αὐτοὺς πολέμῳ καὶ ἐτροπώσατο αὐτούς καὶ ἔφυγον

73 καὶ εἶδον οἱ φεύγοντες παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπέστρεψαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν καὶ
ἐδίωκον μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἕως Κεδες ἕως τῆς παρεμβολῆς αὐτῶν καὶ παρενέβαλον
ἐκεῖ

74 καὶ ἔπεσον ἐκ τῶν ἀλλοφύλων ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ εἰς ἄνδρας τρισχιλίους
καὶ ἐπέστρεψεν Ιωναθαν εἰς Ιερουσαλημ

[Vul](../vul/ma1011)

1 Et rex Ægypti congregavit exercitum, sicut arena quæ est circa oram
maris, et naves multas: et quærebat obtinere regnum Alexandri dolo, et
addere illud regno suo.

2 Et exiit in Syriam verbis pacificis, et aperiebant ei civitates, et
occurrebant ei: quia mandaverat Alexander rex exire ei obviam, eo quod
socer suus esset.

3 Cum autem introiret civitatem Ptolemæus, ponebat custodias militum in
singulis civitatibus.

4 Et ut appropiavit Azoto, ostenderunt ei templum Dagon succensum igni,
et Azotum, et cetera ejus demolita, et corpora projecta, et eorum, qui
cæsi erant in bello, tumulos quos fecerant secus viam.

5 Et narraverunt regi quia hæc fecit Jonathas, ut invidiam facerent ei:
et tacuit rex.

6 Et occurrit Jonathas regi in Joppen cum gloria, et invicem se
salutaverunt, et dormierunt illic.

7 Et abiit Jonathas cum rege usque ad fluvium qui vocatur Eleutherus: et
reversus est in Jerusalem.

8 Rex autem Ptolemæus obtinuit dominium civitatum usque Seleuciam
maritimam, et cogitabat in Alexandrum consilia mala.

9 Et misit legatos ad Demetrium, dicens: Veni, componamus inter nos
pactum, et dabo tibi filiam meam, quam habet Alexander, et regnabis in
regno patris tui:

10 pœnitet enim me quod dederim illi filiam meam: quæsivit enim me
occidere.

11 Et vituperavit eum, propterea quod concupierat regnum ejus.

12 Et abstulit filiam suam, et dedit eam Demetrio, et alienavit se ab
Alexandro, et manifestæ sunt inimicitiæ ejus.

13 Et intravit Ptolemæus Antiochiam, et imposuit duo diademata capiti
suo, Ægypti et Asiæ.  

14 Alexander autem rex erat in Cilicia illis temporibus: quia
rebellabant qui erant in locis illis.

15 Et audivit Alexander, et venit ad eum in bellum: et produxit
Ptolemæus rex exercitum, et occurrit ei in manu valida, et fugavit eum.

16 Et fugit Alexander in Arabiam, ut ibi protegeretur: rex autem
Ptolemæus exaltatus est.

17 Et abstulit Zabdiel Arabs caput Alexandri, et misit Ptolemæo.

18 Et rex Ptolemæus mortuus est in die tertia: et qui erant in
munitionibus, perierunt ab his qui erant intra castra.

19 Et regnavit Demetrius anno centesimo sexagesimo septimo.  

20 In diebus illis congregavit Jonathas eos qui erant in Judæa, ut
expugnarent arcem quæ est in Jerusalem: et fecerunt contra eam machinas
multas.

21 Et abierunt quidam qui oderant gentem suam viri iniqui ad regem
Demetrium, et renuntiaverunt ei quod Jonathas obsideret arcem.

22 Et ut audivit, iratus est: et statim venit ad Ptolemaidam, et
scripsit Jonathæ ne obsideret arcem, sed occurreret sibi ad colloquium
festinato.

23 Ut audivit autem Jonathas, jussit obsidere: et elegit de senioribus
Israël, et de sacerdotibus, et dedit se periculo.

24 Et accepit aurum, et argentum, et vestem, et alia xenia multa, et
abiit ad regem Ptolemaidam: et invenit gratiam in conspectu ejus,

25 et interpellabant adversus eum quidam iniqui ex gente sua.

26 Et fecit ei rex sicut fecerant ei qui ante eum fuerant: et exaltavit
eum in conspectu omnium amicorum suorum,

27 et statuit ei principatum sacerdotii, et quæcumque alia habuit prius
pretiosa, et fecit eum principem amicorum.

28 Et postulavit Jonathas a rege ut immunem faceret Judæam, et tres
toparchias, et Samariam et confines ejus: et promisit ei talenta
trecenta.

29 Et consensit rex: et scripsit Jonathæ epistolas de his omnibus, hunc
modum continentes:

30 Rex Demetrius fratri Jonathæ salutem, et genti Judæorum.

31 Exemplum epistolæ, quam scripsimus Lastheni parenti nostro de vobis,
misimus ad vos ut sciretis:

32 Rex Demetrius Lastheni parenti salutem.

33 Genti Judæorum amicis nostris, et conservantibus quæ justa sunt apud
nos, decrevimus benefacere propter benignitatem ipsorum, quam erga nos
habent.

34 Statuimus ergo illis omnes fines Judææ, et tres civitates, Lydan, et
Ramathan, quæ additæ sunt Judææ ex Samaria, et omnes confines earum,
sequestrari omnibus sacrificantibus in Jerosolymis pro his quæ ab eis
prius accipiebat rex per singulos annos, et pro fructibus terræ et
pomorum.

35 Et alia quæ ad nos pertinebant decimarum et tributorum ex hoc
tempore, remittimus eis: et areas salinarum, et coronas, quæ nobis
deferebantur,

36 omnia ipsis concedimus: et nihil horum irritum erit, ex hoc, et in
omne tempus.

37 Nunc ergo curate facere horum exemplum, et detur Jonathæ, et ponatur
in monte sancto, in loco celebri.  

38 Et videns Demetrius rex quod siluit terra in conspectu suo, et nihil
ei resistit, dimisit totum exercitum suum, unumquemque in locum suum,
excepto peregrino exercitu, quem contraxit ab insulis gentium: et
inimici erant ei omnes exercitus patrum ejus.

39 Tryphon autem erat quidam partium Alexandri prius: et vidit quoniam
omnis exercitus murmurabat contra Demetrium, et ivit ad Emalchuel
Arabem, qui nutriebat Antiochum filium Alexandri:

40 et assidebat ei, ut traderet eum ipsi, ut regnaret loco patris sui:
et enuntiavit ei quanta fecit Demetrius, et inimicitias exercituum ejus
adversus illum. Et mansit ibi diebus multis.

41 Et misit Jonathas ad Demetrium regem, ut ejiceret eos qui in arce
erant in Jerusalem, et qui in præsidiis erant: quia impugnabant Israël.

42 Et misit Demetrius ad Jonathan, dicens: Non hæc tantum faciam tibi,
et genti tuæ, sed gloria illustrabo te, et gentem tuam, cum fuerit
opportunum.

43 Nunc ergo recte feceris, si miseris in auxilium mihi viros: quia
discessit omnis exercitus meus.

44 Et misit ei Jonathas tria millia virorum fortium Antiochiam: et
venerunt ad regem, et delectatus est rex in adventu eorum.

45 Et convenerunt qui erant de civitate, centum viginti millia virorum,
et volebant interficere regem.

46 Et fugit rex in aulam: et occupaverunt qui erant de civitate, itinera
civitatis, et cœperunt pugnare.

47 Et vocavit rex Judæos in auxilium, et convenerunt omnes simul ad eum,
et dispersi sunt omnes per civitatem:

48 et occiderunt in illa die centum millia hominum, et succenderunt
civitatem, et ceperunt spolia multa in die illa, et liberaverunt regem.

49 Et viderunt qui erant de civitate, quod obtinuissent Judæi civitatem
sicut volebant: et infirmati sunt mente sua, et clamaverunt ad regem cum
precibus, dicentes:

50 Da nobis dextras, et cessent Judæi oppugnare nos, et civitatem.

51 Et projecerunt arma sua, et fecerunt pacem, et glorificati sunt Judæi
in conspectu regis, et in conspectu omnium qui erant in regno ejus, et
nominati sunt in regno: et regressi sunt in Jerusalem habentes spolia
multa.

52 Et sedit Demetrius rex in sede regni sui: et siluit terra in
conspectu ejus.

53 Et mentitus est omnia quæcumque dixit, et abalienavit se a Jonatha,
et non retribuit ei secundum beneficia quæ sibi tribuerat, et vexabat
eum valde.

54 Post hæc autem reversus est Tryphon, et Antiochus cum eo puer
adolescens, et regnavit, et imposuit sibi diadema.

55 Et congregati sunt ad eum omnes exercitus, quos disperserat
Demetrius, et pugnaverunt contra eum: et fugit, et terga vertit.

56 Et accepit Tryphon bestias, et obtinuit Antiochiam.  

57 Et scripsit Antiochus adolescens Jonathæ, dicens: Constituo tibi
sacerdotium, et constituo te super quatuor civitates, ut sis de amicis
regis.

58 Et misit illi vasa aurea in ministerium, et dedit ei potestatem
bibendi in auro, et esse in purpura, et habere fibulam auream:

59 et Simonem fratrem ejus constituit ducem a terminis Tyri usque ad
fines Ægypti.

60 Et exiit Jonathas, et perambulabat trans flumen civitates: et
congregatus est ad eum omnis exercitus Syriæ in auxilium, et venit
Ascalonem, et occurrerunt ei honorifice de civitate.

61 Et abiit inde Gazam: et concluserunt se qui erant Gazæ: et obsedit
eam, et succendit quæ erant in circuitu civitatis, et prædatus est ea.

62 Et rogaverunt Gazenses Jonathan, et dedit illis dexteram: et accepit
filios eorum obsides, et misit illos in Jerusalem: et perambulavit
regionem usque Damascum.

63 Et audivit Jonathas quod prævaricati sunt principes Demetrii in
Cades, quæ est in Galilæa, cum exercitu multo, volentes eum removere a
negotio regni:

64 et occurrit illis: fratrem autem suum Simonem reliquit intra
provinciam.

65 Et applicuit Simon ad Bethsuram, et expugnabat eam diebus multis, et
conclusit eos.

66 Et postulaverunt ab eo dextras accipere, et dedit illis: et ejecit
eos inde, et cepit civitatem, et posuit in ea præsidium.

67 Et Jonathas et castra ejus applicuerunt ad aquam Genesar, et ante
lucem vigilaverunt in campo Asor:

68 et ecce castra alienigenarum occurrebant in campo, et tendebant ei
insidias in montibus: ipse autem occurrit ex adverso.

69 Insidiæ vero exsurrexerunt de locis suis, et commiserunt prælium.

70 Et fugerunt qui erant ex parte Jonathæ omnes, et nemo relictus est ex
eis, nisi Mathathias filius Absolomi, et Judas filius Calphi, princeps
militiæ exercitus.

71 Et scidit Jonathas vestimenta sua, et posuit terram in capite suo, et
oravit.

72 Et reversus est Jonathas ad eos in prælium, et convertit eos in
fugam, et pugnaverunt.

73 Et viderunt qui fugiebant partis illius, et reversi sunt ad eum, et
insequebantur cum eo omnes usque Cades ad castra sua, et pervenerunt
usque illuc:

74 et ceciderunt de alienigenis in die illa tria millia virorum: et
reversus est Jonathas in Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 12](ma1012)
