[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1002)  [Next](ma1004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1 Macabees 3

[Apo](../apo/ma1003)

1 Then his son Judas, called Maccabeus, rose up in his stead.

2 And all his brethren helped him, and so did all they that held with
his father, and they fought with cheerfulness the battle of Israel.

3 So he gat his people great honour, and put on a breastplate as a
giant, and girt his warlike harness about him, and he made battles,
protecting the host with his sword.

4 In his acts he was like a lion, and like a lion's whelp roaring for
his prey.

5 For He pursued the wicked, and sought them out, and burnt up those
that vexed his people.

6 Wherefore the wicked shrunk for fear of him, and all the workers of
iniquity were troubled, because salvation prospered in his hand.

7 He grieved also many kings, and made Jacob glad with his acts, and his
memorial is blessed for ever.

8 Moreover he went through the cities of Juda, destroying the ungodly
out of them, and turning away wrath from Israel:

9 So that he was renowned unto the utmost part of the earth, and he
received unto him such as were ready to perish.

10 Then Apollonius gathered the Gentiles together, and a great host out
of Samaria, to fight against Israel.

11 Which thing when Judas perceived, he went forth to meet him, and so
he smote him, and slew him: many also fell down slain, but the rest
fled.

12 Wherefore Judas took their spoils, and Apollonius' sword also, and
therewith he fought all his life long.

13 Now when Seron, a prince of the army of Syria, heard say that Judas
had gathered unto him a multitude and company of the faithful to go out
with him to war;

14 He said, I will get me a name and honour in the kingdom; for I will
go fight with Judas and them that are with him, who despise the king's
commandment.

15 So he made him ready to go up, and there went with him a mighty host
of the ungodly to help him, and to be avenged of the children of Israel.

16 And when he came near to the going up of Bethhoron, Judas went forth
to meet him with a small company:

17 Who, when they saw the host coming to meet them, said unto Judas, How
shall we be able, being so few, to fight against so great a multitude
and so strong, seeing we are ready to faint with fasting all this day?

18 Unto whom Judas answered, It is no hard matter for many to be shut up
in the hands of a few; and with the God of heaven it is all one, to
deliver with a great multitude, or a small company:

19 For the victory of battle standeth not in the multitude of an host;
but strength cometh from heaven.

20 They come against us in much pride and iniquity to destroy us, and
our wives and children, and to spoil us:

21 But we fight for our lives and our laws.

22 Wherefore the Lord himself will overthrow them before our face: and
as for you, be ye not afraid of them.

23 Now as soon as he had left off speaking, he leapt suddenly upon them,
and so Seron and his host was overthrown before him.

24 And they pursued them from the going down of Bethhoron unto the
plain, where were slain about eight hundred men of them; and the residue
fled into the land of the Philistines.

25 Then began the fear of Judas and his brethren, and an exceeding great
dread, to fall upon the nations round about them:

26 Insomuch as his fame came unto the king, and all nations talked of
the battles of Judas.

27 Now when king Antiochus heard these things, he was full of
indignation: wherefore he sent and gathered together all the forces of
his realm, even a very strong army.

28 He opened also his treasure, and gave his soldiers pay for a year,
commanding them to be ready whensoever he should need them.

29 Nevertheless, when he saw that the money of his treasures failed and
that the tributes in the country were small, because of the dissension
and plague, which he had brought upon the land in taking away the laws
which had been of old time;

30 He feared that he should not be able to bear the charges any longer,
nor to have such gifts to give so liberally as he did before: for he had
abounded above the kings that were before him.

31 Wherefore, being greatly perplexed in his mind, he determined to go
into Persia, there to take the tributes of the countries, and to gather
much money.

32 So he left Lysias, a nobleman, and one of the blood royal, to oversee
the affairs of the king from the river Euphrates unto the borders of
Egypt:

33 And to bring up his son Antiochus, until he came again.

34 Moreover he delivered unto him the half of his forces, and the
elephants, and gave him charge of all things that he would have done, as
also concerning them that dwelt in Juda and Jerusalem:

35 To wit, that he should send an army against them, to destroy and root
out the strength of Israel, and the remnant of Jerusalem, and to take
away their memorial from that place;

36 And that he should place strangers in all their quarters, and divide
their land by lot.

37 So the king took the half of the forces that remained, and departed
from Antioch, his royal city, the hundred forty and seventh year; and
having passed the river Euphrates, he went through the high countries.

38 Then Lysias chose Ptolemee the son of Dorymenes, Nicanor, and
Gorgias, mighty men of the king's friends:

39 And with them he sent forty thousand footmen, and seven thousand
horsemen, to go into the land of Juda, and to destroy it, as the king
commanded.

40 So they went forth with all their power, and came and pitched by
Emmaus in the plain country.

41 And the merchants of the country, hearing the fame of them, took
silver and gold very much, with servants, and came into the camp to buy
the children of Israel for slaves: a power also of Syria and of the land
of the Philistines joined themselves unto them.

42 Now when Judas and his brethren saw that miseries were multiplied,
and that the forces did encamp themselves in their borders: for they
knew how the king had given commandment to destroy the people, and
utterly abolish them;

43 They said one to another, Let us restore the decayed fortune of our
people, and let us fight for our people and the sanctuary.

44 Then was the congregation gathered together, that they might be ready
for battle, and that they might pray, and ask mercy and compassion.

45 Now Jerusalem lay void as a wilderness, there was none of her
children that went in or out: the sanctuary also was trodden down, and
aliens kept the strong hold; the heathen had their habitation in that
place; and joy was taken from Jacob, and the pipe with the harp ceased.

46 Wherefore the Israelites assembled themselves together, and came to
Maspha, over against Jerusalem; for in Maspha was the place where they
prayed aforetime in Israel.

47 Then they fasted that day, and put on sackcloth, and cast ashes upon
their heads, and rent their clothes,

48 And laid open the book of the law, wherein the heathen had sought to
paint the likeness of their images.

49 They brought also the priests' garments, and the firstfruits, and the
tithes: and the Nazarites they stirred up, who had accomplished their
days.

50 Then cried they with a loud voice toward heaven, saying, What shall
we do with these, and whither shall we carry them away?

51 For thy sanctuary is trodden down and profaned, and thy priests are
in heaviness, and brought low.

52 And lo, the heathen are assembled together against us to destroy us:
what things they imagine against us, thou knowest.

53 How shall we be able to stand against them, except thou, O God, be
our help?

54 Then sounded they with trumpets, and cried with a loud voice.

55 And after this Judas ordained captains over the people, even captains
over thousands, and over hundreds, and over fifties, and over tens.

56 But as for such as were building houses, or had betrothed wives, or
were planting vineyards, or were fearful, those he commanded that they
should return, every man to his own house, according to the law.

57 So the camp removed, and pitched upon the south side of Emmaus.

58 And Judas said, arm yourselves, and be valiant men, and see that ye
be in readiness against the morning, that ye may fight with these
nations, that are assembled together against us to destroy us and our
sanctuary:

59 For it is better for us to die in battle, than to behold the
calamities of our people and our sanctuary.

60 Nevertheless, as the will of God is in heaven, so let him do.

[Sep](../sep/ma1003)

1 καὶ ἀνέστη Ιουδας ὁ καλούμενος Μακκαβαῖος υἱὸς αὐτοῦ ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ

2 καὶ ἐβοήθουν αὐτῷ πάντες οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ πάντες ὅσοι ἐκολλήθησαν
τῷ πατρὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπολέμουν τὸν πόλεμον Ισραηλ μετ᾽ εὐφροσύνης

3 καὶ ἐπλάτυνεν δόξαν τῷ λαῷ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐνεδύσατο θώρακα ὡς γίγας καὶ
συνεζώσατο τὰ σκεύη τὰ πολεμικὰ αὐτοῦ καὶ πολέμους συνεστήσατο σκεπάζων
παρεμβολὴν ἐν ῥομφαίᾳ

4 καὶ ὡμοιώθη λέοντι ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις αὐτοῦ καὶ ὡς σκύμνος ἐρευγόμενος εἰς
θήραν

5 καὶ ἐδίωξεν ἀνόμους ἐξερευνῶν καὶ τοὺς ταράσσοντας τὸν λαὸν αὐτοῦ
ἐφλόγισεν

6 καὶ συνεστάλησαν ἄνομοι ἀπὸ τοῦ φόβου αὐτοῦ καὶ πάντες οἱ ἐργάται τῆς
ἀνομίας συνεταράχθησαν καὶ εὐοδώθη σωτηρία ἐν χειρὶ αὐτοῦ

7 καὶ ἐπίκρανεν βασιλεῖς πολλοὺς καὶ εὔφρανεν τὸν Ιακωβ ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἕως τοῦ αἰῶνος τὸ μνημόσυνον αὐτοῦ εἰς εὐλογίαν

8 καὶ διῆλθεν ἐν πόλεσιν Ιουδα καὶ ἐξωλέθρευσεν ἀσεβεῖς ἐξ αὐτῆς καὶ
ἀπέστρεψεν ὀργὴν ἀπὸ Ισραηλ

9 καὶ ὠνομάσθη ἕως ἐσχάτου γῆς καὶ συνήγαγεν ἀπολλυμένους

10 καὶ συνήγαγεν Ἀπολλώνιος ἔθνη καὶ ἀπὸ Σαμαρείας δύναμιν μεγάλην τοῦ
πολεμῆσαι πρὸς τὸν Ισραηλ

11 καὶ ἔγνω Ιουδας καὶ ἐξῆλθεν εἰς συνάντησιν αὐτῷ καὶ ἐπάταξεν αὐτὸν
καὶ ἀπέκτεινεν καὶ ἔπεσον τραυματίαι πολλοί καὶ οἱ ἐπίλοιποι ἔφυγον

12 καὶ ἔλαβον τὰ σκῦλα αὐτῶν καὶ τὴν μάχαιραν Ἀπολλωνίου ἔλαβεν Ιουδας
καὶ ἦν πολεμῶν ἐν αὐτῇ πάσας τὰς ἡμέρας

13 καὶ ἤκουσεν Σήρων ὁ ἄρχων τῆς δυνάμεως Συρίας ὅτι ἤθροισεν Ιουδας
ἄθροισμα καὶ ἐκκλησίαν πιστῶν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐκπορευομένων εἰς πόλεμον

14 καὶ εἶπεν ποιήσω ἐμαυτῷ ὄνομα καὶ δοξασθήσομαι ἐν τῇ βασιλείᾳ καὶ
πολεμήσω τὸν Ιουδαν καὶ τοὺς σὺν αὐτῷ τοὺς ἐξουδενοῦντας τὸν λόγον τοῦ
βασιλέως

15 καὶ προσέθετο καὶ ἀνέβη μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ παρεμβολὴ ἀσεβῶν ἰσχυρὰ βοηθῆσαι
αὐτῷ ποιῆσαι τὴν ἐκδίκησιν ἐν υἱοῖς Ισραηλ

16 καὶ ἤγγισεν ἕως ἀναβάσεως Βαιθωρων καὶ ἐξῆλθεν Ιουδας εἰς συνάντησιν
αὐτῷ ὀλιγοστός

17 ὡς δὲ εἶδον τὴν παρεμβολὴν ἐρχομένην εἰς συνάντησιν αὐτῶν εἶπον τῷ
Ιουδα τί δυνησόμεθα ὀλιγοστοὶ ὄντες πολεμῆσαι πρὸς πλῆθος τοσοῦτο
ἰσχυρόν καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐκλελύμεθα ἀσιτοῦντες σήμερον

18 καὶ εἶπεν Ιουδας εὔκοπόν ἐστιν συγκλεισθῆναι πολλοὺς ἐν χερσὶν ὀλίγων
καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν διαφορὰ ἐναντίον τοῦ οὐρανοῦ σῴζειν ἐν πολλοῖς ἢ ἐν
ὀλίγοις

19 ὅτι οὐκ ἐν πλήθει δυνάμεως νίκη πολέμου ἐστίν ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἡ
ἰσχύς

20 αὐτοὶ ἔρχονται ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἐν πλήθει ὕβρεως καὶ ἀνομίας τοῦ ἐξᾶραι ἡμᾶς
καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας ἡμῶν καὶ τὰ τέκνα ἡμῶν τοῦ σκυλεῦσαι ἡμᾶς

21 ἡμεῖς δὲ πολεμοῦμεν περὶ τῶν ψυχῶν ἡμῶν καὶ τῶν νομίμων ἡμῶν

22 καὶ αὐτὸς συντρίψει αὐτοὺς πρὸ προσώπου ἡμῶν ὑμεῖς δὲ μὴ φοβεῖσθε ἀπ᾽
αὐτῶν

23 ὡς δὲ ἐπαύσατο λαλῶν ἐνήλατο εἰς αὐτοὺς ἄφνω καὶ συνετρίβη Σήρων καὶ
ἡ παρεμβολὴ αὐτοῦ ἐνώπιον αὐτοῦ

24 καὶ ἐδίωκον αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ καταβάσει Βαιθωρων ἕως τοῦ πεδίου καὶ ἔπεσον
ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν εἰς ἄνδρας ὀκτακοσίους οἱ δὲ λοιποὶ ἔφυγον εἰς γῆν Φυλιστιιμ

25 καὶ ἤρξατο ὁ φόβος Ιουδου καὶ τῶν ἀδελφῶν αὐτοῦ καὶ ἡ πτόη ἐπέπιπτεν
ἐπὶ τὰ ἔθνη τὰ κύκλῳ αὐτῶν

26 καὶ ἤγγισεν ἕως τοῦ βασιλέως τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ καὶ ὑπὲρ τῶν παρατάξεων
Ιουδου ἐξηγεῖτο τὰ ἔθνη

27 ὡς δὲ ἤκουσεν ὁ βασιλεὺς Ἀντίοχος τοὺς λόγους τούτους ὠργίσθη θυμῷ
καὶ ἀπέστειλεν καὶ συνήγαγεν τὰς δυνάμεις πάσας τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοῦ
παρεμβολὴν ἰσχυρὰν σφόδρα

28 καὶ ἤνοιξεν τὸ γαζοφυλάκιον αὐτοῦ καὶ ἔδωκεν ὀψώνια ταῖς δυνάμεσιν
εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν καὶ ἐνετείλατο αὐτοῖς εἶναι ἑτοίμους εἰς πᾶσαν χρείαν

29 καὶ εἶδεν ὅτι ἐξέλιπεν τὸ ἀργύριον ἐκ τῶν θησαυρῶν καὶ οἱ φόροι τῆς
χώρας ὀλίγοι χάριν τῆς διχοστασίας καὶ πληγῆς ἧς κατεσκεύασεν ἐν τῇ γῇ
τοῦ ἆραι τὰ νόμιμα ἃ ἦσαν ἀφ᾽ ἡμερῶν τῶν πρώτων

30 καὶ εὐλαβήθη μὴ οὐκ ἔχῃ ὡς ἅπαξ καὶ δὶς εἰς τὰς δαπάνας καὶ τὰ δόματα
ἃ ἐδίδου ἔμπροσθεν δαψιλῇ χειρὶ καὶ ἐπερίσσευσεν ὑπὲρ τοὺς βασιλεῖς τοὺς
ἔμπροσθεν

31 καὶ ἠπορεῖτο τῇ ψυχῇ αὐτοῦ σφόδρα καὶ ἐβουλεύσατο τοῦ πορευθῆναι εἰς
τὴν Περσίδα καὶ λαβεῖν τοὺς φόρους τῶν χωρῶν καὶ συναγαγεῖν ἀργύριον
πολύ

32 καὶ κατέλιπεν Λυσίαν ἄνθρωπον ἔνδοξον καὶ ἀπὸ γένους τῆς βασιλείας
ἐπὶ τῶν πραγμάτων τοῦ βασιλέως ἀπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ Εὐφράτου καὶ ἕως ὁρίων
Αἰγύπτου

33 καὶ τρέφειν Ἀντίοχον τὸν υἱὸν αὐτοῦ ἕως τοῦ ἐπιστρέψαι αὐτόν

34 καὶ παρέδωκεν αὐτῷ τὰς ἡμίσεις τῶν δυνάμεων καὶ τοὺς ἐλέφαντας καὶ
ἐνετείλατο αὐτῷ περὶ πάντων ὧν ἠβούλετο καὶ περὶ τῶν κατοικούντων τὴν
Ιουδαίαν καὶ Ιερουσαλημ

35 ἀποστεῖλαι ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς δύναμιν τοῦ ἐκτρῖψαι καὶ ἐξᾶραι τὴν ἰσχὺν
Ισραηλ καὶ τὸ κατάλειμμα Ιερουσαλημ καὶ ἆραι τὸ μνημόσυνον αὐτῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ
τόπου

36 καὶ κατοικίσαι υἱοὺς ἀλλογενεῖς ἐν πᾶσιν τοῖς ὁρίοις αὐτῶν καὶ
κατακληροδοτῆσαι τὴν γῆν αὐτῶν

37 καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς παρέλαβεν τὰς ἡμίσεις τῶν δυνάμεων τὰς καταλειφθείσας
καὶ ἀπῆρεν ἀπὸ Ἀντιοχείας ἀπὸ πόλεως βασιλείας αὐτοῦ ἔτους ἑβδόμου καὶ
τεσσαρακοστοῦ καὶ ἑκατοστοῦ καὶ διεπέρασεν τὸν Εὐφράτην ποταμὸν καὶ
διεπορεύετο τὰς ἐπάνω χώρας

38 καὶ ἐπέλεξεν Λυσίας Πτολεμαῖον τὸν Δορυμένους καὶ Νικάνορα καὶ
Γοργίαν ἄνδρας δυνατοὺς τῶν φίλων τοῦ βασιλέως

39 καὶ ἀπέστειλεν μετ᾽ αὐτῶν τεσσαράκοντα χιλιάδας ἀνδρῶν καὶ
ἑπτακισχιλίαν ἵππον τοῦ ἐλθεῖν εἰς γῆν Ιουδα καὶ καταφθεῖραι αὐτὴν κατὰ
τὸν λόγον τοῦ βασιλέως

40 καὶ ἀπῆρεν σὺν πάσῃ τῇ δυνάμει αὐτῶν καὶ ἦλθον καὶ παρενέβαλον
πλησίον Αμμαους ἐν τῇ γῇ τῇ πεδινῇ

41 καὶ ἤκουσαν οἱ ἔμποροι τῆς χώρας τὸ ὄνομα αὐτῶν καὶ ἔλαβον ἀργύριον
καὶ χρυσίον πολὺ σφόδρα καὶ πέδας καὶ ἦλθον εἰς τὴν παρεμβολὴν τοῦ
λαβεῖν τοὺς υἱοὺς Ισραηλ εἰς παῖδας καὶ προσετέθησαν πρὸς αὐτοὺς δύναμις
Συρίας καὶ γῆς ἀλλοφύλων

42 καὶ εἶδεν Ιουδας καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ αὐτοῦ ὅτι ἐπληθύνθη τὰ κακὰ καὶ αἱ
δυνάμεις παρεμβάλλουσιν ἐν τοῖς ὁρίοις αὐτῶν καὶ ἐπέγνωσαν τοὺς λόγους
τοῦ βασιλέως οὓς ἐνετείλατο ποιῆσαι τῷ λαῷ εἰς ἀπώλειαν καὶ συντέλειαν

43 καὶ εἶπαν ἕκαστος πρὸς τὸν πλησίον αὐτοῦ ἀναστήσωμεν τὴν καθαίρεσιν
τοῦ λαοῦ ἡμῶν καὶ πολεμήσωμεν περὶ τοῦ λαοῦ ἡμῶν καὶ τῶν ἁγίων

44 καὶ ἠθροίσθη ἡ συναγωγὴ τοῦ εἶναι ἑτοίμους εἰς πόλεμον καὶ τοῦ
προσεύξασθαι καὶ αἰτῆσαι ἔλεος καὶ οἰκτιρμούς

45 καὶ Ιερουσαλημ ἦν ἀοίκητος ὡς ἔρημος οὐκ ἦν ὁ εἰσπορευόμενος καὶ
ἐκπορευόμενος ἐκ τῶν γενημάτων αὐτῆς καὶ τὸ ἁγίασμα καταπατούμενον καὶ
υἱοὶ ἀλλογενῶν ἐν τῇ ἄκρᾳ κατάλυμα τοῖς ἔθνεσιν καὶ ἐξήρθη τέρψις ἐξ
Ιακωβ καὶ ἐξέλιπεν αὐλὸς καὶ κινύρα

46 καὶ συνήχθησαν καὶ ἤλθοσαν εἰς Μασσηφα κατέναντι Ιερουσαλημ ὅτι τόπος
προσευχῆς ἦν ἐν Μασσηφα τὸ πρότερον τῷ Ισραηλ

47 καὶ ἐνήστευσαν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ ἐκείνῃ καὶ περιεβάλοντο σάκκους καὶ σποδὸν
ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν αὐτῶν καὶ διέρρηξαν τὰ ἱμάτια αὐτῶν

48 καὶ ἐξεπέτασαν τὸ βιβλίον τοῦ νόμου περὶ ὧν ἐξηρεύνων τὰ ἔθνη τὰ
ὁμοιώματα τῶν εἰδώλων αὐτῶν

49 καὶ ἤνεγκαν τὰ ἱμάτια τῆς ἱερωσύνης καὶ τὰ πρωτογενήματα καὶ τὰς
δεκάτας καὶ ἤγειραν τοὺς ναζιραίους οἳ ἐπλήρωσαν τὰς ἡμέρας

50 καὶ ἐβόησαν φωνῇ εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν λέγοντες τί ποιήσωμεν τούτοις καὶ
ποῦ αὐτοὺς ἀπαγάγωμεν

51 καὶ τὰ ἅγιά σου καταπεπάτηνται καὶ βεβήλωνται καὶ οἱ ἱερεῖς σου ἐν
πένθει καὶ ταπεινώσει

52 καὶ ἰδοὺ τὰ ἔθνη συνῆκται ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς τοῦ ἐξᾶραι ἡμᾶς σὺ οἶδας ἃ
λογίζονται ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς

53 πῶς δυνησόμεθα ὑποστῆναι κατὰ πρόσωπον αὐτῶν ἐὰν μὴ σὺ βοηθήσῃς ἡμῖν

54 καὶ ἐσάλπισαν ταῖς σάλπιγξιν καὶ ἐβόησαν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ

55 καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο κατέστησεν Ιουδας ἡγουμένους τοῦ λαοῦ χιλιάρχους καὶ
ἑκατοντάρχους καὶ πεντηκοντάρχους καὶ δεκαδάρχους

56 καὶ εἶπεν τοῖς οἰκοδομοῦσιν οἰκίας καὶ μνηστευομένοις γυναῖκας καὶ
φυτεύουσιν ἀμπελῶνας καὶ δειλοῖς ἀποστρέφειν ἕκαστον εἰς τὸν οἶκον αὐτοῦ
κατὰ τὸν νόμον

57 καὶ ἀπῆρεν ἡ παρεμβολή καὶ παρενέβαλον κατὰ νότον Αμμαους

58 καὶ εἶπεν Ιουδας περιζώσασθε καὶ γίνεσθε εἰς υἱοὺς δυνατοὺς καὶ
γίνεσθε ἕτοιμοι εἰς πρωὶ τοῦ πολεμῆσαι ἐν τοῖς ἔθνεσιν τούτοις τοῖς
ἐπισυνηγμένοις ἐφ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἐξᾶραι ἡμᾶς καὶ τὰ ἅγια ἡμῶν

59 ὅτι κρεῖσσον ἡμᾶς ἀποθανεῖν ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ ἢ ἐπιδεῖν ἐπὶ τὰ κακὰ τοῦ
ἔθνους ἡμῶν καὶ τῶν ἁγίων

60 ὡς δ᾽ ἂν ᾖ θέλημα ἐν οὐρανῷ οὕτως ποιήσει

[Vul](../vul/ma1003)

1 Et surrexit Judas, qui vocabatur Machabæus, filius ejus, pro eo:

2 et adjuvabant eum omnes fratres ejus, et universi qui se conjunxerant
patri ejus, et præliabantur prælium Israël cum lætitia.

3 \[Et dilatavit gloriam populo suo,  
et induit se loricam sicut gigas,  
et succinxit se arma bellica sua in præliis,  
et protegebat castra gladio suo.  

4 Similis factus est leoni in operibus suis,  
et sicut catulus leonis rugiens in venatione.  

5 Et persecutus est iniquos perscrutans eos:  
et qui conturbabant populum suum, eos succendit flammis:  

6 et repulsi sunt inimici ejus præ timore ejus,  
et omnes operarii iniquitatis conturbati sunt:  
et directa est salus in manu ejus.  

7 Et exacerbabat reges multos,  
et lætificabat Jacob in operibus suis,  
et in sæculum memoria ejus in benedictione.  

8 Et perambulavit civitates Juda,  
et perdidit impios ex eis,  
et avertit iram ab Israël.  

9 Et nominatus est usque ad novissimum terræ,  
et congregavit pereuntes.\]  

10 Et congregavit Apollonius gentes, et a Samaria virtutem multam et
magnam ad bellandum contra Israël.

11 Et cognovit Judas, et exiit obviam illi: et percussit, et occidit
illum: et ceciderunt vulnerati multi, et reliqui fugerunt.

12 Et accepit spolia eorum: et gladium Apollonii abstulit Judas, et erat
pugnans in eo omnibus diebus.

13 Et audivit Seron princeps exercitus Syriæ, quod congregavit Judas
congregationem fidelium, et ecclesiam secum,

14 et ait: Faciam mihi nomen, et glorificabor in regno, et debellabo
Judam, et eos qui cum ipso sunt, qui spernebant verbum regis.

15 Et præparavit se: et ascenderunt cum eo castra impiorum fortes
auxiliarii ut facerent vindictam in filios Israël.

16 Et appropinquaverunt usque ad Bethoron: et exivit Judas obviam illi
cum paucis.

17 Ut autem viderunt exercitum venientem sibi obviam, dixerunt Judæ:
Quomodo poterimus pauci pugnare contra multitudinem tantam, et tam
fortem, et nos fatigati sumus jejunio hodie?

18 Et ait Judas: Facile est concludi multos in manus paucorum: et non
est differentia in conspectu Dei cæli liberare in multis, et in paucis:

19 quoniam non in multitudine exercitus victoria belli, sed de cælo
fortitudo est.

20 Ipsi veniunt ad nos in multitudine contumaci, et superbia, ut
disperdant nos, et uxores nostras, et filios nostros, et ut spolient
nos:

21 nos vero pugnabimus pro animabus nostris, et legibus nostris:

22 et ipse Dominus conteret eos ante faciem nostram: vos autem ne
timueritis eos.

23 Ut cessavit autem loqui, insiluit in eos subito: et contritus est
Seron et exercitus ejus in conspectu ipsius:

24 et persecutus est eum in descensu Bethoron usque in campum, et
ceciderunt ex eis octingenti viri, reliqui autem fugerunt in terram
Philisthiim.

25 Et cecidit timor Judæ ac fratrum ejus, et formido super omnes gentes
in circuitu eorum:

26 et pervenit ad regem nomen ejus, et de præliis Judæ narrabant omnes
gentes.  

27 Ut audivit autem rex Antiochus sermones istos, iratus est animo: et
misit, et congregavit exercitum universi regni sui, castra fortia valde:

28 et aperuit ærarium suum, et dedit stipendia exercitui in annum: et
mandavit illis ut essent parati ad omnia.

29 Et vidit quod defecit pecunia de thesauris suis, et tributa regionis
modica propter dissensionem et plagam quam fecit in terra, ut tolleret
legitima, quæ erant a primis diebus:

30 et timuit ne non haberet ut semel et bis, in sumptus et donaria, quæ
dederat ante larga manu: et abundaverat super reges qui ante eum
fuerant.

31 Et consternatus erat animo valde, et cogitavit ire in Persidem, et
accipere tributa regionum, et congregare argentum multum.

32 Et reliquit Lysiam hominem nobilem de genere regali, super negotia
regia, a flumine Euphrate usque ad flumen Ægypti,

33 et ut nutriret Antiochum filium suum, donec rediret.

34 Et tradidit ei medium exercitum, et elephantos: et mandavit ei de
omnibus quæ volebat, et de inhabitantibus Judæam, et Jerusalem:

35 et ut mitteret ad eos exercitum ad conterendam et extirpandam
virtutem Israël, et reliquias Jerusalem, et auferendam memoriam eorum de
loco:

36 et ut constitueret habitatores filios alienigenas in omnibus finibus
eorum, et sorte distribueret terram eorum.

37 Et rex assumpsit partem exercitus residui, et exivit ab Antiochia
civitate regni sui anno centesimo et quadragesimo septimo: et
transfretavit Euphraten flumen, et perambulabat superiores regiones.  

38 Et elegit Lysias Ptolemæum filium Dorymini, et Nicanorem, et Gorgiam,
viros potentes ex amicis regis:

39 et misit cum eis quadraginta millia virorum, et septem millia
equitum, ut venirent in terram Juda, et disperderent eam secundum verbum
regis.

40 Et processerunt cum universa virtute sua, et venerunt, et
applicuerunt Emmaum in terra campestri.

41 Et audierunt mercatores regionum nomen eorum: et acceperunt argentum,
et aurum multum valde, et pueros, et venerunt in castra ut acciperent
filios Israël in servos, et additi sunt ad eos exercitus Syriæ, et terræ
alienigenarum.

42 Et vidit Judas et fratres ejus, quia multiplicata sunt mala, et
exercitus applicabant ad fines eorum: et cognoverunt verba regis, quæ
mandavit populo facere in interitum et consummationem:

43 et dixerunt unusquisque ad proximum suum: Erigamus dejectionem populi
nostri, et pugnemus pro populo nostro, et sanctis nostris.

44 Et congregatus est conventus ut essent parati in prælium, et ut
orarent et peterent misericordiam et miserationes.

45 Et Jerusalem non habitabatur, sed erat sicut desertum: non erat qui
ingrederetur et egrederetur de natis ejus. Et sanctum conculcabatur: et
filii alienigenarum erant in arce; ibi erat habitatio gentium: et ablata
est voluptas a Jacob, et defecit ibi tibia et cithara.  

46 Et congregati sunt, et venerunt in Maspha contra Jerusalem, quia
locus orationis erat in Maspha ante in Israël.

47 Et jejunaverunt illa die, et induerunt se ciliciis, et cinerem
imposuerunt capiti suo, et disciderunt vestimenta sua:

48 et expanderunt libros legis, de quibus scrutabantur gentes
similitudinem simulacrorum suorum:

49 et attulerunt ornamenta sacerdotalia, et primitias, et decimas: et
suscitaverunt Nazaræos, qui impleverant dies,

50 et clamaverunt voce magna in cælum, dicentes: Quid faciemus istis, et
quo eos ducemus?

51 et sancta tua conculcata sunt, et contaminata sunt, et sacerdotes tui
facti sunt in luctum, et in humilitatem:

52 et ecce nationes convenerunt adversum nos ut nos disperdant: tu scis
quæ cogitant in nos.

53 Quomodo poterimus subsistere ante faciem eorum, nisi tu, Deus,
adjuves nos?

54 Et tubis exclamaverunt voce magna.

55 Et post hæc constituit Judas duces populi, tribunos, et centuriones,
et pentacontarchos, et decuriones.

56 Et dixit his, qui ædificabant domos, et sponsabant uxores, et
plantabant vineas, et formidolosis, ut redirent unusquisque in domum
suam secundum legem.

57 Et moverunt castra, et collocaverunt ad austrum Emmaum.

58 Et ait Judas: Accingimini, et estote filii potentes, et estote parati
in mane, ut pugnetis adversus nationes has quæ convenerunt adversus nos
disperdere nos, et sancta nostra:

59 quoniam melius est nos mori in bello, quam videre mala gentis nostræ,
et sanctorum.

60 Sicut autem fuerit voluntas in cælo, sic fiat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees 4](ma1004)
