[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2006)  [Next](ma2008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2 Macabees 7

[Apo](../apo/ma2007)

1 It came to pass also, that seven brethren with their mother were
taken, and compelled by the king against the law to taste swine's flesh,
and were tormented with scourges and whips.

2 But one of them that spake first said thus, What wouldest thou ask or
learn of us? we are ready to die, rather than to transgress the laws of
our fathers.

3 Then the king, being in a rage, commanded pans and caldrons to be made
hot:

4 Which forthwith being heated, he commanded to cut out the tongue of
him that spake first, and to cut off the utmost parts of his body, the
rest of his brethren and his mother looking on.

5 Now when he was thus maimed in all his members, he commanded him being
yet alive to be brought to the fire, and to be fried in the pan: and as
the vapour of the pan was for a good space dispersed, they exhorted one
another with the mother to die manfully, saying thus,

6 The Lord God looketh upon us, and in truth hath comfort in us, as
Moses in his song, which witnessed to their faces, declared, saying, And
he shall be comforted in his servants.

7 So when the first was dead after this number, they brought the second
to make him a mocking stock: and when they had pulled off the skin of
his head with the hair, they asked him, Wilt thou eat, before thou be
punished throughout every member of thy body?

8 But he answered in his own language, and said, No. Wherefore he also
received the next torment in order, as the former did.

9 And when he was at the last gasp, he said, Thou like a fury takest us
out of this present life, but the King of the world shall raise us up,
who have died for his laws, unto everlasting life.

10 After him was the third made a mocking stock: and when he was
required, he put out his tongue, and that right soon, holding forth his
hands manfully.

11 And said courageously, These I had from heaven; and for his laws I
despise them; and from him I hope to receive them again.

12 Insomuch that the king, and they that were with him, marvelled at the
young man's courage, for that he nothing regarded the pains.

13 Now when this man was dead also, they tormented and mangled the
fourth in like manner.

14 So when he was ready to die he said thus, It is good, being put to
death by men, to look for hope from God to be raised up again by him: as
for thee, thou shalt have no resurrection to life.

15 Afterward they brought the fifth also, and mangled him.

16 Then looked he unto the king, and said, Thou hast power over men,
thou art corruptible, thou doest what thou wilt; yet think not that our
nation is forsaken of God;

17 But abide a while, and behold his great power, how he will torment
thee and thy seed.

18 After him also they brought the sixth, who being ready to die said,
Be not deceived without cause: for we suffer these things for ourselves,
having sinned against our God: therefore marvellous things are done unto
us.

19 But think not thou, that takest in hand to strive against God, that
thou shalt escape unpunished.

20 But the mother was marvellous above all, and worthy of honourable
memory: for when she saw her seven sons slain within the space of one
day, she bare it with a good courage, because of the hope that she had
in the Lord.

21 Yea, she exhorted every one of them in her own language, filled with
courageous spirits; and stirring up her womanish thoughts with a manly
stomach, she said unto them,

22 I cannot tell how ye came into my womb: for I neither gave you breath
nor life, neither was it I that formed the members of every one of you;

23 But doubtless the Creator of the world, who formed the generation of
man, and found out the beginning of all things, will also of his own
mercy give you breath and life again, as ye now regard not your own
selves for his laws' sake.

24 Now Antiochus, thinking himself despised, and suspecting it to be a
reproachful speech, whilst the youngest was yet alive, did not only
exhort him by words, but also assured him with oaths, that he would make
him both a rich and a happy man, if he would turn from the laws of his
fathers; and that also he would take him for his friend, and trust him
with affairs.

25 But when the young man would in no case hearken unto him, the king
called his mother, and exhorted her that she would counsel the young man
to save his life.

26 And when he had exhorted her with many words, she promised him that
she would counsel her son.

27 But she bowing herself toward him, laughing the cruel tyrant to
scorn, spake in her country language on this manner; O my son, have pity
upon me that bare thee nine months in my womb, and gave thee such three
years, and nourished thee, and brought thee up unto this age, and
endured the troubles of education.

28 I beseech thee, my son, look upon the heaven and the earth, and all
that is therein, and consider that God made them of things that were
not; and so was mankind made likewise.

29 Fear not this tormentor, but, being worthy of thy brethren, take thy
death that I may receive thee again in mercy with thy brethren.

30 Whiles she was yet speaking these words, the young man said, Whom
wait ye for? I will not obey the king's commandment: but I will obey the
commandment of the law that was given unto our fathers by Moses.

31 And thou, that hast been the author of all mischief against the
Hebrews, shalt not escape the hands of God.

32 For we suffer because of our sins.

33 And though the living Lord be angry with us a little while for our
chastening and correction, yet shall he be at one again with his
servants.

34 But thou, O godless man, and of all other most wicked, be not lifted
up without a cause, nor puffed up with uncertain hopes, lifting up thy
hand against the servants of God:

35 For thou hast not yet escaped the judgment of Almighty God, who seeth
all things.

36 For our brethren, who now have suffered a short pain, are dead under
God's covenant of everlasting life: but thou, through the judgment of
God, shalt receive just punishment for thy pride.

37 But I, as my brethren, offer up my body and life for the laws of our
fathers, beseeching God that he would speedily be merciful unto our
nation; and that thou by torments and plagues mayest confess, that he
alone is God;

38 And that in me and my brethren the wrath of the Almighty, which is
justly brought upon our nation, may cease.

39 Than the king' being in a rage, handed him worse than all the rest,
and took it grievously that he was mocked.

40 So this man died undefiled, and put his whole trust in the Lord.

41 Last of all after the sons the mother died.

42 Let this be enough now to have spoken concerning the idolatrous
feasts, and the extreme tortures.

[Sep](../sep/ma2007)

1 συνέβη δὲ καὶ ἑπτὰ ἀδελφοὺς μετὰ τῆς μητρὸς συλλημφθέντας ἀναγκάζεσθαι
ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως ἀπὸ τῶν ἀθεμίτων ὑείων κρεῶν ἐφάπτεσθαι μάστιξιν καὶ
νευραῖς αἰκιζομένους

2 εἷς δὲ αὐτῶν γενόμενος προήγορος οὕτως ἔφη τί μέλλεις ἐρωτᾶν καὶ
μανθάνειν ἡμῶν ἕτοιμοι γὰρ ἀποθνῄσκειν ἐσμὲν ἢ παραβαίνειν τοὺς πατρίους
νόμους

3 ἔκθυμος δὲ γενόμενος ὁ βασιλεὺς προσέταξεν τήγανα καὶ λέβητας ἐκπυροῦν

4 τῶν δὲ παραχρῆμα ἐκπυρωθέντων τὸν γενόμενον αὐτῶν προήγορον προσέταξεν
γλωσσοτομεῖν καὶ περισκυθίσαντας ἀκρωτηριάζειν τῶν λοιπῶν ἀδελφῶν καὶ
τῆς μητρὸς συνορώντων

5 ἄχρηστον δὲ αὐτὸν τοῖς ὅλοις γενόμενον ἐκέλευσεν τῇ πυρᾷ προσάγειν
ἔμπνουν καὶ τηγανίζειν τῆς δὲ ἀτμίδος ἐφ᾽ ἱκανὸν διαδιδούσης τοῦ τηγάνου
ἀλλήλους παρεκάλουν σὺν τῇ μητρὶ γενναίως τελευτᾶν λέγοντες οὕτως

6 ὁ κύριος ὁ θεὸς ἐφορᾷ καὶ ταῖς ἀληθείαις ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν παρακαλεῖται καθάπερ
διὰ τῆς κατὰ πρόσωπον ἀντιμαρτυρούσης ᾠδῆς διεσάφησεν Μωυσῆς λέγων καὶ
ἐπὶ τοῖς δούλοις αὐτοῦ παρακληθήσεται

7 μεταλλάξαντος δὲ τοῦ πρώτου τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον τὸν δεύτερον ἦγον ἐπὶ
τὸν ἐμπαιγμὸν καὶ τὸ τῆς κεφαλῆς δέρμα σὺν ταῖς θριξὶν περισύραντες
ἐπηρώτων εἰ φάγεσαι πρὸ τοῦ τιμωρηθῆναι τὸ σῶμα κατὰ μέλος

8 ὁ δὲ ἀποκριθεὶς τῇ πατρίῳ φωνῇ προσεῖπεν οὐχί διόπερ καὶ οὗτος τὴν
ἑξῆς ἔλαβεν βάσανον ὡς ὁ πρῶτος

9 ἐν ἐσχάτῃ δὲ πνοῇ γενόμενος εἶπεν σὺ μέν ἀλάστωρ ἐκ τοῦ παρόντος ἡμᾶς
ζῆν ἀπολύεις ὁ δὲ τοῦ κόσμου βασιλεὺς ἀποθανόντας ἡμᾶς ὑπὲρ τῶν αὐτοῦ
νόμων εἰς αἰώνιον ἀναβίωσιν ζωῆς ἡμᾶς ἀναστήσει

10 μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον ὁ τρίτος ἐνεπαίζετο καὶ τὴν γλῶσσαν αἰτηθεὶς ταχέως
προέβαλεν καὶ τὰς χεῖρας εὐθαρσῶς προέτεινεν

11 καὶ γενναίως εἶπεν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ταῦτα κέκτημαι καὶ διὰ τοὺς αὐτοῦ
νόμους ὑπερορῶ ταῦτα καὶ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ταῦτα πάλιν ἐλπίζω κομίσασθαι

12 ὥστε αὐτὸν τὸν βασιλέα καὶ τοὺς σὺν αὐτῷ ἐκπλήσσεσθαι τὴν τοῦ
νεανίσκου ψυχήν ὡς ἐν οὐδενὶ τὰς ἀλγηδόνας ἐτίθετο

13 καὶ τούτου δὲ μεταλλάξαντος τὸν τέταρτον ὡσαύτως ἐβασάνιζον
αἰκιζόμενοι

14 καὶ γενόμενος πρὸς τὸ τελευτᾶν οὕτως ἔφη αἱρετὸν μεταλλάσσοντας ὑπ᾽
ἀνθρώπων τὰς ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ προσδοκᾶν ἐλπίδας πάλιν ἀναστήσεσθαι ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ
σοὶ μὲν γὰρ ἀνάστασις εἰς ζωὴν οὐκ ἔσται

15 ἐχομένως δὲ τὸν πέμπτον προσάγοντες ᾐκίζοντο

16 ὁ δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἰδὼν εἶπεν ἐξουσίαν ἐν ἀνθρώποις ἔχων φθαρτὸς ὢν ὃ
θέλεις ποιεῖς μὴ δόκει δὲ τὸ γένος ἡμῶν ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ καταλελεῖφθαι

17 σὺ δὲ καρτέρει καὶ θεώρει τὸ μεγαλεῖον αὐτοῦ κράτος ὡς σὲ καὶ τὸ
σπέρμα σου βασανιεῖ

18 μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον ἦγον τὸν ἕκτον καὶ μέλλων ἀποθνῄσκειν ἔφη μὴ πλανῶ
μάτην ἡμεῖς γὰρ δι᾽ ἑαυτοὺς ταῦτα πάσχομεν ἁμαρτόντες εἰς τὸν ἑαυτῶν
θεόν ἄξια θαυμασμοῦ γέγονεν

19 σὺ δὲ μὴ νομίσῃς ἀθῷος ἔσεσθαι θεομαχεῖν ἐπιχειρήσας

20 ὑπεραγόντως δὲ ἡ μήτηρ θαυμαστὴ καὶ μνήμης ἀγαθῆς ἀξία ἥτις
ἀπολλυμένους υἱοὺς ἑπτὰ συνορῶσα μιᾶς ὑπὸ καιρὸν ἡμέρας εὐψύχως ἔφερεν
διὰ τὰς ἐπὶ κύριον ἐλπίδας

21 ἕκαστον δὲ αὐτῶν παρεκάλει τῇ πατρίῳ φωνῇ γενναίῳ πεπληρωμένη
φρονήματι καὶ τὸν θῆλυν λογισμὸν ἄρσενι θυμῷ διεγείρασα λέγουσα πρὸς
αὐτούς

22 οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως εἰς τὴν ἐμὴν ἐφάνητε κοιλίαν οὐδὲ ἐγὼ τὸ πνεῦμα καὶ τὴν
ζωὴν ὑμῖν ἐχαρισάμην καὶ τὴν ἑκάστου στοιχείωσιν οὐκ ἐγὼ διερρύθμισα

23 τοιγαροῦν ὁ τοῦ κόσμου κτίστης ὁ πλάσας ἀνθρώπου γένεσιν καὶ πάντων
ἐξευρὼν γένεσιν καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα καὶ τὴν ζωὴν ὑμῖν πάλιν ἀποδίδωσιν μετ᾽
ἐλέους ὡς νῦν ὑπερορᾶτε ἑαυτοὺς διὰ τοὺς αὐτοῦ νόμους

24 ὁ δὲ Ἀντίοχος οἰόμενος καταφρονεῖσθαι καὶ τὴν ὀνειδίζουσαν ὑφορώμενος
φωνὴν ἔτι τοῦ νεωτέρου περιόντος οὐ μόνον διὰ λόγων ἐποιεῖτο τὴν
παράκλησιν ἀλλὰ καὶ δι᾽ ὅρκων ἐπίστου ἅμα πλουτιεῖν καὶ μακαριστὸν
ποιήσειν μεταθέμενον ἀπὸ τῶν πατρίων καὶ φίλον ἕξειν καὶ χρείας
ἐμπιστεύσειν

25 τοῦ δὲ νεανίου μηδαμῶς προσέχοντος προσκαλεσάμενος ὁ βασιλεὺς τὴν
μητέρα παρῄνει γενέσθαι τοῦ μειρακίου σύμβουλον ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ

26 πολλὰ δὲ αὐτοῦ παραινέσαντος ἐπεδέξατο πείσειν τὸν υἱόν

27 προσκύψασα δὲ αὐτῷ χλευάσασα τὸν ὠμὸν τύραννον οὕτως ἔφησεν τῇ πατρίῳ
φωνῇ υἱέ ἐλέησόν με τὴν ἐν γαστρὶ περιενέγκασάν σε μῆνας ἐννέα καὶ
θηλάσασάν σε ἔτη τρία καὶ ἐκθρέψασάν σε καὶ ἀγαγοῦσαν εἰς τὴν ἡλικίαν
ταύτην καὶ τροφοφορήσασαν

28 ἀξιῶ σε τέκνον ἀναβλέψαντα εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν καὶ τὰ ἐν
αὐτοῖς πάντα ἰδόντα γνῶναι ὅτι οὐκ ἐξ ὄντων ἐποίησεν αὐτὰ ὁ θεός καὶ τὸ
τῶν ἀνθρώπων γένος οὕτω γίνεται

29 μὴ φοβηθῇς τὸν δήμιον τοῦτον ἀλλὰ τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἄξιος γενόμενος
ἐπίδεξαι τὸν θάνατον ἵνα ἐν τῷ ἐλέει σὺν τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς σου κομίσωμαί σε

30 ἔτι δὲ ταύτης καταληγούσης ὁ νεανίας εἶπεν τίνα μένετε οὐχ ὑπακούω
τοῦ προστάγματος τοῦ βασιλέως τοῦ δὲ προστάγματος ἀκούω τοῦ νόμου τοῦ
δοθέντος τοῖς πατράσιν ἡμῶν διὰ Μωυσέως

31 σὺ δὲ πάσης κακίας εὑρετὴς γενόμενος εἰς τοὺς Εβραίους οὐ μὴ διαφύγῃς
τὰς χεῖρας τοῦ θεοῦ

32 ἡμεῖς γὰρ διὰ τὰς ἑαυτῶν ἁμαρτίας πάσχομεν

33 εἰ δὲ χάριν ἐπιπλήξεως καὶ παιδείας ὁ ζῶν κύριος ἡμῶν βραχέως
ἐπώργισται καὶ πάλιν καταλλαγήσεται τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ δούλοις

34 σὺ δέ ὦ ἀνόσιε καὶ πάντων ἀνθρώπων μιαρώτατε μὴ μάτην μετεωρίζου
φρυαττόμενος ἀδήλοις ἐλπίσιν ἐπὶ τοὺς οὐρανίους παῖδας ἐπαιρόμενος χεῖρα

35 οὔπω γὰρ τὴν τοῦ παντοκράτορος ἐπόπτου θεοῦ κρίσιν ἐκπέφευγας

36 οἱ μὲν γὰρ νῦν ἡμέτεροι ἀδελφοὶ βραχὺν ὑπενέγκαντες πόνον ἀενάου ζωῆς
ὑπὸ διαθήκην θεοῦ πεπτώκασιν σὺ δὲ τῇ τοῦ θεοῦ κρίσει δίκαια τὰ πρόστιμα
τῆς ὑπερηφανίας ἀποίσῃ

37 ἐγὼ δέ καθάπερ οἱ ἀδελφοί καὶ σῶμα καὶ ψυχὴν προδίδωμι περὶ τῶν
πατρίων νόμων ἐπικαλούμενος τὸν θεὸν ἵλεως ταχὺ τῷ ἔθνει γενέσθαι καὶ σὲ
μετὰ ἐτασμῶν καὶ μαστίγων ἐξομολογήσασθαι διότι μόνος αὐτὸς θεός ἐστιν

38 ἐν ἐμοὶ δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς μου στῆσαι τὴν τοῦ παντοκράτορος ὀργὴν
τὴν ἐπὶ τὸ σύμπαν ἡμῶν γένος δικαίως ἐπηγμένην

39 ἔκθυμος δὲ γενόμενος ὁ βασιλεὺς τούτῳ παρὰ τοὺς ἄλλους χειρίστως
ἀπήντησεν πικρῶς φέρων ἐπὶ τῷ μυκτηρισμῷ

40 καὶ οὗτος οὖν καθαρὸς μετήλλαξεν παντελῶς ἐπὶ τῷ κυρίῳ πεποιθώς

41 ἐσχάτη δὲ τῶν υἱῶν ἡ μήτηρ ἐτελεύτησεν

42 τὰ μὲν οὖν περὶ τοὺς σπλαγχνισμοὺς καὶ τὰς ὑπερβαλλούσας αἰκίας ἐπὶ
τοσοῦτον δεδηλώσθω

[Vul](../vul/ma2007)

1 Contigit autem et septem fratres una cum matre sua apprehensos
compelli a rege edere contra fas carnes porcinas, flagris et taureis
cruciatos.

2 Unus autem ex illis, qui erat primus, sic ait: Quid quæris, et quid
vis discere a nobis? parati sumus mori, magis quam patrias Dei leges
prævaricari.

3 Iratus itaque rex, jussit sartagines et ollas æneas succendi: quibus
statim succensis,

4 jussit ei qui prior fuerat locutus amputari linguam, et cute capitis
abstracta, summas quoque manus et pedes ei præscindi, ceteris ejus
fratribus et matre inspicientibus.

5 Et cum jam per omnia inutilis factus esset, jussit ignem admoveri, et
adhuc spirantem torreri in sartagine: in qua cum diu cruciaretur, ceteri
una cum matre invicem se hortabantur mori fortiter,

6 dicentes: Dominus Deus aspiciet veritatem, et consolabitur in nobis,
quemadmodum in protestatione cantici declaravit Moyses: Et in servis
suis consolabitur.  

7 Mortuo itaque illo primo hoc modo, sequentem deducebant ad illudendum:
et cute capitis ejus cum capillis abstracta, interrogabant si
manducaret, priusquam toto corpore per membra singula puniretur.

8 At ille respondens patria voce, dixit: Non faciam. Propter quod et
iste, sequenti loco, primi tormenta suscepit:

9 et in ultimo spiritu constitutus, sic ait: Tu quidem scelestissime in
præsenti vita nos perdis: sed Rex mundi defunctos nos pro suis legibus
in æternæ vitæ resurrectione suscitabit.  

10 Post hunc tertius illuditur, et linguam postulatus cito protulit, et
manus constanter extendit:

11 et cum fiducia ait: E cælo ista possideo, sed propter Dei leges nunc
hæc ipsa despicio, quoniam ab ipso me ea recepturum spero:

12 ita ut rex, et qui cum ipso erant, mirarentur adolescentis animum,
quod tamquam nihilum duceret cruciatus.

13 Et hoc ita defuncto, quartum vexabant similiter torquentes.

14 Et cum jam esset ad mortem, sic ait: Potius est ab hominibus morti
datos spem exspectare a Deo, iterum ab ipso resuscitandos: tibi enim
resurrectio ad vitam non erit.

15 Et cum admovissent quintum, vexabant eum. At ille respiciens in eum,

16 dixit: Potestatem inter homines habens, cum sis corruptibilis, facis
quod vis: noli autem putare genus nostrum a Deo esse derelictum:

17 tu autem patienter sustine, et videbis magnam potestatem ipsius,
qualiter te et semen tuum torquebit.

18 Post hunc ducebant sextum, et is, mori incipiens, sic ait: Noli
frustra errare: nos enim propter nosmetipsos hæc patimur, peccantes in
Deum nostrum, et digna admiratione facta sunt in nobis:

19 tu autem ne existimes tibi impune futurum, quod contra Deum pugnare
tentaveris.  

20 Supra modum autem mater mirabilis, et bonorum memoria digna, quæ
pereuntes septem filios sub unius diei tempore conspiciens, bono animo
ferebat propter spem quam in Deum habebat:

21 singulos illorum hortabatur voce patria fortiter, repleta sapientia:
et, femineæ cogitationi masculinum animum inserens,

22 dixit ad eos: Nescio qualiter in utero meo apparuistis, neque enim
ego spiritum et animam donavi vobis et vitam, et singulorum membra non
ego ipsa compegi:

23 sed enim mundi Creator, qui formavit hominis nativitatem, quique
omnium invenit originem, et spiritum vobis iterum cum misericordia
reddet et vitam, sicut nunc vosmetipsos despicitis propter leges ejus.  

24 Antiochus autem, contemni se arbitratus, simul et exprobrantis voce
despecta, cum adhuc adolescentior superesset, non solum verbis
hortabatur, sed et cum juramento affirmabat se divitem et beatum
facturum, et translatum a patriis legibus amicum habiturum, et res
necessarias ei præbiturum.

25 Sed ad hæc cum adolescens nequaquam inclinaretur, vocavit rex matrem,
et suadebat ei ut adolescenti fieret in salutem.

26 Cum autem multis eam verbis esset hortatus, promisit suasurum se
filio suo.

27 Itaque inclinata ad illum, irridens crudelem tyrannum, ait patria
voce: Fili mi, miserere mei, quæ te in utero novem mensibus portavi, et
lac triennio dedi et alui, et in ætatem istam perduxi.

28 Peto, nate, ut aspicias ad cælum et terram, et ad omnia quæ in eis
sunt, et intelligas quia ex nihilo fecit illa Deus, et hominum genus:

29 ita fiet, ut non timeas carnificem istum, sed dignus fratribus tuis
effectus particeps, suscipe mortem, ut in illa miseratione cum fratribus
tuis te recipiam.

30 Cum hæc illa adhuc diceret, ait adolescens: Quem sustinetis? non
obedio præcepto regis, sed præcepto legis, quæ data est nobis per
Moysen.

31 Tu vero, qui inventor omnis malitiæ factus es in Hebræos, non
effugies manum Dei.

32 Nos enim pro peccatis nostris hæc patimur.

33 Et si nobis propter increpationem et correptionem Dominus Deus noster
modicum iratus est: sed iterum reconciliabitur servis suis.

34 Tu autem, o sceleste, et omnium hominum flagitiosissime, noli frustra
extolli vanis spebus in servos ejus inflammatus:

35 nondum enim omnipotentis Dei, et omnia inspicientis, judicium
effugisti.

36 Nam fratres mei, modico nunc dolore sustentato, sub testamento æternæ
vitæ effecti sunt: tu vero judicio Dei justas superbiæ tuæ pœnas
exsolves.

37 Ego autem, sicut fratres mei, animam et corpus meum trado pro patriis
legibus, invocans Deum maturius genti nostræ propitium fieri, teque cum
tormentis et verberibus confiteri quod ipse est Deus solus.

38 In me vero et in fratribus meis desinet Omnipotentis ira, quæ super
omne genus nostrum juste superducta est.  

39 Tunc rex accensus ira in hunc, super omnes crudelius desævit, indigne
ferens se derisum.

40 Et hic itaque mundus obiit, per omnia in Domino confidens.

41 Novissime autem post filios, et mater consumpta est.

42 Igitur de sacrificiis et de nimiis crudelitatibus satis dictum est.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees 8](ma2008)
