[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2010)  [Next](ma2012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2 Macabees 11

[Apo](../apo/ma2011)

1 Not long after the, Lysias the king's protector and cousin, who also
managed the affairs, took sore displeasure for the things that were
done.

2 And when he had gathered about fourscore thousand with all the
horsemen, he came against the Jews, thinking to make the city an
habitation of the Gentiles,

3 And to make a gain of the temple, as of the other chapels of the
heathen, and to set the high priesthood to sale every year:

4 Not at all considering the power of God but puffed up with his ten
thousands of footmen, and his thousands of horsemen, and his fourscore
elephants.

5 So he came to Judea, and drew near to Bethsura, which was a strong
town, but distant from Jerusalem about five furlongs, and he laid sore
siege unto it.

6 Now when they that were with Maccabeus heard that he besieged the
holds, they and all the people with lamentation and tears besought the
Lord that he would send a good angel to deliver Israel.

7 Then Maccabeus himself first of all took weapons, exhorting the other
that they would jeopard themselves together with him to help their
brethren: so they went forth together with a willing mind.

8 And as they were at Jerusalem, there appeared before them on horseback
one in white clothing, shaking his armour of gold.

9 Then they praised the merciful God all together, and took heart,
insomuch that they were ready not only to fight with men, but with most
cruel beasts, and to pierce through walls of iron.

10 Thus they marched forward in their armour, having an helper from
heaven: for the Lord was merciful unto them

11 And giving a charge upon their enemies like lions, they slew eleven
thousand footmen, and sixteen hundred horsemen, and put all the other to
flight.

12 Many of them also being wounded escaped naked; and Lysias himself
fled away shamefully, and so escaped.

13 Who, as he was a man of understanding, casting with himself what loss
he had had, and considering that the Hebrews could not be overcome,
because the Almighty God helped them, he sent unto them,

14 And persuaded them to agree to all reasonable conditions, and
promised that he would persuade the king that he must needs be a friend
unto them.

15 Then Maccabeus consented to all that Lysias desired, being careful of
the common good; and whatsoever Maccabeus wrote unto Lysias concerning
the Jews, the king granted it.

16 For there were letters written unto the Jews from Lysias to this
effect: Lysias unto the people of the Jews sendeth greeting:

17 John and Absolom, who were sent from you, delivered me the petition
subscribed, and made request for the performance of the contents
thereof.

18 Therefore what things soever were meet to be reported to the king, I
have declared them, and he hath granted as much as might be.

19 And if then ye will keep yourselves loyal to the state, hereafter
also will I endeavour to be a means of your good.

20 But of the particulars I have given order both to these and the other
that came from me, to commune with you.

21 Fare ye well. The hundred and eight and fortieth year, the four and
twentieth day of the month Dioscorinthius.

22 Now the king's letter contained these words: King Antiochus unto his
brother Lysias sendeth greeting:

23 Since our father is translated unto the gods, our will is, that they
that are in our realm live quietly, that every one may attend upon his
own affairs.

24 We understand also that the Jews would not consent to our father, for
to be brought unto the custom of the Gentiles, but had rather keep their
own manner of living: for the which cause they require of us, that we
should suffer them to live after their own laws.

25 Wherefore our mind is, that this nation shall be in rest, and we have
determined to restore them their temple, that they may live according to
the customs of their forefathers.

26 Thou shalt do well therefore to send unto them, and grant them peace,
that when they are certified of our mind, they may be of good comfort,
and ever go cheerfully about their own affairs.

27 And the letter of the king unto the nation of the Jews was after this
manner: King Antiochus sendeth greeting unto the council, and the rest
of the Jews:

28 If ye fare well, we have our desire; we are also in good health.

29 Menelaus declared unto us, that your desire was to return home, and
to follow your own business:

30 Wherefore they that will depart shall have safe conduct till the
thirtieth day of Xanthicus with security.

31 And the Jews shall use their own kind of meats and laws, as before;
and none of them any manner of ways shall be molested for things
ignorantly done.

32 I have sent also Menelaus, that he may comfort you.

33 Fare ye well. In the hundred forty and eighth year, and the fifteenth
day of the month Xanthicus.

34 The Romans also sent unto them a letter containing these words:
Quintus Memmius and Titus Manlius, ambassadors of the Romans, send
greeting unto the people of the Jews.

35 Whatsoever Lysias the king's cousin hath granted, therewith we also
are well pleased.

36 But touching such things as he judged to be referred to the king,
after ye have advised thereof, send one forthwith, that we may declare
as it is convenient for you: for we are now going to Antioch.

37 Therefore send some with speed, that we may know what is your mind.

38 Farewell. This hundred and eight and fortieth year, the fifteenth day
of the month Xanthicus.

[Sep](../sep/ma2011)

1 μετ᾽ ὀλίγον δὲ παντελῶς χρονίσκον Λυσίας ἐπίτροπος τοῦ βασιλέως καὶ
συγγενὴς καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν πραγμάτων λίαν βαρέως φέρων ἐπὶ τοῖς γεγονόσι

2 συναθροίσας περὶ τὰς ὀκτὼ μυριάδας καὶ τὴν ἵππον ἅπασαν παρεγίνετο ἐπὶ
τοὺς Ιουδαίους λογιζόμενος τὴν μὲν πόλιν Ἕλλησιν οἰκητήριον ποιήσειν

3 τὸ δὲ ἱερὸν ἀργυρολόγητον καθὼς τὰ λοιπὰ τῶν ἐθνῶν τεμένη πρατὴν δὲ
κατὰ ἔτος τὴν ἀρχιερωσύνην ποιήσειν

4 οὐδαμῶς ἐπιλογιζόμενος τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ κράτος πεφρενωμένος δὲ ταῖς
μυριάσιν τῶν πεζῶν καὶ ταῖς χιλιάσιν τῶν ἱππέων καὶ τοῖς ἐλέφασιν τοῖς
ὀγδοήκοντα

5 εἰσελθὼν δὲ εἰς τὴν Ιουδαίαν καὶ συνεγγίσας Βαιθσουρα ὄντι μὲν ἐρυμνῷ
χωρίῳ Ιεροσολύμων δὲ ἀπέχοντι ὡσεὶ σταδίους πέντε τοῦτο ἔθλιβεν

6 ὡς δὲ μετέλαβον οἱ περὶ τὸν Μακκαβαῖον πολιορκοῦντα αὐτὸν τὰ ὀχυρώματα
μετὰ ὀδυρμῶν καὶ δακρύων ἱκέτευον σὺν τοῖς ὄχλοις τὸν κύριον ἀγαθὸν
ἄγγελον ἀποστεῖλαι πρὸς σωτηρίαν τῷ Ισραηλ

7 αὐτὸς δὲ πρῶτος ὁ Μακκαβαῖος ἀναλαβὼν τὰ ὅπλα προετρέψατο τοὺς ἄλλους
ἅμα αὐτῷ διακινδυνεύοντας ἐπιβοηθεῖν τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς αὐτῶν ὁμοῦ δὲ καὶ
προθύμως ἐξώρμησαν

8 αὐτόθι δὲ πρὸς τοῖς Ιεροσολύμοις ὄντων ἐφάνη προηγούμενος αὐτῶν
ἔφιππος ἐν λευκῇ ἐσθῆτι πανοπλίαν χρυσῆν κραδαίνων

9 ὁμοῦ δὲ πάντες εὐλόγησαν τὸν ἐλεήμονα θεὸν καὶ ἐπερρώσθησαν ταῖς
ψυχαῖς οὐ μόνον ἀνθρώπους θῆρας δὲ τοὺς ἀγριωτάτους καὶ σιδηρᾶ τείχη
τιτρώσκειν ὄντες ἕτοιμοι

10 προῆγον ἐν διασκευῇ τὸν ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ σύμμαχον ἔχοντες ἐλεήσαντος
αὐτοὺς τοῦ κυρίου

11 λεοντηδὸν δὲ ἐντινάξαντες εἰς τοὺς πολεμίους κατέστρωσαν αὐτῶν
χιλίους πρὸς τοῖς μυρίοις ἱππεῖς δὲ ἑξακοσίους πρὸς τοῖς χιλίοις τοὺς δὲ
πάντας ἠνάγκασαν φεύγειν

12 οἱ πλείονες δὲ αὐτῶν τραυματίαι γυμνοὶ διεσώθησαν καὶ αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ
Λυσίας αἰσχρῶς φεύγων διεσώθη

13 οὐκ ἄνους δὲ ὑπάρχων πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ἀντιβάλλων τὸ γεγονὸς περὶ αὐτὸν
ἐλάττωμα καὶ συννοήσας ἀνικήτους εἶναι τοὺς Εβραίους τοῦ δυναμένου θεοῦ
συμμαχοῦντος αὐτοῖς

14 προσαποστείλας ἔπεισεν συλλύεσθαι ἐπὶ πᾶσι τοῖς δικαίοις καὶ διότι
καὶ τὸν βασιλέα πείσει φίλον αὐτοῖς ἀναγκάζων γενέσθαι

15 ἐπένευσεν δὲ ὁ Μακκαβαῖος ἐπὶ πᾶσιν οἷς ὁ Λυσίας παρεκάλει τοῦ
συμφέροντος φροντίζων ὅσα γὰρ ὁ Μακκαβαῖος ἐπέδωκεν τῷ Λυσίᾳ διὰ γραπτῶν
περὶ τῶν Ιουδαίων συνεχώρησεν ὁ βασιλεύς

16 ἦσαν γὰρ αἱ γεγραμμέναι τοῖς Ιουδαίοις ἐπιστολαὶ παρὰ μὲν Λυσίου
περιέχουσαι τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον Λυσίας τῷ πλήθει τῶν Ιουδαίων χαίρειν

17 Ιωαννης καὶ Αβεσσαλωμ οἱ πεμφθέντες παρ᾽ ὑμῶν ἐπιδόντες τὸν
ὑπογεγραμμένον χρηματισμὸν ἠξίουν περὶ τῶν δι᾽ αὐτοῦ σημαινομένων

18 ὅσα μὲν οὖν ἔδει καὶ τῷ βασιλεῖ προσενεχθῆναι διεσάφησα ἃ δὲ ἦν
ἐνδεχόμενα συνεχώρησεν

19 ἐὰν μὲν οὖν συντηρήσητε τὴν εἰς τὰ πράγματα εὔνοιαν καὶ εἰς τὸ λοιπὸν
πειράσομαι παραίτιος ἀγαθῶν γενέσθαι

20 ὑπὲρ δὲ τούτων καὶ τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἐντέταλμαι τούτοις τε καὶ τοῖς παρ᾽
ἐμοῦ διαλεχθῆναι ὑμῖν

21 ἔρρωσθε ἔτους ἑκατοστοῦ τεσσαρακοστοῦ ὀγδόου Διὸς Κορινθίου τετράδι
καὶ εἰκάδι

22 ἡ δὲ τοῦ βασιλέως ἐπιστολὴ περιεῖχεν οὕτως βασιλεὺς Ἀντίοχος τῷ
ἀδελφῷ Λυσίᾳ χαίρειν

23 τοῦ πατρὸς ἡμῶν εἰς θεοὺς μεταστάντος βουλόμενοι τοὺς ἐκ τῆς
βασιλείας ἀταράχους ὄντας γενέσθαι πρὸς τὴν τῶν ἰδίων ἐπιμέλειαν

24 ἀκηκοότες τοὺς Ιουδαίους μὴ συνευδοκοῦντας τῇ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐπὶ τὰ
Ἑλληνικὰ μεταθέσει ἀλλὰ τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἀγωγὴν αἱρετίζοντας ἀξιοῦντας
συγχωρηθῆναι αὐτοῖς τὰ νόμιμα

25 αἱρούμενοι οὖν καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἔθνος ἐκτὸς ταραχῆς εἶναι κρίνομεν τό τε
ἱερὸν ἀποκατασταθῆναι αὐτοῖς καὶ πολιτεύεσθαι κατὰ τὰ ἐπὶ τῶν προγόνων
αὐτῶν ἔθη

26 εὖ οὖν ποιήσεις διαπεμψάμενος πρὸς αὐτοὺς καὶ δοὺς δεξιάς ὅπως
εἰδότες τὴν ἡμετέραν προαίρεσιν εὔθυμοί τε ὦσιν καὶ ἡδέως διαγίνωνται
πρὸς τῇ τῶν ἰδίων ἀντιλήμψει

27 πρὸς δὲ τὸ ἔθνος ἡ τοῦ βασιλέως ἐπιστολὴ τοιάδε ἦν βασιλεὺς Ἀντίοχος
τῇ γερουσίᾳ τῶν Ιουδαίων καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις Ιουδαίοις χαίρειν

28 εἰ ἔρρωσθε εἴη ἂν ὡς βουλόμεθα καὶ αὐτοὶ δὲ ὑγιαίνομεν

29 ἐνεφάνισεν ἡμῖν Μενέλαος βούλεσθαι κατελθόντας ὑμᾶς γίνεσθαι πρὸς
τοῖς ἰδίοις

30 τοῖς οὖν καταπορευομένοις μέχρι τριακάδος Ξανθικοῦ ὑπάρξει δεξιὰ μετὰ
τῆς ἀδείας

31 χρῆσθαι τοὺς Ιουδαίους τοῖς ἑαυτῶν δαπανήμασιν καὶ νόμοις καθὰ καὶ τὸ
πρότερον καὶ οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν κατ᾽ οὐδένα τρόπον παρενοχληθήσεται περὶ τῶν
ἠγνοημένων

32 πέπομφα δὲ καὶ τὸν Μενέλαον παρακαλέσοντα ὑμᾶς

33 ἔρρωσθε ἔτους ἑκατοστοῦ τεσσαρακοστοῦ ὀγδόου Ξανθικοῦ πεντεκαιδεκάτῃ

34 ἔπεμψαν δὲ καὶ οἱ Ῥωμαῖοι πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἐπιστολὴν ἔχουσαν οὕτως Κόιντος
Μέμμιος Τίτος Μάνιος πρεσβῦται Ῥωμαίων τῷ δήμῳ τῶν Ιουδαίων χαίρειν

35 ὑπὲρ ὧν Λυσίας ὁ συγγενὴς τοῦ βασιλέως συνεχώρησεν ὑμῖν καὶ ἡμεῖς
συνευδοκοῦμεν

36 ἃ δὲ ἔκρινεν προσανενεχθῆναι τῷ βασιλεῖ πέμψατέ τινα παραχρῆμα
ἐπισκεψάμενοι περὶ τούτων ἵνα ἐκθῶμεν ὡς καθήκει ὑμῖν ἡμεῖς γὰρ
προσάγομεν πρὸς Ἀντιόχειαν

37 διὸ σπεύσατε καὶ πέμψατέ τινας ὅπως καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐπιγνῶμεν ὁποίας ἐστὲ
γνώμης

38 ὑγιαίνετε ἔτους ἑκατοστοῦ τεσσαρακοστοῦ ὀγδόου Ξανθικοῦ
πεντεκαιδεκάτῃ

[Vul](../vul/ma2011)

1 Sed parvo post tempore, Lysias procurator regis et propinquus, ac
negotiorum præpositus, graviter ferens de his quæ acciderant,

2 congregatis octoginta millibus, et equitatu universo, veniebat
adversus Judæos, existimans se civitatem quidem captam gentibus
habitaculum facturum,

3 templum vero in pecuniæ quæstum, sicut cetera delubra gentium,
habiturum, et per singulos annos venale sacerdotium:

4 nusquam recogitans Dei potestatem, sed mente effrenatus in multitudine
peditum, et in millibus equitum, et in octoginta elephantis confidebat.

5 Ingressus autem Judæam, et appropians Bethsuræ, quæ erat in angusto
loco, ab Jerosolyma intervallo quinque stadiorum, illud præsidium
expugnabat.

6 Ut autem Machabæus et qui cum eo erant cognoverunt expugnari præsidia,
cum fletu et lacrimis rogabant Dominum, et omnis turba simul, ut bonum
angelum mitteret ad salutem Israël.

7 Et ipse primus Machabæus, sumptis armis, ceteros adhortatus est simul
secum periculum subire, et ferre auxilium fratribus suis.

8 Cumque pariter prompto animo procederent, Jerosolymis apparuit
præcedens eos eques in veste candida, armis aureis hastam vibrans.

9 Tunc omnes simul benedixerunt misericordem Dominum, et convaluerunt
animis: non solum homines, sed et bestias ferocissimas, et muros ferreos
parati penetrare.

10 Ibant igitur prompti, de cælo habentes adjutorem et miserantem super
eos Dominum.

11 Leonum autem more impetu irruentes in hostes, prostraverunt ex eis
undecim millia peditum, et equitum mille sexcentos:

12 universos autem in fugam verterunt, plures autem ex eis vulnerati
nudi evaserunt. Sed et ipse Lysias turpiter fugiens evasit.  

13 Et quia non insensatus erat, secum ipse reputans factam erga se
diminutionem, et intelligens invictos esse Hebræos, omnipotentis Dei
auxilio innitentes, misit ad eos:

14 promisitque se consensurum omnibus quæ justa sunt, et regem
compulsurum amicum fieri.

15 Annuit autem Machabæus precibus Lysiæ, in omnibus utilitati
consulens: et quæcumque Machabæus scripsit Lysiæ de Judæis, ea rex
concessit.

16 Nam erant scriptæ Judæis epistolæ a Lysia quidem hunc modum
continentes: Lysias populo Judæorum salutem.

17 Joannes et Abesalom, qui missi fuerant a vobis, tradentes scripta,
postulabant ut ea quæ per illos significabantur, implerem.

18 Quæcumque igitur regi potuerunt perferri, exposui: et quæ res
permittebat, concessit.

19 Si igitur in negotiis fidem conservaveritis, et deinceps bonorum
vobis causa esset, tentabo.

20 De ceteris autem per singula verbo mandavi et istis, et his, qui a me
missi sunt, colloqui vobiscum.

21 Bene valete. Anno centesimo, quadragesimo octavo mensis Dioscori, die
vigesima et quarta.  

22 Regis autem epistola ista continebat: Rex Antiochus Lysiæ fratri
salutem.

23 Patre nostro inter deos translato, nos volentes eos qui sunt in regno
nostro sine tumultu agere, et rebus suis adhibere diligentiam,

24 audivimus Judæos non consensisse patri meo ut transferrentur ad ritum
Græcorum, sed tenere velle suum institutum, ac propterea postulare a
nobis concedi sibi legitima sua.

25 Volentes igitur hanc quoque gentem quietam esse, statuentes
judicavimus templum restitui illis, ut agerent secundum suorum majorum
consuetudinem.

26 Bene igitur feceris, si miseris ad eos et dexteram dederis: ut
cognita nostra voluntate, bono animo sint, et utilitatibus propriis
deserviant.  

27 Ad Judæos vero regis epistola talis erat: Rex Antiochus senatui
Judæorum, et ceteris Judæis salutem.

28 Si valetis, sic estis ut volumus: sed et ipsi bene valemus.

29 Adiit nos Menelaus, dicens velle vos descendere ad vestros, qui sunt
apud nos.

30 His igitur qui commeant usque ad diem trigesimum mensis Xanthici,
damus dextras securitatis,

31 ut Judæi utantur cibis et legibus suis, sicut et prius: et nemo eorum
ullo modo molestiam patiatur de his quæ per ignorantiam gesta sunt.

32 Misimus autem et Menelaum, qui vos alloquatur.

33 Valete. Anno centesimo quadragesimo octavo, Xanthici mensis
quintadecima die.  

34 Miserunt autem etiam Romani epistolam, ita se habentem: Quintus
Memmius et Titus Manilius legati Romanorum, populo Judæorum salutem.

35 De his quæ Lysias cognatus regis concessit vobis, et nos concessimus.

36 De quibus autem ad regem judicavit referendum, confestim aliquem
mittere, diligentius inter vos conferentes, ut decernamus, sicut
congruit vobis: nos enim Antiochiam accedimus.

37 Ideoque festinate rescribere, ut nos quoque sciamus cujus estis
voluntatis.

38 Bene valete. Anno centesimo quadragesimo octavo, quintadecima die
mensis Xanthici.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees 12](ma2012)
