[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Mars](../mars/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipm03)  [Next](ipm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691001014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From India to the Planet Mars*, by Théodore Flournoy; tr. Daniel B.
Vermilye, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### CHAPTER II

#### CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH OF MLLE. SMITH

THE psychological history of Mlle. Smith and her automatisms is
naturally divided into two separate periods by the important fact of her
initiation into spiritism at the beginning of 1892. Before that time,
not suspecting the possibility of voluntary communication with the world
of disincarnate spirits, she naturally manifested nothing more than a
few spontaneous phenomena, the first flutterings of her mediumistic
faculties which still lay dormant, the exact nature and progress of
which it would be interesting to know in detail; unfortunately, in the
absence of written documents concerning that pre-spiritistic period, we
are confined to the statements of Hélène and her parents in regard to
it, and the untrustworthiness of the memory in connection with events of
a remote past is only too well known.

The spiritistic period, on the contrary, extending over the last seven
years, and infinitely more fertile in artificially promoted (*e.g.*, the
seances) as well as in spontaneous manifestations, is much better known
to us; but in order to comprehend it intelligently, it is necessary
first to pass in review the few facts

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

which we have been able to gather relating to the pre-spiritistic
period—that is to say, the childhood and youth of Mlle. Smith. That will
be the subject of this chapter.

Mlle. Smith has lived in Geneva since her infancy. After attending
school, she entered as an apprentice, at the age of fifteen, a large
commercial house, where, as I have already stated, she still remains,
and where, little by little, she has risen to a very responsible
position. Her father, a merchant, was a Hungarian, and possessed a
remarkable facility for languages, which is of interest to us in
presence of the phenomena of glossolalia, a subject which will be
discussed hereafter. Her mother is a Genevese. Both enjoyed excellent
health and attained a venerable old age. Hélène had a younger sister who
died in early childhood, and two brothers older than herself, who are
now fathers of families and established abroad, where they have had
successful business careers.

I am not aware that M. Smith, who was a man of positive character, ever
displayed any phenomena of automatisms. Mme. Smith, however, as well as
her grandmother, has experienced several thoroughly characteristic
phenomena of that kind, and one, at least, of Hélène's brothers, it
appears, could easily have become a good medium. This is another
instance of the distinctly hereditary tendency of mediumistic faculties.

M. Smith, a man of active and enterprising character, died quite
suddenly, probably of an embolism, at the age of seventy-five years. He
had left Hungary

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

in his youth, and finally established himself at Geneva, after having
travelled extensively in Italy and Algiers, where he remained for
several years. He spoke fluently Hungarian, German, French, Italian, and
Spanish, understood English fairly well, and also knew Latin and a
little Greek. It would seem that his daughter has inherited these
linguistic aptitudes, but only in a latent and subliminal manner, for
she has always detested the study of languages, and rebelled against
learning German, in which she took lessons for three years.

Mme. Smith, who is a kind-hearted woman, with much good, practical
sense, is sixty-seven years of age. Neither she nor her husband was ever
a nervous or psychopathic subject, but both showed a marked tendency to
broncho-pulmonary affections of a somewhat alarming type. Mme. Smith
has, besides, suffered frequently from rheumatism. Hélène does not
appear to have inherited these tendencies; she has always enjoyed robust
health, and has not even had the slight diseases usually incidental to
childhood.

Although both M. and Mme. Smith were Protestants, through a chain of
peculiar circumstances their daughter was baptized a Catholic shortly
after her birth, her name being inscribed some months later on the
register of the Protestant church of Geneva. The memory of this unusual
baptism has certainly not been lost by Hélène's subliminal imagination,
and has duly contributed to the hypothesis of a mysterious origin. Of
the years of childhood I know nothing specially interesting. At the
intermediate

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

school, at which she passed only a year, and where I have consulted the
records of her class, she was not distinguished either for good or ill
from the point of view of deportment, but she certainly did not reveal
the full measure of her intelligence, since she failed to pass the
examinations at the end of the year, a fact which decided her entrance
upon an apprenticeship. On the other hand, the worthy pastor who gave
her religious instruction somewhat later, and who has never lost sight
of her since, has furnished me with most eulogistic testimonials as to
her character; he remembers her as a young girl of serious disposition,
intelligent, thoughtful, faithful in the discharge of her duties, and
devoted to her family.

M. Smith never showed the least trace of mediumistic phenomena; from
having been very indifferent, or even hostile, to spiritism until his
daughter began to interest herself in it, he finally succumbed to her
influence and became a believer in that doctrine towards the close of
his life. Mme. Smith, on the contrary, has always been predisposed to
it, and has experienced several phenomena of that nature in the course
of her life. At the period of the epidemic of "table-tipping" which
raged in our country about the middle of this century, she too
experimented quite successfully for a while upon the table with her
friends and acquaintances. Later, she had some sporadic visions. The
following is one of the most typical. While her little daughter three
years old was ill, Mme. Smith awoke in the middle of the night and saw
an angel, of dazzling brightness, standing by the side of the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

little bed with its hands stretched out above the child; after some
moments the apparition gradually dissolved. Mme. Smith awakened her
husband and told him of the fatal significance which she attached to the
vision, but he, unable to see anything, ridiculed her superstitious
fears. As a matter of fact, the child died on the following day, to the
great surprise of the physician attending her. This is a fine example of
true maternal presentiment, subconsciously felt and transferring itself
into the normal consciousness by a visual hallucination which borrowed
for its symbolic content an appropriate popular image.

Mme. Smith never knew her mother, who died shortly after her birth; but
she recalls and has related to me some characteristic visions of her
grandmother, who brought her up; various phenomena connected with one of
Hélène's brothers (hearing of steps in the night, etc.) have proved to
her that one of her sons, at least, is a medium.

Hélène Smith was certainly predisposed, both by heredity and
temperament, to become a medium, as soon as the outward opportunity—that
is, the suggestions of spiritism—should present itself.

It is evident, indeed, from her recital of events, that she was more or
less visionary from her infancy. It does not appear, however, that she
ever manifested phenomena capable in themselves of attracting the
attention of her family. I have not been able to discover any indication
whatever of crises or attacks of an abnormal nature, not even of
sleep-walking. Her automatisms have been always almost entirely con
fined to the sensory or mental sphere, and it is only

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

from her own narratives that other people have any knowledge of them.
They assume the double form of reveries more or less conscious, and of
hallucinations properly so called.

1\. *Reveries*.—The habit of falling into reverie, of building castles
in the air, of transporting one's self into other conditions of
existence, or of telling one's self stories in which one plays the chief
rôle, is more frequent among women than among men, and in childhood and
youth than in mature years. This propensity seems to have always been
extremely marked in the case of Mlle. Smith, since from her school-girl
days she has shown herself to be of a sedentary and domestic
temperament, preferring the quiet companionship of her mother to the
games of her comrades, and her needle-work to out-door recreations. The
fragments which have survived in Hélène's conscious memory are all that
is known to us of the content of these reveries, but it suffices,
nevertheless, to reveal to us the general tone of her fictions, and to
show us that the images suddenly surging up before her mental vision had
a peculiar, often very fantastic, character, and which enables us to see
in them the beginnings of her later great somnambulistic romances. It is
to be noticed also that the designs, embroideries, varied artistic
works, which were always the favorite occupations of her moments of
leisure and in which she excels, were almost always, from her infancy,
not copies of exterior models, but the products of her own invention,
marked with the bizarre and original stamp of her internal images.
Moreover, these pieces of work grew under her fingers with an ease and

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

rapidity that astonished herself. They made themselves, as it were.

She was always fond of indulging in day-dreams, and recalls many a
half-hour passed motionless in an easy-chair, on which occasions she was
accustomed to see all kinds of strange things, but, being of a very
reticent nature, she seldom mentioned them to her parents for fear of
not being understood. She used to see highly colored landscapes, a lion
of stone with a mutilated head, fanciful objects on pedestals, etc. She
does not remember the details, but does clearly recollect that they all
bore a close resemblance to her Hindoo and Martian visions of later
years.

These phantasmagoria also appeared to her in the night. She remembers,
among other things, to have seen, when about fourteen or fifteen years
old, a bright light thrown against the wall of her room, which then
seemed to be filled with strange and unknown beings. She had the
impression of being fully awake, but it suddenly occurred to her that
she must have been dreaming, and it was only then that she comprehended
that it was really a "vision" which she had experienced.

2\. *Hallucinations*.—In the foregoing examples it would be difficult to
say to exactly which category the psychologic facts belong, especially
the nocturnal phenomena, and one may hesitate whether to regard them as
simple dreams of a very vivid character, hypnagogic or hypnopompic <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2) visions, or as veritable

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

hallucinations. On the other hand, we undoubtedly have the right to give
the latter designation to the numerous apparitions which Mlle. Smith has
when in full possession of her senses in the daytime.

One day, for example, as she was playing out-of-doors with a friend, she
saw some one following her, and mentioned the fact to her companion, who
could not see any one. The imaginary individual, after having followed
her around a tree for a moment, disappeared, and she was unable to find
him again.

Of an entirely different order are the strange characters which she
remembers having sometimes involuntarily substituted for French letters
when writing to her friends, which must be regarded as graphomotor
hallucinations. These were undoubtedly the same characters which at
other times appeared to her in visual images.

This was the prelude to the phenomenon so frequently experienced by her
in the last few years, and of which we shall hereafter see many
examples—namely, automatic writing, mingling with her ordinary
chirography in her waking state.

Alongside of hallucinations like these, which do not show any
intentional or useful character and are only a capricious and fortuitous
irruption into the normal consciousness, mere dreams or fancies filling
up the sub-conscious strata, there are also manifested in Hélène's case
some hallucinations of a manifest utility, which have in consequence the
sense of messages

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

addressed by the subliminal consciousness of the subject to her normal
consciousness, by way of warning and protection. It is to be noted that
these hallucinations, which might be called teleological, have lately
been claimed by Leopold, although he has no recollection of, and does
not assert himself to be the author of, the earlier ones.

The following is a curious example: At about the age of seventeen or
eighteen, Hélène was returning from the country one evening, carrying a
fine bouquet of flowers. During the last minutes of the journey she
heard behind her a peculiar cry of a bird, which seemed to her to warn
her against some danger, and she hastened her steps without looking
behind. On her arrival at home the cry followed her into her room
without her having been able to see the creature from which it emanated.
She went tired to bed, and in the middle of the night awoke in great
pain, but was unable to cry out. At that moment she felt herself gently
lifted, together with the pillow on which she lay, as if by two friendly
hands, which enabled her to recover her voice and call her mother, who
hastened to comfort her, and carried the flowers, which were too
odorous, out of the room. Leopold, on being interrogated recently during
a somnambulism of Hélène as to this incident, coming up again after so
many years, has a very clear recollection of it and gives the following
explanation.

It was not really the cry of a bird, but it was he, Leopold, who caused
Hélène to hear a sort of whistle, hoping thereby to attract her
attention to the danger lurking in the bouquet of flowers, in which was

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

a great deal of garden-mint of powerful odor. Unfortunately Hélène did
not understand, and retained the bouquet in her room. He adds that his
failure to give a more clear and intelligible warning was due to the
fact that it was at that time impossible for him to do so. The whistle
which Hélène took for the cry of a bird was all that it was in his power
to utter. It was again he who intervened at the moment of her nocturnal
illness by raising her head in order to enable her to call for help.

I have no reason to doubt the substantial accuracy either of the account
given by Hélène and her mother, or of the explanation recently furnished
by Leopold. The incident belongs to the category of well-known cases
where a danger of some sort not suspected by the normal personality, but
which is subconsciously known or recognized, is warded off by a
preservative hallucination, either sensory (as here—the cry of the bird)
or motor (as in the lifting of the body). The subliminal consciousness
is not always able to give a clear message; in the present case, the
auditive automatism remained in a state of elementary hallucination, a
simple whistle, without being able to elevate it to a distinct verbal
hallucination. Its general warning sense, however, was understood by
Hélène, thanks to the confused feeling of danger that she felt at the
same time. Moreover, this confused feeling, which caused her to quicken
her steps, it seems to me, ought not to be considered as the consequence
of the whistle she heard, but rather as a parallel phenomenon; the
appearance or the odor of the mint she was carrying, while not
attracting her conscious

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

attention, nevertheless dimly roused in her an idea of the danger
lurking in the flowers, and that idea in turn affected her clear
consciousness under the double form of a vague emotion of danger and a
verbo-auditive translation which did not go so far as to formulate
itself explicitly.

Under circumstances of a nature calculated to cause a strong emotional
shock, and especially when the psychic sphere which involves the
sentiment of modesty is strongly acted upon, Hélène has a visual
hallucination of a man clothed in a long, brown robe, with a white cross
on his breast, like a monk, who comes to her aid, and accompanies her in
silence as long as the necessity for his presence continues. This
unknown protector, always silent, each time appearing and disappearing
in a sudden and mysterious manner, is no other than Leopold himself,
according to the recent affirmations of the latter.

We should naturally expect that Hélène would have had in her youth many
striking experiences of prevision, marvellous intuition, divination,
etc., which are among the most diffuse forms of teleological automatism.
Such, however, does not seem to have been the fact; neither she nor her
mother has recounted to me anything remarkable of this nature, and they
confine themselves to a general affirmation of frequent presentiments,
which were subsequently justified as to the persons and events with
which they were connected.

All the examples which I have above cited concur in bringing to light
the strong penchant of Mlle. Smith towards automatism. But from the
point of

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

view of their meaning there is a notable difference between the
teleological phenomena, presentiments or hallucinations of a manifest
utility, and those which have none—mere reveries and other
perturbations, which are altogether superfluous, if not actually
detrimental, to Hélène's normal personality.

There are dreams and other automatisms absolutely useless which have
insinuated themselves without rhyme or reason into Hélène's normal life.
One does not know how or in what manner to interpret these phenomena,
capricious and fortuitous as they seem to be, and they remain isolated,
inconsiderable facts, without bearing and without interest, since they
cannot be attached to any central principle, to one mother-idea or
fundamental emotion.

We are, therefore, reduced to certain conjectures, the most reasonable
of which is that these diverse fragments make part of some vast
subconscious creation, in which all the being of Mlle. Smith, crushed
and bruised by the conditions which the realities of life have imposed
upon her, as is more or less the case with each one of us, gave free
wing to the deep aspirations of its nature and expanded into the fiction
of an existence more brilliant than her own. All that we know of
Hélène's character, both as a child and as a young girl, shows us that
her dominant emotional note was a sort of instinctive inward revolt
against the modest environment in which it was her lot to be born, a
profound feeling of dread and opposition, of inexplicable malaise, of
bitter antagonism against the whole of her material and intellectual
environment. While showing herself always very devoted to her parents

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

and brothers, she had only feeble natural affinities for them. She felt
like a stranger in her family and as one away from home. She had a
feeling of isolation, of abandonment, of exile, which created a sort of
gulf between her and her family. So strong were these feelings that she
actually one day seriously asked her parents if it was absolutely
certain that she was their daughter, or whether it was not possible that
the nurse might some day by mistake have brought home another child from
the daily walk.

This want of adaptation to her environment, this sort of mysterious
homesickness for an unknown country, shows itself in a characteristic
manner in the following fragment of narrative, in which Hélène, who has
always attributed great importance to dreams, tells of one in which an
isolated house figured. "To me this retired mansion, in which I lived
alone, isolated, represents my life, which from my infancy has been
neither happy nor gay. Even while very young I do not remember to have
shared any of the tastes or any of the ideas of the members of my
family. Thus during the whole of my childhood I was left in what I call
a profound isolation of heart And in spite of all, in spite of this
complete want of sympathy, I could not make up my mind to marry,
although I had several opportunities. A voice was always saying, 'Do not
hurry: the time has not arrived; this is not the destiny for which you
are reserved.' And I have listened to that voice, which has absolutely
nothing to do with conscience, and I do not regret it, for since I have
engaged in spiritism I have found myself so surrounded with sympathy

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

and friendships that I have somewhat forgotten my sad lot."

This quotation speaks volumes in regard to the turn of mind and the
emotional disposition which ruled Hélène as a little girl. It is surely,
so to speak, the vulgar story and the common lot of all; many a child,
many a youth, many an unrecognized genius, feel themselves suffocating
in their too narrow environment when the latent energies of life begin
to ferment. But there are differences in kind and in degree. With Mlle.
Hélène Smith the sentiment of not having been made for her environment,
and of belonging by nature to a higher sphere, was intense and lasting.
Her mother always had the impression that Hélène was not happy, and
wondered that she was so serious, so absorbed, so wanting in the
exuberance of spirits natural to her age. Her father and her brothers,
not comprehending the real reasons for this absence of gayety, taxed her
very unjustly with pride and hauteur, and accused her sometimes of
despising her humble surroundings. There are shades of feeling which can
only be understood when they have been experienced. Hélène well knew
that she really had no contempt for her material and social environment,
which, on the contrary, inspired her with respect, but which simply was
not congenial to her nature and temperament.

To this fundamental feeling of imprisonment in a too paltry sphere was
joined, in Hélène's case, a timid disposition. Darkness, the least
noise, the creaking of the furniture, made her tremble; by day, a person
walking behind her, an unexpected movement,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the ringing of the door-bell, gave her the impression that some one
wishing to harm her had come to seize her and carry her off. On the
whole, Hélène's tendency to be startled by everything and nothing
constituted with her a grievous panophobia, a state of fear and
insecurity which greatly strengthened her impression of want of union—of
*mésalliance*—with an environment to which she was decidedly superior.

It is easy now to see the connection between that depressing
emotionalism which was the attribute of Hélène's childhood and the
slightly megalomaniac tone of her later subliminal romances. The idea
intrudes itself that, in spite of—or by reason of—their apparent
contrast, these two traits are not independent of each other, but bound
by the tie of cause and effect. But this causal connection is in great
danger of being interpreted in a precisely inverse sense by the
empirical psychologist and the metaphysical occultist. The latter will
explain Mlle. Smith's curious impression of strangeness and superiority
to the base conditions of her actual existence, by her illustrious
previous incarnations; the psychologist, on the contrary, will see in
that sane impression the wholly natural origin of her grandiose
somnambulistic personifications. In default of a complete understanding,
always dubious, between these so different points of view, of which we
shall speak later, it will be advisable to adopt at least a provisional
*modus vivendi*, based on the party-wall of the native constitution or
individual character of Mlle. Smith. On the farther side of that wall,
*in eternity*,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

so to speak, *a parte ante* which precedes the arrival of Hélène into
this life, the occultist will have full latitude to imagine such a
succession of existences as it shall please him in order to explain the
character she has had from her infancy. But on this side of the
wall—that is to say, within the limits of her present life—the
psychologist will have the right to ignore all these prenatal
metempsychoses, and taking for his point of departure the innate
constitution of Hélène, without troubling himself about anything she may
have received by the accidents of heredity or preserved from her royal
pre-existences, he will endeavor to explain by that same constitution,
as it reveals itself in her daily life, the genesis of her subliminal
creations under the action of occasional exterior influences. The
occultist, then, can have the pleasure of regarding Mlle. Smith's
characteristic trait as a child, that impression of solitude and
wandering about in a world for which she was not made, as the effect of
her real past greatnesses, while the psychologist will be permitted to
see in it the cause of her future dreams of grandeur.

The emotional disposition which I have depicted, and which is one of the
forms under which the mal-adaptation of the organism, physical and
mental, to the hard conditions of the environment, betrays itself, seems
therefore to me to have been the source and starting-point for all the
dreamings of Hélène in her childhood. Thence came these visions, always
warm, luminous, highly colored, exotic, bizarre; and these brilliant
apparitions, superbly dressed, in which her antipathy for her insipid
and

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

unpleasant surroundings betrays itself, her weariness of ordinary,
commonplace people, her disgust for prosaic occupations, for vulgar and
disagreeable things, for the narrow house, the dirty streets, the cold
winters, and the gray sky. Whether these images, very diverse, but of
the same brilliant quality, were already existent in Hélène's
subconscious thought while still a child or a young girl, we are unable
to say. It is, however, probable that their systematization was far from
attaining to such a degree of perfection as they have presented during
the past few years under the influence of spiritism.

All the facts of automatism to which Hélène can assign a vaguely
approximate date group themselves around her fifteenth year, and are all
included between the limits of her ninth and twentieth years.

This evident connection with a phase of development of major importance
has been confirmed to me by Leopold on various occasions, who says that
he appeared to Hélène for the first time in her tenth year, on an
exceptional occasion of extreme fright, but after that, not until about
four years later, because the "physiological conditions" necessary to
his apparition were not yet realized. The moment they were realized, he
says, he began to manifest himself, and it is at the same period,
according to him, that Hélène commenced to recover memories of her
Hindoo existence, under the form of strange visions of which she
comprehended neither the nature nor the origin.

After the age of about twenty years, without affirming or believing that
her visions and apparitions

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

ceased altogether, Mlle. Smith has no striking recollections of any, and
she has not told me of any psychic phenomenon experienced by her in the
series of years immediately preceding her entrance into spiritism. We
may infer from this, with some reason, that the ebullitions of the
imaginative subconscious life gradually became calm after the explosion
of the period we have mentioned. They had been appeased. The conflict
between Hélène's inner nature and the environment in which she was
forced to live became less fierce. A certain equilibrium was established
between the necessities of practical life and her inward aspirations. On
the one hand, she resigned herself to the necessities of reality; and if
her native pride could not yield to the point of condescending to a
marriage, honorable undoubtedly, but for which she felt she was not
intended, we must nevertheless pay homage to the perseverance, the
fidelity, the devotion which she always brought to the fulfilment of her
family and business duties. On the other hand, she did not permit the
flame of the ideal to be extinguished in her, and it reacted upon her
environment as strongly as possible, making its imprint upon her
personality well marked.

She introduced a certain stamp of elegance into the modest home of her
parents. She arranged for herself a small *salon*, coquettish and
comfortable in its simplicity. She took lessons in music, and bought
herself a piano. She hung some old engravings on her walls, secured some
Japanese vases, a jardinière filled with plants, cut flowers in pretty
vases, a hanging lamp with a beautiful shade of her

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

own make, a table-cover which she had put together and embroidered
herself, some photographs curiously framed according to her own design;
and out of this harmonious whole, always beautifully kept, she evolved
something original, bizarre, and delightful, conforming well to the
general character of her fantastic subconsciousness.

At the same time that Mlle. Smith succeeded in accommodating herself to
the conditions of her existence, the state of latent timidity in which
she lived gradually diminished. She is still occasionally overcome by
fear, but much less frequently than formerly, and never without a
legitimate exterior cause.

Indeed, judging her by these latter years, I do not recognize in her the
child or young girl of former days, always timid, trembling, and
frightened, taciturn and morose, who has been depicted to me by herself
and her mother.

It seems to me, then, that the wildness of the dreams and automatisms,
which were symptoms of a tendency to mental disintegration, which marked
the years of puberty, was succeeded by a progressive diminution of these
troubles and a gradual gaining of wisdom on the part of the subliminal
strata. We may presume that this harmonization, this reciprocal
adaptation of the internal to the external, would in time have perfected
itself, and that the whole personality of Mlle. Smith would have
continued to consolidate and unify itself, if spiritism had not come all
of a sudden to rekindle the fire which still slumbered under the ashes
and to give a new start to the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

subliminal mechanism which was beginning to grow rusty.

The suppressed fictions aroused themselves, the reveries of former years
resumed their sway, and the images of subliminal phantasy began to be
more prolific than ever under the fertile suggestions of occult
philosophy, rallying-points or centres of crystallization—such as the
idea of former existences and reincarnations—around which they had only
to group and organize themselves in order to give birth to the vast
somnambulistic constructions the development of which we shall be
obliged to follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[21:\*](ipm04.htm#fr_2) This term is used to
designate the visions which manifest themselves at the moment of
awakening from sleep immediately <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> prior
to complete awakening, and which form a pendant to the well-known, much
more frequent hypnagogic hallucinations, arising in the intermediate
state between sleep and waking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Mlle. Smith Since Her Initiation Into
Spiritism](ipm05)
