[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Mars](../mars/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipm12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691001014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From India to the Planet Mars*, by Théodore Flournoy; tr. Daniel B.
Vermilye, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

### CHAPTER XI

#### CONCLUSION

THIS volume reminds me of the mountain which gave birth to a mouse. Its
length would be excusable if only it marked a step in advance in the
field of psychology or physiology, or as to the question of the
supernormal. As such is not the case, it is unpardonable, and nothing
more is left me to do except to make clear its deficiencies in this
triple aspect.

First: From the physiological point of view, it is apparent that Mlle.
Smith, as is doubtless true of all mediums, presents during her visions
and somnambulisms a plenitude of disturbances of motility and
sensibility, from which she seems entirely free in her normal state.

But these trifling observations do not suffice to solve the
neuropathological problem of mediumship, and the question still remains
open as to whether that term corresponds to a special category of
manifestations and to a distinct syndrome, or whether it merely
constitutes a happy euphemism for various scientific denominations
already in use.

To endeavor to fix the connections of mediumship with other functional
affections of the nervous system,

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

it would first be necessary to possess exact intelligence on a number of
important points still enveloped in obscurity. In regard to some of
these, such as the phenomena of periodicity, of meteorological and
seasonal influences, of impulses, and of fatigue, etc., we have only
very vague and incomplete hints. And we know almost nothing of other
still more essential questions, such as the relations of equivalence and
substitution between the various modalities of automatism (nocturnal
visions, crepuscular states, complete trances, etc.), the effect of
spiritistic exercises, and especially of that of the seances upon
nutrition or denutrition (variations of temperature, of urotoxicity,
etc.), which would permit the comparison of spontaneous seizures and
those excited by mediumship with those of the more serious nervous
affections, the phenomena of heredity, similar or reversed, etc.

Let us hope that a near future will establish some good mediums and
their observers in practical conditions favorable to the elucidation of
these various problems, and that the day will come when the true place
of mediumship in the framework of nosology will be discovered.

Secondly: Front the psychological point of view, the case of Mlle.
Smith, although too complex to be reduced to a single formula, is
explicable *grosso modo* by some recognized principle, the successive or
concurrent action of which has engendered her multiple phenomena. There
is, in the first place, the influence, so often verified, of emotional
shocks and of certain psychic traumatisms upon mental dissociation. By

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

means of these the birth of hypnoid states may become the germ either of
secondary personalities more or less strongly marked (we have seen that
the first manifestations of Leopold in the childhood of Hélène are
attributable to this cause) or of somnambulistic romances, which hold
the same relation towards the normal state as does that exaggeration of
stories and indulgence in reveries to which so many are addicted—perhaps
all of us.

We must also take into consideration the enormous suggestibility and
auto-suggestibility of mediums, which render them so sensitive to all
the influences of spiritistic reunions, and are so favorable to the play
of those brilliant subliminal creations in which, occasionally, the
doctrinal ideas of the surrounding environment are reflected together
with the latent emotional tendencies of the medium herself. The
development of the personality of Leopold-Cagliostro, starting from the
moment at which Mlle. Smith began her seances, is easily explained in
this manner, as well as the Martian dream and the previous existences of
the Hindoo princess and the queen of France.

And, finally, we must note the phenomena of cryptomnesia, the awakening
and setting to work of forgotten memories, which easily account for the
elements of truth contained in the great preceding constructions and in
the incarnations or casual visions of Mlle. Smith in the course of her
seances.

But besides this general explanation how many points of detail there are
which remain obscure! For example, the precise origin of Hélène's
Sanscrit, and many of her retrocognitions, for want of information

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

concerning the thousand facts of her daily life whence the ideas which
nourish her somnambulism may have been drawn! And how difficult it is to
gain a correct idea of her case as a whole, on account of the crudity of
our actual notions as to the constitution and organization of the human
being, of our almost total ignorance of psychological ontogeny!

Without mentioning Hélène's ephemeral incarnations (in which I have
shown there is no reason far seeing anything beyond the imitations due
to autosuggestion), the divers more stable personalities which manifest
themselves in her hypnoid life—Leopold, Esenale, and the actors of the
Martian romance, Simandini, Marie Antoinette, etc.—are only, in my
opinion, as I have hinted on many occasions, the varied psychological
states of Mlle. Smith herself—allotropic modifications, as it were, or
phenomena of polymorphism of her personality. For no one of these
personalities corresponds sufficiently with her ordinary personality by
intellectual faculties, the moral character, separation of memories, to
justify the hypothesis of a foreign *possession*.

But the theory of psychic polymorphism is still very imperfect, and
inadequate to explain the embryological shades which shine forth in
Hélène's subliminal products—the retrograde perspective which they open
as to the different stages or periods of her evolution. The Martian
cycle, with its unknown language, evidently betrays an eminently puerile
origin and the display of an hereditary linguistic aptitude, buried
under Hélène's ordinary self; whereas the Hindoo romance denotes a more

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

advanced age, and that of Marie Antoinette seems to have sprung from
still more recent strata, contemporaneous with the actual normal
personality of Mlle. Smith. The primitive nature and different ages of
the various hypnoid lucubrations of Mlle. Smith seem to me to constitute
the most interesting psychological fact of her mediumship. It tends to
show that the secondary personalities are probably, in their origin, as
the idea has been sometimes suggested, phenomena of reversion of the
ordinary actual personality, or of momentary returns of inferior phases,
long since passed, and which normally should have been absorbed in the
development of the individuality, instead of breaking forth again in
strange proliferations.

Thirdly: As to the supernormal, I believe I have actually found a little
telekinesis and telepathy. As to lucidity and spiritistic messages, I
have only encountered some brilliant reconstructions, which the hypnoid
imagination, aided by latent memory, excels in fabricating in the case
of mediums. I do not complain of this, since for psychology, which is
not specially enamoured of the marvellous, these admirably successful
imitations are also interesting and instructive on account of the light
which they throw upon the inward workings of our faculties.

Of course Mlle. Smith and her friends see things in a very different
light. With Hélène everything, or almost everything, is supernormal,
from the reminiscences of her lives as Marie Antoinette and Simandini,
to the Martian and the incarnations of Cagliostro, of Mlle. Vignier, or
of the *curé* of Chessenaz.

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

And now let us admit, hypothetically, that I have not been able to see
the supernormal, which was plainly before my eyes, and that it is this
blindness of mine alone which has prevented me from recognizing the real
presence of Joseph Balsamo, my own mother, the Hindoo princess, etc.—or,
at all events, the presence of real, disincarnate, independent spirits.
It is, of course, to be regretted, but then it is I alone who will be in
disgrace on the day when the truth shall be made manifest.

For, as to progress in our knowledge of things, everything is to be
feared from easy credulity and obstinate dogmatism, but that progress
will not be arrested or seriously retarded by possible errors, committed
in good faith, through an exaggerated severity of application and a too
strict observance of the principles themselves of all experimental
investigation: while, on the contrary, the obstacles and the
difficulties which the necessities of the method multiply along its path
have always been a strong stimulant, producing new movements forward and
more durable conquests based on better demonstrations.

It is better, then, to follow my advice—in the well-understood interest
of and for the advancement of science, in a domain where superstition is
always ready to give itself free play—it is better to err through excess
of caution and strictness of method than to run the risk of being
sometimes deceived; it is better to allow some interesting fact to
escape for the moment, rather than to open the door to the follies of
the imagination by a relaxation of necessary caution.

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

As to Mlle. Hélène Smith, supposing that I have failed to recognize in
her phenomena which are really supernormal (which, in that case, will
some day be better set forth by other observers), she will,
nevertheless, accomplish more in the way of discovering the real truth,
whatever it may be, in submitting herself disinterestedly to my free
criticisms, than by doing as so many useless mediums have done, who,
afraid of the light, in their foolish eagerness for the triumph of a
cause very dear to their hearts, have shunned close investigation, and
would have us rely upon their word alone.

They forget the saying of Bacon, which is ever being confirmed: "*Truth
is the daughter of time, not of authority*."

 

 

<span class="small">THE END</span>

 

 

 
