[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc23003)  [Next](cc23005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 23: Ezekiel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 16

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#000)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>:

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1.** Again the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying,

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me, dicendo,

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>**2.** Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her
abominations,

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>**2.** Fili hominis, indica  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) Hierosolymae suas abominationes,

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>**3.** And say, Thus says the Lord GOD unto
Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity *is* of the land of Canaan; thy
father *was* an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite.

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>**3.** Sic dices, Sic dicit Dominator Iehovah
Hierosolymae, habitationes tuae, et natales tui e terra Chanaan: pater
tuus Amorrhaeus, mater tua Hithaea, et quae sequuntur.

<span id="v.i-p9"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p10"></span><span id="v.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>This chapter contains very severe reproaches
against the people of Judea who were left at Jerusalem. For although
Ezekiel had been a leader to the Israelites and the Jewish exiles, yet
God wished his assistance in profiting others. Hence the office which
God had imposed upon his Prophet is now extended to the citizens of
Jerusalem, whose abominations he is ordered to make manifest. The manner
is afterwards expressed, when God shows the condition of that nation
before he embraced it with his favor. But after recounting the benefits
by which he had adorned the people, he reproves their ingratitude, and
shows in many words, and by different figures, how detestable was their
perfidy in revolting: so far from God after he had treated them so
liberally. These things will now be treated in their own order. As to
Ezekiel’s being ordered *to lay bare to the Jews their abominations*, we
gather from this that men are often so blinded by their vices that they
do not perceive what is sufficiently evident to every one else. And we
know that the people was quite drunk with pride, for they voluntarily
blinded themselves by their own flatteries. It is not surprising, then,
that God orders them to bring their abominations into the midst, so that
they may at length feel themselves to be sinners. And this passage is
worthy of notice, since we think those admonitions superfluous until God
drags us into the light, and places our sins before our eyes. There is
no one, indeed, whose conscience does not reprove him, since God’s law
is written on the hearts of all, and so we naturally distinguish between
good and evil; but if we think how great our stupidity is concealing our
faults, we shall not wonder that the prophets uttered this command, to
lay open our abominations to ourselves. For not only is that
self-knowledge of which I have spoken cold, but also involved in much
darkness, so that he who is but partially conscious grows willingly
hardened while he indulges himself. Again, we must remember that the
Jews were to be argued with in this way, because they pleased themselves
with their own superstitions. For the Prophet shows that their chief
wickedness consisted in deserting God’s law, in prostituting themselves
to idols, and in setting up adulterous worship like houses of ill fame;
but in this they pleased themselves, as we daily see in the papacy, that
under this pretext the foulest idolatries are disguised, since they
think themselves to be thereby worshipping God.

<span id="v.i-p12"></span>It is not surprising, then, if God here
obliquely blames the stupidity and sloth of the Jews when he *commands
their abominations to be laid open*, which are already sufficiently
known to all. Afterwards, that God may begin to show how improperly the
people were behaving, he recalls them to the first origin or fountain of
their race. But we must notice that God speaks differently of the origin
of the people. For sometimes he reminds them of Abraham’s condition
before he had stretched forth his hand and dragged them, as it were,
from the lowest regions into life, as it is said in the last chapter of
Joshua, (<span id="v.i-p12.1"></span>[Josh.
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#003)<span id="v.i-p12.1"></span>,) Thy
father Abraham was worshipping idols when God adopted him. But sometimes
the beginning is made from the covenant of God, when he chose Abraham
with his posterity for himself. But in this passage God takes the time
from the period of the small band of men emerging by wonderful increase
into a nation, although they had been so wretchedly oppressed in Egypt;
for the redemption of the people which immediately followed is called
sometimes their nativity. So here God says that the Jews were there born
when they increased so incredibly, though when oppressed by the Egyptian
tyranny they had scarcely any place among living men. And what he says
of Jews applies equally to all the posterity of Abraham: for the
condition of the ten tribes was the same as that of Judea. But since the
Prophet speaks to a people still surviving, he is silent about what he
would have said, if he had been commanded to utter this mandate to the
exiles and captives, as well as to the citizens of Jerusalem. Whatever
its meaning, God here pronounces *that the Jews sprang from the land of
Canaan, from an Amorite father, and from a Hittite mother*

<span id="v.i-p13"></span><span id="v.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p14"></span>A question arises here — When God had adopted
Abraham two hundred years previously, why was not that covenant taken
into account? for he here seems not to magnify his own faithfulness and
the constancy of his promise when he rejects the Jews as sprung from the
Canaanites or Amorites; but this only shows what they were in
themselves: for although he never departed from his purpose, and his
election was never in vain, yet we must hold, as far as the people were
concerned, that they are looked upon as profane Gentiles. For we know
how they corrupted themselves in Egypt. Since, then, they were so
degenerate and so utterly unlike their fathers, it is not surprising if
God says *that they were sprung from Canaanites and Amorites*. For by
Hosea he says, that they were all born of a harlot, and that the place
of their birth was a house of ill fame. (<span id="v.i-p14.1"></span>[Ho
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#004)<span id="v.i-p14.1"></span>.) This
must be understood metaphorically: since here God does not; chide the
women who had been false to their husbands, and had borne an adulterous
offspring; but he simply means that the Jews were unworthy of being
called or reputed Abraham’s seed. Why so? for although God remained firm
in his covenant, yet if we consider the character of the Jews, they had
entirely cut themselves off by their faithlessness. Since, then, they
did not differ from the profane Gentiles, they are deservedly rejected
with reproach, and are called an offspring of Canaan, as in other
places. Now therefore, we understand the intention of the Prophet, or
rather of the Holy Spirit. For if God had only said that he would pity
that race when reduced to extreme misery, it would not have been
subjected to such severe and heavy reproof, as we shall see. Hence God
not only relates his kindness towards them, but at the same time shows
from what state he had taken the Jews when he first aided them, and
what, was their condition when he deigned to draw them out of such great
misery. Moreover, since he was at hand to take them up, their redemption
was founded on covenant, and so they were led forth, because God had
promised Abraham four centuries ago that he would be the liberator of
the people. That they should not be ignorant of the favor by which God
had bound himself to Abraham, the Prophet meets them, and pronounces
them a seed of Canaan, having nothing in common with Abraham, because,
as far as they were concerned, according to common usage, God’s promise
was extinct, and their adoption dead and buried. Since they had acted so
perfidiously, they could no longer boast themselves to be Abraham’s
children. Hence he says, *thy habitations*, that is, the place of their
origin. Jerome translates it “root;” but the word “nativity” suits
better, or native soil, or condition of birth *in the land of Canaan:
and thy father an Amorite and thy mother a Hittite* There were other
tribes of Canaan, but two or three kinds are put here for the whole. Now
it follows —

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>**4.** And *as for* thy nativity, in the day
thou wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast you washed in water
to supple *thee*; thou wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Et nativitates tuae in die qua nata es
tu  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) non praecisus fuit umbilicus
tuus, aquis non fuisti lota, ad mollitiem  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) sale non fuisti salita, et non fuisti
involuta fasciis.  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66)

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>**5.** None eye pitied thee, to do any of
these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in
the open field, to the lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast
born.

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>**5.** Non misertus est super te oculus
faciendum tibi unum ex his ad considerandum super te et projecta fuisti
in superficie agri, in probrum animae tuae quo die nata es.

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span> 

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span><span id="v.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span>Here the Prophet metaphorically describes
that most miserable state in which God found the Jews. For we know that
scarcely any nation was ever so cruelly and disgracefully oppressed. For
when they were all driven to servile labor without reward, the edict
went forth that their males should be cut off. (<span
id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>[Exod. 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#016),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#022)<span id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>.) No
species of disgrace was omitted, and their life was worse than a hundred
deaths. This, then, is the reason why God says that the Jews were so
*cast forth on the face of the earth* without any supply of the common
necessaries of life. He takes these figures from customary usage; for it
is usual to cut the navel-string of infants: for the navel affords them
nourishment in their mothers’ womb, and mother and child would both
perish unless a separation took place; and if the navel-string were not
tied the child would perish; for all the blood flows through that organ,
as the child received its sustenance through it: and this is the
midwife’s chief care as soon as the child is born, to cut away what must
afterwards be restored to its place, and to bind up the part, and to do
it, as I have said, with the greatest care, as the infant’s life depends
upon it.

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span>But God says, *that the navel-string of the
Jews is not cut off*. Why so? *because they were cast,* says he*, on the
surface of the earth;* that is, they were deserted and exposed, — using
but a single word. He now adds, *they were not washed with water*: for
we know how young infants require ablution; and unless it be performed
immediately, they will perish. Hence he says, they were not washed with
water. He adds, to soften or refresh, or “fettle” them, as the common
phrase is; for water softens and smoothes the skin, though others
translate it in the sense of causing it to shine: but we understand the
Prophet’s meaning sufficiently. He afterwards adds*, they were not
rubbed with salt;* for salt is sprinkled on the body of an infant to
harden the flesh, while care must be taken not to render it too hard;
and this moderate hardness is effected by the sprinkling of salt. The
full meaning is, that the Jews at their birth were cast out with such
contempt, that they were destitute of the necessary care which life
requires. He adds, *No eye pitied thee, so as to discharge any of these
duties, and to show thee pity*: and this is sufficiently evident, since
the Israelites would have been destroyed had no one taken compassion on
them; for they were in some sense buried in the land of Egypt; for we
know how cruel was the conspiracy of the whole land against them. No
wonder, then, if God here relates that they were cast upon the surface
of the land, so that no eye looked upon them and showed them pity. He
adds, *they were cast to the loathing of their life*. He simply means,
that they were so despicable that they had no standing among men; for
loathing of life means the same as rejection. It now follows —

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006)<span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>**6.** And when I passed by thee, and saw
thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee, *when thou wast* in
thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto thee, *when thou wast* in thy blood,
Live.

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span>**6.** Et transivi juxta te, et vidi te
foedatam  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) in sanguinibus tuis: et
dixi tibi, in sanguinibus tuis, Vive: et dixi tibi, in sanguinibus tuis,
Vive.

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span><span id="v.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span>I have already explained the time to which
the Prophet alludes, when the seed of Abraham began to be tyrannically
oppressed by the Egyptians. For God here assumes the character of a
traveler when he says that *he passed by.* For he had said that the Jews
and all the Israelites were like a girl cast forth and deserted. Now,
therefore, he adds, that this spectacle met him as he passed by: as
those who travel cast their eyes on either side, and if anything unusual
occurs they attend and consider it; meanwhile God declares that he was
taking care of his people. And truly the matter is sufficiently evident,
since he seemed to have neglected those wretched ones, while he had
wonderfully assisted them. For they might have perished a hundred times
a-day, and if he had not taken notice of them, they had not dragged out
their life to the end. That celebrated sentence is well known — I have
seen, I have seen, the affliction of my people. When he sent for Moses
and commanded him to liberate the people, he prefaces it in this way, I
have seen, I have seen. (<span id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>[Ex
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007)<span id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>)
Hence he had long ago seen, though he seemed to despise them by shutting
his eyes. There is no doubt that the doubling of the word here means
that God always watched for the safety of this desperate people,
although he did not assist them directly: he now means the same thing
when he says*,* that *he passed by: I passed by*, then, *near thee, and
saw thee defiled with blood*. That spectacle could not turn away God’s
eyes; for whatever is contrary to nature excites horror. God therefore
here shows how compassionate he was towards the people, because he was
not horrified by that disgraceful foulness, when he saw the infant so
immersed in its own gore without any shape. As to the following phrase,
*I said to thee*, he does not mean that he spoke openly so that the
people heard his voice, but he announces what he had determined
concerning the people. The expression, *live in thy blood*, may indeed
be taken contemptuously, as if God had grudged moving his hand, lest the
very touch should prove contagious; for we do not willingly touch any
putrid gore. The words, *live in thy blood,* may be thus explained,
since at first God did not deign to take care of the people. But it is
evident from the context, that God here expresses the secret virtue by
which the people was preserved contrary to the common feelings. For if
we consider what has been previously said, the people surely had not
lived a single day, unless it had received rigor from this voice of God.
For if a new-born child is cast out, how can it bear the cold of the
night? surely it will instantly expire: and I have already said that
death is prepared for infants, unless their navel-string be cut. Since
therefore a hundred deaths encompassed the people, they could never have
continued alive, had not the secret voice of God sustained them.

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span>God therefore in commanding them to live,
already shows that he was willingly and wonderfully preserving them
amidst various kinds of death. As it is said in the 68th psalm, (<span
id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>[Ps 68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020)<span
id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>,) “In his hands are the issues of death,” so
that death is converted into life: since he is the sovereign and lord of
both. But this phrase is doubled, since the people were afflicted in
Egypt for no short period. But if that tyranny had endured only a few
years, they must have been consumed. But their slavery was protracted to
many years: whence that remarkable wonder occurred, that their
remembrance and their name were not often cut off. We see then that God
has reason enough to speak that sentence in which the safety of the
people was included, *live in thy bloods, live in thy bloods*. The fact
itself shows the people to have been preserved, since it pleased God.
The history which Moses relates in the book of Exodus is a glass in
which we may behold the living image of that life of which we have made
mention as drawing its whole vigor from the secret good pleasure of God.
Now the reason is asked why God did not openly and directly take up his
people, and treat them as kindly as he did during their youth? The
reason is sufficiently manifest, since if the people had been freed at
the very first, the memory of the benefit would have by and by vanished
away, and God’s power would have been more obscure. For we know that
men, unless thoroughly convinced of their own misery, never acknowledge
that they have obtained safety through God’s pity. The people then
thought so to live, as always to have death before their eyes — nay, as
if they were bound by the chains of death. *It lived,* then, *in
bloods,* that is, in the tomb, like a carcass remaining in its own
putridness, and its life in the meantime lying hid: so it happened to
the sons of Abraham. Now then we understand God’s intention why he did
not raise up the children of Abraham with grandeur from the beginning,
but suffered them to drag out a miserable life, and to be steeped in the
very pollution of death. It now follows —

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007)<span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>**7.** I have caused thee to multiply as the
bud of the field, and thou hast increased and waxen great, and thou art
come to excellent ornaments: *thy* breasts are fashioned, and thine hair
is grown, whereas thou *wast* naked and bare.

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span>**7.** Et magnam te feci quasi germen agri:
 <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) et crevisti, et adolevisti,  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) et venisti in ornamentum ornamentorum:
 <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) ubera tua aptata sunt,  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) et pilus tuus germinavit: tu autem nuda
et discooperta eras.

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span><span id="v.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span>Here what I lately touched upon is now
clearly expressed, that the people in their extreme distress were not
only safe, but increased by God’s singular favor. For if the infant
after exposure retains its life, it will still be a weak abortion. Hence
God here by this circumstance magnifies his favor, since the people
increased as if it had been properly and attentively cared for, and as
if no kind office had been omitted. This is the meaning of the words
*they were increased*; for though he looks to the propagation of
Abraham’s family, yet the simile is to be observed, for the people is
compared to a girl exposed in a field from its birth, and their growth
took place when God increased them so incredibly, as we know. And surely
God’s blessing was great when they entered Egypt, 75 in number, and were
many thousands when they left it. (<span id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>[Ac
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#014)<span id="v.iv-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="v.iv-p10.2"></span>[Ex
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)<span id="v.iv-p10.2"></span>.)
For within 250 years, the family of Abraham was so multiplied, that they
amounted to 800,000 when God freed them. But since the Prophet speaks
metaphorically, when he says *the people were increased*, and, under the
image of a tender girl, *until they grew up to a proper age*; meanwhile
he shows that this was done only by the wonderful counsel and power of
God. *I placed thee,* says he. God claims to himself the praise for this
great multiplication, and then strengthens what I have said, namely,
that the people’s safety was included in that phrase *live in bloods*:
then he says, *she came into ornament of ornaments*. Here <span
id="v.iv-p10.3"></span>עדי, *gnedi*, cannot mean any occasional
ornament, since it is added directly, *thou wast naked and bare*. It
follows then that it refers to personal comeliness. It means not only
that the girl grew in loftiness of stature but in beauty of person.
Hence elegance and loveliness are here marked, as the context shows us.
*Thou camest* then *to excellent* or exquisite *beauty*, for we know
this to be the meaning of the genitive, signifying excellence. He adds
at the same time, *thy breasts were made ready*, for <span
id="v.iv-p10.4"></span>כון, *kon*, means to prepare, to strengthen: but
as he is speaking of breasts, I have no doubt that he means them to have
swelled as they ought to do. *Thy breasts then were fashioned*, that is,
of the right size, as in marriageable girls. *Thy hair also grew long*.
Finally, the Prophet expresses thus grossly what he could have said more
concisely, in consequence of the people’s rudeness. *Thy hair grew long,
whilst thou wast naked and bare*; that is, as yet you had no outward
ornament, you was like a marriageable girl — you had great beauty of
person, a noble stature, and all parts of thy body mutually accordant,
but you had cause to be ashamed of thy nakedness. And such was the
condition of the people since the Egyptians devised everything against
them, and conspired by all means for their destruction: we see then how
God stretched forth his hand not only for the people’s defense, but to
carry them forth against the tyranny of Pharaoh and of all Egypt. He
points out the time of their redemption as near, because the people had
increased and multiplied, just like a girl who had reached her twentieth
year. Now it follows —

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span><span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008)<span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p2"></span>**8.** Now when I passed by thee, and looked
upon thee, behold, thy time *was* the time of love; and I spread my
skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and
entered into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord GOD, and thou becamest
mine.

<span id="v.v-p3"></span>**8.** Et transivi juxta te, et vidi te; et
ecce tempus tuum tempus amorum: et extendi alam meam  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) super te, et texi nuditatem tuam,  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) et juravi tibi, et veni in foedus tecum,
dicit Dominator Iehovah: et fuisti mea.

<span id="v.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.v-p7"></span><span id="v.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p8"></span>God now reproaches the Jews with his kindness
towards them, since he had clothed them in splendid ornaments, and yet
they afterwards cast themselves into the vilest lusts, as we shall see.
But we must remember that the Prophet is now speaking of the time of
their liberation. But God says *that he passed by again and saw the
state of the people*, — not that he had ever forgotten it. For we know
that even when he dissembles and seems to shut his eyes and turn them
from us or even to sleep, yet he is always anxious for our safety. And
we have already said that there was need of his present power, that the
people might prolong their lives, since if he had not breathed life into
them, a hundred deaths would have immediately prevailed. But it is
sufficiently common and customary to mark an open declaration of help by
God’s aspect. When God appears so openly to deliver us that it may be
comprehended by our senses, then he is said to look down upon us, to
rise up, and to turn himself towards us. He passed by, then, near the
people, namely, when he called Moses out of the desert and appointed him
the minister of his favor, (<span id="v.v-p8.1"></span>[Exodus
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#000)<span id="v.v-p8.1"></span>,) he then
saw his people, and proved by their trial that he had not utterly cast
them away. I looked, then, and *behold thy time, thy time of years*.
Here God speaks grossly, yet according to the people’s comprehension.
For he personates a man struck with the beauty of a girl and offering
her marriage. But God is not affected as men are, as we well know, so
that it is not according to his nature to love as young men do. But such
was the people’s stupidity, that they could not be usefully taught,
unless the Prophet accommodated himself to their grossness. Add also
that the people had been by no means lovely, unless God had embraced
them by his kindness, so that his love depended on his good pleasure
towards them. *So by the time of loves*, we ought to understand the
complete time of their redemption, for God had determined to bring the
people out of Egypt when he pleased, and that had been promised to
Abraham: after four hundred years I will be their avenger. (<span
id="v.v-p8.2"></span>[Gen. 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#014)<span id="v.v-p8.2"></span>; <span
id="v.v-p8.3"></span>[Acts 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#007)<span id="v.v-p8.3"></span>,) We
see, then, that the years were previously fixed in which God would
redeem the people. He now compares that union to a marriage. Hence if
God would bind his people to himself by a marriage, so also he would
pledge himself to conjugal fidelity. But I cannot proceed further — I
must leave the rest till tomorrow.

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since from our first
origin we have been entirely accursed, so that we were entirely foul and
polluted in thy sight, that we may be mindful of our condition, and
acknowledge your inestimable pity towards us, since you have deigned to
draw us from the lowest estate, and to adopt us among thy children: and
may we so desire to spend our whole life in obedience to thee, that we
may at length enjoy that blessed glory to which you has called us, and
which you have prepared for us in your only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="v.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Third.

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain another point
of which the Prophet treats, namely, the liberation of the people. For
then was the fitting time in which God espoused them to himself. He now
adds, *that he spread out the skirt of his garment to cover the foulness
and disgrace of the people*. This spreading comprehends all the virtues
which God exercised in freeing his people. For he then delivered them
from all reproaches by which they were shamefully and disgracefully
treated in Egypt. Some think that it was a nuptial rite for a spouse or
husband to cover the bride with his garment, but this is only a
conjecture. Hence I simply interpret it*, the border of the garment was
spread out*, when God vindicated his people from the reproaches by which
they had been deformed. He afterwards adds, and I have sworn to thee,
*and come into covenant with thee*. There is no doubt that this thought
to be referred to the promulgation of the law. For although God had long
ago made a covenant with Abraham, and the adoption of the people was
founded upon it, yet that favor on the people’s part had almost vanished
away, as I yesterday said; hence God pronounces that he had, as it were,
adopted the people afresh. It was like the renewal of the covenant, when
God bound the people to himself by a fixed law, and prescribed a fixed
method of worship. These, then, were the accustomed marriage rites. But
God deservedly announces that he had come into covenant, because he then
coupled the people to himself; whence also that eulogy of Moses — What
nation is so illustrious under heaven, which has God so near them, as
thy God approaches unto thee? You shall be to me a kingdom of priests;
you shall be my inheritance. (<span id="v.vii-p2.1"></span>[De
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)<span id="v.vii-p2.1"></span>;
<span id="v.vii-p2.2"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="v.vii-p2.2"></span>.) We
should remark the word *swear* as emphatic, for God increases his
indulgence when he says *that he swore*. If we think of the majesty of
God, and of what his people was, this is surely incredible, that God
should deign to descend so far as to swear like men accustomed to pledge
their faith, and to sanction it by an oath. Now, therefore, we see the
singular benefit expressed here with which God adorned his people, when,
at the giving of the law, he chose them as his own, and appointed them
to be a kingdom of priests. It now follows —

<span id="v.viii"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#009)<span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p2"></span>**9.** Then washed I thee with water; yea, I
throughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.

<span id="v.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Et lavi te aquis, et mundavi  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) sanguines tuos abs te  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) et unxi te oleo.

<span id="v.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.viii-p7"></span><span id="v.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p8"></span>Here God more clearly explains what had been
formerly touched upon, namely, that he then married the people, as a
young man marries his bride. But he here states that he endowed her; for
they would not have been sufficiently adopted by God unless they had
been adorned with superior presents; since if they had been left in that
miserable slavery by which they were oppressed, God’s favor would have
been very obscure. Now, therefore, God means, that by his law he had
entered into a new covenant with his people, so that he did not leave
them naked and bare, but clothed with remarkable gifts. First of all, he
says, *I washed thee with water*. Although he had just said that the
people were like a beautiful damsel, and had praised their beauty, yet
the filth of which the prophet had spoken yet remained: it ought,
therefore, to be cleansed from those stains: *I have cleansed thee with
water,* says he*, and washed off thy bloods,* namely, the corrupt blood
which the damsel whom Ezekiel mentions had retained from her birth.
Lastly, Ezekiel says that God performed those offices which the nurse
discharges for the child. Afterwards he adds —

<span id="v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span><span id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010)<span id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p2"></span>**10.** I clothed thee also with broidered
work, and shod thee with badgers’ skin, and I girded thee about with
fine linen, and I covered thee with silk.

<span id="v.ix-p3"></span>**10.** Et vestivi te Phrygionica veste,
 <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) et calceavi te taxo,  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) et cinxi te bysso, et operui te serico.

<span id="v.ix-p6"></span>**11.** I decked thee also with ornaments, and
I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck.

<span id="v.ix-p7"></span>**11.** Et ornavi te ornatu, et posui armillas
in manibus tuis, et torquem in collo tuo.

<span id="v.ix-p8"></span>**12.** And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and
earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head.

<span id="v.ix-p9"></span>**12.** Et posui circulum super faciem tuam,
 <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) et inaures super aures tuas, et
coronam decoris in capite tuo.  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)

<span id="v.ix-p12"></span>**13.** Thus wast thou decked with gold and
silver; and thy raiment *was of* fine linen, and silk, and broidered
work; you didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast
exceeding beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a kingdom.

<span id="v.ix-p13"></span>**13.** Et ornata fuisti auro et argento, et
vestitus tuus byssus, et sericum  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80)
et variegatus:  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) similam, et mel, et
oleum comedisti, et pulchra fuisti in valde valde,  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) et prospere  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) progressa es usque ad regnum.

<span id="v.ix-p18"></span> 

<span id="v.ix-p19"></span><span id="v.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p20"></span>Here the Prophet, in a metaphor, relates
other benefits of God by which he liberally adorned his people; for we
know that nothing has been omitted in God’s pouring forth the riches of
his goodness on the people. And as to the explanations which some give
of these female ornaments allegorically, I do not approve of it, as they
fruitlessly conjecture many trifles which are at variance with each
other. First of all, their conjectures may be refuted by the Prophet’s
words: then, if we suffer the Prophet’s words to be turned and twisted,
what these allegorical interpreters chatter with each other is entirely
contrary in their meaning. Let us, therefore, be content with the
genuine sense, that God was so generous towards the Israelites that he
poured forth all his blessings in enriching them. Now, if one asks how
the people were adorned? I answer, in two ways — first, God embraced
them with his favor, and promised to be their God, and this was their
chief honor; as Moses says they were naked, and their shame was
discovered when they set up an idol in the place of God. He now adds a
second kind of blessing, when God took care of them in the desert: he
appeared by day in a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire: the water
flowed for them from the rock; daily food was given them from heaven, as
if God with his own hands had placed it within their mouths: then in his
strength they conquered their enemies, and entered the promised land;
while he slew the nations for them, and gave them quiet possession and
dominion there: then he blessed the land, so that it nourished them
abundantly, and made it testify that it was no vain promise that the
land should flow with milk and honey. (<span id="v.ix-p20.1"></span>[Ex
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#017)<span id="v.ix-p20.1"></span>;
<span id="v.ix-p20.2"></span>[Exod.
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#022)<span id="v.ix-p20.2"></span>;
<span id="v.ix-p20.3"></span>[Exod.
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016)<span id="v.ix-p20.3"></span>;
<span id="v.ix-p20.4"></span>[Ex
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006)<span id="v.ix-p20.4"></span>;
<span id="v.ix-p20.5"></span>[Ex
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025)<span id="v.ix-p20.5"></span>;
<span id="v.ix-p20.6"></span>[Nu
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#011)<span id="v.ix-p20.6"></span>.)
Ezekiel includes all these things under *necklaces, bracelets, gold,
silver, linen garments, broidered work*, etc. As to the particular words
I will not, accurately insist, unless I shortly touch on a point or two
which may occasion doubt.

<span id="v.ix-p21"></span>When he says that *he clothed them*, <span
id="v.ix-p21.1"></span>רקמה, *rekmeh*, this is in accordance with
eastern customs: for they were accustomed to use clothing of different
colors; as Benjamin wore a dress of this kind when he was a boy; and
this was no royal splendor on his father’s part, who was a shepherd, but
simply the usual custom. At this day, indeed, if any one among us wore a
party colored garment, it would not be manly: nay, women who desire such
variety in colors show themselves to have cast off all modesty. But
among the Orientals, as I have said, this was the usual kind of dress.
He afterwards adds*, I shod thee with badgers’ skin.* I know not why
Jerome translates it violet-colored, and others hyacinth: it is
sufficiently clear that it was a precious kind of skin. The word is
often used by Moses when treating of the tabernacle; for the coverings
were of violet-colored skin, and the whole tabernacle was covered with
them. The badger was an animal unknown to us: but since he is here
treating of shoes, there is no doubt that the skin was more elegant, and
more highly esteemed by God. (<span id="v.ix-p21.2"></span>[Exod.
35:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#023), [Exod.
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#019)<span id="v.ix-p21.2"></span>.)
Afterwards he adds, *I bound thee with fine linen.* We know that linen
garments were in more frequent use among that people than in Greece or
in Italy, or in these parts: for linen was rarely used by the Romans
even in their greatest luxury; but in the East they wore linen, as that
region is very warm. But we know that linen is very fine, and that they
were accustomed to weave transparent veils. Now this clothing was
commonly worn by men in the East, though it is by no means manly: nay,
in women it is scarcely tolerable. But the priests afterwards adopted
the custom, and clothed themselves in linen while performing sacred
rites. The Papal priests too — apes in all things — have imitated the
custom; and although they do not wear fine linen, yet use linen robes,
which they call surplices.

<span id="v.ix-p22"></span>He now adds, and *I covered thee with silk*,
or silken garments, or silk cloth. He adds, *that he placed bracelets
upon the hands*: barbarians call them armlets. This luxury was spread
abroad almost everywhere; but the circular ornament which the Prophet
adds to it was rejected by other nations. He puts a *chain round the
neck*: chains were in common use as they are this day: nay, to necklaces
were added looser chains — double, threefold, and fourfold; for this
fault was too common. And what he afterwards adds of the ring was left
to the Orientals, for they had jewels hanging from their nostrils: and I
wonder why interpreters put earrings here, and then instead of earrings
put nose-rings. But the Prophet here means a ring, whence a jewel was
hung from the nose; and this with us is ridiculous and deforming: but in
those barbarous regions both men and women have gems hanging from both
their noses and ears. He adds, *a crown on thy head.* He does not mean a
diadem or crown as a sign of royalty, but an ornament sufficiently
common.

<span id="v.ix-p23"></span><span id="v.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p24"></span>If any one makes any inquiry about these
various kinds of dresses, whether it was lawful for women to use so many
ornaments, the answer is easy, that the Prophet here does not approve of
what he relates, but uses a common image. We said that his only
intention was to show that God could not have treated his people more
freely; since in every way he had unfolded the incomparable treasures of
his beneficence in adorning the Israelites. He now describes this in a
metaphor, and under figures taken from the common practice everywhere
received. It does not follow, therefore, that women ought to adorn
themselves in this way. For we know that superfluous ornaments are
temptations; and we know also the vanity of women, and their ambition to
show themselves off, as the saying is: and we see how sharply this eager
desire of women is blamed, especially by Isaiah. (<span
id="v.ix-p24.1"></span>[Isa 3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#000)<span
id="v.ix-p24.1"></span>.) But it is sufficient to elicit what God wished
to teach by these figures, namely, that he had not omitted any kind of
liberality. Whence it follows, that the people’s ingratitude was the
less excusable, as Ezekiel will immediately add. But before we proceed
further, we must turn this instruction to our use. What has hitherto
been said of the Israelites does not suit us, I confess, in all things:
but yet there is some likeness between us and them. If we reflect upon
our origin, we are all born children of wrath, all cursed, all Satan’s
bondsmen, (<span id="v.ix-p24.2"></span>[Eph
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span id="v.ix-p24.2"></span>;) and
although many have been well brought up, yet as to our spiritual state
we are like infant children or the new-born babe, exposed and immersed
in its own filth and corruption. For what can be found in man before his
renewal but the curse of God? Hence we are such slaves of Satan, that
God hates us, as it is said in Genesis, (<span
id="v.ix-p24.3"></span>[Ge 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#007)<span
id="v.ix-p24.3"></span>,) I repent of having formed man; where he does
not acknowledge his image in us, which is not only defiled by original
sin, but is all but extinct, surely this is the height of deformity: and
though we do not perceive what is said by our senses, yet we are
sufficiently detestable before God and the angels. We have no cause,
then, to please ourselves; nay, if we open our eyes, the foulness which
I have mentioned will be sufficiently clear to us. Meanwhile, God so
aided us that he truly fulfilled what Ezekiel relates. For although we
were not freed from any external tyranny, yet God espoused us: then he
adopted us into his Church: this was our greatest honor; this was more
than royal dignity. We see, then, that this instruction is useful for us
also at this time, if we only consider in what we are like the ancient
people. I had almost omitted one point — the nourishment. God here not
only reminds them that he had adorned the people with various kinds of
clothing, and necklaces, and gems, and silver; but he adds also, *you
did eat fine flour, or fine meal, and honey and oil, and you was very
beautiful, and proceeded prosperously, even to a kingdom.* Here God
again commends and extols his beneficence, because he not only clothed
sumptuously his spouse of whom he speaks, but also fed her plentifully
with the best, and sweetest, and most delicate food. He puts only three
species: he makes no mention of will or flesh; but by fine flour he
means that they lacked no delicacy: the oil and honey mean the same
thing. This clause points out an accumulation of grace when he says
*that they progressed happily even to a kingdom*: all God’s benefits
could not be recounted: he says that his bride was not only
magnificently clothed and delicately brought up, but *that she proceeded
even to the royal dignity*. In the next verse he still reminds them of
his benefits.

<span id="v.x"></span>

<span id="v.x-p1"></span><span id="v.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#014)<span id="v.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p2"></span>**14.** And thy renown went forth among the
heathen for thy beauty: for it *was* perfect through my comeliness,
which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="v.x-p3"></span>**14.** Et egressum tibi fuit nomen in gentibus
in pulchritudine tua:  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) quia
perfecta fuisti in decore quem posueram super te, dicit Dominator
Iehovah.

<span id="v.x-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.x-p6"></span><span id="v.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p7"></span>Here the Prophet still continues to recite
those blessings of God by which he had bound the people to himself. As
to his saying, *that its name had gone forth*, it cannot be restricted
to a short period; but it embraces a continued series of God’s favors
until the people reached the highest point of happiness; and this
happened under David. There is no doubt that God here means that he was
so continually liberal towards the people that their fame became
celebrated, for the name of the Israelites were spread far and wide; and
God deservedly recounts their nobility or celebrity of fame among his
benefits: hence he adds, *on account of the beauty or elegance which I
have placed upon thee*, says he; *because you was perfect through the
ornament which I had placed upon thee*. Here, therefore, God signifies
that the people had not earned their fame by their own virtue, nor were
they noble through their own native excellence, so to speak; but rather
by ornament bestowed upon them. *You*, therefore, *was of great name
among the nations*, said he. But wherein was that nobility and
excellence? Certainly from my gifts. For nothing was accomplished by
thyself so to arrive at a name and dignity more than royal. *Through
that ornament thy fame was spread abroad among the nations.* But this
enlargement must be noticed, since the people had not only experienced
God’s goodness in that corner of Judea, but, when they ought to be
content with their lot, were held in admiration and repute among
foreigners. Now follows the reproof —

<span id="v.xi"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p1"></span><span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015)<span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p2"></span>**15.** But thou didst trust in thine own
beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out
thy fornications on every one that passed by; his it was.

<span id="v.xi-p3"></span>**15.** Et confisa es in pulchritudine tua, et
fornicata es pro nomine tuo,  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) et
effudisti fornicationes tuas ad omnem transeuntem;  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) illius fuit.

<span id="v.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xi-p7"></span><span id="v.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p8"></span>Here God begins to expostulate with his
people; and with this view relates all the benefits which for a long
time he had bestowed upon the Israelites, and especially upon the tribe
of Judea. The Prophet now addresses them. Nothing was more unworthy or
preposterous than for the Jews to be proud through the pretext of God’s
gifts. But this vice has always been rife in the world, as it is now too
prevalent, and especially among handsome women; for, though beauty is
God’s gift, nine women out of ten who possess it are proud, and fond of
men, and unite lust with elegance of form. This is quite unworthy of
them; but it was customary in all ages, as it is this day: for we
recognize the same in men; for as each excels in anything, so he
arrogates to himself more than he ought, when he exults against God, and
is reproachful towards others. If any one abounds in riches, he
immediately gives himself to luxury and empty pomp; and others abuse
them to various perverse, and even corrupt uses. If any one is endowed
with ability, he turns his acuteness to cunning and fraud; then he plans
many devices, as if he wished to mingle earth and heaven. Thus almost
all men profane God’s gifts. But here the Prophet shows the fountain of
this pride, when he says that the Jews *trusted in their own beauty*:
for if modesty flourished in us, it would certainly suffice for
restraining all insolence; but when that restraint has been once thrown
off, there is no moderation before either God or man. This passage,
then, is worthy of observation, where God reproves his ancient people
for *trusting in their beauty*: because the figure signifies that they
drew their material for pride from the gifts which ought rather to lead
them to piety; for the gifts which we receive from God’s hand ought to
be invitations to gratitude: but we are puffed up by pride; and luxury,
so that we profane God’s gifts, in which his glory ought to shine forth.
We must also observe that God has thus far recited his benefits, that
the people’s ingratitude may appear more detestable: for God gives all
things abundantly, and upbraids not, as James says, (<span
id="v.xi-p8.1"></span>[Jas 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005)<span
id="v.xi-p8.1"></span>;) that is, if we acknowledge that we owe all
things to him, and thus devote and consecrate ourselves in obedience to
his glory, with the blessings which he has bestowed upon us. But when
God sees us impiously burying and profaning his gifts, and, through
trusting in them, growing insolent, it is not surprising if he reproves
us beyond what is customary. Hence we see that God assumes as it were
another character, when he expostulates with us concerning our
ingratitude; because he willingly acknowledges his gifts in us, and
receives them as if they were our own; as we call that bread ours by
which he nourishes us, although it is compelled to change its nature as
far as we are concerned. It always remains the same in itself; but I
speak of external form. God therefore, as it were, transfigures himself,
so as to reprove his own gifts, conferred for the purpose of our
glorying only in him. (<span id="v.xi-p8.2"></span>[Mt
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011)<span id="v.xi-p8.2"></span>;
<span id="v.xi-p8.3"></span>[Lu
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#013)<span id="v.xi-p8.3"></span>.)

<span id="v.xi-p9"></span>God afterwards says, *that the people had
played the harlot according to their renown*. I have no doubt that the
Prophet alludes to famous harlots who excel in beauty, and interpreters
have not observed this sufficiently; for they do not explain anything by
saying, you have committed fornication in thy name: for as many lovers
flow from all sides in troops towards a famous harlot, so the Prophet
says the Jews were like her; and since they were universally noted, they
were exposed to promiscuous lust, and attracted lovers to themselves.
Here the Prophet condemns two kinds of fornication in the Jews; one
consisting in superstitions and in the multiplication of idols, — the
other in perverse and unlawful treaties: and we know this to be the
worst kind of fornication, when God’s worship is vitiated; for this is
our spiritual chastity, if we worship God purely according to the
prescription of his teaching, if we do not bend to either the right or
the left from his commands: so on the other hand, as soon as we pass the
goal fixed by him, we wander like impure harlots, and all our
superstitions are so many acts of defilement. The Prophet begins with
the former kind, when he says *that the Jews had committed fornication*,
namely, with their idols. But before he comes to that, he shows that
their lust had been insatiable, since they had so eagerly and ardently
approached their various idols, just as a harlot burns with unsatisfied
desire, and is carried hither and thither, and must have a number of
men; so the Prophet here says that the Jews committed fornication, not
with one or two only, but with whomsoever they met; and this was
occasioned by that favor of which we formerly spoke. It now follows —

<span id="v.xii"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p1"></span><span id="v.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#016)<span id="v.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p2"></span>**16.** And of thy garments thou didst take,
and deckedst thy high places with divers colours, and playedst the
harlot thereupon: *the like things* shall not come, neither shall it be
*so*

<span id="v.xii-p3"></span>**16.** Et sumpsisti e vestibus tuis, et
fecisti tibi excelsa conspersa maculis,  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) et scortata es cum illis: non venientes:
 <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) deinde et non erit.

<span id="v.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xii-p7"></span><span id="v.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p8"></span>He says that the Jews erected houses of ill
fame for themselves; and the language is mixed, because the Prophet,
expresses simply the kind of harlotry of which he is speaking, and yet
in the meantime mingles another figure; for he says *that they took
garments and made themselves altars*. No doubt he compares the high
places to tents, just as if a harlot wished to attract a number of eyes
to herself, and, through desire of a crowd, should place her standard on
a lofty place. So also the Prophet says that the Jews, when they gave
themselves up to fornication, *made high places for themselves*. When he
says *high places with different colors*, some refer this to ornaments;
yet it may be taken in a bad sense, since those high places were
stained, so that they could be distinguished from chase and modest
dwellings; as if he had said, If you had been a modest woman, you had
remained in retirement at home, as honest matrons do, and you would not
have done anything to attract men to thee; but you has erected thy high
places, like conspicuous houses of ill fame, as if a female, forgetful
of modesty and delicacy, should set up a sign, and show her house to be
open to all, and especially to her own adulterers. It seems to me that
the Prophet intends this; for when he adds, *that they committed
fornication with them*, he means doubtless with their lovers, and all
besides; but this is not the sense of the words <span
id="v.xii-p8.1"></span>במות טלאות, *bemoth telaoth*. Now, at the end of
the verse, where he says, *they do not come, and it shall not be*, some
explain this part as if the Prophet had said that there was no instance
like it in former ages, and there should be none such hereafter. In this
way they understand that the insane lust of the people is condemned, as
if it were a prodigy, such as was never seen, nor yet to be expected.
Others say, that such was the multitude of high places, that nothing was
ever like it; because, although the Gentiles built idols, and temples,
and altars everywhere, yet the Prophet says that the madness and fury of
the people surpassed the intemperance of the Gentiles: — this is indeed
to the purpose. Meanwhile, as to the general scope, it is not of much
consequence; as in the former verse, where he said *it shall be theirs*,
some understand appetite or desire. But I interpret it more simply —
that she was exposed to every passer-by, and that it was in his power to
engage her. The sense does not seem to me doubtful, because the Jews
were so cast out, that no liberty remained to them, as when a woman
becomes abandoned, she is the slave of all, and all use her
disgracefully after that, since she is no longer her own mistress.
Ezekiel now reproves the Jews for the same vice.

<span id="v.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we may diligently
consider in how many ways we are bound to thee, and may deservedly
magnify thy fatherly indulgence towards us, so that in return we may
desire to devote ourselves to thee: Grant also, that as you have adorned
us with thy glory, we may endeavor to glorify thy name, until at length
we arrive at the enjoyment of that eternal glory which you have prepared
for us in heaven by Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Fourth.

<span id="v.xv"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p1"></span><span id="v.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#017)<span id="v.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p2"></span>**17.** Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels
of my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, and madest to
thyself images of men, and didst commit whoredom with them,

<span id="v.xv-p3"></span>**17.** Et sumpsisti vasa pulchritudinis tuae
ex auro meo et ex argento meo quae dederam tibi: et fecisti tibi
imagines masculi,  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) et scortata es
cum illis.

<span id="v.xv-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xv-p6"></span><span id="v.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p7"></span>The Prophet reproves them because they used
silver and gold in making idols for themselves. He not only condemns
idolatry, but ingratitude, since they turned to God’s dishonor the gifts
which he had bestowed. First, the profanation of his gifts was base;
besides this, they had rashly and purposely abused his liberality to his
dishonor, and that was not to be endured. He reproves at the same time
their blind intemperance, since they willingly gave themselves up to
licentiousness, and buried themselves in their superstitions. But he
does not say that they simply took gold and silver, *but vessels of
elegance or beauty of gold and silver*. Whence it appears that they were
blinded by furious lusts, as we have seen. He still pursues the simile
of fornication, when he calls these manufactured deities *images of
males*; and it seems obliquely to mark the excess of lust in having to
do with shadows; by which he means that they were hurried away about
nothing by their unbridled appetites, just as a woman feeds her passion
by the mere picture of her paramour. It now follows —

<span id="v.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#018)<span id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p2"></span>**18.** And tookest thy broidered garments,
and coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil and mine incense before
them.

<span id="v.xvi-p3"></span>**18.** Et tulisti  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) vestes tuas discolores,  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) et operuisti eos  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) et oleum meum, et suffitum meum dedisti
coram ipsis.  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93)

<span id="v.xvi-p8"></span>**19.** My meat also which I gave thee, fine
flour, and oil, and honey, *wherewith* I fed thee, thou hast even set it
before them for a sweet savour: and *thus* it was, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="v.xvi-p9"></span>**19.** Et. panem meum quem dederam tibi,
similam, et oleum, et mel quibus te cibaveram  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) etiam dedisti coram ipsis in odorem
quietis: et ita fuit, dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="v.xvi-p11"></span> 

<span id="v.xvi-p12"></span><span id="v.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p13"></span>Here God complains that the Jews turned
their abundance of all things to perverse worship: for, as a husband who
indulges his wife freely supplies all her wants, so a woman who is
immodest was what she has received from her husband, and bestows it on
adulterers; so also the Jews were prodigal in the worship of idols, and
wasted upon them the blessings which God had bestowed upon them.
Ezekiel, therefore, now follows up this sentiment. He says *that they
took those variegated garments*, of which we spoke yesterday, and
*covered their idols*; just as if an adulteress were to clothe her
paramours in the very garments which she had received from her husband’s
liberality: *you have covered them*, he says. He afterwards adds, *you
have offered my oil and incense*. Here he speaks more clearly, although
he does not depart far from the figure, for they were accustomed to use
oil in sacrifices; and incense was used by all nations when they wished
to propitiate their deities. There is no doubt that the unbelievers
imitated the holy fathers, but sinfully, because they did not consider
the right end. We know that the fathers used oil in their sacrifices,
(<span id="v.xvi-p13.1"></span>[Le
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)<span id="v.xvi-p13.1"></span>, and
often elsewhere;) we know that incense was prescribed by God’s law, and
it was used promiscuously by all the nations, but without reason and
judgment. So now God complains that they made incense of his herbs, and
an offering of the oil which he had bestowed upon the Jews. He then adds
the same of bread, and *fine flour, oil, and honey*. We said yesterday
that by these words ample and delicate food was intended; for by the
figure, a part for the whole, fine flour comprehends the best and
sweetest bread, as well as other viands. *Oil and honey* are added. It
is then just as if the Prophet had said that the Jews overflowed with
all luxuries, yet consumed them badly. But this was a mockery not. to be
borne, when the Jews, after being enriched by God’s beneficence, rashly
threw it all away, and not only so, but adorned their false gods to the
dishonor of God himself, when they ought to have offered to him what
they wasted upon idols. For this reason he calls it *his own bread*, and
explains the passage in this sense, that the Jews could neither ascribe
to themselves the abundance of their possessions, nor boast in the
fruitfulness of the soil; for all these things flowed from the mere
benevolence of God. This ingratitude, then, was too foul — to bestow
upon idols what God had given for a far different purpose. *I,* says he,
*have fed thee* He shows the legitimate use of such manifold abundance.
Since they abounded in wheat, whence they obtained fine flour, and were
stuffed full of other delicacies, they thought to be elevated towards
God, and to exercise themselves in the duties of gratitude; but they
abused that abundance in adorning false deities.

<span id="v.xvi-p14"></span>*You have offered it to them*, therefore,
*for a savor of peace*. Rest no doubt signifies appeasing here, as
frequently with Moses, though others translate “for an odor of
sweetness;” but they do not sufficiently express the meaning of Moses;
for he means that when God is appeased there is peace between himself
and men. (<span id="v.xvi-p14.1"></span>[Lev.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#009),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017)<span id="v.xvi-p14.1"></span>, and
often.) There is no doubt that “the odor of quiet” signifies a just
expiation, by which God is appeased, so that he receives men into favor.
This is everywhere said of the sacrifices of the law, since there was no
other means by which men could be reconciled to God, unless by offering
sacrifices according to his command. Now the Prophet transfers this
ironically to their impious worship, when he says that they offered to
idols all the delicacies by which God nourishes his people. To what
purpose? *for a sweet savor*; that is, that they may be propitious to
you. But it was ridiculous to wish to appease gods of stone and wood and
silver. We see then how Ezekiel reproves the people’s folly, when he
says, that *they offered both fine flour and other things* to their
idols to reconcile themselves to them. Now the crime is increased since
the Jews did not recognize that singular blessing of being so reconciled
to God, that he no longer imputed their sins to them. Woe indeed to us
if we are destitute of this remedy! because we constantly commit various
faults, and are thus subject to God’s judgments. Unless, then, God
receives us into favor, we see that nothing can be more miserable for
us. But he has prescribed a fixed and easy rule by which he will be
appeased, namely, by sacrifices — I am speaking of the fathers who lived
under the law: for we know that we of this day must flee to the only
sacrifice of Christ, which the sacrifices of the law shadowed forth.
Since, therefore, the Jews could return to God’s favor, and bury all
their sins, and redeem themselves from the curse, how great was their
madness in willingly depriving themselves of so inestimable a boon!
Hence the Prophet now rebukes this folly, when he says that they
propitiated their idols that they might appease them. He concludes at
length, *and it was so, says the Lord Jehovah*. Here God takes away all
occasion for their turning aside, when he says it was so; for we know
that men always have various pretenses by which they lay the blame on
some other parties, or soften it off, or cover it with some disguise.
But God here says that there is no occasion for dispute, since the
matter is perfectly plain. We see, then, that this word is used
emphatically, when he says *I am the Lord;* for, if Ezekiel had
announced it, they would not have listened to him; but God himself comes
before them, and cuts off all excuses from the Jews. It follows —

<span id="v.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020)<span id="v.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p2"></span>**20.** Moreover thou hast taken thy sons
and thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and these hast thou
sacrificed unto them to be devoured. *Is this* of thy whoredoms a small
matter,

<span id="v.xvii-p3"></span>**20.** Et sumpsisti filios tuos, et filias
tuas quos genueras mihi: et jugulasti eos  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) ad comedendum:  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) an parum a scortationibus tuis?

<span id="v.xvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xvii-p7"></span><span id="v.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p8"></span>Here God blames them for another crime, that
of sacrificing their offspring to idols. This was a very blind
superstition, by which parents put off the sense of humanity. It is
indeed a detestable prodigy when a father rejects his children, and has
no regard or respect for them. Even philosophers place among the
principles of nature those affections which they call natural
affections.  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) When, therefore, the
affection of a father towards his children ceases, which is naturally
implanted in all our hearts, then a man becomes a monster indeed. But
not only did an inconsiderate fury seize upon the Jews, but, by slaying
their own offspring, they thought that they obeyed God, as at this day
the Papists are content with the name of good intentions, and do not
think that any offering can be rejected if it be only daubed over with
the title of either good intention or zeal for good. Such also was the
confidence of the Jews; but, as I have said, we see that they were
seized with a diabolic fury when they slew their sons and daughters.
Abraham prepared to offer his son to God, but he had a clear command.
(<span id="v.xvii-p9.3"></span>[Gen.
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#010)<span id="v.xvii-p9.3"></span>, and
<span id="v.xvii-p9.4"></span>[Heb
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019)<span id="v.xvii-p9.4"></span>.)

<span id="v.xvii-p10"></span>Then we know that his obedience was founded
on faith, because he was certainly persuaded, as the Apostle says, that
a new offspring could spring up from the ashes of his son. Since,
therefore, he extols the power of God as equal to this effect, he did
not hesitate to slay his son. But since these wretches slew their sons
without a command, they must be deservedly condemned for prodigious
madness. The Prophet therefore now brings this crime before us: *that
they had taken, their sons and their daughters, and slew them to idols*.
He now adds, to consume them, since it is probable, and may be collected
from various passages, that the sons were not always slain, but there
were two kinds of offerings.  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)
Sometimes they either slew their sons or cast them alive into the fire
and burnt them as victims. Sometimes they carried them round and passed
them through the fire, so that they received them safe again. But God
here shows that he treats of that barbarous and cruel offering, since
they did not spare their sons.

<span id="v.xvii-p12"></span>In this sense he adds, *that they slew
their sons to eat them up*, or consume them. But another exaggeration of
their crime is mentioned, when God expostulates concerning the insult
offered: *thou*, says he, *hath slain thy sons and daughters,* but they
are mine also, for you barest them to me. Here God places himself in the
position of a parent, because he had adopted the people as his own: the
body of the people was as it were his spouse or wife. All their
offspring were his sons, since, if God’s treaty with the people was a
marriage, all who sprung from the people ought to be esteemed his
children. God therefore calls those his sons who were thus slain, just
as if a husband should reproach his wife with depriving him of their
common children. God therefore not only blames their cruelty and
superstition, but adds also that he was deprived of his children. But
this, as is well known, is a most atrocious kind of injury. For who does
not prefer his own blood to either fields, or merchandise, or money? As
children are more precious than all goods, so a father is more
grievously injured if children are taken away, as God here pronounces
that he had done: *you had born them unto me,* says he. Hence sacrilege
was added to idolatry when you did deprive me of them. He will soon call
them again his own in the same sense. A question arises here, how God
reckons among his sons those who were complete strangers to him? He had
said in the beginning of the chapter (<span
id="v.xvii-p12.1"></span>[Eze 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)<span
id="v.xvii-p12.1"></span>) that the people derived their origin from the
Amorites and Hittites, since they had declined from the piety of Abraham
and the other fathers. Since then the Jews were cast off while they were
in Egypt, and after that had been such breakers of the covenant as the
Prophet had thus far shown, were they not aliens? Yes; but God here
regards his covenant, which was inviolable and could not be rendered
void by man’s perfidy. The Jews, then, of whom the Prophet now speaks,
could no longer bear children to God: for he said that the body of the
people was like a foul harlot, who walks about and turns round and seeks
vague and promiscuous meetings. Since it was so, the children whom such
idolaters bore were spurious, instead of being worthy of such honor that
God should call them his sons: this is true with respect to them, but as
concerns the covenant, they are called sons of God. And this is worthy
of observation, because in the Papacy such declension has grown up
through many ages, that they have altogether denied God. Hence they have
no connection with him, because they have corrupted his whole worship by
their sacrilege, and their religion is vitiated in so many ways, that it
differs in nothing from the corruption’s of the heathen. And yet it is
certain that a portion of God’s covenant remains among them, because
although they have cut themselves off from God and altogether abandoned
him by their perfidy, yet God remains faithful. (<span
id="v.xvii-p12.2"></span>[Rom. 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="v.xvii-p12.2"></span>.)
Paul, when he speaks of the Jews, shows that God’s covenant with them is
not abolished, although the greater part of the people had utterly
abandoned God. So also it must be said of the papists, since it was not
in their power to blot out God’s covenant entirely, although with regard
to themselves, as I have said, they are without it; and show by their
obstinacy that they are the sworn enemies of God. Hence it arises, that
our baptism does not need renewal, because although the Devil has long
reigned in the papacy, yet he could not altogether extinguish God’s
grace: nay, a Church is among them; for otherwise Paul’s prophecy would
have been false, when he says that Antichrist was seated in the temple
of God. (<span id="v.xvii-p12.3"></span>[2Th
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)<span id="v.xvii-p12.3"></span>.)
If in the papacy there had been only Satan’s dungeon or brothel, and no
form of a Church had remained in it, this had been a proof that
Antichrist did not sit in the temple of God. But this, as I have said,
exaggerates their crime, and is very far from enabling them to erect
their crests as they do. For when they thunder out with full cheeks —
“We are the Church of God,” or, “The seat of the Church is with us,” —
the solution is easy; the Church is indeed among them, that is, God has
his Church there, but hidden and wonderfully preserved: but it does not
follow that they are worthy of any honor; nay, they are more detestable,
because they ought to bear sons and daughters to God: but they bear them
for the Devil and for idols, as this passage teaches. It follows —

<span id="v.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p1"></span><span id="v.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021)<span id="v.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p2"></span>**21.** That thou hast slain my children,
and delivered them to cause them to pass through *the fire* for them?

<span id="v.xviii-p3"></span>**21.** Et maetasti filios meos, et
posuisti eos ut transirent illis.  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99)

<span id="v.xviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xviii-p6"></span><span id="v.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p7"></span>He strengthens the same sentence, and more
clearly explains that they offered their sons and daughters by cruelly
sacrificing them when they passed them through the fire. This was a kind
of purifying, as we have seen elsewhere. When, therefore, they passed
their children through the fire, it was a rite of illustration and
expiation; and they brought them to the fire, as I have lately
explained, in two different ways. Here the Prophet speaks especially of
that cruel and brutal offering. We have already mentioned the sense in
which God claims a right in the sons of his people, not as members of
the Church properly speaking, but as adopted by God. And here again we
must hold what Paul says, that all the progeny of Abraham were not
lawful sons, since a difference must be made between sons of the flesh
and sons of promise. (<span id="v.xviii-p7.1"></span>[Rom.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)<span id="v.xviii-p7.1"></span>.)
This is as yet partially obscure, but it may be shortly explained. We
may remark that there was a twofold election of God: since speaking
generally, he chose the whole family of Abraham. For circumcision was
common to all, being the symbol and seal of adoption: since when God
wished all the sons of Abraham to be circumcised from the least to the
greatest, he at the same time chose them as his sons: this was one kind
of adoption or election. But the other was secret, because God took to
himself out of that multitude those whom he wished: and these are sons
of promise, these are remnants of gratuitous favor, as Paul says. (<span
id="v.xviii-p7.2"></span>[Ro 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#008)<span
id="v.xviii-p7.2"></span>.) This distinction, therefore, now takes away
all doubt, since the Prophet speaks of the unbelievers and the profane
who had departed from the worship of God. For this their unbelief was a
complete abdication. It is true, then, that as far as themselves were
concerned, they were strangers, and so God’s secret election did not
flourish in them, but yet they were God’s people, as far as relates to
external profession. If any one objects that this circumcision was
useless, and hence their election without the slightest effect, the
answer is at hand: God by his singular kindness honored those miserable
ones by opening a way of approach for them to the hope of life and
salvation by the outward testimonies of adoption. Then as to their being
at the same time strangers, that happened through their own fault. Hence
we may shortly hold, that the Jews were naturally accursed through being
Adam’s seed: but by supernatural and singular privilege, they were
exempt and free from the curse: since circumcision was a testimony of
the adoption by which God had consecrated them to himself: hence they
were holy; and as to their being impure, it could not, as we have said,
abolish God’s covenant. The same thing ought at this time to prevail in
the Papacy. For we are all born under the curse: and yet God
acknowledges supernaturally as his sons all who spring from the
faithful, not only in the first or second degree, but even to a thousand
generations. And so Paul says that the children of the faithful are
holy, since baptism does not lose its efficacy, and the adoption of God
remains fixed, (<span id="v.xviii-p7.3"></span>[1Co
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#014)<span id="v.xviii-p7.3"></span>,)
yet the greater part is without the covenant through their own unbelief.
God meanwhile has preserved to himself a remnant in all ages, and at
this day he chooses whom he will out of the promiscuous multitude.

<span id="v.xviii-p8"></span>Now let us go on. I had omitted at the end
of the last verse the phrase, *Are thy fornications a small matter?* By
this question God wishes to press the Jews home, since they had not only
violated their conjugal fidelity by prostituting themselves to idols,
but had added the cruelty which we have seen in slaying their sons.
Lastly, he shows that their impiety was desperate.

<span id="v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p1"></span><span id="v.xix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#022)<span id="v.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p2"></span>**22.** And in all thine abominations and thy
whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast
naked and bare, *and* wast polluted in thy blood.

<span id="v.xix-p3"></span>**22.** Et in omnibus abominationibus tuis et
scortationibus tuis non recordata es dierum adolescentiae tuae, cum tu
esses nuda et discooperta, et foedata in sanguinibus tuis esses.

<span id="v.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xix-p5"></span><span id="v.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p6"></span>Here God accommodates to his own ends what he
has hitherto related, namely, the extreme wickedness and baseness of the
people’s ingratitude in thus prostituting themselves to idols. Hence he
recalls to mind their condition when he espoused them. For if the
wretched slavery from which they had been delivered had been present to
their mind, they had not been so blinded with perverse confidence, nor
had they exulted in their lasciviousness. But since they had forgotten
all God’s benefits, they became lascivious, and prostrated themselves to
foul idolatries, and provoked God in every way. Now the Prophet proves
this when he says, *behold, through these abominations the people did
not remember their youth*. Whence happens it that impure and lustful
women thus despise their husbands, unless through being blinded by their
own beauty? And since they do not recognize their own disgrace, they
please themselves in foul loves, as says the Prophet Hosea, (<span
id="v.xix-p6.1"></span>[Ho 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#005)<span
id="v.xix-p6.1"></span>.) Such then was the self-confidence of the,
Jews, that they pleased themselves by their beauty and ornaments: though
God’s glory and brightness shone forth in them, yet they did not
perceive the source of their dignity; and hence the addition of
ingratitude to pride. *You have not remembered, says he, the days of thy
youth, when you was naked, and bare, and defiled in thy blood.* It
follows —

<span id="v.xx"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p1"></span><span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#023)<span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p2"></span>**23.** And it came to pass after all thy
wickedness, (woe, woe unto thee! saith the Lord GOD;)

<span id="v.xx-p3"></span>**23.** Et fuit post omnem malitiam tuam, Vae
vae tibi, dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="v.xx-p4"></span>**24.** *That* thou hast also built unto thee
an eminent place, and hast made thee an high place in every street.

<span id="v.xx-p5"></span>**24.** Et aedificasti tibi excelsum, et
fecisti tibi excelsum in omni platea.  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100)

<span id="v.xx-p7"></span>**25.** Thou hast built thy high place at
every head of the way, and hast made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast
opened thy feet to every one that passed by, and multiplied thy
whoredoms.

<span id="v.xx-p8"></span>**25.** Ad omne caput  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) viae aedificasti excelsum tuum: et
abominabilem fecisti tuam pulchritudinem: et divaricasti  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) pedes tuos omni transeunti, et
multiplicasti tuas scortationes.

<span id="v.xx-p11"></span> 

<span id="v.xx-p12"></span><span id="v.xx-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p13"></span>The first verse is variously explained. Some
read the clause separately, <span id="v.xx-p13.1"></span>ויהי אחרי כל
רעתך, *vihi achri kel regnethek* — *it was after all thy wickedness*:
and they think that God threatens the Jews here as he did in Hosea,
(<span id="v.xx-p13.2"></span>[Hos.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#010)<span id="v.xx-p13.2"></span>.) For
after God had there complained that his wool and his flax had been taken
away, and offered as gifts to idols, he afterwards adds, I will demand
all things back again, and then all thy beauty shall be taken from thee,
and thy nakedness shall be laid bare, so that you shall be deservedly
ashamed. Thus then they explain these words, that the condition of the
Jews should be as it formerly was; as if he had said in one word, I will
so avenge myself, that whether you will or not, you shall be compelled
to feel the disgrace of your nakedness, since I will manifest it again.
But this sense seems forced; therefore I unite it with the remainder of
the verse which follows it. Thus then the language of the Prophet flows
on: *and it was after all thy wickedness that you built a high place for
thyself* — *you made for thyself a lofty place in every street*: there
are two different words, but the sense is the same: *you did set up thy
high places in all the principal ways, and so,* says he, *thy beauty
became abominable*. But this is inserted by way of parenthesis, *Alas!
alas for thee!* This exclamation is abruptly interposed. But, at the
same time, I have no doubt that these things all adhere together, since
the Jews added sin to sin, and never made an end of sinning. He says,
therefore, after they had been perfidious and ungrateful to God, after
they had basely devoted all they had to perverse worship, then this new
crime was added, *that they had erected high places in every street and
in every path.*

<span id="v.xx-p14"></span>If any one objects that this was not a
greater crime than others, the answer is easy, that God does not speak
of one high place only, or of one altar, but he comprehends all the
signs of idolatry by which they had infected the land; for it was the
height of impudence to erect everywhere the standard of their
superstitions. For every high place and every altar was a testimony of
their backsliding; just as if they had openly boasted that they would
not magnify the worship of the law, and intended purposely to overthrow
whatever God had prescribed. God therefore, not without cause, burns
with wrath *because the Jews had erected high places and altars
everywhere.* Now, then, we understand the Holy Spirit’s meaning as far
as these words are concerned. *It is added, after all thy wickedness*,
says he; that is, in addition to all thy crimes, this sin and impudence
is added, that you have built not only one, but innumerable high places
*in every street, nay, in every pathway of importance*, that is, in the
most celebrated places. For the heads of the pathways are the most
conspicuous places, and whatever is done there is more exposed to the
eyes of all.

<span id="v.xx-p15"></span>We must now notice the exclamation which is
interposed. *Alas! alas! for thee, says the Lord Jehovah*. Since the
Jews, through their sloth, were not at all attentive to the reproofs of
the prophets, that God might waken them up, he here pronounces his curse
twice. It is clear that they were not moved by it: but this vehemence
tended to their severer condemnation, since, though they were drowned
and sunk in deep sleep, yet they might be raised by this formidable
voice. There is no doubt that they applauded themselves for their own
superstitions; but it is on that account profitable to estimate the
weight of these words of God. For we gather from hence, that when
idolaters indulge in their own fictions, and think themselves entirely
free from blame, the word of God is sufficient, by which he thunders
against them, saying, *alas! alas! for thee*. Hence men cease to judge
according to their own notions, and are rather attentive to the sentence
of God, and acknowledge his curse passing on them when they think that
they are rightly discharging the duty of piety in worshipping idols.

<span id="v.xx-p16"></span><span id="v.xx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p17"></span>He now adds, *that he made their beauty to be
abhorred.* I have no doubt that the Prophet alludes to the filthiness of
abandoned women; and even the Latins called them “worn out,” whose
foulness arises from their utterly giving themselves up to every
wickedness. The Prophet then says that the people were not only like an
abandoned woman who engages in impure amours, but that their conduct was
gross in the extreme; for though many gratify improper desires through
intemperate lust, yet they fastidiously reject those foul and shameless
females who are notorious for profligacy. The Prophet means, then, that
the people had come to such a pitch of abomination, just as the most
abandoned of the sex. He now adds, *you have spread thy feet to every
passer-by, and have multiplied thy fornications.* This is taken also
from the conduct of harlots and confirms what we have already explained,
that the Jews indulged not only in one kind of idolatry, but were prone
to all abominations, like females who beset the paths, and address all
they meet, and not only so, but shamelessly *spread their feet*
everywhere to entice admirers.

<span id="v.xxi"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you desire to
receive us not only into confidence and dependence, but to the condition
of sons, that we may worship thee with sacred love, and revere thee
through our whole life as a Father; and may we so submit ourselves to
thee as to feel thy covenant firm and sacred towards us; and may we
experience that you never call men to thee in vain, so long as they obey
thee and respond to thy promises; until at length we enjoy that
blessedness which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ our Lord.
— Amen.

<span id="v.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Fifth

<span id="v.xxiii"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026)<span id="v.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p2"></span>**26.** Thou hast also committed
fornication with the Egyptians thy neighbours, great of flesh; and hast
increased thy whoredoms, to provoke me to anger.

<span id="v.xxiii-p3"></span>**26.** Et scortata es cum fills AEgypti
vicinis tuis magnis carne: et multiplicasti scortationes tuas ad
irritandum me.

<span id="v.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p6"></span>I Mentioned at the beginning of the
chapter, that the Prophet blames the Jews not for one single kind of
fornication, but for two different kinds. Interpreters do not observe
this, but think that the Prophet is always discoursing of idols and
superstitions. But if we prudently weigh all the circumstances, what I
have said will not appear doubtful, namely, that the Jews were condemned
not only for vitiating the worship of God by their perverse fictions,
but for flying, now to the Egyptians, now to the Assyrians, and thus
involving themselves in unlawful covenants. It is a very common method
with the Prophets to call such covenants fornications: for as a wife
ought to lie under the shadow of her husband, so God wished the Jews to
be content under his protection. But as soon as any danger frightened
them, they fled tremblingly to either Egypt, or Assyria, or Chaldea. We
see, then, that they had in some sense renounced God’s help, since they
could not rest under his protection, but were hurried hither and thither
by vague impulse. After the Prophet had inveighed against their
superstitions, he now approaches another crime, namely, the Jews
implicating themselves in forbidden treaties. He begins with Egypt. God
had clearly forbidden the elect people to have any dealings with Egypt.
Even if God had not made known the reason, yet they ought to have obeyed
his command. But I have already explained the reason why God was
unwilling that the Israelites should enter into any covenant with the
Egyptians, because he wished to try their faith and patience, and if
they would fly to his help when any danger pressed upon them, as the
saying is, like a sacred anchor. There was also another reason, because
from the time when God drew his people out from thence, he wished them
separated from that nation which had raged so cruelly against their
miserable guests. As far as the Chaldmans and Assyrians are concerned,
the former reason prevailed thus far, that it was not lawful for them to
distrust God’s aid in their dangers.

<span id="v.xxiii-p7"></span>Now, therefore, we understand the Prophet’s
meaning when he says, *that the Jews had committed fornication with the
sons of Egypt* He adds*, they were gross in flesh*. He means that they
were foul and immodest, and were inflamed with disgraceful lust.  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) He uses a grosser simile by and by,
for the perfidy of this detestable people could not be sufficiently
condemned. The Prophet here says reproachfully, *you have committed
fornication with the Egyptians,* as a licentious woman acting most
basely. He adds, *you have multiplied thy fornications:* he speaks to
the people under the character of a woman, as we have formerly seen: to
irritate me. Here the Prophet takes away all excuse for error from the
impious people. He says, therefore, since they so wandered after these
impure desires, that they had not fallen through ignorance, since they
knew well enough what God had commanded in his law. And there is no
doubt that they darkened their own minds, as the impious always dig
hiding-places for themselves, and have specious pretexts, by which they
not only hide their malice before men, but also deceive themselves.
Hence it is probable that the Jews were not free from such pretenses.
But, on the other hand, we must remark that they were abundantly
instructed by God’s law what was lawful and right. Since, therefore,
through neglect of the law they were so ravenous in impious desires, the
Prophet says that they had purposely and designedly entered into a
contest with God. For if any one raises the question whether it is
lawful to enter into an alliance with the impious, the answer is easy,
that we must beware of all alliances which may couple us under the same
yoke; for we are naturally enough inclined towards all vices: and when
we invent fresh occasions for sin we tempt God. And when any one joins
himself in too great familiarity with the impious, it is just like using
a fan to inflame his corrupt affections, which, as I have said, were
already sufficiently flagrant in his mind. We must take care, therefore,
as far as we can, not to make agreements with the impious. But, if
necessity compels us, this conduct cannot be thought wrong in itself, as
we see that Abraham entered into an agreement with his neighbors, though
their religion was different. (<span id="v.xxiii-p8.2"></span>[Gen.
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#027),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#032)<span id="v.xxiii-p8.2"></span>.)
But because he could not otherwise obtain peace, that was a kind of
agreement by which Abraham hoped to acquire peace for himself. (<span
id="v.xxiii-p8.3"></span>[Ge
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)<span id="v.xxiii-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="v.xxiii-p8.4"></span>[Isa
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#002)<span id="v.xxiii-p8.4"></span>.)
Nor did he hesitate to use the assistance of allies when he succored his
nephew. But if we seek the principle and the cause which induced Abraham
to enter into a treaty with his neighbors, we shall find his intention
to be nothing else but to dwell at home in peace, and to be safe from
all injury. He was solitary, as Isaiah calls him: he had, indeed, a
numerous family, but no offspring; and hence he could not escape making
treaties with his neighbors. But when the Lord placed the people in the
land of Canaan on the condition of defending them there, of protecting
them on all sides, and of opposing all their foes, we see them enclosed,
as it were, by his protection, so as to render all treaties useless;
since they could not treat with either the Egyptians or the Assyrians
without at the same time withdrawing themselves from God’s aid.

<span id="v.xxiii-p9"></span>As far as we are concerned, I have said
that we have more freedom, if we are only careful that the lusts of the
flesh do not entice us to seek alliances which may entangle us in the
sins of others; for it is difficult to retain the favor of those with
whom we associate, unless we entirely agree with them. If they are
impious, they will draw us into contempt of God and adulterous rites,
and so it will happen that one evil will spring from another. Nothing,
therefore, is better than to reef our sails, and to look to God alone,
and to have our minds fixed on him, and not to allow any kind of
alliance, unless necessity compels us. And though we must prudently take
care that no condition be mingled with it which may draw us off from the
pure and sincere worship of God, since the devil is always cleverly
plotting against the sons of God, and draws them into hidden snares.
When, therefore, we are about to contract an alliance, we should always
take care lest our liberty be in any degree abridged, and lest we be
drawn aside by stealthy and concealed arts from the simple worship of
God. It now follows —

<span id="v.xxiv"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#027)<span id="v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p2"></span>**27.** Behold, therefore I have stretched
out my hand over thee, and have diminished thine ordinary *food*, and
delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of
the Philistines, which are ashamed of thy lewd way.

<span id="v.xxiv-p3"></span>**27.** Et ecce, extendi manum meam super
te, et diminui demensum tuum, et tradidi te desiderio  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) earum quae te oderant filiarum
Philistim, quae pudefactae sunt a viis tuis sceleris.  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105)

<span id="v.xxiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxiv-p7"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p8"></span>Here God reproves the hardness of the Jews
because admonition did not render them wise. The common proverb aptly
says, “fools grow wise only by the rod;” and when their obstinacy is
such that the rod does no good, their faults are indeed desperate. Hence
God complains, when he had chastised the Jews, that even this did not
profit them, for they were so perverse that they did not apply their
minds to reflect upon their sins. For God’s blows ought to rouse us up,
so that our faults previously hidden ought to be brought to light and
knowledge; but when we champ the bit, and are not affected by the blows,
then our abandoned disposition is made manifest. Now the Prophet
condemns this obstinacy in the Jews: *I have extended,* says he*, my
hand over thee*. He now enumerates two kinds of chastisement, first,
when God deprived the Jews of the abundance of the possessions by which
they were enriched; and then because he had subjected them to the lust
of their enemies. Those who translate justification as Jerome does,
depart from the sense of the Prophet: <span id="v.xxiv-p8.1"></span>חק,
*chek*, signifies, indeed, a statute and edict, and he explains it of
the law. But how will this agree with the Prophet’s retaining the simile
already used? for he compares God to a husband. God now pronounces *that
he had taken away their appointed portion*, when he saw himself a
laughingstock through his impure wife; that is, what he had intended for
both food and clothing: for husbands spend a fixed sum on their wives in
food, clothing, and ornament. And God previously recounted, among other
things, that what he had conferred upon the Jews they had spent in
superstitions. Hence, for this reason, he now says, *I have taken away
their allotted portion*, that is, what I had assigned to them. This was
one part of the chastisement: for he compares the fruitfulness of the
land and other advantages to the portion which the husband assigns to
the wife.

<span id="v.xxiv-p9"></span>Now the other chastisement follows — their
being harassed by their enemies; for not only did the Jews find
themselves encompassed by the Philistines, but they were delivered up
and bound to slavery, as Moses says, (<span id="v.xxiv-p9.1"></span>[De
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030)<span id="v.xxiv-p9.1"></span>,)
How, then, could one vanquish ten, and ten chase a thousand, unless we
had been shut up in his hand? He shows, therefore, that our enemies are
never our superiors unless God enslaves us to them. But those who do not
calmly subject themselves to God’s command, but are refractory, are
delivered into the enemy’s hand, that their contumacy may be subdued by
severe tyranny. Now we understand what the Prophet means by this verse:
he enlarges upon the people’s wickedness in not turning to God, though
they felt by clear experience that they were under a curse. They ought
to examine their lives, to groan before God, to acknowledge their fault,
and to beg for pardon: since no feeling was awakened, the Prophet
gathers that their obstinacy was desperate. This passage is worthy of
our notice, that we may be attentive to God’s chastisements. Whenever
God even raises his finger and threatens us, let us know that he is
anxious for our safety: hence in our turn let us rouse ourselves and
implore his pity, and especially let us repent of our sins by which we
see his anger to have been enflamed. (<span id="v.xxiv-p9.2"></span>[Jer
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030)<span id="v.xxiv-p9.2"></span>.)
But if we remain slothful, we see that no excuse for us remains, since
God elsewhere complains that he is trifled with, when he has chastised
his children in vain. Here, <span id="v.xxiv-p9.3"></span>נפש, *nepish*,
the soul is used for lust or desire, as I have explained it. It follows
—

<span id="v.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#028)<span id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p2"></span>**28.** Thou hast played the whore also with
the Assyrians, because thou wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the
harlot with them, and yet couldest not be satisfied.

<span id="v.xxv-p3"></span>**28.** Et scortara es cum fills Assur,
 <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) quia, non esse satietatem tibi,
 <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) scortata es inquam cum illis,
et ne sic quidem fuisti satiata.

<span id="v.xxv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxv-p7"></span><span id="v.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p8"></span>I interpret this verse also of the covenant
by which the Jews had entangled themselves, when they willingly joined
themselves to the Assyrians; for this was a sure sign of distrust, when
they so desired foreign aid, as if they had been deprived of God’s
protection. And it would be absurd to explain this verse of idolatries,
since the prophets were not accustomed to speak in this way, that the
people committed fornication with the Assyrians, because they imitated
their superstitions and perverse worship. As, therefore, we formerly saw
that the Jews had defiled themselves with idols, and prostituted
themselves to impious ceremonies, forgetful of God’s law; so now the
Prophet accuses them of a different kind of pollution, since they
eagerly sought for aid from all quarters, as if God had not sufficient
strength for their protection. For otherwise there was no religious
reason for their not making peace with the Assyrians; but when they saw
themselves oppressed by the kings of Israel and Syria, then they thought
of sending for the Assyrians; and this was like thrusting God from his
place. (<span id="v.xxv-p8.1"></span>[2Ki
16:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007)<span id="v.xxv-p8.1"></span>.)
For God was willing to defend the land with extended wings, and to
cherish the Jews as a hen does her brood, as Moses says, (<span
id="v.xxv-p8.2"></span>[De 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)<span
id="v.xxv-p8.2"></span>.) Now, in thinking themselves exposed to any
danger, they really throw off the help of God. It is not surprising,
then, that the Prophet says, *that they had polluted themselves with the
Assyrians, because they were not satisfied*. He pursues the simile on
which we have dwelt sufficiently; for he blames the Jews for their
insatiable lust, just as when a woman is not content with a single
follower, and attracting a crowd obtrudes herself without modesty or
delicacy, and sells herself to wickedness. Such was the licentiousness
of the Jews, that they united many acts of pollution together. They had
already departed from the true faith in making a treaty with the
Egyptians, and they added another imagination, that it was useful to
have the Assyrians in alliance with them: hence that unbridled lust
which the Prophet metaphorically rebukes. It follows —

<span id="v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#029)<span id="v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p2"></span>**29.** Thou hast moreover multiplied thy
fornication in the land of Canaan unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not
satisfied herewith.

<span id="v.xxvi-p3"></span>**29.** Et multiplicasti  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) scortationes tuas super terram Chanaan
in Chaldaea, et ne in hoc quidem fuisti satiata.

<span id="v.xxvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xxvi-p6"></span><span id="v.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p7"></span>Here the Prophet teaches that the Jews were
immoderate in their desires, just as if a woman was not satisfied with
two or three followers, should wantonly crave after many lovers: such,
says the Prophet, was the Jews’ licentiousness. As to his saying, over
the land of Canaan in Chaldaea, some think it means, that they heaped up
the impure rites of all the nations, and not only defiled themselves
with the ancient. idolatries of the nations of Canaan, but imitated the
Chaldaeans in their impiety. Others say in Chaldea, which is next to the
land of Canaan; but this comment, like the last, is too forced: others
take <span id="v.xxvi-p7.1"></span>אל, *al*, comparatively, for
“through” the land of Canaan. But I only understand it as a particle
expressing likeness, *thus, you have multiplied thy pollution’s in
Chaldaea just as in the land of Canaan.* It is not surprising if they
defiled themselves with their neighbors, as the Prophet had formerly
said they did with the Egyptians, but when they ran about to a remote
region of the world, this indeed was most remarkable. This then seems
the real sense, and it reads best, *that they increased their defilement
in Chaldaea as in the land of Canaan*. For if a female meets with a
stranger she may act sinfully without so much disgrace, but when she
runs about to a distance to seek followers, this proves her most
abandoned. I have no doubt that the Prophet here exaggerates the
people’s crimes by comparison, since they penetrated even to the
Chaldaeans to pollute themselves among them. He says *that the Jews were
not satisfied even with this*, using the same expression as when
treating of the Assyrians. The sum of the whole is, that the Jews were
seized with such a furious impulse that they manifested no moderation in
their wickedness. For they had not revolted from God once only, or in
one direction: but wherever occasion offered, they were accustomed to
seize it too eagerly, so that they showed in this way that not even a
drop of piety remained in their minds. Let us learn then from this
passage to put the bridle on cur lusts in time: for when the fire is
lighted up, it is not easily extinguished, and the devil is always
supplying wood or adding oil to the furnace, as the phrase is. Let us
then prevent the evil which is here condemned in the Jews, and let us
restrain ourselves, lest the devil seize upon us with insane fury. It
follows —

<span id="v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#030)<span id="v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p2"></span>**30.** How weak is thine heart, saith the
Lord GOD, seeing thou doest all these *things*, the work of an imperious
whorish woman;

<span id="v.xxvii-p3"></span>**30.** Quam molle  <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) est cor tuum! dicit Dominator Iehovah,
cum facis hoc totum opus mulieris meretricis robustae.  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110)

<span id="v.xxvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxvii-p7"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p8"></span>The Prophet seems at variance with himself
when he compares the Jews to a robust or very strong woman, and yet says
that their heart was dissolute. For those who translate an obstinate
heart are without a reason for it, for this seems to imply some kind of
resistance, as they were strong and bold, and yet of a soft or weak or
infirm heart. But in the despisers of God both evils are to be blamed
when they flow away like water and yet are hard as rocks. They flow
away, then, when there is no strength or constancy in them; for they are
drawn aside this way and that, as some explain it, by a distracted
heart, but we must always come to the idea of softness. All who revolt
from God are borne along by their own levity, so that the minds of the
impious are changeable and moveable: for the heart is here taken for the
seat of the intellect, as in many other places. Hence the Prophet
accuses the Jews of sloth, but under the name of a dissolute heart: as
in French we say <span id="v.xxvii-p8.1"></span>*un coeur lasche*, and
the Prophet’s sense is best explained by that French word —
faint-hearted. But it is sufficient to understand the Prophet’s meaning,
that the Jews were unstable, and agitated and distracted hither and
thither, since there was nothing in them either firm or solid. Meanwhile
he compares them to a strong and abandoned woman, since we know the
boldness of the despisers of God in sinning against him. Since then they
are dissolute, because they have no power of attention, and nothing is
stable in their minds: yet they are like rocks, and carry themselves
audaciously, and do not hesitate to strive with God. Although therefore
these two states of mind appear contrary in their nature, yet we may
always see them in the reprobate, though in different ways. Thus he
properly calls the Jews not only *a robust* or abandoned woman, but “a
high and mighty dame,” as it may best be rendered in French, <span
id="v.xxvii-p8.2"></span>*une maitresse putain ou painarde*.  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) It is forced to explain the word
“lofty,” as taking license for her desires. I do not hesitate to
interpret it of the people being like dissolute women, who throw aside
all modesty, and seek lovers from all quarters, and entertain them all.
This is the Prophet’s sense. It now follows —

<span id="v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#031)<span id="v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p2"></span>**31.** In that thou buildes thine eminent
place in the head of every way, and makest thine high place in every
street; and hast not been as an harlot, in that thou scornest hire;

<span id="v.xxviii-p3"></span>**31.** Cum extulisti sublime tuum in
capite omnis viae, et excelsum tuum fecisti in omni celebri loco: et non
fuisti tanquam meretrix ad spernendum munus.

<span id="v.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet again reproves the
superstitions to which the Jews had devoted themselves: but yet he
speaks figuratively, because by high places he does not simply mean
altars, but tents by which the Jews had attempted to entice their
neighbors: just as if an immodest female should choose a high place, and
build her couch there conspicuously to attract her followers. Although
therefore he inveighs against superstitions, the language is not simple,
but retains the same simile as had been previously used. He says that
the Jews were so prone to lust, that they were ostentatious and thought
followers from a distance, and erected their tents or couches in high
places. Since this has been treated before, I now pass it over slightly.
But we may remark that a thing which seems of slight importance is here
seriously condemned by the Prophet, whence we may learn that the worship
of God is not to be estimated by our natural perception. For who would
think it so great a crime to build an altar on a high place to God’s
honor? but we see that the Prophet abhors that superstition. Since
therefore God wishes nothing to be changed in his worship, as the
principal part of his worship is obedience, which he prefers to all
sacrifices, (<span id="v.xxviii-p6.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span
id="v.xxviii-p6.1"></span>,) let us learn that things which we might
tolerate ought to be detested by us, because God condemns them so
severely.

<span id="v.xxviii-p7"></span>*Since therefore you have erected and made
for thyself a high place at the head of all streets and paths*, that is
in every celebrated place. Here we see how ardently they were enflamed
by idolatry so as to provoke the anger of God, and this seemed unworthy
of them, as the papists at this day, who are bent upon idol worship, and
under the title of “devotion,” think that any vice both can and ought to
be excused before God. But, on the other side, the Holy Spirit says that
idolaters sin the more grievously in being so eager for those impure
rites. He says, *thou wast not like a harlot in despising hire* Some
explain this coldly, that harlots mentally despise the folly of those
who reward them, but this comment is incorrect: the other view is more
probable, namely, that the Jews were not like a harlot who despises the
bribe by which she is deceived: for by this craftiness they gain most
influence when they contemptuously despise what is offered them, and
scarcely deign to touch it: they do this that the wretched lover may not
think himself sufficiently liberal, and so may double his gift and
squander away all his goods. This passage then may mean that the people
were not like a harlot who despises her reward that the wretched lover
may feel ashamed and increase his offer. But the Prophet’s sense seems
to me different, though I do not altogether reject this. I interpret it
thus: the Jews were not like a harlot, since they despised any reward
for their sin, and harlots do not: they make a gain of their lusts,
whence the name they bear. Since then such persons sell themselves for
reward, the Prophet say’s that the Jews were not like them: how so?
because they despised reward, and through the mere desire of gratifying
their appetites, they neither asked nor expected any reward. Afterwards
it follows —

<span id="v.xxix"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p1"></span><span id="v.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032)<span id="v.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p2"></span>**32.** *But as* a wife that committeth
adultery, *which* taketh strangers instead of her husband!

<span id="v.xxix-p3"></span>**32.** Mulier adultera loco viri sui sumit
extraneos.

<span id="v.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxix-p5"></span><span id="v.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p6"></span>Some translate it an adulteress under her
husband’s roof, and <span id="v.xxix-p6.1"></span>תחת, *thecheth*,
signifies “instead of:” and they explain it thus, that adulteresses do
not divorce themselves from their husbands when they violate the
marriage bond, but always remain at home for the purpose of admitting
strangers; and they think the people’s crime increased by this
comparison, that they not only acted deceitfully towards God, but openly
revolted from him, and left his home; for many shameless women remain at
home, and hide their crimes as far as they can; but when a woman deserts
her husband and children, then her case is most deplorable: they think,
therefore, that the Prophet is here exaggerating the divorce or revolt
of the people from God; but the sense seems better simply to compare
them to an adulteress who admits strangers in her husband’s stead: *thou
art* says he*, an adulteress who has sent for strange lovers instead of
thy husband*: for a woman married to a liberal husband is treated by him
honorably; and if she seeks lovers from all sides, she is induced by
neither avarice nor covetousness, but by her own lusts. In fine, as the
Prophet lately said that they despised all gain through being blinded by
their appetites, so he now says they were like an adulteress who rejects
her husband; and not only so, but throws herself into the protection of
others, while she has an honorable and happy home.

<span id="v.xxx"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xxx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have thought
us worthy of such honor, that we should be bound to thee in your
only-begotten Son by the bond of a spiritual marriage, — that we may
remain in that fidelity which we promised to thee, since we have found
thee faithful to us by so many proofs on thy part, until, having passed
through this present life, we arrive at the enjoyment of that
blessedness which is the fruit of our faithful chastity, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.xxxi"></span>

<span id="v.xxxi-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Sixth.

<span id="v.xxxii"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#033)<span id="v.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p2"></span>**33.** They give gifts to all whores: but
thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may
come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom.

<span id="v.xxxii-p3"></span>**33.** Cunctis meretricibus dant munus,
 <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) tu autem dedisti munera tua
cunctis amatoribus tuis: et conduxisti eos ut ingrederentur ad te
undique  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) in scortationibus tuis.

<span id="v.xxxii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxii-p7"></span><span id="v.xxxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p8"></span>Here the Prophet shows the great folly of
the Jews in shamelessly squandering their goods; for gain impels harlots
to their occupation: they feel the disgrace of it, but want urges them
on. But the Prophet says, that when the Jews committed sin they did it
with extravagance, since they spared no expense in attracting their
lovers. He pursues the simile which we have had before; for he compares
the nation to a perfidious woman who leaves her husband and offers
herself to adulterers. We now understand the Prophet’s meaning. It is
clear that the Jews did not act thus on purpose, for they thought they
would profit by their treaties with the Egyptians and Assyrians’ they
were unwilling to serve their idols for nothing, since they hoped for
most ample rewards from this their adulterous worship. But the Holy
Spirit does not regard either what they wished or hoped for, but speaks
of the matter as it was. It is clear, then, that the Jews were very
prodigal in their superstitions, and we see this even now in the papacy.
Those who grudge even a farthing for the relief of the poor will throw
away guineas when they wish to compound for their sins; and there is no
end to their extravagance under this madness. The very same rage
prevailed among the Jews for which Ezekiel now reproves them. He says,
then, *that they offered gifts to their lovers*; for, as I have said,
they were so prodigal in the worship of false gods, that when they
desired a treaty with either the Egyptians or Assyrians, they were
necessarily loaded with valuable presents; and history bears witness
that they entirely exhausted themselves. Lastly, the Prophet here shows
that the Jews were so blind, that in leaving God, and devoting
themselves to idols, they failed to obtain any advantage. Then, when
they implicated themselves in perverse and wicked treaties, he shows
that they were so utterly deranged as to deprive themselves of all their
goods, and yet to receive nothing but disgrace in return for their
extravagance: *presents are given to all harlots, but thou bestowest
thine.* Jerome takes the pronoun passively, meaning the blessings which
God had bestowed upon the people: and this passage is like that in
Hosea, (<span id="v.xxxii-p8.1"></span>[Ho
2:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#005)<span id="v.xxxii-p8.1"></span>)
where God complains that the Jews had profaned the blessings which he
had conferred upon them, just as if a wife should bestow on adulterers
what she had received from her husband. Foul indeed is this! for a
husband thought these would be pledges of chastity when he adorned his
wife with precious garments, or enriched her with other presents and
ornaments; but when a wife, forgetful of modesty and propriety, throws
her husband’s gifts at the feet of adulterers, this is indeed
outrageous. Hence this sense does not displease me, although it would be
more simple to understand it that the Jews had washed away all their
goods. He says, *that they had hired their lovers to come in from every
side for wickedness.* He repeats again what we saw before, that the Jews
were abandoned sinners, for some, though impure, are content with a
single lover. But as he had before said that the Jews spread their feet
widely, so he now adds, *that they hired lovers from all sides*.
Shameful indeed is such conduct in any woman: yet Ezekiel reproves the
Jews for this indelicacy, and we saw the reason in yesterday’s lecture.
It follows —

<span id="v.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#034)<span id="v.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p2"></span>**34.** And the contrary is in thee from
*other* women in thy whoredoms, whereas none followeth thee to commit
whoredoms: and in that thou givest a reward, and no reward is given unto
thee, therefore thou art contrary.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p3"></span>**34.** Et fuit in te inversio a
mulieribus, in scortationibus tuis, et post tua postrema  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) non erit scortatio:  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) quia dedisti munus, et munus tibi non
fuit datum: ita fuisti in contrarium.  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116)

<span id="v.xxxiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxiii-p8"></span><span id="v.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p9"></span>But the Prophet only confirms his former
teaching, that the Jews were seized with such lust, and in so
unaccustomed a manner, that they could only satisfy their desires with
severe loss; but this comparison only magnifies their crime, since they
were worse than any harlots; for although they basely sell themselves,
yet the hope of gain is a kind of pretext and excuse, and a starving
woman may be led into great excess; but far fouler and less excusable is
her conduct who purchases her lovers. It now follows —

<span id="v.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#035)<span
id="v.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p2"></span>**35.** Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word
of the LORD:

<span id="v.xxxiv-p3"></span>**35.** Propterea, meretrix, audi sermonem
Iehovae.

<span id="v.xxxiv-p4"></span>**36.** Thus says the Lord GOD; Because thy
filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness discovered through thy
whoredoms with thy lovers, and with all the idols of thy abominations,
and by the blood of thy children, which thou didst give unto them;

<span id="v.xxxiv-p5"></span>**36.** Sic dicit Dominator Iehovah, quia
effusum fuit infimum tuum,  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) et
detecta fuit turpitudo tua  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) in
scortationibus tuis erga amatores tuos, et erga omnia idola
abominationum tuarum, et in sanguinibus filiorum tuorum quos dedisti
illis.

<span id="v.xxxiv-p8"></span>**37.** Behold, therefore I will gather all
thy lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all *them* that thou
hast loved, with all *them* that thou hast hated; I will even gather
them round about against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto
them, that they may see all thy nakedness.

<span id="v.xxxiv-p9"></span>**37.** Propterea ecce congregabo cunctos
amatores tuos, quibus te oblectasti erga eos, et omnes quos dilexisti,
et quos odisti: congregabo inquam, eos contra te a circuitu, et retegam
 <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) pudenda tua  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) coram ipsis, et videbunt totam
turpitudinem tuam.

<span id="v.xxxiv-p12"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxiv-p13"></span><span id="v.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p14"></span>After God has inveighed against the
people’s sins, and treated the whole nation as guilty, he now pronounces
judgment on their wickedness. He repeats shortly what he had said, as a
judge explains the reason of his sentence. *Since,* says he*, the lower
parts of thy body and thy disgrace has been discovered before thy
lovers.* This is the reason of the judgment, whence it is collected that
God is induced to treat his people harshly for just and necessary
causes. It now follows: *therefore,* says he*, I will assemble all thy
lovers, with those also whom you hate, I will assemble them, and uncover
thy shame before them.* We may now see what the Jews are threatened
with, namely, a disgraceful destruction, so that they become a common
laughingstock without any one to succor them; for the diction is
metaphorical when he speaks of lovers and of parts of the body; for by
lovers he here means the Egyptians, Assyrians, and Chaldeeans. Whence
their opinion is refuted who think that the Prophet treats only of
superstitions. Nor can this language be transferred to idols, since we
know that false gods were not spectators of the punishment which the
Prophet denounces against the Jews. Whence it follows that this language
will only suit those persons to whose protection the Jews trusted, so as
to treat God’s help as useless. Since, then, such is the metaphorical
sense of the passage, we understand that shame means spoliation and
slaughter; nay, the destruction of both the kingdom and city, and even
of the temple. Thus the nation was a common laughingstock, and in this
way like a foul and aged harlot. Now we understand the Prophet’s
intention. As to Jerome translating “wealth,” it is altogether adverse
to the Prophet’s meaning; there is no doubt that he means the lower part
of the body, and it follows in the same sense, *thy shame was
uncovered*. But at the same time God expresses why it was done, *namely,
for fornication*, as if an abandoned woman were to act so disgracefully.
He now says it was done *towards your lovers, towards the idols of your
abominations*: <span id="v.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>על, *gnel*, is here taken
for towards or against. He distinguishes between lovers and idols. Those
who think that the Prophet treats only of superstitious think the copula
superfluous; but there is no doubt that the Prophet means, on one side,
the Assyrians, and Egyptians, and Chaldeeans; and on the other, false
gods.

<span id="v.xxxiv-p15"></span>*And in bloods,* says he. He here adds
another crime, namely, that of barbarous cruelty, because they did not
spare their own sons, as we saw before: many offered up their children,
and some were found so excited as to cast them into the fire: it was
indeed a monstrous crime when they hesitated not to rage against their
own offspring: but they were so carried away by insane zeal that they
burnt, up their children when others only drew them through the fire.
Hence the Prophet again accuses them of cruelty for offering their
children to idols, and so pouring forth innocent blood. Now follows the
punishment*. Behold,* says he*, I collect all thy lovers.* We said that
this ought to be understood of the Egyptians, Assyrians, and Chaldreans,
all of whom looked upon the slaughter of that perverse and perfidious
nation, but none of them helped her. God therefore pronounces the
destruction of the people just like that of a harlot abandoned by her
lovers, and perishing through hunger, want, and other miseries: for it
very often happens that a person under the impulse of love prefers a
harlot to his own life; for he will throw off all regard for his wife;
he will be disrespectful to both his father and mother, and will break
through every restraint to enjoy her company: but when such persons are
grown old, and their hair becomes white, which represents the winter of
life, and when wrinkles deform the face, then they are despised, and
especially if they suffer through disease. So also the Prophet now says
that the Jews would be despised by all, so that their lovers should be
compelled to behold that example; and meanwhile they scarcely deign to
look at the foul appearance which had formerly sweetly delighted them.

<span id="v.xxxiv-p16"></span>Then he proceeds further, namely, *that
their enemies should behold their ignominy*: we know that the Jews were
surrounded on all sides by enemies, and that all their neighbors were
hostile to them. The Prophet now says *that the nations disgrace should
be exposed before their lovers*, that is, the Egyptians, the Assyrians,
Chaldaeans, Philistilles, Edomites, and other nations. This passage
teaches us, that although the reason for God’s judgments does not always
clearly appear, yet they are never too severe; and when he condescends
to afford us a reason, he grants us a gratuitous indulgence. But when he
silently executes his judgments, let us learn to acquiesce in his
justice, and not to cry out if he exceeds moderation; because when he
has once explained that his severity is only justice, hence we must
gather the general rule, that whenever he seems to treat his people too
severely and harshly, yet he has just reasons for it. Let us learn,
also, that the Jews only suffered a just recompense when God so cursed
all their counsels. They thought themselves very provident and
circumspect when they engaged in alliances with Egyptians and Assyrians.
But all their plans turned out unhappily for them, since they consulted
their own will contrary to that of God. Let us learn, then, if we wish
to promote our own salvation, and to obtain a prosperous result, to do
nothing without God’s permission, and not to undertake any deliberations
except those which God has dictated and suggested by his word and
Spirit. For here every future event is shown to us as in a glass when we
wish to be wiser than they ought, and than God permits them. It now
follows —

<span id="v.xxxv"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#038)<span id="v.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p2"></span>**38.** And I will judge thee, as women that
break wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will give thee blood in
fury and jealousy.

<span id="v.xxxv-p3"></span>**38.** Et judicabo te judiciis adulterarum,
et fundentium sanguinem et ponam te sanguinem excandescentiae  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) et zeli.  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122)

<span id="v.xxxv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxv-p7"></span><span id="v.xxxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p8"></span>This verse is only added for the sake of
explanation. Already God had explained shortly and clearly every event
which should happen to the Jews, yet they should perish in the greatest
disgrace and be destitute of all help, since through distrust in God
they sought the favor of men, like a woman eager for lovers. But he
confirms the same teaching, that they should suffer double punishment,
since they not only polluted themselves thus shamefully, but also by
impious slaughters, since they burnt their children in honor of false
gods. This sentence may be explained generally, *I will judge you with
the judgments of women pouring out blood*, as we know that not only
idolatry was rampant at Jerusalem, but rapine, and all kinds of cruelty;
for since they had departed from God and his worship, they boldly
violated his law. By the second word we may understand all the crimes by
which they had provoked God’s anger on account of their cruelty. But
since he has lately spoken of sons, I willingly retain that sense, *that
they should suffer as an adulteress and a parricide who has put her
children to death*. But they thought that they obeyed: but he not only
rejects, but abominates such foolish thoughts; for nothing is more
disgraceful than, under the pretense of piety, to slay and to burn one’s
own children: this, I say, was a profanation of God’s name scarcely
tolerable. No wonder, then, that he denounces double vengeance, since,
when the Jews pleaded their zeal, God branded upon them the mark of
wickedness, though they thought him bound to their interests. It
afterwards follows —

<span id="v.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039)<span id="v.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvi-p2"></span>**39.** And I will also give thee into
their hand, and they shall throw down thine eminent place, and shall
break down thy high places: they shall strip thee also of thy clothes,
and shall take thy fair jewels, and leave thee naked and bare.

<span id="v.xxxvi-p3"></span>**39.** Et dabo te in manum eorum: et
sublime tuum diruent,  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) et
disrumpent  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) excelsa tua; et
spoliabunt te vestibus tuis, et sument vasa gloriae tuae,  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) et dimittent te nudam et discoopertam.

<span id="v.xxxvi-p7"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxvi-p8"></span><span id="v.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvi-p9"></span>Here Ezekiel enlarges upon God’s judgment,
when he teaches that the Jews would not only be exposed to every
disgrace, as if they were brought forward into a noble and conspicuous
theater, but they would suffer spoliation and rapine from those in whom
they formerly trusted. *I will give thee*, says he, *into their hands*
He speaks of lovers and enemies: in truth, he says all shall meet
together — your ancient allies and friends as well as your enemies: and
we know that they were spoiled at one time or another by the Egyptians,
Assyrians, and Chaldaeans. For at the time when Jerusalem was taken and
cut off, the Assyrians were reduced under the monarchy of the Chaldees.
Babylon had oppressed Nineveh, as is well known, but the strength of
both people were joined together. Thus the Jews were spoiled by them
when they thought that they had provided for themselves very
successfully by an alliance with the Assyrians against the kings of
Israel and Syria: and afterwards, when they had formed an alliance with
the Chaldaeans, they thought themselves beyond the reach of all danger.
But now the Prophet derides there foolish confidence, and says that they
should be spoiled by all their friends: so also he says that their
altars should be thrown down. Those who translate it “a house of sin” do
not sufficiently consider what I yesterday observed, that the Prophet
uses the figure so as to mark a thing simply from any part of it. The
Prophet’s language is moderate or mixed, because he speaks partially of
lofty and profane altars, and at the same time follows out its own
simile. There is no doubt, therefore, that by *a high place and lofty
things* he means altars themselves: although he does allude to these
sinful houses, because he said in yesterday’s lecture that the Jews
stood at the top of the streets so as to entice any casual and unknown
strangers to them. As also the Chaldaeans did not spare the temple, so
there is no doubt that they destroyed all the altars promiscuously. and
yet the Jews had wished to gratify them by destroying a part of them.
But God shows how foolishly men imagine they shall succeed while they
purposely fight against him: and experience teaches that the same thing
happens to all unbelievers. For when any one has embraced his own
superstitions, and despises what others think sacred and holy, then the
conquerors destroy temples and images, and deform the region which they
wish to be ruined and desolate. So also it is now said, *they shall
destroy your altars and high places*. He now adds, *and they shall spoil
thee of thy garments, and take away the vessels of thy beauty*. The
Prophet comprehends in these words whatever benefits God had conferred
on the Jews; for we know how liberally he had adorned them with his
gifts, and especially in rendering the earth wonderfully fruitful by his
blessing. He signifies in a word, that the Jews, when deprived of all
their ornaments, would be disgraced; as it follows, and *they shall send
thee away naked and bare*; that is, they shall cast thee off, just as a
lover when satisfied rejects the companion of his iniquity.

<span id="v.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#040)<span id="v.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvii-p2"></span>**40.** They shall also bring up a company
against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee
through with their swords.

<span id="v.xxxvii-p3"></span>**40.** Et ascendere facient contra te
coetum,  <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) et lapidabunt te
lapidibus,  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) et perfodient te
gladiis suis.

<span id="v.xxxvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxvii-p7"></span><span id="v.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvii-p8"></span>Since what Ezekiel has hitherto brought
forward was incredible, he now explains the manner of its accomplishment
— that the Chaldmans and Assyrians should bring a large army *and bury
the whole of Judea with stones, and pierce it through with swords*. By
these figures he simply means that there should be such slaughter that
the whole region should be made desolate, just as if the enemy should
slay all that they met with stones and swords. Some think that he
alludes to stones which were thrown by engines of war; but I doubt
whether the Prophet thought of this. What I have stated is more simple,
that the Jews had no cause to think themselves free from that final
slaughter of which the Prophet spoke, *since numerous and powerful
armies should come and overwhelm them with stones, and pierce them
through with swords*. It follows —

<span id="v.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="v.xxxviii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#041)<span id="v.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxviii-p2"></span>**41.** And they shall burn thine houses
with fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women:
and I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also
shall give no hire any more.

<span id="v.xxxviii-p3"></span>**41.** Et exurent domes tuas igni,
 <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) et facient in te  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) judicia in oculis mulierum multarum,
et cessare faciam te a scortando: atque etiam munus non offeres amplius.

<span id="v.xxxviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxviii-p7"></span><span id="v.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxviii-p8"></span>After he had spoken of the slaughter of
men, he adds the burning of their dwellings. This was sad indeed, that
the whole land should be deprived of inhabitants: but the deformity of
this last slaughter was heaped upon them when the houses were burnt up;
for the country was laid waste for the future, and for a length of time.
For when men are slain others may succeed, if they find houses prepared,
and fields not uncultivated. But when all these things are consumed by
fire, and by other means of ruin, all hope for the future is taken away.
The Prophet now means this when he says, *that the houses were burnt
up*. He adds, *they shall execute judgment against thee in the sight of
many women*. As he had used the simile of a harlot for the Jewish
people, that the clauses of the sentence may correspond, he understands
the neighboring people under the name of women. He confirms what we
formerly saw, that the penalty which should be exacted of the Jews
should be joined with the greatest disgrace. But this is very bitter,
when not only we must perish, but the cruelty of enemies must be
satiated while many behold us; and doubtless it was much more severe for
the Jews to sustain the ridicule of their foes than to perish at once.
If they had perished at once, death had not been such a torture to them
as those mockeries by which they were harassed by their enemies. For we
said that they were hated by almost all; and in the 137th Psalm (<span
id="v.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)<span
id="v.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>) it is shown that the Edomites, and others
like them, said, by way of congratulation, Hail! hail! when Jerusalem
was destroyed: Remember, O Lord, the sons of Edom, who said in the day
of Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. The
Prophet, therefore, announces this, that the punishment which he
formerly mentioned should be an example to all nations. He speaks
improperly of the Chaldaeans, when he says that they should be executors
of God’s judgments, for there was not a duty assigned to them; but God
often transfers to man as the instrument of his wrath what peculiarly
belongs to himself alone. And in this way he wounds the Jews more
severely when he makes the Chaldaeans their judges. God, properly
speaking, was the sole judge who avenged the people’s wickedness; but
meanwhile he substitutes the Chaldaeans for himself, that the punishment
might be the more disgraceful. He adds, *and I will make thee cease from
fornication, nor shall you offer gifts any more* God does not mean that
the Jews would be better when in exile, but simply reminds them that the
opportunity for their sinning would be wanting, as when an immodest
person is ashamed through being despised by every one, not through any
improvement in her disposition, since her licentious feelings are the
same as before. So also the Jews were always obstinate in their
wickedness, though deprived of the opportunity of sinning. It follows —

<span id="v.xxxix"></span>

<span id="v.xxxix-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042)<span id="v.xxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxix-p2"></span>**42.** So will I make my fury toward thee
to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet,
and will be no more angry.

<span id="v.xxxix-p3"></span>**42.** Et quiescere faciam excandescentiam
meam in te, et recedet aemulatio mea abs te: et quiescam, et non irascar
amplius.

<span id="v.xxxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxix-p5"></span><span id="v.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxix-p6"></span>Although God seems here to promise some
mitigation of his wrath, there is no doubt that he expresses what we
formerly saw, namely, that such should be the destruction of the nation
that there would be no need to return again to punish them. When,
therefore, he says*, I will make my indignation rest upon thee*, it
means that he would satiate himself with vengeance for all their crimes:
so that the consumption of the people is here called the rest of God’s
indignation, as if he had said, When I have utterly reduced you to
nothing, then my indignation against thee shall rest. In the same way he
afterwards adds, *and my indignation shall depart from thee*. But I
cannot finish today.

<span id="v.xl"></span>

<span id="v.xl-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xl-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have hitherto
sustained us, and since we are worthy of being utterly destroyed a
hundred times, — Grant, I say, that we may repent of ourselves, and
prevent that horrible judgment of which you set before us a specimen in
your ancient people: and may we so devote ourselves to thee in the true
chastity of faith, that we may experience the course of thy goodness
until we enjoy the eternal inheritance which your only-begotten Son has
acquired for us by his blood. — Amen.

<span id="v.xli"></span>

<span id="v.xli-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Seventh

<span id="v.xli-p2"></span>We stopped yesterday at the passage where God
pronounces *that his rivalry should depart from the Jews*. Some
interpret this of jealousy, and this sense does not displease me; for we
know that God has hitherto spoken in the character of a husband. But
when a husband avenges the injury which he has suffered, he is enflamed
with jealousy. Hence he has no moderation in his wrath; but when he
begins to despise his wife because she is defiled, and to think her
unworthy of further notice, then his anger and indignation is allayed.
So, therefore, some understand it, *My jealousy shall depart from thee,*
that is, You shall be no longer esteemed as my wife, but I shall despise
thee as if you are altogether strange and unknown to me. But the word
*jealousy* or rivalry may be taken otherwise; as he said yesterday, I
will put upon thee the blood of indignation and jealousy, that is, I
will treat thee in no milder way than those do who burn with wrath, and
breathe out nothing but slaughters; as when any one is enflamed against
his enemies, he slays all he meets. As, therefore, God put aside, in the
last lecture, the blood of jealousy and anger, so in this place the word
may be taken to mean simple rivalry; *for God’s* <span
id="v.xli-p2.1"></span>קנאה, *kenah*, *zeal*, or ardor in vengeance,
shall depart from the Jews, because material shall be deficient, as we
explained it yesterday*, I shall be at rest,* says he*, and shall not be
angry anymore.* By these words he confirms the same thing, that such
should be the destruction of Jerusalem that God shall cease his wrath,
as if he were satiated. He does not here promise any mitigation, as some
think, but expresses its formidable nature, since it should consume and
abolish the whole people, so that God’s anger ceases, just like a fire
is extinguished of its own accord when no fuel is left. This is the full
sense. It follows —

<span id="v.xlii"></span>

<span id="v.xlii-p1"></span><span id="v.xlii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043)<span id="v.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlii-p2"></span>**43.** Because thou hast not remembered the
days of thy youth, but hast fretted me in all these *things*; behold,
therefore I also will recompense thy way upon *thine* head, saith the
Lord GOD: and thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all thine
abominations.

<span id="v.xlii-p3"></span>**43.** Quia  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) non es recordata dierum adolescentiae
tuae, et irritasti me in hoc toto  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) etiam ego viam tuam in caput reddam,
 <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) dicit Dominator Iehovah: et non
fecisti cogitationem super cunctis abominationibus tuis.  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133)

<span id="v.xlii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.xlii-p9"></span><span id="v.xlii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlii-p10"></span>He first blames the Jews for not reflecting
on the liberality of their treatment. But that ingratitude was too
shameful, since God had not omitted any kind of beneficence for their
ornament. But since they thought themselves not adorned with sufficient
splendor by God, and that he was less munificent than he ought to be, it
may here be gathered that they were unworthy of such great and
remarkable benefits. Finally, God here shows that how severely soever he
punished the Jews, yet they deserved it for their ingratitude in not
thinking him sufficiently liberal towards them: for their spirits were
utterly broken. If a wife leave her husband, she is either compelled to
do so by his perverse conduct, or else she betrays an illiberal
disposition if she has been treated honorably. But since the Jews were
bound to God so strongly in so many ways, their perfidy and revolt was
so much the more detestable; for God does not suffer his blessings to be
despised by us: since we must always mark the reason of his omitting
nothing which may testify his paternal love towards us, namely, that we
may celebrate his goodness. But when we turn his benefits to the
profanation of his name, that is like mingling heaven and earth. Hence
this passage against ingratitude must be remarked.

<span id="v.xlii-p11"></span>He now adds, *thou, has been tumultuous
against me,* or has moved or irritated me. <span
id="v.xlii-p11.1"></span>רגן, *regen*, sometimes signifies to frighten,
but it means here to quarrel with, contend, or be in a rage with: for
the word may, in my opinion, be taken either actively or passively, and
also as a neuter. If we take it in the neuter sense, it will mean that
the Jews were tumultuous against God, as if they were seized by a
turbulent spirit, so as to neglect and despise him, and to indulge
themselves in wickedness. If you prefer the active sense, it means you
have irritated me. He adds again*, I also will recompense thy way upon
thy head*,  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) by which words God
again affirms that he was not induced to punish the Jews by any rash or
inconsiderate zeal, since if any one considered their crimes, he will
acknowledge that they had received a just recompense. In fine, the mouth
of the Jews is here stopped, lest they should suppose God to act
unfairly when they were only reaping the fruit of their deeds. He next
adds, *and you have not made consideration* I have already given two
expositions in the note, but neither of them pleases me, for it seems
altogether adverse to the Prophet’s context to receive it as if God were
the speaker: besides, it is not necessary to change the tense of the
verb, and take the past for the future, when the sense tends in another
direction. It agrees far better that the Jews did not recall to mind
their own abominations so as to be displeased with them. *To make
consideration,* means to reflect upon. <span
id="v.xlii-p12.1"></span>זמה, *zemeh*, is mostly taken in a good sense,
and signifies consideration simply; and as this is the word’s proper
meaning, we see that the Prophet here accuses the Jews of stupidity,
because they did not turn their attention to reconsider their
abominations. Those who take it for lewdness distort the sense. The
whole meaning is, that the Jews were worthy of the horrible destruction
which hung over them, because they were not only obstinate in their
ingratitude, but altogether stupid: for their abominations were so foul
before the nations, as we have formerly seen, that the daughters of the
Philistines were ashamed of the wickedness of the nation, but they did
not apply their minds to the consideration of these things. Since,
therefore, their abominations were so gross, it was a mark of the
greatest indolence not to turn their attention to review them. It now
follows —

<span id="v.xliii"></span>

<span id="v.xliii-p1"></span><span id="v.xliii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:44-46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#044)<span
id="v.xliii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xliii-p2"></span>**44.** Behold, every one that useth
proverbs shall use *this* proverb against thee, saying, As *is* the
mother, *so is* her daughter.

<span id="v.xliii-p3"></span>**44.** Ecce quisquis proverbiat  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) super te proverbiabit dicendo, Sicut
mater filia ejus.

<span id="v.xliii-p5"></span>**45.** Thou *art* thy mother’s daughter,
that lotheth her husband and her children; and thou *art* the sister of
thy sisters, which lothed their husbands and their children: your mother
*was* an Hittite, and your father an Amorite.

<span id="v.xliii-p6"></span>**45.** Filia matris tuae es quae abjecit
 <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) maritum suum et filios suos: et
soror sororis tuae  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) quae
repudiarunt maritos suos, et filios suos. Mater vestra Chitaea, et pater
vester Amorrhaeus.

<span id="v.xliii-p9"></span>**46.** And thine elder sister *is*
Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy
younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, *is* Sodom and her
daughters.

<span id="v.xliii-p10"></span>**46.** Et soror tua major Samaria est, et
filiae ejus, quae habitant ad sinistram tuam: et soror tua minor prae
te, quae habitat a dextris tuis, Sodoma et filiae, ejus.

<span id="v.xliii-p11"></span> 

<span id="v.xliii-p12"></span><span id="v.xliii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.xliii-p13"></span>Here the Prophet uses another form of
speech; for he says that the Jews deserved to be subject to the taunting
proverbs of those who delight in wickedness. The sense is, that they
were worthy of extreme infamy, so that their disgrace was bandied about
in vulgar sayings. This is one point: he now adds, that proverbs of this
kind were the Jews’ desert — *the daughter is like her mother and
sisters* Then he says*, their mother was a Hittite, and their sisters
Samaria and Sodom*. We must briefly treat these clauses in order. When
the Prophet speaks of proverbs, he doubtless means what I have touched
on, namely, that the crimes of the nation deserved that their infamy
should fly abroad on the tongues of all; for there are many sins which
are hidden, through either their being spared, or their not seeming to
be much noticed. If any one surpass all others in cruelty, avarice,
lust, and other vices, his disgrace will be notorious, and he will be
pointed at by vulgar proverbs. Hence Ezekiel dwells on the people’s
wickedness, since they supply material for all men to laugh at their
expense; for he alludes to buffoons and wits, and such as are ingenious
in fabricating vulgar sayings.

<span id="v.xliii-p14"></span>*The maker of proverbs shall utter this
proverb against thee: like mother like daughter.* There is no doubt that
they used this saying at that period, and it often happens that
daughters’ faults are like their mothers’. Daughters indeed often
degenerate from the best mothers, and matrons will be found who excel in
the virtues of modesty, chastity, sobriety, and watchfulness, while
their daughters are rash and proud, luxurious, lustful, and intemperate;
but it usually happens that a mother has wicked daughters like herself:
this happens less by nature than by education; for a woman of a perverse
inclination will think that a stigma attaches to herself if her daughter
is better than she is, and so she will wish to form her after her own
morals; hence it happens that few daughters are found modest whose
mothers are immodest: few sober who have been brought up by drunkards.
Since therefore experience always taught the similarity between mothers
and daughters, hence this proverb was in the mouth of every one.
Proverbs, however, are not always true, but only on the whole; but God
sometimes extends his pity so far that the daughter of a wicked woman is
honorable and well conducted. But this is very rare: hence this
proverbial saying cannot be rejected, — *like mother like daughter*. It
now follows: *thou art the daughter of thy mother*; that is, altogether
like her: and this phrase is equally common among us, “*Thou art thy
father’s son*,” namely, you are like him in thy sins. Thus the Prophet
means that the nation was like their mother, since it differed in
nothing from the Canaanites and the Hittites. He adds also, *sister and
their daughters*, as if he would collect the whole family. He *says that
Samaria is their elder sister, and Sodom their younger.* I know not
whether those who think that Samaria is called older than Jerusalem,
through its revolting first from the worship of God, have sufficient
grounds for their interpretation: for as we go on we shall see that
Samaria is compared with Sodom, and since Sodom is the worst, it is very
naturally compared with it. For Jerusalem will afterwards be placed in
the highest rank, because it had surpassed them all in enormity.
*Samaria therefore is one of the sisters*, and *so is Sodom* these towns
are called daughters, for we know that Sodom was not the only one
destroyed by fire from heaven, since there were five cities. (<span
id="v.xliii-p14.1"></span>[Ge
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#019)<span id="v.xliii-p14.1"></span>,
and <span id="v.xliii-p14.2"></span>[Ge
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#025)<span
id="v.xliii-p14.2"></span>.) We see, then, why those smaller cities near
at hand were called daughters of Sodom, and as far as Samaria is
concerned, it was the head of the kingdom of Israel: hence all the
cities of the ten tribes were called its daughters.

<span id="v.xliii-p15"></span>With relation to the father, the Prophet
says here more than he had ventured before. He says, *their father was
an, Amorite*, as if the Jews had sprung from profane nations, and did
not draw their origin from a holy parent; and the Prophet very often
makes this objection, not that they were spurious or descended according
to the flesh from the uncircumcised Gentiles, but because they were
unworthy of their father Abraham, through being degenerate. In fine, God
here signifies that the parents of the Jews were not only profane
nations but utterly reprobate, and those whom God for very just reasons
had ordered to be destroyed, since they had contaminated the earth with
their crimes far too long. He says that the Jews were like a daughter
sprung from most abandoned parents. As to his saying, *that the mother
as well as sisters had despised their husbands*, this may seem absurd.
But we know that in proverbs, parables, examples, and comparisons, all
things ought not to be exacted with the utmost nicety. When Christ’s
coming is said to be stealthy, (<span id="v.xliii-p15.1"></span>[Matt.
24:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044)<span id="v.xliii-p15.1"></span>,)
if any one here desires to be cunning and inquires how Christ is like a
thief, that will be absurd. And also in this place when it is said, *thy
mother has abandoned her husband and her sons, and thy sisters have done
the same*. God simply means that both the mother and sisters of
Jerusalem were impure and perfidious women; and cruel also, since they
not only had violated the marriage pledge and had thus broken through
all chastity, but were like ferocious beasts against their own sons.
(<span id="v.xliii-p15.2"></span>[Luke
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#040)<span id="v.xliii-p15.2"></span>;
<span id="v.xliii-p15.3"></span>[1Th
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002)<span id="v.xliii-p15.3"></span>.)
He reproves the crime which we yesterday exposed, that of the Jews
burning their own sons. In fine, he means to compare the Jews with the
Canaanites, the Samaritans, and the Sodomites, in both perfidy and
cruelty. Hence they are first condemned for throwing away all modesty
and conjugal fidelity, and next for forgetting all humanity. It now
follows —

<span id="v.xliv"></span>

<span id="v.xliv-p1"></span><span id="v.xliv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#047)<span id="v.xliv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xliv-p2"></span>**47.** Yet hast thou not walked after their
ways, nor done after their abominations: but, as *if that were* a very
little *thing*, thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways.

<span id="v.xliv-p3"></span>**47.** Et non in viis ipsarum ambulasti, et
non secundum abominationes earum fecisti quasi parum  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) et exiguum: et corrupt, es prae illis
in cunctis viis tuis.

<span id="v.xliv-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xliv-p6"></span><span id="v.xliv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xliv-p7"></span>Now the Prophet, not content with the simile
which he had used, says that the Jews were far worse than either their
mothers or sisters. Yet he is not inconsistent, for God wished by
degrees to drag the wicked to trial. If at the very first word he had
said that they were worse than the Sodomites, they would have been less
attentive to this accusation. But when he proposed a thing incredible,
namely, that they were the daughters of the nations of Canaan, and the
sisters of Samaria and Sodom, and afterwards proceeded further, and
pronounced that they surpassed both their mother and sisters, this, as I
have said, would stir up their minds more vehemently. This difference
then contains no inconsistency, but rather tends to magnify their
crimes. You, says he, have not walked according to their ways. He does
not here exempt the Jews from participating in sins as if they were
faultless through not imitating the Hittites, or Sodomites, or
Israelites: but the word *walking* ought to be restricted to the sense
of equality, as if he said, you are not equal. But it is a kind of
correction when God says that the Jews were not equal to the Hittites or
Sodomites, meaning that their impiety was more detestable, since they
rushed forward to all kinds of wickedness with greater license. We now
understand the Prophet’s meaning when he says that; the Jews *had not
walked in the ways* of either Sodom or Samaria or the nations of Canaan,
since they had gone before them, and even with greater ardor of pursuit;
for if they had simply imitated the three people of whom mention has
been made, *they had walked in their ways*. But when they were so
hurried on in their intemperance as to run before them, they did not
walk in their ways only through leaving them behind. And this comparison
will sufficiently explain the Prophet’s mind, that the Jews did not
follow either the Sodomites, Israelites, or Canaanites, but through
their base and headlong violence left them far behind. And he says, as
if it were only a small matter, that is, as if it were of little moment
to thee to be like thy mother and sisters. But *you have been corrupt*,
says he, *before them*. He now explains the case more clearly, since
they had not walked in their ways through precipitating themselves with
greater license, as we have already said. It follows —

<span id="v.xlv"></span>

<span id="v.xlv-p1"></span><span id="v.xlv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048)<span id="v.xlv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlv-p2"></span>**48.** *As* I live, saith the Lord GOD,
Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast
done, thou and thy daughters.

<span id="v.xlv-p3"></span>**48.** Vivo ego, dicit Dominator Iehovah, si
fecerit Sodoma, soror tua ipsa et filiae ejus quemadmodum fecisti tu, et
filiae tuae.

<span id="v.xlv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xlv-p5"></span><span id="v.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlv-p6"></span>Since what we have lately seen was difficult
to be believed, hence God interposes an oath. Nor is it surprising that
shame was so despised and cast far away by the Jews, since they were
inured to it; and we know how they were swollen with pride, for they
always boasted in their adoption and gloried in the name of God.
Besides, we know that at this day, if any one accuses a wicked nation,
yet it is not so detestable as Sodom, and if he uses this phrase, he
inflames all against himself, and causes them to reject his language
with indignation. For who will suffer either one city or nation to be
compared with Sodom? As far as concerned the Jews, we have said that it
was intolerable in them to be fastidious and proud. There was also
another reason why they should be indignant at being pronounced worse
than the Sodomites: since God had not chosen them as his peculiar
treasure in vain and marked them with magnificent titles: you shall be a
nation of priests unto me, you shall be my inheritance, and besides, my
son — my first-born Israel. (<span id="v.xlv-p6.1"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="v.xlv-p6.1"></span>, and
<span id="v.xlv-p6.2"></span>[Ex
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)<span id="v.xlv-p6.2"></span>.) We
now see how necessary the interposition by oath was to sanction what the
Prophet had said. God therefore here swears by himself, because we call
him in as a witness and judge when we swear. But he swears by himself or
by his life, because, as the Apostle teaches, he has no greater by whom
to swear. (<span id="v.xlv-p6.3"></span>[Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span id="v.xlv-p6.3"></span>.)
Whatever it be, he here prostrates all foolish boasting, by which the
Jews were puffed up when he swears by himself, *that they were worse
than Sodom and her daughters*. And here also he calls in like manner the
smaller cities *daughters of Jerusalem*. This was very hard upon the
Jews, when the Prophet says and often repeats, thy sister Sodom. But he
wounds their feelings far more bitterly, *that Sodom was just in
preference to Jerusalem:* this was indeed intolerable, and yet we see
that the Holy Spirit by no means indulges them here. Hence we must not
regard what the reprobate are able to bear, but they must be treated
according to their own disposition, and since they rise fiercely against
God, so also are they to be subdued, and, according to the common
proverb, “a hard wedge must be formed for a hard knot.” It now follows —

<span id="v.xlvi"></span>

<span id="v.xlvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xlvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049)<span id="v.xlvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlvi-p2"></span>**49.** Behold, this was the iniquity of thy
sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in
her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the
poor and needy.

<span id="v.xlvi-p3"></span>**49.** Ecce haec fuit iniquitas Sodomae
sororis tuae, superbia, satietas panis, et securitas oti  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) fuit illi et filiabus ejus: et manum
egeni et inopis non apprehendit.

<span id="v.xlvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xlvi-p6"></span><span id="v.xlvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlvi-p7"></span>Here God begins to show the reason why he
extenuated the wickedness of Sodom in comparison with that of his own
people: for if he had spoken generally, without explaining the counsel
of God, his language would have been incredible, and so would have been
ineffectual. But now God shows that he did not pronounce rashly what we
heard before, namely, that the Jews were worse than the Sodomites. How
so? *for this was the iniquity of Sodom thy sister,* says he, first
*pride, then fullness of bread*, and luxury in which they were in the
habit of indulging, and of drowning themselves in ease to enjoy a long
peace; afterwards, *they did not seize the hand of the poor*. Now he
adds —

<span id="v.xlvii"></span>

<span id="v.xlvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xlvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:50](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#050)<span id="v.xlvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlvii-p2"></span>**50.** And they were haughty, and
committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw
*good*

<span id="v.xlvii-p3"></span>**50.** Et superbe se extulit, et fecit
abominationem coram me, et abstuli ipsos quemadmodum vidi.  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140)

<span id="v.xlvii-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xlvii-p6"></span><span id="v.xlvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlvii-p7"></span>We must diligently attend to this passage;
for God does not here excuse the wickedness of Sodom; but, abominable as
that people was, he says that the Jews were yet more abandoned. We know
why God inflicted his vengeance in a terrible manner against the
Sodomites and their neighbors, for that was a fearful example; and Judea
says that it was a kind of mirror of the wrath of God which awaits all
the impious, (<span id="v.xlvii-p7.1"></span>[Jude
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007)<span id="v.xlvii-p7.1"></span>;)
and Scripture often recalls us to that proof of God’s judgement: but we
must see how Sodom rushed forward to that degree of licentiousness so as
to be horrified by no enormity. God says that they began by pride, and
surely pride is the mother of all contempt of God and of all cruelty.
Let us learn, then, that we cannot be restrained by the fear of God,
unless moderation and humility reign within us. Pride, we know, has two
horns, so to speak; one is, when men forget their own condition, and
claim to themselves not only more than is right, but what God alone
calls his own. This, then, is one horn of pride, when men, trusting in
their dignity, excellence, plenty, and wealth, are intoxicated by false
imaginations, so as to think themselves equal to God. Now, another horn
of pride is, when they do not acknowledge their vices, and despise
others in comparison with themselves, and please themselves in
enormities, just as if they were free from any future account. Since,
therefore, pride is contained in these two clauses, when men arrogate
too much to themselves, and thus are blind to their own vices, each of
these is doubtless condemned in the Sodomites, since they first *raised
themselves by a rash confidence*, and then refused to subject themselves
to God, and rebelled against him as if they could shake off his yoke.

<span id="v.xlvii-p8"></span>He afterwards adds *fullness of bread*. But
the Prophet seems to condemn in the Sodomites what was not blamable in
itself: for when God feeds us bountifully, fullness is not to be
considered a crime; but he takes it here for immoderate gluttony; for
those who have abundance are often luxurious, and nothing is more rare
than self-restraint when materials for luxury are supplied to us. Hence
*fullness of bread* is here taken for intemperance, since the Sodomites
were so addicted to gluttony and drunkenness, that they gratified their
appetites worse than the brutes, who do retain some moderation, for they
are content with their own food: but men’s covetousness is altogether
insatiable. Let us observe, then, that by *fullness of bread* we are to
understand that intemperance in which profane men indulge when God
supplies them bountifully with the means of living; for they do not
consider why they abound in wine, and corn, and abundance of all things,
but they drown themselves in luxuries with a blind and brutal impulse.
Hence such greediness, so inflaming to the spirits of the Sodomites, is
added to pride, that they arrogate to themselves more than is just. He
afterwards adds, *and rest*; תולש, *sheloth*: some translate it
abundance, but almost everywhere it means peace; the noun טקש, *sheket*,
which is added next, means properly rest; so that it will be the peace
of rest or ease, and this seems without blame: for why shall we not be
permitted to enjoy ease, if no one molests or troubles us? nay, it is
reckoned among God’s blessings: you shall sleep, and no one shall
frighten thee. (<span id="v.xlvii-p8.1"></span>[Le
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#006)<span id="v.xlvii-p8.1"></span>.)
Since God, therefore, wishes this to be considered among his blessings,
that the faithful should sleep soundly, without any anxiety or trouble,
why is Sodom condemned for thus enjoying ease and peace? But here its
excess is pointed out, not its true use, since the use of peace is to
render our minds tranquil, that we may return thanks to God, and dwell
calmly under his sway. But how do the reprobate act? They grow brutish,
so to speak, in their own peacefulness. Hence sloth is in this passage
meant by the peacefulness of ease, and God means that the Sodomites were
intoxicated by their luxuries when they enjoyed peace. We must put off
the remainder.

<span id="v.xlviii"></span>

<span id="v.xlviii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xlviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have
deigned to graft us once into the body of your only-begotten Son, that
we may be mindful of our origin, since from our very birth we were lost
and cursed; and grant that we may be mindful of that grace by which you
have honored us, so that we may worship thee as a father, and preserve
our trust in thee inviolate: and may we be so obedient to thee that thy
image may be renewed in us more and more in all righteousness and
holiness, until thy glory may perfectly shine forth in us in thy
heavenly kingdom by the same Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.xlix"></span>

<span id="v.xlix-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Eighth.

<span id="v.xlix-p2"></span>We began in the last lecture to treat that
passage where God pronounces that the Jews surpassed in all kinds of
wickedness both the Sodomites and the ten tribes of Israel. When he
wished to prove this he said that the iniquity of Sodom was *pride,
fullness of bread*, and then *ease, with sloth and cruelty:* afterwards
he put another kind of pride, since the people were intoxicated with
confidence, and indulged in unbridled and brutal license, as he
afterwards says. For he adds, that the cities were overthrown and
destroyed since they had perpetrated foul abominations. With regard to
excess, we said that good living simply is not here condemned when any
one uses the affluence granted to him for God’s glory; but luxury and
intemperance. For the rich boast as much as possible, and are not only
eager for delicacies, and stuff themselves to the full, but they triumph
and luxuriate in what is sure to destroy them. The Prophet then blames
this in the Sodomites. We said also of quiet and rest, that it denoted
that sloth by which the profane madden themselves; but that is more
clearly expressed shortly by vain-boasting. The Prophet now adds, *that
they had not seized the hand of the poor and needy*. We must notice
this, since pride is almost always cruel; and truly no one heartily
succors his poor brethren who is not affected by their necessities. But
those who are intoxicated by false confidence, and claim everything for
themselves, despise their brethren, and thus carelessly permit them to
be utterly oppressed by poverty and want. The Prophet here pronounces
nothing concerning Sodom but what we too often perceive by daily
experience. He now adds —

<span id="v.l"></span>

<span id="v.l-p1"></span><span id="v.l-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:50](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#050)<span id="v.l-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.l-p2"></span>**50.** And they were haughty, and committed
abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good.

<span id="v.l-p3"></span>**50.** Et extulit se,  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) et fecerunt abominationem coram facie
mea, et abstuli eas quemadmodum volui.  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142)

<span id="v.l-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.l-p7"></span>Here God shows that Sodom had not at first
fallen into those foul and gross crimes which were the cause of its
final destruction. We must diligently mark this: for when Satan begins
to entice us, we think that we shall be free to retract our steps
whenever we please; but we are ensnared, some in one way and some in
another. But when we are entangled by Satan’s deceits, it is not in our
power to escape from them; nay, we feel that we are involved in a
complete labyrinth. Since, then, men proceed gradually in provoking
God’s wrath, we must observe this passage, in which God informs us that
the Sodomites were not given up at once to enormous lust, but they began
with smaller sins, and then became luxurious through their abundance,
and were stupefied by ease and quiet; meanwhile they despised the poor
and needy, and did not stretch forth their hands to them. For to *seize
the hand* means the same as to stretch forth the hand, when we set up
again those who have fallen, or prop up those who are slipping. Hence
God shows that the Sodomites were afterwards so corrupted by luxuries,
that he at length adds, that *they raised themselves up,* that is, that
they purposely, and of their own accord, exempted themselves from all
fear of punishment: for this is the meaning of the word raised up; that
is, they buoyed themselves up, since they promised themselves freedom
from punishment; and in that fallacious hope *they dared to perpetrate
abomination before my face*. Hence we must always fear lest Satan should
entangle us by His enticements, and at length so fascinate and stupefy
our senses that we can no longer distinguish between good and evil, as
the Sodomites exceeded the brutes in their abominations, which were the
cause of their ruin.

<span id="v.l-p8"></span>When God announces *that he removed those
cities as he pleased*, he wishes to inspire the Jews with terror, lest
they should suppose that they would profit by turning their backs;
because, whether they wished it or not, he would at length drag them
before his tribunal. God, therefore, here passes the final sentence,
that the Jews may feel that they must render an account to him. Now, if
any one should ask whether these crimes which Ezekiel relates are worse
than those of the Jews, the answer is at hand, that the Sodomites were
not under the law; and hence it is no wonder if they wandered and
stumbled in darkness: but when the right course of life was pointed out
to the Jews, they professedly sought their own destruction, they
knowingly and willfully rejected God’s yoke, and haughtily despised all
the prophets who daily desired to recall them into the path of duty.
Other circumstances are also to be noticed, that the Jews not only
abused the goods which God plentifully bestowed upon them, but, as we
have seen, squandered them upon adulterous worship, and then they
fetched from thence all kinds of superstition, and became worse than the
beasts, as we have seen elsewhere. While we know that the imitation of
the people of Sodom was very common in Judea, when they were tainted
with many corruption’s through forgetfulness of the law. If, therefore,
we weigh these points together, it will not be surprising that God
pronounces the Jews to have sinned more grievously that the Sodomites.
It now follows —

<span id="v.li"></span>

<span id="v.li-p1"></span><span id="v.li-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:51](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#051)<span id="v.li-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.li-p2"></span>**51.** Neither hath Samaria committed half of
thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they,
and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast
done.

<span id="v.li-p3"></span>**51.** Et Samaria secundum dimidium scelerum
tuorum non scelerate egit: et multiplicasti abominationes tuas prae
illis, et justificasti sorores tuas in omnibus abominationibus tuis quas
patrasti.

<span id="v.li-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.li-p5"></span><span id="v.li-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.li-p6"></span>God now pronounces the same thing concerning
Samaria, whom he had formerly called the younger sister. By Samaria, as
we said, he means the Israelites, because that city was the head of the
Kingdom of Israel: the ten tribes had been already driven into exile;
and he says they were not half so wicked when compared with the Jews.
This, at the first glance, may seem absurd; for we know that God’s
worship was continued at Jerusalem when the Israelites rejected the law,
and basely and openly turned aside to idolatry. Since, therefore, some
sound piety flourished at Jerusalem when the Israelites wickedly
revolted from God’s law, what can it mean by the Jews being censured as
worse than they were? We must always come to the fountain which I have
pointed out; for ingratitude has great influence in exaggerating men’s
crimes. But another reason must also be remarked. The Jews had seen how
severely God had avenged the superstitions of the kingdom of Israel:
they were so far from repenting that they rather courted their alliance,
as if for the very purpose of provoking God afresh. If we reflect upon
these two points, the question will be solved as far as relates to the
present passage. God says what is incredible to us, that the Jews were
worse than the Israelites: but he asserts this, because ingratitude had
rendered them less excusable; for God had retained them under his own
charge when that wretched dispersion happened, and the ten tribes were
all but absorbed. God’s candle was always shinning at Jerusalem, as it
is said. (<span id="v.li-p6.1"></span>[Ex
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020)<span id="v.li-p6.1"></span>.)
When, therefore, God had preserved for himself that small band as the
very flower of the people, safe and sound, the revolt of this people was
far more criminal than that of the ten tribes: for these tribes were
drawn away from the worship of God by little and little, as is well
known. For Jeroboam always set before himself one definite object — the
worship of God as the liberator of the people, (<span
id="v.li-p6.2"></span>[1Ki 12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#000)<span
id="v.li-p6.2"></span>:) for the Israelites did not look on themselves
as apostates, although they had degenerated from their fathers. But the
Jews addicted themselves to gross superstitions, of which the Israelites
at first were ashamed; and then they were warned by many penalties not
to imitate their kinsmen: still, as we saw before, the temple was
defiled by many pollution’s; for Ezekiel, in the eighth chapter, says
that he saw there many defilement’s. Since then the Jews profited so
badly, though God set his vengeance before their eyes, it is not
surprising that they are said to have sinned grievously.

<span id="v.li-p7"></span>In conclusion, he adds, *thou hast multiplied
your abominations beyond them; and you have justified thy sisters in all
the abominations which you have perpetrated*. Here the word “justified”
is to be received at first comparatively: it does not signify that the
fault of others is extenuated by the wickedness of the Jews; but if the
people wished to offer excuses, they might easily be convinced that both
Sodom and the kingdom of Israel were just in comparison with the Jews.
To justify is usually received for to absolve; and we must observe this
when we treat of justification, since the papists always seize upon the
quality, as if to be justified was in reality to be just. Hence they are
unable to comprehend a doctrine sufficiently familiar to Scripture, and
plain enough — that we are justified by faith: for they examine man,
that they may find justice there, and do not ascend any higher: but to
be justified by faith signifies nothing but to be absolved, though we
are not just in ourselves; hence a justification by faith without us
must be sought for, and hence we gather that it is not a quality. Hence
*Jerusalem justified her sisters*, although Sodom and Samaria were found
worse than herself. It follows —

<span id="v.lii"></span>

<span id="v.lii-p1"></span><span id="v.lii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052)<span id="v.lii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.lii-p2"></span>**52.** Thou also, which hast judged thy
sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed more
abominable than they: they are more righteous than thou: yea, be thou
confounded also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy
sisters.

<span id="v.lii-p3"></span>**52.** Etiam tu porta probrum tuum quae
judicasti sororem tuam in sceleribus tuis quibus impie egisti  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) prae illis: justificatae sunt prae te.
Atque etiam tu  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) pudefias, et
porta probrum tuum, quod justificaveris sorores tuas.

<span id="v.lii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.lii-p7"></span><span id="v.lii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.lii-p8"></span>Here at length God announces that he would
punish the Jews according to their deserts. Hitherto he has recounted
their crimes, as judges are accustomed, when they condemn criminals, to
state the reasons which induce them to pass sentence: thus God shortly
shows how wicked the Jews were. He now adds, that he would avenge them
according to the magnitude of their crimes. For they would easily have
swallowed all reproaches if the fear of punishment had not been infused
into them. This second head, then, was necessary, lest they should Judea
off with impunity, since they had surpassed both Sodom and Samaria. *Do
thou also bear thy disgrace who has judged thy sisters.* Here Ezekiel
seems to be at variance with himself, for he said just now and will
repeat again shortly, that Jerusalem had justified her sisters; and this
is contrary to judging. But he says that Samaria was condemned by the
Jews; and the solution of this discrepancy is easy: for the Jews
justified both the Israelites and the Sodomites, not by absolving them
in any sentence passed on them, but because they were worthy of double
condemnation; as Christ says, In the last day it shall be more tolerable
for Sodom and Gomorrah than for the Jews. (<span
id="v.lii-p8.1"></span>[Mt 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024)<span
id="v.lii-p8.1"></span>.) But what is here said of condemnation has
another meaning — that the Jews insulted over their brethren when they
saw their kingdom destroyed, and the Israelites driven away from their
land. Since they spoke so proudly of the slaughter of the ten tribes, as
if innocent themselves, the Prophet here reproves them as if they judged
them. And this is too common with all hypocrites, to inveigh hardly
against all others, and to grow hot against them, as if in this way they
covered their own crimes. And Paul reproves this vice in them, since
they were supercilious censors of others, and at the same time committed
every sin. Thinkest you, O man, says he, when you judge others, that God
will not condemn thee; for who art you, O mortal man? Do you claim the
office of a judge? (<span id="v.lii-p8.2"></span>[Ro
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001)<span id="v.lii-p8.2"></span>.)
Meanwhile will God be deprived of his rights, so as not to call thee to
account for thy sins? Now, therefore, we understand the Prophet’s
intention: for he exaggerates the crimes of the Jews when he pronounces
sentence from on high against the ten tribes. Truly God blotted out this
kingdom deservedly: for they were apostates; they had revolted from the
family of David, and had violated that sacred unity by which God had
bound to himself the whole family of Abraham. They had indeed just cause
for speaking thus in condemning the Israelites; but when they were worse
than them, what arrogance it was to harass their brethren, and to be
blind to their own vices, nay, to grow utterly callous to them!

<span id="v.lii-p9"></span>*Thou,* therefore*, have judged thy sister*,
that is, you have taken God’s office upon thee, and yet you were worse
than thy sister. Some explain it otherwise, that the Jews judged the ten
tribes as long as they remained in a moderate degree worshipers of God:
but they do not attend to the context. There is no doubt that the
Prophet here rebukes the pride with which the Jews were puffed up, while
they judged others severely and themselves leniently. *They were
justified in comparison with thee,* says he*: you, therefore,* he
repeats*, blush and bear thy disgrace.* This repetition is not
superfluous, although in the former words there was nothing obscure, for
it was difficult to persuade the Jews that they should suffer
punishment, since God had borne with them so long. God’s goodness, then,
which invited them to repentance, had rather hardened them, and had
occasioned so much torpor that they thought themselves free from all
danger. Hence this is the reason why the Prophet confirms his former
teaching concerning the nearness of God’s vengeance against them. He
says, *when you have justified them.* He here repeats the cause, and
does so to restrain all pretenses by which the Jews could in any way
protect themselves. For by one word he shows that they must perish,
since they had justified those who had been treated so strictly. For it
is by no means likely, that God should cease from his office of judge in
one direction, since he had been so severe against the Sodomites, who
were in some way excusable for their errors. This then is the reason why
the Prophet affirms again *that Sodom and Samaria were justified by the
Jews*. It follows —

<span id="v.liii"></span>

<span id="v.liii-p1"></span><span id="v.liii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:53](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053)<span id="v.liii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.liii-p2"></span>**53.** When I shall bring again their
captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity
of Samaria and her daughters, then *will I bring again* the captivity of
thy captives in the midst of them:

<span id="v.liii-p3"></span>**53.** Et convertam captivitatem earum,
captivitatem Sodomae et filiarum ejus, et c.aptivitatem Samartiae et
filiarum ejus, et captivitatem captivitatum tuarum in medio ipsarum.

<span id="v.liii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.liii-p5"></span><span id="v.liii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.liii-p6"></span>He here confirms again what we lately saw,
that the Jews were doomed and devoted to final destruction, nor was it
possible for them to escape any more than for Sodom to rise again and
Samaria to be restored to her original dignity. The Jews foolishly
corrupt this passage, since they think that restoration is promised to
Israel and Sodom. But by Sodomites they mean the Moabites and Ammonites,
the descendants of Lot who dwell at Sodom: but a child may see that this
is trifling. There is no doubt that the Prophet here deprives the Jews
of all hope of safety by reasoning upon an impossibility: as if he had
said, you shall be safe when Sodom and Samaria are. We now understand
the Prophet’s meaning. But the inquiry arises — how can he pronounce
none of the Israelites safe, when their return home is so often
promised? But we must bear in mind, what we saw elsewhere, and what it
is often necessary to repeat, since many passages in the prophets would
otherwise give rise to scruples. Therefore we have sometimes said, that
the prophets speak of the people in two ways; for they sometimes regard
the whole body of the nation promiscuously: but the Israelites were
already alienated from God; afterwards the Jews also cut themselves off
from him. Since therefore each people, considering them in a body and in
the mass, to speak roughly, was outcast, it is not surprising if the
prophets use this language — that no hope of mercy remained — since they
had excluded themselves from God’s mercy. But afterwards they change
their discourse to the remnant: for God always preserves a hidden seed,
that the Church should not be utterly extinguished: for there must
always be a Church in the world, but sometimes it is preserved miserably
as it were in a sepulcher, since it is nowhere apparent. God, therefore,
when he denounces final vengeance on the Jews, regards the body of the
people, but then he promises that there shall be a small seed which he
wishes to remain safe. Hence it is said in Isaiah, (<span
id="v.liii-p6.1"></span>[Isa 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)<span
id="v.liii-p6.1"></span>,) seal my law, bind up my testimony among my
disciples; that is, address my disciples as if you were reading in a
hidden corner any writing which you did not wish to be made public. Do
you therefore collect my disciples together, that you may deliver to
them my law and my testimony like a sealed letter. But now God cites to
his tribunal those degenerate Jews who had nothing in common with
Abraham, since they had made void and utterly abolished his covenant:
Now, therefore, we see how the Jews perished together with Sodom and
Samaria, and were never restored, that is, as far as relates to that.
filth and dregs which were utterly unworthy of the honor of which they
boasted. *I will restore,* therefore*, their captivities; namely, the
captivity of Sodom and of its cities, and the captivity of Samaria and
its cities, and the captivity of thy captivities*, that is, and the
captivity of all thy land; I will restore you, says he, altogether; but
he speaks ironically, and, as I have said, he shows that God’s taking
pity upon the Jews was impossible. It follows —

<span id="v.liv"></span>

<span id="v.liv-p1"></span><span id="v.liv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:54](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#054)<span id="v.liv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.liv-p2"></span>**54.** That thou mayest bear thine own
shame, and mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou
art a comfort unto them.

<span id="v.liv-p3"></span>**54.** Ut portes probrum tuum, et pudefias
ab omnibus quae fecisti, consolando ipsas.

<span id="v.liv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.liv-p5"></span><span id="v.liv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.liv-p6"></span>Hence we gather from the last verse, that God
gave the Jews no hope of safety, but rather confirms their utter
destruction, so that no future safety was to be hoped for. For he says*,
that you may bear thy reproach and become ashamed*, namely, because they
had sinned grievously, as I have said before, and had not repented of
their wickedness. He adds, *in consoling them.* He speaks after the
ordinary manner of men, since the miserable feel some consolation in
seeing themselves perish among a great multitude. This then is the
consolation of which the Prophet speaks, not that the sorrow of Sodom
and Samaria was mitigated when they saw the Jews joined to themselves,
but, as I have said, God adopts the common language of men. It follows —

<span id="v.lv"></span>

<span id="v.lv-p1"></span><span id="v.lv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055)<span id="v.lv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.lv-p2"></span>**55.** When thy sisters, Sodom and her
daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her
daughters shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy
daughters shall return to your former estate.

<span id="v.lv-p3"></span>**55.** Et sorores tuae Sodoma, et filiae ejus
revertentur ad pristina sua,  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) et
Samaria et filiae, ejus revertentur ad antiquitatem suam,  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) et tu et filiae tuae revertimini ad
pristinum statum.

<span id="v.lv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.lv-p7"></span><span id="v.lv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.lv-p8"></span>A clearer explanation of the former doctrine
now follows, that the Jews, should thus feel God merciful when his mercy
reached Samaria and Sodom; but that never could be done, and hence the
Jews were reduced to despair; for, as I have said, the Prophet argues
from what is impossible and almost absurd. Just as Virgil writes —

<span id="v.lv-p9"></span>*“The inhabitants of seas and skies shall
change,  
And fish on shore, and stags in air shall range:”  
Virgil, Dryden’s, Eclogue 1. V. 60* —

<span id="v.lv-p10"></span>which can never take place: so that it
implies the complete denial of what might seem doubtful. This way of
speaking is proverbial, when Ezekiel says that *the Sodomites and
Israelites should return to their ancient state* or their former
dignity; and that could never be hoped for, as I have said: hence it
follows, that the Jews could not be safe when God draws them into the
same punishment. Besides, the Prophet speaks as if the city should be
cut off and temple overthrown, since the Jews had often been threatened
with this, and he had shown them the wrath of God present before their
eyes. But, although they had always hoped well, yet he despises their
pride by which they were blinded, and utters his prophecies openly as if
God had executed whatever he had threatened. For this reason he says,
*the captivity of thy captivities shall be in the midst of them.* But
they might object, that they enjoyed their country, that they still
cultivated their fields, and had sufficient food for their support
although besieged by their enemies. But the Prophet looked down upon it
all, because before God the city was as it were taken and all were
exiles, since God had not threatened them in vain. Weakness here compels
me to break off.

<span id="v.lvi"></span>

<span id="v.lvi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="v.lvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since in your
inestimable mercy you have deigned to separate us from the profane
nations, and to adopt us into thy family, that we may so conduct
ourselves that you may not treat us as strangers: but while you
acknowledge us as thy sons, may thy Spirit govern us until the end, so
that thy name may be glorified in us, and at length we may be made
partakers of that glory which has been acquired for us through Jesus
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.lvii"></span>

<span id="v.lvii-p1"></span>Lecture Forty-Ninth.

<span id="v.lviii"></span>

<span id="v.lviii-p1"></span><span id="v.lviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:56-57](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#056)<span
id="v.lviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.lviii-p2"></span>**56.** For thy sister Sodom was not
mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,

<span id="v.lviii-p3"></span>**56.** Et non fuit Sodoma soror tua in
sermonem in ore tuo in die superbiarum tuarum,  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147)

<span id="v.lviii-p5"></span>**57.** Before thy wickedness was
discovered, as at the time of *thy* reproach of the daughters of Syria,
and all *that are* round about her, the daughters of the Philistines,
which despise thee round about.

<span id="v.lviii-p6"></span>**57.** Priusquam detegeretur malitia tua
secundum tempus probri filiarum Syriae, et omnium quae in circuitu ejus
sunt filiarum Philistim, quae spreverunt  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) te a circuitu.

<span id="v.lviii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.lviii-p9"></span><span id="v.lviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.lviii-p10"></span>God here blames the Jews because they did
not attend to that remarkable judgment which he had executed against the
Sodomites: for they had always before their eyes what ought to retain
them in the fear of God; for that was a formidable spectacle, as it is
this day. They knew that region to have been like the paradise of God,
as it is called by Moses. (<span id="v.lviii-p10.1"></span>[Ge
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010)<span
id="v.lviii-p10.1"></span>.) Since, then, the fertility and pleasantness
of the place was so great, to see there the lake of sulphur and bitumen
was sufficient material for instructing them, unless they had been
utterly sluggish. But the Prophet says, that there was no mention of
Sodom while the Jews lived happily; and we know that it was a great
crime not to consider God’s judgments, as we read in Isaiah. (<span
id="v.lviii-p10.2"></span>[Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012)<span id="v.lviii-p10.2"></span>.)
Among other things he says, that the Jews and Israelites were so corrupt
that they did not regard God’s works: hence as it is a useful exercise
to consider God’s judgments, yea, this is the chief prudence of the
faithful; so, on the other hand, those who shut their eyes to the
manifest judgments of God are like the brutes. And yet this is a very
common fault, especially when the circumstance here expressed is added,
that profane men do not attend to God’s operations through being
intoxicated by prosperity; for in this passage we have two ways of
explaining the word <span id="v.lviii-p10.3"></span>גאוניך, *gaonik*,
which the Prophet uses for pride or loftiness. Sometimes the word <span
id="v.lviii-p10.4"></span>גאון, *gaon*, is taken in a bad sense, as well
as for sublimity or any high degree of honor. Besides, the Prophet’s
meaning is clear, while things proceeded according to the Jews desires
they were not anxious about rendering an account before God; nay, they
passed by with their eyes shut that memorable example which God designed
for them in Sodom and the neighboring cities. Therefore we should learn
from this passage, when God indulges us, and treats us softly and
delicately, that we must always recall his judgments to mind, that we
may be restrained from all licentiousness, lest prosperity should incite
us to self-indulgence; for such remembrance is most needful. For we know
that nothing is more dangerous than to exult like ferocious horses when
God feeds us in abundance. Hence the remedy must be taken in time that
we may receive instruction from the examples of punishment which we read
in Scripture, or in other histories, or such as we witness with our own
eyes. He adds, *before thy wickedness was discovered*. Here Ezekiel says
that their wickedness was discovered, when it appeared that God was
hostile to their sins; because even then, when their sins could be
pointed out with the finger as notorious throughout Jerusalem, yet the
people gloried in them; just as if an immodest woman, who is the town’s
talk, is saluted honorably by all because she has many admirers to
worship and adore her, and so sets herself above every chase matron: but
if they all reject her, and she is reduced to want, and to foul and
disgraceful ulcers, then all her enormities are made evident. This is
the effect of which the Prophet speaks: *before,* says he*, thy
enormities were discovered*. How so? God, indeed, constantly proclaimed
them ‘by his prophets, and the wickedness of the people was open enough;
but then they also remained as if buried: for they proudly rejected all
the prophetic warnings, and were even restive against God himself: thus
they lay hid under their own hiding-places. But when they became a
laughingstock they were spoiled by their neighbors, and suffered the
extremity of reproach, and then it was apparent that God had rejected
them; for their crimes were detected by punishments, since neither
reproofs nor threats profited them in any way.

<span id="v.lviii-p11"></span>Besides, interpreters explain this of the
slaughter which the Jews suffered in the time of Ahaz. (<span
id="v.lviii-p11.1"></span>[2Ki 16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#000)<span
id="v.lviii-p11.1"></span>.) For then the King of Syria laid waste
almost the whole region, and the citizens of Jerusalem were grievously
fined. The Philistines took advantage of this occasion and made an
irruption: they think, therefore, that the time is pointed out when the
King of Syria made war upon the Israelites, and violently assaulted
Judea. But I know not whether the Prophet looks to the future, as I said
yesterday; for he speaks of punishment at hand, just as if God was
fulfilling what he had already determined. I am inclined to think that
the beginning and the end ought to be united. Hence God begins to
disclose the wickedness of the people from the time when the burning
consumed their neighbors till it reached themselves; for the slaughter
of the tribes of Israel brought upon them many losses, as we know well
enough. But God seems to embrace their ultimate destruction, which was
now at hand. Hence he says, that they had been, and would be, a
laughingstock to the daughters of Syria, and the nations all around, and
also to the daughters of the Philistines. But because they were spoiled
by the Philistines, who took their cities, as the sacred narrative
informs us, it is very suitable thus to explain the word <span
id="v.lviii-p11.2"></span>שאט, *shat*, to despise, in this passage. But
because it signifies to despise, and the Prophet spoke of reproach, he
may repeat the same thing of the Philistines which he had a little
before said of the Syrians. It follows —

<span id="v.lix"></span>

<span id="v.lix-p1"></span><span id="v.lix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:58](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#058)<span id="v.lix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.lix-p2"></span>**58.** Thou hast borne thy lewdness and
thine abominations, saith the LORD.

<span id="v.lix-p3"></span>**58.** Pravas cogitationes tuas,  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) et abominationes tuas, tu portasti ea,
dicit Iehovah.

<span id="v.lix-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.lix-p6"></span><span id="v.lix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.lix-p7"></span>Here God repeats what we saw before, that the
Jews were deprived of all excuse. We know how bold they were in their
expostulations, and how they always cried out when God treated them
severely. Because, therefore, complaints were always flying about from
this proud people, here, as before, God pronounces that they deserved
their sufferings: *you bear*, says he, not any immoderate rigor of which
you falsely accuse me, but *your abominations* and crimes. <span
id="v.lix-p7.1"></span>זמה, *zemeh*, signifies simply purpose, but also
abomination, so that it is better to translate it wickedness or
baseness. Now, therefore, we understand the Prophet’s intention, that
the Jews, indeed, suffered the just reward of their wickedness; and the
penalties which awaited them could not be imputed to God as too severe,
since, if they weighed their enormities, they would be found heavier
than God’s treatment of them. Besides, this verse also embraces the
final destruction of the city and temple; although God at the same time
adds the punishment by which he wished to recall them into the way of
life. It follows —

<span id="v.lx"></span>

<span id="v.lx-p1"></span><span id="v.lx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:59](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#059)<span id="v.lx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.lx-p2"></span>**59.** For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will
even deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath in
breaking the covenant.

<span id="v.lx-p3"></span>**59.** Quia sic dicit Dominator Iehovah, et
faciam tibi quemadmodum fecisti, quae  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) sprevisti jusjurandum ad dissipandum
 <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) foedus.

<span id="v.lx-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.lx-p7"></span><span id="v.lx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.lx-p8"></span>Here, also, God meets the false objection by
which the Jews might strive with him; for whatever they were, yet God
had entered into covenant with them. They might, therefore, fly to this
refuge, that God had bound himself in covenant with them, since he had
adopted Abraham with his seed. Although they had provoked God’s anger a
thousand times, yet this exception remained, that God ought to stand to
his agreement, and not to look at what they had deserved by their
ingratitude, but rather to be consistent with his promises. Now,
therefore, he returns to this cavil, and says that he is free to break
the covenant since they have done so first. *I will do*, says he, *to
thee as thou has done*. We see, therefore, that the calumny is here
repelled by which the Jews could obliquely defame God, as they were
accustomed to do, as if he had rendered his covenant void. He says,
then, that in agreement it is customary for a person, when deceived, no
longer to be necessarily bound to a perfidious breaker of agreements;
for covenanting requires mutual faith: but the Jews had violated their
agreement, and reduced it to nothing. Hence, through their perfidy and
wickedness, God had acquired the liberty of rejecting them, and of no
longer reckoning them among his people. Hence, as in the last verse, he
said that the Jews paid a just penalty; so now, he adds specially, that
he could not be condemned for bad faith in departing from his agreement,
because he had to deal with traitors and covenant-breakers who had
rendered void their agreement: for there is no covenant when either
party declines it. *I will do,* therefore*, to thee as you has done,*
namely, *because you have despised an oath, so as to render the covenant
void* Here God enlarges upon the crime of revolt, because the Jews had
not only dissipated the covenant, but had despised an oath. <span
id="v.lx-p8.1"></span>אלה, *aleh*, signifies both an oath and a curse;
(<span id="v.lx-p8.2"></span>[De
27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#000)<span id="v.lx-p8.2"></span>;) hence
some think that the Prophet here looks to the curses by which the law
was sanctioned, which I willingly adopt. But we must remark what I have
already said, that their criminality is increased, because the Jews had
not only acted falsely, but had also set at naught that solemn oath by
which they had bound themselves. For as God promised that he would be
their God, so Moses stipulated in his name that the people should remain
obedient to him, and they all answered, Amen; (<span
id="v.lx-p8.3"></span>[Le 26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#000)<span
id="v.lx-p8.3"></span>.) A punishment was announced, and such as ought
to have terrified them. For the Jews then to neglect this covenant as a
mere trifle, was the act of brutal stupidity. Whence we see that their
crime was doubled, when the Prophet accuses them of not only being
truce-breakers, but also of wantonly deriding God, and of treating their
own solemn oath, by which they had bound themselves, as a childish
action. It follows —

<span id="v.lxi"></span>

<span id="v.lxi-p1"></span><span id="v.lxi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060)<span id="v.lxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.lxi-p2"></span>**60.** Nevertheless I will remember my
covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto
thee an everlasting covenant.

<span id="v.lxi-p3"></span>**60.** Et memor ero  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) foederis mei tecum diebus
adolescentiae tuae: et stabiliam tibi foedus perpetuum.

<span id="v.lxi-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.lxi-p6"></span><span id="v.lxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.lxi-p7"></span>Because God here promises that he would be
propitious to the Jews, some translate the former verse as if it had
been said, “Shall I do with thee as you have done?” or, I would do as
you have done, unless I had been mindful; but that is too forced in my
opinion. I have no doubt that the Prophet restrains himself, so to
speak, and directs his discourse peculiarly to the elect, of whom we
spoke yesterday. Hitherto he had regarded the whole body of the people
which was abandoned, and hence he put before them nothing but despair.
But he now turns himself to the election of grace, of which Paul speaks,
(<span id="v.lxi-p7.1"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span id="v.lxi-p7.1"></span>;)
and for this reason promises them that God would be mindful of his
covenant, though he would not restore the whole people promiscuously.
For the body on the whole must perish; a small band only was reserved.
We know, therefore, that this promise was not common to all the sons of
Abraham who were his offspring according to the flesh, but it was
peculiar to the elect alone. God therefore pronounces, *that he would be
mindful of his covenant which he had made with that people in their
youth*, by which words he signifies, that his pity should not go forth
except from the covenant. For God always recalls the faithful, as it
were, to the fountain, lest they should claim anything as their right,
or imagine this or that to be the cause of God’s being reconciled to
them. He shows, therefore, that this pity has no other foundation than
the covenant; and this is the reason why he says, *that he would be
mindful of his covenant*. He now adds, *and I will establish a perpetual
covenant with thee.* Here God promises, without obscurity, a better and
more excellent covenant than that ancient one already abolished through
the people’s fault. This passage, then, cannot be understood except of
the new covenant which God has established by the hand of Christ. But
these two clauses are so mutually united that they ought to be carefully
weighed, namely, that God here gives the hope of a new covenant, and yet
teaches us that it originates in the old one already abolished through
the people’s fault. Thus we see that the New Testament flows from that
covenant which God made with Abraham, and afterwards sanctioned by the
hand of Moses. That which is promulgated for us in the Gospel is called
the; New Covenant, not because it had no beginning previously, but
because it was renewed, and better conditions added; for we know that
the Law was abrogated by the New Covenant. Whether it be so or not, the
excellence of the New Testament is not injured, because it has its
source and occasion in the Old Covenant, and is founded on it. It
follows —

<span id="v.lxii"></span>

<span id="v.lxii-p1"></span><span id="v.lxii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061)<span id="v.lxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.lxii-p2"></span>**61.** Then thou shalt remember thy ways,
and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy
younger: and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy
covenant.

<span id="v.lxii-p3"></span>**61.** Et recordaberis viarum tuarum, et
pudefies cum tu assumes sorores tuas majores prae te, et cum minoribus
prae te: et dabo ipsas tibi in filias: et non a foedere tuo.

<span id="v.lxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.lxii-p5"></span><span id="v.lxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.lxii-p6"></span>As God, then, shows that he would not be
merciful to the Jews for any other reason than through being mindful of
his covenant, so now, in return, he informs us what he requires from
them, namely, that they should begin to acknowledge how basely they had
abjured their pledged fidelity — how unworthily they had despised his
law — how impiously obstinate they had been against all his prophets in
deriding their threats, and in being stupid under manifest penalties.
But this passage is worthy of notice, since we gather that none are
capable of obtaining God’s mercy except those who are dissatisfied with
themselves, and, being ashamed and confounded, betake themselves to his
mercy. In fine, we see that God’s grace does not profit the obstinate at
all: it is offered to all in common; but none receive it except those
who condemn themselves, and bear in mind their crimes, so that they are
forgotten before God. If, therefore, we wish our sins to be buried
before God, we must remember them ourselves; if we wish our iniquities
to be blotted out before God and the angels, we must disgrace ourselves;
that is, we must blush and be ashamed of our baseness whenever we
transgress and provoke God’s wrath. Hence we here see that the whole
contents of the Gospel are shortly summed up; for the Gospel contains
nothing else but repentance and faith, as is well known. Concerning
faith, Ezekiel has proclaimed that God, mindful of his covenant, will
become reconciled to the lost; but he now adds an exhortation that they
should acknowledge their faults: but we know that the shame of which the
Prophet speaks is the fruit or part of repentance, as is evident from
Paul’s description of penitence in the seventh chapter of his second
epistle to the Corinthians, (<span id="v.lxii-p6.1"></span>[2Co
7:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009)<span id="v.lxii-p6.1"></span>.)
But we shall have yet to speak on this subject, so that I now hasten
forwards, because what I have hitherto taught cannot be understood until
we come to the end of the verse. He says, *when you shall receive thy
sisters, as well the elder as the younger*; for he does not speak here
of Sodom and Samaria alone,, but of all nations; for all the nations may
properly be called sisters, for all the world was corrupt. Since,
therefore, they were all alike in vices, their union was like that of
relationship. For this reason he says, that when the Jews shall return
to favor, they shall then have a great multitude with them, *who shall
receive their own sisters*; that is, shall collect from all sides an
immense multitude, so that all shall be assembled in obedience to God,
and shall be partakers of the same covenant. If any one object that this
has never been fulfilled, the answer is at hand, that the prophets speak
of the calling of the Gentiles in two ways. They sometimes proclaim it
so as to declare that the Jews and Israelites are the leaders of all the
others, so as to confer upon them the favor and patronage of God. In
that day seven men shall lay hold of the skirt of a single Jew, and
shall say, Lead us to your God, (<span id="v.lxii-p6.2"></span>[Zec
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023)<span id="v.lxii-p6.2"></span>;)
and this was the legitimate order, that the Jews, as first-born, should
join others in alliance to themselves, and thus unite all into one body
and one Church: but because the Jews were cut off through their
ingratitude, the prophets make mention of another calling, that the
Gentiles should succeed in the place of the ungrateful people, as Paul
says that the natural branches were cut off, and that we were grafted in
who belonged to the unfruitful tree. (<span id="v.lxii-p6.3"></span>[Ro
11:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span
id="v.lxii-p6.3"></span>.) The Prophet adds this former reason, *that
the Jews should receive their sisters, both elder and younger*, since
they should collect God’s Church from all nations; and this has been
partly fulfilled. For whence came the Gospel except from this fountain?
as it had been foretold, A law shall go out from Zion, and God’s word
from Jerusalem. (<span id="v.lxii-p6.4"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="v.lxii-p6.4"></span>;
<span id="v.lxii-p6.5"></span>[Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002)<span id="v.lxii-p6.5"></span>.)
Again, in the 110th Psalm, (<span id="v.lxii-p6.6"></span>[Ps
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)<span id="v.lxii-p6.6"></span>,)
Thy scepter shall go forth from Zion; that is, the kingdom of Christ
shall be propagated throughout the whole world: because, therefore,
salvation flowed from the Jews, and the Gospel emanated from thence,
what is here promised was partly fulfilled, namely, that other people
were received by the Jews.

<span id="v.lxii-p7"></span>He now subjoins, *I will give them to thee
for daughters:* for if the Jews had not, by their ingratitude, rejected
the honor of which God had reckoned them worthy, they had always been
the first-born in the Church. Then the Gentiles would have been, as it
were, under a mother, since they were “the primitive Church“ (according
to the language of the day,) and thus they would have obtained the
degree of mother among all nations. Therefore God here deservedly
*pronounces that he would give them, all nations for daughters*, to be
added to the Jews, when the Gentiles were grafted into the same body of
the Church by faith in the Gospel. But he adds, *not from thy covenant*.
Some refer this to ceremonies, since, when the Gentiles were adopted,
they still remained free from the ceremonies of the law; but that is
cold. Others compare this passage with Jeremiah: I will establish a new
covenant with you, not such as I established with your fathers, which
they rendered vain; but this is the covenant which I will make with you,
etc. (<span id="v.lxii-p7.2"></span>[Jer
31:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span
id="v.lxii-p7.2"></span>.) Since, then, it is here said, the *covenant
shall not be according to the covenant of the people*, this is said with
truth, because it will be a New Testament. But such expounders are
partly right, but not wholly so; for a contrast must be understood
between the people’s covenant and God’s. He had said just before, I will
be mindful of my covenant: he now says, *not of thine*. Hence he
reconciles what seemed opposites, namely, that he would be mindful of
his own agreement, and yet it had been dissipated, broken, and
abolished. He shows that it was fixed on his own side, as they say, but
vain on the people’s side. *I will be reconciled, then, but not through
thy covenant*; for there was now no covenant, as Hosea says — Not my
people, not beloved. (<span id="v.lxii-p7.3"></span>[Ho
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009)<span id="v.lxii-p7.3"></span>.)
All the progeny of Abraham were not God’s people, nor all their
daughters beloved: but although the covenant was vain through the
people’s perfidy, yet God overcame their malice, and so he again erected
his own covenant towards them. And when he says, *I will establish a
covenant*, we may explain it, I will set it up again, or restore it
afresh: for we said that the New Testament was so distinguished from the
Old, that it was founded upon it. For what is proposed to us in Christ,
unless what God had promised in the law? and therefore Christ is called
the end of the law, and elsewhere its spirit: for if the law be
separated from Christ, it is like a dead letter: Christ alone gives it
life. Since, therefore, God at this day exhibits to us nothing in his
only-begotten Son but what he had formerly promised in the law, it
follows that his covenant is set up again, and so perpetually
established; and yet this is not man’s part. Wherefore? For men had so
revolted from the faith, that God was free; nay, the covenant itself had
no force, and lost its effect through their perfidy: for it is easy to
collect the points in which the New and Old Testaments are alike, and
those, in which they differ. They have this similarity, that God to this
day confirms to us what he had formerly promised to Abraham, and in no
other sense could Abraham be called the Father of the Faithful.

<span id="v.lxii-p8"></span>Since, therefore, Abraham is at this time
the father of all the faithful, it, follows that our safety is not to be
thought otherwise than in that covenant which God established with
Abraham; but afterwards the same covenant was ratified by the hand of
Moses. A difference must now be briefly remarked from a passage in
Jeremiah, (<span id="v.lxii-p8.1"></span>[Jer
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032)<span id="v.lxii-p8.1"></span>,)
namely, because the ancient covenant was abolished through the fault of
man, there was reed of a better remedy, which is there shown to be
twofold, namely, that God should bury men’s sins, and inscribe his law
on their hearts: that also was done in Abraham’s time. Abraham believed
in God: faith was always the gift of the Holy Spirit; therefore God
inscribed his covenant in Abraham’s heart. (<span
id="v.lxii-p8.2"></span>[Ge 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006)<span
id="v.lxii-p8.2"></span>; <span id="v.lxii-p8.3"></span>[Ro
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003)<span id="v.lxii-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="v.lxii-p8.4"></span>[Eph
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008)<span id="v.lxii-p8.4"></span>.) He
inscribed his law on the heart of Moses and on the rest of the faithful.
This is true: but at first that inner grace was more obscure under the
law, and then it was an additional benefit. It could not therefore be
ascribed to the law that God regenerated his own elect, because the
spirit of regeneration was from Christ, and therefore from the Gospel
and the new covenant. But yet we must remember what I have said, that
the faithful under the ancient covenant were gifted and endowed with a
spirit of regeneration. As far as relates to the remission of sins, it
was still more obscure: for cattle were sacrificed, which could not
acquire salvation for miserable men, nor blot out their sins. Therefore,
if the law is regarded in itself, the promise in the new covenant will
not be found in it: I will not remember thy sins: yet to this day God is
propitious to us, because he promised to Abraham that all nations should
be blest in his seed. (<span id="v.lxii-p8.5"></span>[Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)<span id="v.lxii-p8.5"></span>;
<span id="v.lxii-p8.6"></span>[Ge
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003)<span id="v.lxii-p8.6"></span>,
and <span id="v.lxii-p8.7"></span>[Ge
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#018)<span id="v.lxii-p8.7"></span>.)
We see then that the difference which Jeremiah points out was really
true; and yet the new covenant so flowed from the old, that it was
almost the same in substance, while distinguished in form.

<span id="v.lxiii"></span>

<span id="v.lxiii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.lxiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since your
only-begotten Son has appeared for us, who filled up all the measure of
thy grace, that we may not be ungrateful in despising so inestimable a
boon; but may we embrace with true and sincere faith what you offer us,
namely, the mercy which we always need, and also the spirit of
regeneration; that we may so devote ourselves to thee through a whole
life of obedience, that at length we may arrive at that glory which at
this day: shines upon us as in a mirror, until its fruition shall appear
in heaven, by the same Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.lxiv"></span>

<span id="v.lxiv-p1"></span>Lecture Fiftieth.

<span id="v.lxv"></span>

<span id="v.lxv-p1"></span><span id="v.lxv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:62](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#062)<span id="v.lxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.lxv-p2"></span>**62.** And I will establish my covenant with
thee; and thou shalt know that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="v.lxv-p3"></span>**62.** Et stabiliam ego foedus meum tecum,
et cognosces quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="v.lxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.lxv-p5"></span><span id="v.lxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.lxv-p6"></span>The Prophet here confirms his former
teaching, namely, that although the Jews rendered God’s covenant vain as
far as they possibly could, yet it should be firm and fixed. But we must
hold what I have mentioned, that this discourse is specially limited to
the elect, because the safety of the whole people was already desperate.
Hence God shows that the covenant which he had made with Abraham could
not be abolished by the, perfidy of man. And this is what Paul says in
the third chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, (<span
id="v.lxv-p6.1"></span>[Ro 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span
id="v.lxv-p6.1"></span>,) Even if the whole world were liars, yet God
must always remain true. But we see that the covenant of which we are
now teaching was new, and yet had its origin from the old, because we
are so reconciled to God by Christ that we ought to be grafted into the
body of the ancient Church, and be made sons of Abraham, since, as we
saw before, he is not called the father of the faithful in vain. God
says, therefore, *that his own covenant should be firm with the people*,
not with that people which had been already deserted through its
perfidy, but with the true and genuine children of Abraham, who followed
their father in faith and piety, as it is said in the 102d Psalm, (<span
id="v.lxv-p6.2"></span>[Ps 102:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#018)<span
id="v.lxv-p6.2"></span>,) A people shall be created to the praise of
God. For the Prophet now shows that God’s covenant could not be
otherwise constituted afresh unless a new Church were formed, and God
was to create a new world: for this is the meaning of the words, A
people when created shall praise God. The Spirit, therefore, obliquely
reproves the Israelites, as if he had said that the praises of God were
abolished among them: but when the new people shall come forth, then God
should be glorified. He adds, *and you shall know that I am Jehovah.*
This phrase is often repeated, but in a different sense. For when a
prophet threatened the people, he always added this particle, and thus a
contrast must be understood between the people’s stupidity and good
sense; for all their prophecies were neglected by the people. God’s
servants indeed uttered their voice, and severely blamed the impious and
wicked, but without any effect. Since, therefore, they so wantonly
played with reproaches and threats, it was often said to them, You shall
begin to feel me to be God when I shall cease to speak to you, and shall
instruct you by scourges. But now the Prophet, as we see, preaches
concerning the gratuitous reconciliation of the people with God. Hence
they really felt him to be God, because he stood firm to his promises,
although, through the fault of man, his covenant had fallen to pieces
and become invalid. The Prophet here announces that they should feel God
to be unlike themselves, that is, not to change his counsels, or to vary
with the levity and inconstancy of men: as also it is said in Isaiah, My
thoughts are not as your thoughts: as far as the heavens are distant
from the earth, so are my thoughts distant from yours, and my ways from
your ways. (<span id="v.lxv-p6.3"></span>[Isa.
55:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#009)<span id="v.lxv-p6.3"></span>.) God
here means that the Jews acted wrong in estimating his pity by their own
common sense: for he says that he differed very much from them, since
his pity was unfathomable, and his truth incomprehensible.

<span id="v.lxv-p7"></span>Now, therefore, we understand what the
Prophet means in this verse. In the first clause he pronounces, that the
covenant which God would make with his new and elect people should be
firm: then he adds, that the Jews should know that they were dealing
with God, because they could not take away what God was then promising.
Now we can understand the reason why God’s covenant in Christ was
perpetual: because, as we read in Jeremiah, he inscribed his law on the
hearts of the righteous, and remitted their iniquities. (<span
id="v.lxv-p7.1"></span>[Jer 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span
id="v.lxv-p7.1"></span>.) This, then, was the cause of its perpetuity.
Besides, although the Prophet magnifies God’s grace in the second
clause, yet at the same time he recalls the Jews from every perverse
imagination which might entirely shake their confidence. For when they
thought themselves plunged in an abyss, they were ready to collect that
there was no further remedy. But if God wished to preserve them, why did
he not send them help in time? But when he suffered them to be led into
exile, and to be plunged into the lowest depths, there was no hope of
restoration. For this cause Ezekiel announces that the faithful ought
not to persist in their own thoughts, but rather to raise their minds to
heaven, and to expect what seemed altogether out of place, since they
thought to judge according to the nature of God, and to measure the
effects of his promises by the immensity of his power rather than by
their own perceptions.

<span id="v.lxvi"></span>

<span id="v.lxvi-p1"></span><span id="v.lxvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063)<span id="v.lxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.lxvi-p2"></span>**63.** That thou mayest remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when
I am pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the Lord
GOD.

<span id="v.lxvi-p3"></span>**63.** Ut recorderis, et pudefias, et non
sit tibi amplius apertio oris propter probrum tuum cum propitius fuero
tibi in omnibus quae fecisti, dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="v.lxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.lxvi-p5"></span><span id="v.lxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.lxvi-p6"></span>Ezekiel again exhorts the faithful to
repentance and constant meditation. We have said that these members
cannot be divided, namely, the testimony of grace with the doctrine of
repentance: we have said, also, that this is the substance of the
gospel, that God wishes those to repent whom he reconciles by gratuitous
pardon. For he is appeased by us only when he makes us new creatures in
Christ, and regenerates us by his Spirit; as it is said in Isaiah, God
will be propitious to the people who shall have returned from their
iniquity. (<span id="v.lxvi-p6.1"></span>[Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020)<span id="v.lxvi-p6.1"></span>.)
That promise is restricted to those who do not indulge and revel in sin,
but humble themselves before God, and decide their own salvation to be
impossible without their being severe judges to their own condemnation.
Therefore Ezekiel follows up this point when he says *that you may
remember and be ashamed*. I have said that penitence is not only to be
commended here, but the continual desire for it. And this must be
remarked, because it is troublesome to us to be often shaking off our
sins; and hence we escape as far as we can from the perception of them:
for we desire our own enjoyment, and every one willingly puts his sins
out of sight. Surely if we do look upon them, they first compel us to be
ashamed, and then we are wounded with serious grief; conscience summons
us to God’s tribunal: we then acknowledge the formidable vengeance which
slays even the boldest, unless they are upheld by the assurance of
pardon. Since, then, the acknowledgment of sins brings us both shame and
sorrow, we endeavor to put it far away from us by all means. But no
other way of access to embracing God’s favor is open to us, except that
of repentance of sins. This, then, is the reason why God insists so much
on this point: we do not follow him directly; hence it is not sufficient
to show us what ought to be done, unless God pricks us sharply, and
violently draws us to himself. This passage, then, must be remarked
where the Prophet commands the faithful, after they have obtained
pardon, to remember their sins, for hypocrites are here distinguished
from the true sons of God. Hypocrites boast with swelling words, that
they rely on the mercy of God, and speak mightily of the grace of
Christ, but meanwhile they wish the memory of their sins to remain
buried. On the other hand, we cannot be otherwise truly humble before
God, unless we judge ourselves, as I have said. If we desire, therefore,
our sins to be blotted out before God, and to be buried in the depths of
the sea, as another Prophet says, (<span id="v.lxvi-p6.2"></span>[Mic
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#019)<span id="v.lxvi-p6.2"></span>,)
we must recall them often and constantly to our remembrance: for when
they are kept before our eyes we then flee seriously to God for mercy,
and are properly prepared by humility and fear.

<span id="v.lxvi-p7"></span>The Prophet adds also, *that you may be
ashamed*: for it is not sufficient simply to remember, unless we add the
shame of which the Prophet speaks. For we see that many remember their
faults and confess their sins, but they do it lightly, and as a matter
of duty; nay, they acknowledge them so as to remain in their integrity,
and, as they say, to preserve their credit. But the recognition here
required is accompanied by shame, as Paul, when addressing the faithful,
puts before them their past life thus:

<span id="v.lxvi-p8"></span>“What fruit could you gather from that
course of life.”  
(<span id="v.lxvi-p8.2"></span>[Ro
6:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)<span
id="v.lxvi-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.lxvi-p9"></span>You blush now in truth when so many crimes
are heaped upon you: you were then blind, and wandered in darkness: but
when God shone upon you by the gospel, you acknowledge your baseness and
foulness, from which shame is produced. He now adds, *neither may thou
open thy mouth any more*. It is not surprising if the Prophet uses many
words in explaining one thing which is not obscure in itself. But I have
already shown why he does so, because we are with the greatest
difficulty led on to that shame which the Prophet mentions. We condemn
ourselves indeed verbally at once; but scarcely one in a hundred can be
found so to cast himself down as to sustain willingly the reproach which
he deserves. Since then voluntary submission is not found in man, it is
necessary that we should be impelled more hardly and sharply, as the
Prophet does here. When he says, *there shall be no opening of the
mouth*, he means, that no partial confession of sins shall be exacted by
which men bear witness, and acknowledge themselves liable to God’s
judgment; but a full and entire confession, so that they may be held
convicted on all sides. And this must be diligently noticed. For we see
that the world is always endeavoring to escape God’s sentence by turning
away from it; and since it cannot do this completely, it invents
subterfuges, so as to retain some portion of its innocence.

<span id="v.lxvi-p10"></span>Hence the fiction among the papists of
partial justification: hence also their satisfactions; for they are
compelled, whether they wish it or not, to confess themselves worthy of
death: but afterwards they use the exception, that they have merited
something before from God through their good works, and are not
altogether worthy of condemnation: then they descend to compensations,
and wish to treat with God, as if they could appease him by what they
call works of supererogation. Whatever be the sense, men can scarcely be
found who sincerely and honestly acknowledge that there exists in
themselves nothing but material for condemnation. We confess, as I have
said, that we are guilty before God, but only for one or two faults.
What then does the Holy Spirit here prescribe? *that there should be no
opening of the mouth*; as also Paul says, adopting his form of speech
from this and similar passages. It is often said in the Prophets, Let
all flesh be silent before God, (<span id="v.lxvi-p10.1"></span>[Zec
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013)<span id="v.lxvi-p10.1"></span>;)
but here the Prophet speaks specially of the shame by which God’s
children lie so confused, that they are altogether silent. Paul also
says, that every mouth may be shut, and all flesh humbled before God.
(<span id="v.lxvi-p10.2"></span>[Ro
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)<span id="v.lxvi-p10.2"></span>.)
He afterwards shows that Jews as well as Gentiles were involved in the
same condemnation, and that there was no hope of safety left except
through God’s mercy: he then adds, that God’s justice truly shines forth
when our mouth is stopped, that is, when we do not turn aside and offer
any excuses, as hypocrites divide the merit between God and themselves.
I indeed confess that I have sinned; but why may not my good works come
into the account? why should I be condemned for one fault only? as if
those who violate law do not depart from righteousness. We see, then,
that we are properly humbled when we are silent and do not reproach God,
when we do not quibble or allege first one thing and then another to
extenuate or excuse our fault. God indeed wishes our mouth to be open;
as Peter says, that we are called out of darkness into marvelous light,
to show forth his praises who delivered us. (<span
id="v.lxvi-p10.3"></span>[1Pe 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span
id="v.lxvi-p10.3"></span>.) For this purpose, then, God was merciful to
us, that we might be heralds of his grace. And in this sense, also,
David says, Lord, open you my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy
praise; that is, by giving me material for a song, as he elsewhere says,
He has put a new song into my mouth. (<span id="v.lxvi-p10.4"></span>[Ps
51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015)<span id="v.lxvi-p10.4"></span>;
<span id="v.lxvi-p10.5"></span>[Ps
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003)<span id="v.lxvi-p10.5"></span>.)
God, therefore, opens the mouths or lips of the faithful whenever he is
liberal or beneficent towards them. But he is here treating of the
exceptions of those who would willingly transact business with God, as
if they were not wholly worthy of condemnation. In fine, Ezekiel
signifies that this is the true fruit of penitence when we do not defend
ourselves, but silently confess ourselves convicted. A passage of Paul’s
may possibly be objected as apparently contrary to this of our Prophet,
in which he reckons defense among the effects or fruits of penitence,
(<span id="v.lxvi-p10.6"></span>[2Co
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)<span id="v.lxvi-p10.6"></span>;)
but defense is not here used in our customary sense: for any one who
asserts that he has acted rightly, and so without fault is said to
defend himself. But a defense in Paul’s sense is nothing else but a
prayer against punishment when a sinner comes forward, and after
confessing his fault, begs of God to pardon it, and, as it were, covers
himself with mercy, so that his condemnation is nowhere apparent. We
see, then, that the language of Paul is not in opposition to that of the
Prophet.

<span id="v.lxvi-p11"></span>He now adds, *from thy disgrace*, verbally
from the face of thy disgrace, *when I shall be propitious to thee*. We
again see that these things agree well together, that God buries our
sins and we recall them to memory. For we turn aside his judgment when
we willingly accuse and condemn ourselves. For when conscience is
asleep, it nourishes a hidden fire, which at length emerges into a flame
and lights up God’s wrath. If, therefore, we desire the fire of God’s
wrath to be extinguished, there is no other remedy than to shake off our
sins and to set before our eyes the disgrace which we deserve, and God’s
mercy induces us to this. For we must remark the connection, *when I
shall be propitious to thee, you shall be silent in thy disgrace*. And
surely the more any one has tasted of the grace of God, the more ready
he is to condemn himself, and as unbelief is proud, so the more any one
proceeds in the faith of God’s grace, he is thus humbled more and more
before him. And that is best expressed in the words of the Prophet,
since he teaches that silence is the effect of grace or of gratuitous
reconciliation. When therefore he says, *I shall have been propitious to
thee, then you shall blush that thou may be mute, namely, on account of
thy disgrace.* And we see that the people were so taught by legal
ceremonies to apprehend the mercy of God, and to be touched at the same
time with the serious affection of penitence; for without a victim, God
was never appeased under the law. And now although animals are not
sacrificed, yet when we consider that no other price was sufficient to
satisfy God, except his only-begotten Son poured forth his blood in
expiation, there matter is set before us for embracing the grace of God,
and at the same time we are touched, as the saying is, with the true
affection of penitence. Besides, God amplifies the magnitude of his
grace when he says <span id="v.lxvi-p11.1"></span>לכל אשר עשית, *lekel*
*asher gnesith, on account of all things which, you have done.* For the
people thought not only to feel God merciful, but to examine their
faults, and then to feel how manifold and remarkable was God’s mercy
towards them. For if the people had only been guilty of one kind of sin,
they would have valued God’s grace the less: but when they had been
convicted of so many crimes, as we have seen, hence the magnitude of his
grace became more apparent.  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) Let
us now go on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc23004.htm#fr_63) <span
id="v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p6"></span> Or, “make evident.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc23004.htm#fr_64) <span
id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span> That is, “of your origin or nativity.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc23004.htm#fr_65) <span
id="v.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span> Or “to soften thy flesh:” we shall speak of
this afterwards. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc23004.htm#fr_66) <span
id="v.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span> Verbally, “wrapped in wrappings.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc23004.htm#fr_67) <span
id="v.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span> Or, “contaminated:” some translate “trodden
down,” I know not why. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc23004.htm#fr_68) <span
id="v.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span> Others translate, “ten thousand,” and, <span
id="v.iv-p4.1"></span>רבבה, *rebbeh*, means this, but the other sense is
simpler: I made thee fruitful as the bud of the field. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc23004.htm#fr_69) <span
id="v.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span> “You became great.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc23004.htm#fr_70) <span
id="v.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span> Or rather, “to beauty of beauties; that is,
the greatest beauty.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc23004.htm#fr_71) <span
id="v.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span> Others translate, “swelled or were
prominent.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc23004.htm#fr_72) <span
id="v.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p4"></span> That is, “the skirt of my garments.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc23004.htm#fr_73) <span
id="v.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p5"></span> Or, “shame.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc23004.htm#fr_74) <span
id="v.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p4"></span> Or, “I wiped.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc23004.htm#fr_75) <span
id="v.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p5"></span> Or, “down from thee.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc23004.htm#fr_76) <span
id="v.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p4"></span> Or, “variegated.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc23004.htm#fr_77) <span
id="v.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p5"></span> Or, “purple.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc23004.htm#fr_78) <span
id="v.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p10"></span> Or, “thy nose or nostrils.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc23004.htm#fr_79) <span
id="v.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p11"></span> “These are all to be united together.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc23004.htm#fr_80) <span
id="v.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p14"></span> Or, “silk cloth.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc23004.htm#fr_81) <span
id="v.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p15"></span> Or, “many-colored.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc23004.htm#fr_82) <span
id="v.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p16"></span> That is, “beyond measure.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc23004.htm#fr_83) <span
id="v.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p17"></span> Or, “happily.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc23004.htm#fr_84) <span
id="v.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p4"></span> Or, “on account of thy beauty.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc23004.htm#fr_85) <span
id="v.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p4"></span> Or, “according to thy name.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc23004.htm#fr_86) <span
id="v.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p5"></span> That is, “to whomsoever she met.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc23004.htm#fr_87) <span
id="v.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p4"></span> Or, “tinged with divers colors,” as some
translate. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc23004.htm#fr_88) <span
id="v.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p5"></span> But it is in the feminine gender. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc23004.htm#fr_89) <span
id="v.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p4"></span> That is, “masculine.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc23004.htm#fr_90) <span
id="v.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p4"></span> Or, “has taken.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc23004.htm#fr_91) <span
id="v.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p5"></span> Or, “variated.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc23004.htm#fr_92) <span
id="v.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p6"></span> Namely, “the false gods or lovers.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc23004.htm#fr_93) <span
id="v.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p7"></span> That is, “has offered to them.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc23004.htm#fr_94) <span
id="v.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p10"></span> Or, “had nourished.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc23004.htm#fr_95) <span
id="v.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p4"></span> Or, “has slain them.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc23004.htm#fr_96) <span
id="v.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p5"></span> Or rather, “to consume them.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc23004.htm#fr_97) <span
id="v.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p9"></span> Calvin uses here the appropriate Greek word
<span id="v.xvii-p9.1"></span>στόργη

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc23004.htm#fr_98) <span
id="v.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p11"></span> A passage in Dionysius Halicarnassus
illustrates this idolatrous practice: “And after this, having ordered
that fires should be made before the tents, he brings out the people to
leap over the flames, for the purifying of their pollutions.” — Antiq.
Romans Bk. 1, sect. 88, p. 72, and marg. 75. Edit. Hudson.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc23004.htm#fr_99) <span
id="v.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p4"></span> Verbally, for passing them over to them,
that is, to idols. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc23004.htm#fr_100) <span
id="v.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p6"></span> In every street.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc23004.htm#fr_101) <span
id="v.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p9"></span> Or, “beginning.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc23004.htm#fr_102) <span
id="v.xx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p10"></span> “Thou have poured forth, or opened; but we
may use the proper word, you has spread.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc23004.htm#fr_103) <span
id="v.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p8"></span> Calvin’s Latin adds, “<span
id="v.xxiii-p8.1"></span>ut inhiarent longis et crassis mentulis.” The
Reformer dwells so minutely on the language of the Prophet, that the
refined taste of modern days will not bear a literal translation of some
clauses.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc23004.htm#fr_104) <span
id="v.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p4"></span> Or, “lust.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc23004.htm#fr_105) <span
id="v.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p5"></span> That is, “which were wicked.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc23004.htm#fr_106) <span
id="v.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p4"></span> “Of Assyria.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc23004.htm#fr_107) <span
id="v.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p5"></span> Verbally, “because there was no satisfying
thee.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc23004.htm#fr_108) <span
id="v.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p4"></span> Or, “you has increased.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc23004.htm#fr_109) <span
id="v.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p4"></span> Or, “dissolute.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc23004.htm#fr_110) <span
id="v.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p5"></span> Or. “ruling.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc23004.htm#fr_111) <span
id="v.xxvii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p9"></span> The readers of Shakespeare will readily
translate this into idiomatic English.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc23004.htm#fr_112) <span
id="v.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p4"></span> That is, “presents are accustomed to be
given.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc23004.htm#fr_113) <span
id="v.xxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p5"></span> “From all around.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc23004.htm#fr_114) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p4"></span> That is, “following thee.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc23004.htm#fr_115) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p5"></span> “Understand like your.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc23004.htm#fr_116) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p6"></span> The meaning is the same, the verb <span
id="v.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>הפך, *hephek*, means to overthrow; hence the
noun signifies “inversion,” or “the contrary.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc23004.htm#fr_117) <span
id="v.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p6"></span> Properly “thy money;” but it is taken
metaphorically for “thy lower parts.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc23004.htm#fr_118) <span
id="v.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p7"></span> Or, “nakedness.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc23004.htm#fr_119) <span
id="v.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p10"></span> Or, “I will discover.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc23004.htm#fr_120) <span
id="v.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p11"></span> Or, “thy disgrace.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc23004.htm#fr_121) <span
id="v.xxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p4"></span> Or, “of emulation.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc23004.htm#fr_122) <span
id="v.xxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p5"></span> Or, “of envy.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc23004.htm#fr_123) <span
id="v.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvi-p4"></span> Or, “overthrow.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc23004.htm#fr_124) <span
id="v.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvi-p5"></span> Or, “break down.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc23004.htm#fr_125) <span
id="v.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvi-p6"></span> Or, “of beauty;” that is, “thy precious
furniture.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc23004.htm#fr_126) <span
id="v.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvii-p4"></span> Or, “army.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc23004.htm#fr_127) <span
id="v.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvii-p5"></span> But the noun is superfluous, since <span
id="v.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>רגם, *regem*, signifies to stone to death. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc23004.htm#fr_128) <span
id="v.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxviii-p4"></span> The noun “fire” is redundant. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc23004.htm#fr_129) <span
id="v.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxviii-p5"></span> Or, “they shall execute.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc23004.htm#fr_130) <span
id="v.xlii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlii-p4"></span> “Because.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc23004.htm#fr_131) <span
id="v.xlii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlii-p5"></span> Or, “you have been tumultuous against me.”
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc23004.htm#fr_132) <span
id="v.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlii-p6"></span> “I will put.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc23004.htm#fr_133) <span
id="v.xlii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlii-p7"></span> Others translate, “that you may not execute
thy thought in all your abominations.” Jerome reads it in the first
person, and translates it thus: “I have not fulfilled my thought
according to your abominations,” as if God would praise his own clemency
here in being so moderate in his wrath; but this is altogether foreign
to the subject. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc23004.htm#fr_134) <span
id="v.xlii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.xlii-p12"></span> We must understand the pronoun “thy”
before “head.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc23004.htm#fr_135) <span
id="v.xliii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xliii-p4"></span> “Verbally.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc23004.htm#fr_136) <span
id="v.xliii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xliii-p7"></span> Or, “repudiated, abominated.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc23004.htm#fr_137) <span
id="v.xliii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xliii-p8"></span> I rather think the place corrupt, and that
<span id="v.xliii-p8.1"></span>אחותך, *achothek*, is put for <span
id="v.xliii-p8.2"></span>אחותיך, *achothik*, for it follows — “who have
turned away from their husbands;” and this does not agree with a single
sister: then shortly after the Prophet will say, that the Jews had two
sisters, Sodom and Samaria; and surely what follows cannot be understood
of one woman; for it says, “they have despised their husbands.” —
*Calvin*. Newcome agrees with this emendation of Calvin’s; so also does
Maldonatus, the Jesuit, Comment. in Ezekiel, etc.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc23004.htm#fr_138) <span
id="v.xliv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xliv-p4"></span> “A small matter.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc23004.htm#fr_139) <span
id="v.xlvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlvi-p4"></span> Or, “quiet peace;” others, “abundance of
ease.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc23004.htm#fr_140) <span
id="v.xlvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xlvii-p4"></span> That is, “as I pleased.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc23004.htm#fr_141) <span
id="v.l-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.l-p4"></span> “And they raised themselves up,” for he
comprehends the daughters of Sodom, that is, the neighboring cities. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc23004.htm#fr_142) <span
id="v.l-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.l-p5"></span> That is, “as I pleased and desired.” —
*Calvin.* He repeats <span id="v.l-p5.1"></span>[Eze
16:50](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#050)<span id="v.l-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc23004.htm#fr_143) <span
id="v.lii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.lii-p4"></span> Or, “thou was abominable.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc23004.htm#fr_144) <span
id="v.lii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.lii-p5"></span> “Even thou.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc23004.htm#fr_145) <span
id="v.lv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.lv-p4"></span> “To their ancient state.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc23004.htm#fr_146) <span
id="v.lv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.lv-p5"></span> That is, “to their former state.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc23004.htm#fr_147) <span
id="v.lviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.lviii-p4"></span> Or, “loftiness.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc23004.htm#fr_148) <span
id="v.lviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.lviii-p7"></span> Or, “have seized.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc23004.htm#fr_149) <span
id="v.lix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.lix-p4"></span> Or, “your enormities.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc23004.htm#fr_150) <span
id="v.lx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.lx-p4"></span> Or, “because.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc23004.htm#fr_151) <span
id="v.lx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.lx-p5"></span> Or, “that you should render vain” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc23004.htm#fr_152) <span
id="v.lxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.lxi-p4"></span> Or, “I shall yet be, mindful,” for the
copula ought to be resolved into the adversative particle. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc23004.htm#fr_153) <span
id="v.lxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.lxvi-p12"></span> In commenting on this chapter, Calvin
takes occasion to explain the gospel doctrines of justification, faith,
and repentance, and refers to the adverse fictions of the papacy. This
interesting subject is fully treated by Bishop Davenant in his <span
id="v.lxvi-p12.1"></span>Disputatio de justitia habituali et actuali,
delivered when professor of divinity at the University of Cambridge
(1631). The English translation by the Revelation Josiah Allport, 1844,
is a most valuable work, and treats largely on this and all collateral
subjects. His “Determinationes,” edit. 1634 and 1639, may also be
consulted: with Penrose on the Atonement, 1843; and St. Bernard’s Sermon
on <span id="v.lxvi-p12.2"></span>[Isa.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002)<span id="v.lxvi-p12.2"></span>.
Oecolampadius, on <span id="v.lxvi-p12.3"></span>[Eze
16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055)<span id="v.lxvi-p12.3"></span>,
is copious, spiritual, and practical; and Maldonatus gives the sense of
the Hebrew remarkably well and with great consistency, though he adds no
practical comments. Theodoret and Jerome are both very explanatory,
especially on <span id="v.lxvi-p12.4"></span>[Eze
16:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#045)<span id="v.lxvi-p12.4"></span>.
See Dissertations at the end of this volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](cc23005)
