[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc23007)  [Next](cc23009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 23: Ezekiel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 20

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass in the seventh
year, in the fifth *month*, the tenth *day* of the month, *that* certain
of the elders of Israel came to inquire of the LORD, and sat before me.

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit anno septimo, quinto mense,
decimo mensis venerunt viri e senioribus Israel ad consulendum Jehovam:
et sederunt coram facie mea.  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255)

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span><span id="ix.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>Here he does not narrate a vision but an event
which really happened. It is a simple historical narrative, that some of
the elders of Israel were chosen to interrogate him. We know this to be
customary, and when God separates His people from the profane nations,
he opposes his prophets to the soothsayers and magi, augurs and
astrologers. For he says that the Gentiles inquire what concerns them in
various ways, and so interrogate their deities; but that he prescribes
to the chosen people but one method: I will raise for them a prophet
from the midst of their brethren, says Moses, (<span
id="ix.i-p7.1"></span>[De 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018)<span
id="ix.i-p7.1"></span>;) that is, they need not wander about, like the
wretched gentiles, destitute of counsel, first to their soothsayers,
then to magi, and then to astrologers: there is no end to them’ but I
will meet them, says he, by my prophets, who shall always exist among
the people. In this sense Ezekiel says *that the elders of Israel came
to consult God.* The verb, <span id="ix.i-p7.2"></span>דרש, *deresh*,
properly signifies “to seek” but it is here received for “to consult” or
“inquire into,” as in many other places. Now it is not surprising that
the elders came by public consent to the Prophet: for the Israelites
were already worn out by long weariness, and thought that they had
almost perished through their long exile. But there was another reason,
since false prophets, as we saw, tickled the ears of the simple by
offering them daily some new hope. Since therefore they were agitated
between hope and fear, and the devil scattered false prophecies which
distracted the minds of the vulgar, it is probable that the elders of
Israel came and were sent to inquire concerning either the prosperous or
disastrous event of their captivity. They come therefore to the
prophets; he says *it happened in the seventh year*, that is, after the
captivity of Jehoiakim. They reckoned the years from that change, and
deservedly so: for so remarkable an act of God’s vengeance ought to be
kept constantly in remembrance. There was also another reason, since God
gave some hope of restoration. The reckoning of the years, then, which
the Israelites dated from Jehoiakim’s exile, had a twofold use and end,
first, that God’s judgment might remain fixed in their minds, and next,
that they might nevertheless refresh their spirits by the hope of good.
Hence as often as they dated the first year or the second, it was just
as if they kept before their eyes that slaughter by which God testified
himself grievously offended. But for another reason they ought to cheer
their spirits by good hopes, because if the kingdom had been utterly
abolished and no promise added to lighten their sorrow, that reckoning
was superfluous, since in a state of desperation we do not take an
account of years: but when seventy years were fixed, they nourished and
cherished hope in this way, because they renewed the remembrance of
their liberty, which had been promised them by the mouth of Jeremiah.
(<span id="ix.i-p7.3"></span>[Jer.
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#013)<span id="ix.i-p7.3"></span>, and
<span id="ix.i-p7.4"></span>[Jer
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)<span id="ix.i-p7.4"></span>.)
Now therefore we understand why he simply says the *seventh year* he
mentions also the day and the month.

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>Now the Clause which I have noticed contains
some useful instruction, — *the elders of Israel came to consult God and
sat before the Prophet*. We see, then, as far as concerns outward forms,
that they followed what God had commanded in his law; lest you should
say, Who shall ascend above the clouds? who shall descend into the
abyss? who shall cross the sea? The word is ever there, in thy heart and
in thy mouth. (<span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>[De
30:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)<span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p8.2"></span>[Ro
10:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span id="ix.i-p8.2"></span>.)
Since therefore God in some way brought himself forward whenever he
instructed his servants by the spirit of prophecy, so when the elders of
Israel came to the Prophet, they are said to come to God himself,
because God was unwilling to utter his own oracles either from heaven or
by means of angels, but he appointed his servant by whom he would speak,
and suggested what he should say. Hence we gather that our faith is not
rightly founded unless when we listen to God alone, who only deserves
and claims us as listeners. But at the same time, we must remark that
faith was joined with humility and modesty. Hence if any one desires to
ascend to the clouds to inquire what God will answer, he departs far
from him, although he pretends to approach him. Hence this moderation is
to be observed, that our faith may acquiesce in the authority of the one
God, and not be carried hither and thither by the will of men; and yet
it should not object to here God speak through his servants, but calmly
submit itself to the prophets. It now follows —

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#002)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Then came the word of the LORD unto
me, saying,

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad me dicendo,

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span>**3.** Son of man, speak unto the elders of
Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Are ye come to
inquire of me? *As* I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will not be inquired
of by you.

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>**3.** Fili hominis, loquere ad seniores
Israel, et dic illis, Sic dicit Dominator Iehovah, An ad quaerendum me,
 <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) venistis? Vivo ego si quaerar a
vobis, dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span><span id="ix.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span>Here the Prophet is ordered to blame those
elders, although they pretended to rare piety in inquiring of him: God
says that they did not come with a right disposition. Many translate
otherwise — if I shall be found, or be en-treated by you, or if I shall
answer: thus they take the word, <span id="ix.ii-p9.1"></span>דרש,
*deresh*, in a double sense: in the first clause, for to seek or
interrogate; but when it is added, as I live, etc., they do not take the
word by “to be sought” or “interrogated,” but by “to answer” or “be
entreated.” But this seems far-fetched and in <span
id="ix.ii-p9.2"></span>[Eze 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003)<span
id="ix.ii-p9.2"></span>, a phrase not unlike this was explained; and
hence we may gather, that God rather inveighs against the people’s
hypocrisy than rejects them, and refuses to answer. There the Prophet
said that the elders came to consult him, as if they had been his best
disciples; but as Ezekiel might be deceived by that deceptive picture,
God meets him, and says, Do you think that they come to inquire of me?
They are fixed upon their idols; for their heart is towards them, and
they raise their eyes to their own abominations: As I live, if they seek
me, says he; that is, it is easy to convict them of bad faith, when they
come suppliantly to inquire of thee. For if they truly and heartily
sought me, they would renounce their idols, and would no longer partake
of their abominations; but they do not repent, but remain obstinate in
their wickedness. It is certain, therefore, that they are by no means
sincere: there is no reason why you should delay them, or trouble
yourself about them, since their conduct is mere dissimulation. So,
therefore, in this passage God pronounced by his Prophet, *are you come
to seek me?* that is, to consult me. *I will not be inquired of by you,*
says he: the reason is, because, as we saw in the <span
id="ix.ii-p9.3"></span>[Ezekiel
14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#000)<span id="ix.ii-p9.3"></span>th,
they always remained the same, since therefore they were at the greatest
distance from God, and remained wrapped up in their own abominations,
their seeking God was only fallacious. The conclusion is, that God
rejected them, because, though they pretended a holy zeal, they were
still perverse in their disposition; hence God refuses to discharge the
office of a master towards them since they did not come to learn: this
is one point. He then says, *if I shall be inquired of by you*. And
because their hypocrisy was stained by various colors, God swears that
their disposition was perverse, and that they did not come with pious
and holy affections, and were neither docile nor obedient, nor desirous
of making progress, and hence were unworthy of having him for a teacher.
Now let us go on.

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#004)<span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>**4.** Wilt thou judge them, son of man,
wilt you judge *them*? cause them to know the abominations of their
fathers:

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>**4.** An judicabo eos? an judicabo eos,
fili hominis? abominationes patrum ipsorum indica  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) illis.

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span><span id="ix.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>The context flows very well if we embrace
this sense, that God swears that the Israelites did not come to be
subject to his Prophet, and to submit themselves modestly to his
instructions. If this sense pleases, it is well added, *shall you judge
them?* that is, shall you spend thy breath in arguing with them? He
means that they are rather to be dismissed than instructed; as Christ
says, *You shall not cast pearls before swine.* (<span
id="ix.iii-p7.1"></span>[Mt 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span
id="ix.iii-p7.1"></span>.) And we know what God pronounces: My Spirit
shall not always strive with man, because he is flesh. (<span
id="ix.iii-p7.2"></span>[Ge 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)<span
id="ix.iii-p7.2"></span>.) He now means that there was no need of any
dispute, since there was no means of carrying it on; so in this passage,
since the Prophet was dealing with men utterly broken down, who never
listened to wise counsels, nor obeyed any admonitions, nor were softened
by any chastisement, he adds, therefore, *shall you judge them?* Some
indeed coldly and insipidly explain this of taking away the part of a
judge, since God rather wishes them to be called to repentance than to
be condemned. But here *judging* embraces within itself all reproaches
and threats. On the whole, since they acted deceitfully, and by no means
proposed to submit themselves to God, hence he uses this bitterness,
What! are they worthy of your judging them? that is, of your contending
with them? for the Prophet’s duty is to argue with sinners, to threaten
them, and to cite them to God’s tribunal. God, therefore, pronounces
them unworthy of such disputing, because they are not only deaf, but,
hardened by abandoned obstinacy. Now, therefore, we understand the sense
of the words, *wilt you judge them? will you judge them?* The repetition
is emphatic, that God may strongly express the obstinacy of that
desperate people. He afterwards adds, *If this be done, then show them
the abominations of their fathers*. God here mitigates the asperity
which he had used, and by means of a correction descends to a reason for
it, namely, that he may for once try whether or not they are curable. If
then they are to be judged, that is, if he chooses to enter into any
dispute, and to argue with them, he says that he ought to begin not with
themselves, but with their fathers. God wishes them to be judged, not
only on account of the wickedness of a few years, but because before
they were born their fathers were obstinately attached to their
abominations. In fine, God shows that the wound was deep, and could not
be cured, unless the hidden poison was carefully examined, which
otherwise would cause putrid matter, from which at length inflammation
would arise. For many think that they have properly discharged their
duty when they have but lightly probed their wounds: but sometimes it is
necessary to penetrate to the inmost parts, as the people had not only
provoked God lightly, and for a short time, but their impiety had been
growing for ages, and their sins had become a kind of inheritance to
them. Since, then, this hidden poison existed, which could not be cured
either easily or by any slight remedy, hence God orders them to begin
with their fathers. *Show them, therefore, the abominations of their
fathers*. It follows —

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**5.** And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
GOD; In the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up mine hand unto the
seed of the house of Jacob, and made myself known unto them in the land
of Egypt, when I lifted up mine hand unto them, saying, I *am* the LORD
your God;

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>**5.** Et dices illis, Sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah, Die quo elegi Israelem, et sustuli manum meam ad semen domus
Iacob, et cognitus fui illis in terrae Ægypti, et sustuli manum meam
illis dicendo, Ego Iehovah Deus vester;

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span>**6.** In the day *that* I lifted up mine
hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of Egypt into a land
that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, which *is* the
glory of all lands:

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span>**6.** Die illo sustuii manum meam ad ipsos,
ut educerem eos e terra Ægypti in terram quam prospexi illis fluentem
lacte et melle, desiderium  <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) prae
omnibus terris:

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span>**7.** Then said I unto them, Cast ye away
every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with
the idols of Egypt: I *am* the LORD your God.

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span>**7.** Et dixi illis, Quisque spurcitias
oculorum suorum projicite et in idolis  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) Ægypti ne polluamini: ego Iehovah Deus
vester.

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span>**8.** But they rebelled against me, and
would not hearken unto me: they did not every man cast away the
abominations of their eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt:
then I said, I will pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger
against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span>**8.** Et rebelles fuerunt mihi, et
noluerunt audire me, et quae sequuntur.

<span id="ix.iv-p12"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p13"></span><span id="ix.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p14"></span>God confirms what I said before, that the
Jews were not to be reproved for beginning lately to sin: it was not
sufficient to bring recent offenses before them; but God orders the
Prophet to begin with their fathers, as if he had said that the nation
was abandoned from the very beginning, as Stephen reproaches them:
Uncircumcised in heart, you still resist the Holy Spirit, as your
fathers always did. (<span id="ix.iv-p14.1"></span>[Ac
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)<span id="ix.iv-p14.1"></span>.)
And Christ had said the same thing before: You fill up the measure of
your fathers. (<span id="ix.iv-p14.2"></span>[Mt
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#032)<span id="ix.iv-p14.2"></span>.)
We know also how frequently rebukes of this kind occur in the Prophets.
God therefore says, that from the time when he chose the seed of Israel,
he had experienced both the wickedness and obstinacy of the people; for
he says that they were not drawn aside by either error or ignorance, but
because they were unwilling to hear, when they were over and over again
admonished as to their duty. Hence three things are to be marked,
namely, that the people were bound to God, since he had gratuitously
adopted them; for God here commends his gratuitous election, together
with the singular benefits which he had conferred on that people: this
is one point. The second is, that he not only took them once to himself,
but showed them what was right, so that they could not mistake, except
knowingly and willfully: this is the second point. Then the third is,
that they rebelled purposely, because they would not listen: for if they
had been left at the meeting of two roads, their error had been
excusable if they had turned to the left instead of the right. But if
God by his law so shone before them, that he was prepared to direct them
straight to the mark, and they turned aside; thus their obstinacy and
rebellion is plainly detected. This is the sense.

<span id="ix.iv-p15"></span>Now as far as words are concerned, he says,
*that he had chosen Israel.* But election, as I have already briefly
touched upon, is opposed to all merits: for if anything had been found
in the people which should cause them to be preferred to others, it
would be improperly said that God had elected them. But since all were
in the same condition, as Moses says in his song (<span
id="ix.iv-p15.1"></span>[Deut. 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv-p15.1"></span>,)
there was scope for God’s grace, since he separated them from others of
his own accord: for they were just like the rest, and God did not find
any difference between them; we see, then, that they were bound to God
more sacredly, since he had joined them to himself gratuitously. He now
adds, *that he lifted up his hand to the seed of Jacob.* The lifting up
the hand seems to be taken here in different senses. Since it was a
customary method of swearing, God is said sometimes to lift up his hand
when he swears. That is indeed harsh, since the lifting up the hand does
not suit God: for we lift up the hand when we call God to witness; but
God swears by himself, and cannot raise his hand above himself. But we
know that he uses forms of speech according to the common customs of
men: hence there is nothing absurd in this phrase, *he lifted up his
hand,* that is, he swore. Hence, if we may so explain it, this was a
confirmation of the covenant, when God by interposing a oath promised
himself to be Israel’s God. But since he shortly afterwards adds, *that
he was known,* the other sense suits pretty well, since it refers to the
benefits which he had conferred upon the people. And truly experimental
knowledge is intended, since God really proved himself to be worthy of
credit, and thus illustrated his own power in preserving the people.
Hence I said that to lift up the hand is to be received variously in
this chapter, since, if we read the two clauses conjointly, *I lifted up
my hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob, and was made known to
them*, truly the lifting up the hand will imply a display of power. That
also has been said by means of a simile; but shortly afterwards the
lifting up of the hand must be taken for to swear, by the figure of
rhetoric called catachresis, which is the use of a word in a different
signification, and yet there is no absurdity.

<span id="ix.iv-p16"></span>I have raised my hand, therefore, to the
seed of the house of Jacob, saying, I Jehovah am your God. (<span
id="ix.iv-p16.1"></span>[Eze 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#005)<span
id="ix.iv-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.iv-p17"></span>We see, then, that God raised his hand to
sanction the covenant which he had made; for when he pronounces himself
their God, he binds them to himself, and claims them for his peculiar
people, and thus confirms his covenant. But at the same time he had
raised his hand or arm by so many miracles performed in freeing the
people. He says*, in that day I raised my hand to, or towards them, to
bring them out.* Again, the raising the hand refers to God’s power,
since he brought them forth by an extended arm from that miserable
slavery. Since, therefore, he so raised his hand, he acquired them as
his own, that they should no longer be free, but belong altogether to
him. He afterwards adds other benefits, since he not only snatched them
from the tyranny of Pharaoh, *but brought them into a land flowing with
milk and honey, which he had espied for them.* We see how briefly God
enlarges upon that remarkable benefit which he had bestowed upon his
people. Not only was he their Redeemer, but he looked out for a place of
residence for them, not only commodious, but abounding with plenty; for
this phrase is common enough with Moses. *In that same day in which I
led them out of Egypt, I brought them into a land, the desire of all
lands;* that is, which is desirable and superior to all other lands. It
is true, indeed, that other nations were not less fruitful; but God, in
thus praising the land of Canaan. considers it, clothed and adorned by
his bounty. But there was no region under heaven to be compared with the
land of Canaan in one point, namely, God’s choosing it as his earthly
dwelling place. Since the land of Canaan excelled all others in this
respect, it is deservedly called the desire of all lands, or desirable
beyond all lands.

<span id="ix.iv-p18"></span>Another clause now follows, that God
instructed the Jews in piety, and withdrew them from all the idolatries
to which they had been devoted. Instruction then went before, which
showed them the right way of salvation, and recalled them from their
superstitions. The meaning is, that when God adopted the people, he gave
them the rule of living piously, that they should not be tossed about
hither and thither, but. have an aim, to which they might direct the
whole course of their life. *I said,* therefore*, to each of them*: this
seems more emphatic than if he had spoken to all promiscuously and
generally: but this familiar invitation ought to penetrate more into
their minds, when he speaks to each individually, just as if he said,
let each of you cast away your abominations, and *not pollute himself
anymore with the idols of Egypt*. When therefore God thus attached them
to himself, he shows that he could not be rightly worshipped by them
unless they bid their idolatries farewell, and formed their whole life
according to the rule of his law. He calls their enticements defilements
or idols of the eyes: but we know that the Prophet often speaks thus,
that unbelievers should consider their idols. Hence it is just as if God
recalled them from all the wiles of Satan in which they were enticed,
and were so devoted to them as to have their eyes exclusively fixed on
them. He speaks by name of the idols of Egypt: whence it easily appears
that they were corrupted by depraved desires, so as for the most part to
worship the fictitious gods of Egypt. Yet they knew themselves elected
by the true God, and boasted in circumcision as a symbol of divorce from
all nations. Yet though they wished to be thought illustrious on the one
hand, they afterwards prostituted themselves so as to differ in nothing
from the Egyptians. We see then that the desire of piety was almost
extinct in their hearts, since they had so contaminated themselves with
the superstitions of Egypt. That he might retain them the better, he
says at the same *time that he was their God*: for without this
principle men are tossed hither and thither, for we know that we are
lighter than vanity. Hence the devil will always find us subject to his
fallacies unless God restrains us in our duty, until he appears to us
and shows himself the only God: we see then the necessity for this
remedy, lest men should be carried away by idolatries, namely, the
knowledge of the true God. The third clause will follow afterwards, but
we shall explain it in its turn.

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have once
stretched forth your hand to us by your only-begotten Son, and have not
only bound thyself to us by an oath, but have sealed your eternal
covenant by the blood of the same, thy Son: Grant, I pray thee, that we
in return may be faithful to thee, and persevere in the pure worship of
thy name, until at length we enjoy the fruit of our faith in thy
heavenly kingdom by the same Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-First.

<span id="ix.vi-p2"></span><span id="ix.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p3"></span>In the last lecture I began to explain the
eighth verse, where God complains that he was exasperated by the
children of Israel when he had begun to extend his hand to free them. He
says, then, that they had rejected his grace. But at the same time we
see that all pretense of ignorance was removed, because unless Moses had
exhorted them to good hope, they would have pretended. to be so deserted
through two centuries, that they had hoped for help from God in vain.
But since Moses was a witness of their redemption, hence their
ingratitude was the more without excuse, since they were unwilling to
embrace the message which they had so greatly desired. Nor is the
language of Moses vain, that they often cried out in their calamities.
Although their clamor was turbulent, yet they doubtless remembered what
they had heard from their fathers, that the end of those evils was at
hand to which God had fixed an appointed time. But more is expressed in
this passage than Moses relates, who simply says, because they saw
themselves treated too roughly, that they were worn down and disgusted:
hence those expostulations — You have made our name to stink before
Pharaoh: God shall judge between you and us: Judea you gone from us.
(<span id="ix.vi-p3.1"></span>[Ex
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#021)<span id="ix.vi-p3.1"></span>.) We
do not then clearly collect from Moses that they were rebels against
God, since they had not cast away their idols and superstitions, but the
probable conjecture is that they were, so rooted in their filth, that
they repelled God’s hand from succoring them. And truly if they had
promptly embraced what Moses had promised them in God’s name, the
accomplishment would have been readier and swifter: but we may
understand that their sloth was the hindrance to the exertion of God’s
hand in their favor and to the real fulfillment of his promises. God
ought indeed to contend, with Pharaoh, that his power might be more
conspicuous: but the people would not have been so tyrannously
afflicted, unless they had closed the door against God’s mercy. They
were, as we have said, immersed in their defilement’s from which God
wished to withdraw them. He now accuses them of ingratitude*, because
they did not cast away their idols,* but obstinately persisted in their
usual and customary superstitions. He speaks of the time of their
captivity in Egypt, and this passage assures us that while there they
were infected and polluted by Egyptian defilement’s. For the contagion
of idolatry is wonderful: for since we are all naturally inclined to it
as soon as any example is offered to us, we are snatched in that
direction by a violent impulse. It is not surprising then that the
children of Israel contracted pollution from the superstitions of Egypt,
especially as they lived there as slaves, and were desirous of
gratifying the Egyptians: for if they had been treated liberally, they
might have lived freely after their custom, but since they were not free
and were oppressed as slaves, it happened that they pretended to worship
the gods of Egypt according to the will of those by whom they saw
themselves oppressed: and not only did they sin by pretending, but it is
probable that they were impelled by their own lusts as well as by fear:
for it will soon be evident that they were too inclined to impiety of
their own accord.

<span id="ix.vi-p4"></span>On the whole, Ezekiel here testifies that
they were rebels against God, *because they did not listen to God by
casting away the idols of their eyes,* that is, to the worship of which
they were too attentive, *nor did they desert the idols of Egypt.* When
he speaks of *the idols of their eyes*, we gather what I have touched
upon, that they were not impelled to idolatry by fear and necessity, but
by their own depraved appetites: For unless they had been eagerly
devoted to Egyptian superstitions, Ezekiel would not have called them
idols of the eyes. Hence by this word he means that they were not only
superstitious through obedience to the Egyptians, but were spontaneously
inclined towards them. Besides, when he adds *the idols of Egypt*, he
points out as the occasion of their corruption their spending time under
that tyranny, and their being compelled to bear many evils, since
slavery commonly draws with it dissimulation. It now follows*, And I
said I would pour forth*, that is, I determined to pour forth. God here
signifies that he was inflamed by anger, and unless they had respect to
his name he would not withdraw his hand from the vengeance to which it
was armed and prepared. We know that this does not properly belong to
God, but this is, the language of accommodation, since first of all, God
is not subject to vengeance, and, secondly, does not decree what he may
afterwards retract. But since these things are not in character with
God, simile and accommodation are used. As often as the Holy Spirit uses
these forms of speech, let us learn that they refer rather to the matter
in hand than to the character of God. God determined to pour forth his
anger, that is, the Israelites had so deserved it through their crimes,
that it was necessary to execute punishment upon them. The Prophet
simply means that the people’s disposition was sinful, and hence God’s
wrath would have been poured out, unless he had been held back from some
other cause. I have already touched upon the obstacle, because he
consulted his honor *lest it should be profaned.*

<span id="ix.vi-p5"></span>*I have decreed,* therefore, *to pour forth
my burning fury upon them in the midst of the land of Egypt*. Some
translate, to consume them, but improperly, for the word, <span
id="ix.vi-p5.1"></span>כלה, *keleh,* signifies to fill up or accomplish,
as well as to consume. But although God sometimes says that he consumes
all his weapons or scourges in the punishment of men’s sins, yet it is
not suitable to transfer this to his wrath itself. Hence another sense
will suit better, namely, that *God decreed to pour out his wrath* until
he satisfied himself. For here, as we have said, he puts on the
character of an angry man, who cannot appease his mind otherwise than by
satiating it by the exaction of punishment: for anger is usually
inexhaustible. But God on the whole here expresses that such was the
atrocity of their wickedness, that the Israelites deserved destruction
through the pouring forth of God’s wrath and the filling up of the
measure of his indignation; *and that in the midst of the land of
Egypt;* because they had shown themselves unworthy of his redemption,
and hence it was enough for them to perish in the midst of the land of
Egypt. But he afterwards added —

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span><span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#009)<span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>**9.** But I wrought for my name’s sake,
that it should not be polluted before the heathen, among whom they
*were*, in whose sight I made myself known unto them, in bringing them
forth out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span>**9.** Et feci propter nomen meum ne
profanaretur in oculis gentium, in quibus ipsi in medio eorum, quibus
cognitus fui ipsis in oculis eorum, ad educendum eos e terra Ægypti.

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.vii-p5"></span><span id="ix.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p6"></span>Here God signifies that he was restrained
for one reason only from entirely blotting out so ungrateful and wicked
a nation, namely, since he saw his own sacred name would be exposed to
the Gentiles as a laughing-stock. He teaches, therefore, that he spared
them, and suspended his rigor for the time, rather through being induced
by regard to his own glory than by pity to them. Hence, by the word *I
did it,* we ought to understand what will be more clearly explained. The
sense is, that he abstained from the final act of vengeance for his
name’s sake, that it should not be profaned among the Gentiles. Although
God here pronounces that he had respect rather to himself than to them,
yet there is no doubt that he spared them, because he saw that they
could not be otherwise preserved than by his pardoning them even in such
hardness and obstinacy; and certainly God’s glory and the salvation of
the Church are things almost inseparably united. When I speak of the
salvation of the Church, I do not comprehend all those who profess to be
its members, but I mean only the elect. Since, therefore, God had
adopted that nation, he must preserve the remnant in safety, otherwise
his truth would have failed, and thus his name would have been much more
severely profaned. Hence we may gather, whenever God pardons us, though
he regards himself, and wishes in this way to exercise his clemency, yet
his pity towards us is another reason for his pardoning us: but when he
says that he has withdrawn his hand from vengeance through regard for
His own glory, he in this way prostrates still more the pride of this
nation, since, whenever he had pity on them, they thought it a
concession to their own worthiness and merits. The Prophet therefore
shows here that they were snatched from destruction, while they were
remaining in the land of Egypt, for no other reason than this, that God
was unwilling to expose his name to the contempt of the nations. He
says, therefore, *in the eyes of the Gentiles, among whom they were,*
regarding not the Egyptians only, but others.

<span id="ix.vii-p7"></span>Yet the question arises, in what sense, he
adds by and by, *that he was known to them?* for as yet he had given no
specimen of his power among the Gentiles. He had borne witness by two
miracles that Moses should be the agent in their redemption, (<span
id="ix.vii-p7.1"></span>[Ex 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#002)<span
id="ix.vii-p7.1"></span>, and following:) afterwards Moses approached
Pharaoh himself: there God put forth the signs of his power, which
deservedly frightened all the Egyptians; but his fame had not yet
reached other nations. But this knowledge ought not to be simply
restricted to past time; for God only means that he had already begun to
show, by certain and remarkable proofs, that Moses was chosen, by whose
hand he wished to redeem his own people. Since, therefore, God had.
already come forward with those remarkable signs, he says, *that he was
known to those nations*, not that his fame had reached them, but because
he had gone there himself, so that the event could not be in obscurity,
and all must know that miracles had been performed by the hand of Moses,
by which it was evident that he wished to claim the Israelites as his
own. Now, therefore, we understand in what sense Ezekiel says *that God
was known*. Some explain this relatively thus: I was known to them,
meaning the Israelites, in their eyes, meaning the Gentiles: but this
sense seems to me forced; for in my opinion this one word “their,” in
the Prophet’s language, is superfluous. He simply means that God was
manifested in the eyes of all the nations *in leading them forth*. This
clause shows the kind of knowledge intended, since God showed his power
in liberating the people by remarkable miracles. It follows —

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span><span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#010)<span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span>**10.** Wherefore I caused them to go forth
out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness.

<span id="ix.viii-p3"></span>**10.** Et eduxi (*eduxi ergo*) eos e terra
AEgypti, et adduxi in desertum.

<span id="ix.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.viii-p5"></span><span id="ix.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p6"></span>After Ezekiel had taught that the
Israelites deserved to perish in Egypt, unless God had spared them for
his name’s sake rather than for their own, he now adds the cause of
their coming forth, which was the promotion of his own glory. Hence,
therefore, we gather that the Israelites falsely imagined any other
cause of their deliverance than that respect of which the Prophet now
speaks. But this is more than if he had simply said that they were
snatched from the tyranny of Egypt by God’s gratuitous pity, since God
gratuitously stretched out his hand towards them, and was so induced by
feelings of humanity and clemency as to snatch away from their miseries
the innocent who were unjustly afflicted; but he here excludes them from
God’s clemency, because they were unworthy of his notice. I said,
indeed, that two things were united, the salvation of the Church and the
glory of God; but at the same time I noticed that the Prophet’s
intention must be considered, since he wished to withdraw all confidence
from such a proud people, and to show that, as far as they could, they
had always repelled God’s favor by their obstacles, unless he had
overcome their wickedness by his untiring goodness. It follows —

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span><span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#011)<span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p2"></span>**11.** And I gave them my statutes, and
shewed them my judgments, which *if* a man do, he shall even live in
them.

<span id="ix.ix-p3"></span>**11.** Et dedi illis decreta mea,  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) et judicia mea patefeci ipsis, qua,
qui fecerit homo vivet in ipsis.

<span id="ix.ix-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.ix-p6"></span><span id="ix.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p7"></span>Here God enlarges upon his favors, since he
had given his law to the Israelites, as if he would prescribe to them a
certain rule of living. If they had only been brought out of Egypt, that
would have been an inestimable benefit: but God was much more generous,
since he deigned to rule them familiarly with his doctrine, lest they
should wander to one side or the other; and in this way he testified
that he would be their God. He adds a promise: for God might precisely
enjoin what he wished on the people of his choice; but he spontaneously
adopts the method of indulgence by promising them life. Now, then, we
understand why this promise is mentioned; for God might simply command
anything, and say, this pleases me, and use but a monosyllable, after
the manner of kings issuing a command. Since, then, God not only exacted
of the Israelites what he might justly require, but, by annexing a
promise, enticed them gently to the pursuit of obedience, this was
certainly a mark of his fatherly indulgence. Hence he now exaggerates
the people’s ingratitude by this circumstances, that neither by commands
nor by kindness could he induce these obstinate and perverse
dispositions to bend to the yoke. *I gave them, therefore*, my statutes
and my laws; and afterwards, *which if a man do, he shall live in them.*
He thus briefly reminds them, that it was not his fault if the
Israelites were not in any sense happy; for when he stipulated with them
for the observance of his law, he bound them in turn to himself, that
they should want nothing which contributed to a good and happy life; for
in the name of life solid happiness is comprehended.

<span id="ix.ix-p8"></span>Yet it is here asked how the Prophet
testifies *that men should live by the works of the law,* when the law,
on the testimony of Paul, can only bring us death. (<span
id="ix.ix-p8.1"></span>[Ro 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span
id="ix.ix-p8.1"></span>; <span id="ix.ix-p8.2"></span>[De
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015)<span id="ix.ix-p8.2"></span>.)
He took this testimony from Moses, and we shall see immediately that he
cites it in a different sense. Moses there pronounces that the life of
man rests on the observance of the law; that is, — life was surely to be
expected through satisfying the law. Some think this absurd, and so
restrict what is said to the present life, taking *he shall live in
them* politically or civilly: but this is a cold and trifling comment.
The reasoning which influenced them is readily answered: they object,
that we owe all things to God; that we ourselves and our possessions are
all his by the right of possession; so that if we keep the law a hundred
times over, still we are not, worthy of such a reward. But the solution
is at hand, that we deserve nothing, but God graciously binds himself to
us by this promise, as I have already touched upon. And from this
passage it is easy to infer that works are of no value before God, and
are not estimated for their intrinsic value, so to speak, but only by
agreement. Since, then, it pleased God to descend so far as to promise
life to men if they kept his law, they ought to accept this offer as
springing from his liberality. There is no absurdity, then, if men do
live, that is, if they deserve eternal life according to agreement. But
if any one keeps the law, it will follow that he has no need of the
grace of Christ. For of what advantage is Christ to us unless we recover
life in him? but if this is placed in ourselves, the remedy must not be
thought anywhere but in ourselves. Every one, then, may be his own
savior if life is placed the observance of the law. But Paul solves this
difficulty for us when he determines for us a twofold righteousness of
the law and of faith. (<span id="ix.ix-p8.3"></span>[Rom.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span id="ix.ix-p8.3"></span>.) He
says that this righteousness is of the law when we keep God’s precepts.
Now, since we are far distant from such obedience, nay, the very faculty
of keeping the law is altogether defective in us: hence it follows that
we must fly to the righteousness of faith. For he defines the
righteousness of faith, if we believe Christ to be dead, and to be risen
again for our justification. We see, therefore, although God promised
salvation to his ancient people, if they only kept the law, yet that
promise was useless, since no one could satisfy the law and perform
God’s commands. Here another question arises. For if this promise does
not take effect, God vainly reckons that as a benefit to the Israelites
which we see was offered them in vain: hence no utility or fruit would
arise from it. But some one may say that the imagination was fallacious,
when God promised life, and now by his Prophet blames the Israelites for
despising such a benefit. But the reply is easy: although men are not
endued with the power of obeying the law, yet they ought not on that
account to depart from the goodness of God; for men’s declension by no
means hinders them from estimating the value of so liberal a promise:
God is treating with men: he might then, as I have said, imperiously
demand whatever he pleased, and exact it with the utmost rigor; but he
treats according to an agreement, and so there is a mutual obligation
between himself and the people. No one will surely deny that God here
exhibits a specimen of his mercy when he deigns thus familiarly to make
a covenant with men. “Ah! but this is all in vain: God’s promise is of
no effect, because no one is able to keep the law.” I confess it: but
man’s declension cannot, as I have said, abolish the glory of God’s
goodness, since that always remains fixed, and God still acts liberally
in being willing thus to enter into covenant with His people. We must
then consider the subject simply, and by itself: man’s declension is
accidental. God then put forth a remarkable proof of His goodness, in
promising life to all who kept His law: and this will remain perfect and
entire. It now follows —

<span id="ix.x"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p1"></span><span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012)<span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p2"></span>**12.** Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths,
to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I *am* the
LORD that sanctify them.

<span id="ix.x-p3"></span>**12.** Atque etiam sabbatha mea dedi ipsis,
ut essent in signum inter me et ipsos, ut cognoscerent quod ego sim
(*vel, ego sum*) Iehovah, qui ipsos sanctifico.

<span id="ix.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.x-p5"></span><span id="ix.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p6"></span>Besides the law God here commends his
Sabbaths, which we know to be only a part of His law: nay, whoever
compares the commandments one by one, will at first sight perceive more
weight in others than in the fourth. For what is the meaning of that
commandment, You shall not have any strange god? You shall not make any
idols? Afterwards, Do not take God’s name in vain? (<span
id="ix.x-p6.1"></span>[Exod. 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007)<span id="ix.x-p6.1"></span>; <span
id="ix.x-p6.2"></span>[Deut. 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#008),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#011)<span id="ix.x-p6.2"></span>.) I
answer, that the Prophet takes one precept of the law the better to
explain what I have already touched on before, namely, that the law was
given to the Israelites to bind them more and more to their benefactor.
For God was unwilling to cast them away after redeeming them: but he
testified by his law that he would be the guide of their whole life.
Still the Prophet looked further, meaning, that the law consisted not
only of the commandments, but embraced the whole grace of God, on which
the adoption of the nation depended. For if God had simply commanded
either one thing or another, it would not have been easy to perceive and
taste his goodness. Why so? because when he calls upon us to discharge a
duty, every one, feels that a greater burden is imposed on him than he
can bear. Even if the promise should entice us by its sweetness, — he
who does these things shall live in them; yet when we try, we are
deficient through being destitute of all power. But the Prophet means
that something else was intended by the Sabbath, that the Israelites
might acknowledge themselves separated by God, so as to experience him
for their Father in all things. Hence, though the precepts of the law
were somewhat distasteful; yet, as the fourth commandment has in it a
gratuitous promise, it has a different savor, since the people thus
recognizes itself as elected by God for a peculiar nation: and this the
Prophet sufficiently expresses by the word *sanctifying*, for it means
that the people were separated from the profane nations to be God’s
peculiar inheritance. If any one wishes to render sanctify by one word
it will be, “to separate.” But the meaning of separation ought to be
explained. How, then, did God separate a certain people from the whole
world? Why, by promising to Abraham that he would be a God to his seed.
(<span id="ix.x-p6.3"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span id="ix.x-p6.3"></span>.)
Then he could not otherwise be their God than by gratuitously loving his
elect, by regenerating them by his Spirit, and becoming propitious and
easily entreated: and besides, a single people could not be separated
from others without a mediator. For separation cannot last unless the
people be united to God; and what bond of union is there without a
mediator?

<span id="ix.x-p7"></span>Now, therefor, we understand why the Prophet
speaks of the Sabbath, since he had formerly commended the whole law, of
which the Sabbath was a part, namely, because it displayed God’s
gratuitous adoption; and at the same time the Israelites might
acknowledge that the way of approach to God was open to them, and he was
rendered placable; then that they were not adopted in vain, but were
sought by God, that he should renew them by his Spirit, and rule the
whole course of their life. It was, then, the greatest ingratitude to
break the Sabbath, as will be said shortly afterwards. But this passage
teaches that God was not pleased with the people’s quiet or ease when he
commanded them to keep the seventh day holy, but he has another
intention. Whence we gather that that precept was shadowy: for there are
some things which please God of themselves, and must be performed; but
others have a different object. For to worship one God, to abominate
idols, to use God’s name reverently, these things are, as I have said,
the simple duties of piety in themselves: so the honor which sons pay to
their parents is a duty pleasing to God in itself, like chastity,
abstinence, and such like. But Sabbaths do not please God simply and by
themselves. We ought, therefore, to look for another purpose, if we wish
to understand the reason of this precept. And hence Paul says, that
Sabbaths were shadows of those things of which Christ is the substance.
(<span id="ix.x-p7.1"></span>[Col.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017)<span id="ix.x-p7.1"></span>.)
This, therefore, is one point. Ezekiel is not the first who says so,
though he took it from Moses; for though he does not clearly say in so
many words that the Sabbath was the symbol of sanctification, yet he
afterwards shows this to be its object, (<span
id="ix.x-p7.2"></span>[Exod. 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014)<span id="ix.x-p7.2"></span>,) and
that God commanded the people to rest on the seventh day with this
intent. Moses then himself shows that the command had another object,
which Ezekiel interprets for us; but the matter is made much clearer in
the Gospel, since in Christ the truth and substance of this precept is
set forth, which Paul calls the body. I have, then, sufficiently
explained this object., namely, that the Israelites might know God to be
their sanctifier. But if we desire to understand the matter better, we
ought first to lay it down that the Sabbath was the sign of
mortification. God, therefore, sanctifies us; because when we remain in
our natural state we are there mixed with others, and have nothing
different from unbelievers: hence, therefore, it is necessary to begin
by dying to ourselves and the world, and by exercising self-denial; and
this depends on the grace of God. But I perceive that I cannot complete
the subject today so I shall put it off till tomorrow.

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have not only
deigned to bestow upon us a rule for living rightly, but has so shown
thyself our Father in Christ as to be prepared to engrave thy law in our
inward parts: Grant, I pray thee, that we may not cast away that
inestimable boon through either ingratitude or sloth; but may we offer
up ourselves to thee as a sacrifice: and then do you so pardon us that
our infirmities may not hinder us from finding thee always propitious
whenever we fly to thy mercy in Christ, your only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Second.

<span id="ix.xii-p2"></span>We said in yesterday’s lecture, that God’s
Church was separated from the profane nations that he might regenerate
it by his Spirit: we said also, that the Sabbath was a proof of this
favor; but now a confirmation of this teaching must be added. This is
easily gathered from the institution of the Sabbath, when God is said to
have rested from his work on the seventh day. (<span
id="ix.xii-p2.1"></span>[Ge 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002)<span
id="ix.xii-p2.1"></span>; <span id="ix.xii-p2.2"></span>[Ex
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#011)<span id="ix.xii-p2.2"></span>,
and 31:17; <span id="ix.xii-p2.3"></span>[De
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014)<span id="ix.xii-p2.3"></span>.)
Now there is no doubt that he wished to bring the faithful to imitate
his example: it follows, then, that rest was enjoined upon the ancient
people, that they should each rest from their works, and so conform
themselves to God’s example. For we are said to rest from our works when
we are dead to ourselves; and allow ourselves to be governed by God’s
Spirit, when we live in him, and he in us. Now, therefore, we see that
the grace of regeneration was promised to the ancient people when God
consecrated the seventh day; and the Apostle also shows this in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, where he treats of the true and lawful use of
the Sabbath, and refutes the gross supposition with which the Jews were
imbued, that God was properly worshipped by an outward rest. (<span
id="ix.xii-p2.4"></span>[Heb 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#005)<span
id="ix.xii-p2.4"></span>.) he shows them that it was only an outward
symbol, and that it contained a spiritual mystery. It now follows, as I
lately touched on it, that the Sabbath was a sacrament, since it was a
visible figure of an invisible grace. And this also is expressed with
sufficient clearness by the Prophet, when he says, *the Sabbath was
given for a sign.* By this word, therefore, he shows that regeneration
was promised to the ancient people; and if I may use the expression by a
visible word, since God not only spoke, but wished some symbol or pledge
or mark of his promise to be perpetual. The phrase between me and you
must be noticed: from which we gather that there is a mutual agreement
in the sacraments, by which God binds us to himself, and we mutually
pledge our faith. And hence also their foolishness is refuted who think
the sacraments nothing but marks of outward separation: for if the
sacraments concern only the profession of faith, it is inconsistent with
the Prophet’s teaching that they are a mutual and reciprocal sign, as I
may express it, since God requires faith on the part of his people; and
he promises in return what he witnesses and prefigures by an outward
sign. It now follows —

<span id="ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#013)<span
id="ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p2"></span>**13.** But the house of Israel rebelled
against me in the wilderness: they walked not in my statutes, and they
despised my judgments, which *if* a man do, he shall even live in them;
and my sabbaths they greatly polluted: then I said, I would pour out my
fury upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.

<span id="ix.xiii-p3"></span>**13.** Et rebelles fuerunt in me  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) domus Israel  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) in deserto: in decretis meis non
ambularunt, et judicia mea spreverunt: qua qui fecerit homo rivet in
ipsis: et Sabbatha mea violarunt valde: et dixi  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) effundere excandescentiam meam super
eos in deserto ad consumendum eos.

<span id="ix.xiii-p7"></span>**14.** But I wrought for my name’s sake,
that it should not be polluted before the heathen, in whose sight I
brought them out.

<span id="ix.xiii-p8"></span>**14.** Et feci propter nomen meum, ut non
profanaretur in oculis gentium, sub quarum oculis eduxeram ipsos.

<span id="ix.xiii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.xiii-p10"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p11"></span>Here God pronounces that the sons were
like their fathers; and that the people, after their deliverance from
Egypt, were so obstinate in their wickedness as not to profit in any
way. He had complained already before of their rejecting his grace: for
it is equivalent to rejecting all offers to be corrupted by
superstitions, and not to cleanse themselves from that defilement,
although they knew it to be abominable before God. But after the law was
promulgated, they then might have put away their perverse affections.
And surely redemption ought to have conformed them to obey God; when
they beheld his hand stretched out as it were from heaven, how was it
that this spectacle did not avail to humble them, and to make them
submissive to God? But in addition to the teaching of the law, God’s
promise was given, by which he bore witness to them, that, if they
sought from him the spirit of regeneration, the Sabbath would be really
given them as a pledge and sign of it; and since all these things
produced no effect, that was a proof of astounding contumacy. God says,
therefore, that he obtained nothing more in the desert than he had
formerly experienced from the people under their Egyptian tyranny:
*then, also,* says he*, the house of Israel exasperated me in the
desert*. The circumstance of place must be noticed, because they were
wonderfully rescued by God’s incredible power, and they depended every
moment on his good pleasure; for there they wanted food and drink: God
daily rained down manna from heaven, and brought them water from the
rock. (<span id="ix.xiii-p11.2"></span>[Ex
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#014)<span id="ix.xiii-p11.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.xiii-p11.3"></span>[Nu
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#009)<span id="ix.xiii-p11.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.xiii-p11.4"></span>[Deut.
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#016)<span id="ix.xiii-p11.4"></span>.)
Since, therefore, necessity compelled them every moment to look to God,
was it not more than brutal stupidity to exasperate God? When men grow
wanton, it arises from becoming intoxicated by prosperity, and forgetful
of their lot through not feeling how much they need God’s help. But when
death is presented to our view, when terror hems us in on every side,
when God is up in arms against us, what madness it is to despise him! We
see, then, why the Prophet dwells so on this point.

<span id="ix.xiii-p12"></span>He says too, *they did not walk in God’s
precepts, and they despised his judgments*. He confirms what was said
yesterday, that they were not deceived through ignorance, but manifested
utter contempt of God, since they knew well enough what was pleasing to
him. Since, then, they had a sure rule which could not deceive them, we
see how they wandered away after their own superstitions by deliberate
wickedness. This is the reason, then, why Ezekiel says *that they
despised God’s judgments*. He repeats the promise which I expounded
yesterday. For this reason also availed to exaggerate their crime,
namely, the mildness of God in deigning to allure, them: he did not
command them, exactingly and imperiously, as he might have done, but he
entered into a covenant with them, and testified that a reward was
prepared for them if they kept the law. Since, therefore, they neglected
this promise, we see that they were not only rebels, but ungrateful to
God. He adds, *they had polluted his Sabbaths*; which I refer not only
to the outward rite, but rather to the inward spirit. It is true,
indeed, that their impiety was sufficiently notorious as to outward
desecration, as it appears from the seventeenth chapter of Jeremiah,
when he says, that they carried their burdens on the Sabbath, and
occupied themselves in common business. (<span
id="ix.xiii-p12.1"></span>[Jer. 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#022)<span id="ix.xiii-p12.1"></span>.)
There is no doubt that they broke the Sabbath when they then
promiscuously transacted their own business. But when it is added, *that
they violated the Sabbath greatly* or *grievously*, we may understand
that profanation is denoted in the mystery itself, since they struck off
the yoke, and gave the rein to their own desires: for Isaiah also shows
that the Sabbath was violated in this way, especially when the will of
men is consulted. (<span id="ix.xiii-p12.2"></span>[Isa
58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013)<span
id="ix.xiii-p12.2"></span>.) For hypocrites think they have discharged
every duty by abstaining from all work; but the Prophet replies that
this is a mere laughing-stock, since they fast on a Sabbath for strife
and contention, and then that they gratify their will, which is opposed
to self-denial. Hence God not only accuses the ancient people here for
not hallowing the Sabbath, but also for neglecting its legitimate object
and use. He now repeats what we saw yesterday. *I have determined,*
therefore*, to pour out upon them mine anger in the desert to consume
them.* If it is asked when this was done, it is sufficient to reply,
that God’s wrath was frequently inflamed by the people’s wickedness. For
although Moses does not verbally relate every event, yet there is no
doubt that God often threatened the people with destruction, as we shall
soon see with reference to their dispersion. It follows, *I did it for
my name’s sake, that it should not be profaned in the eyes of the
Gentiles*. God repeats again that he was appeased, not because he
pardoned them, but because he was unwilling to allow his name to become
a laughing-stock among the nations. We said that in this way God’s
twofold pity is commended, as he had already gratuitously adopted the
people: hence their redemption could only be ascribed to his sole and
gratuitous liberality, since it flowed from the election or adoption
which we have mentioned. But though this was one kind of mercy, yet it
did not suffice to render the people worthy of the grace offered them.
Hence it came to pass that the promise given to Abraham could not profit
them, unless God conquered the nation’s iniquity. This is the meaning of
the Prophet when he says, that the people were preserved, although
unworthy of it, since God saw that otherwise his name would be profaned
among the nations. Without doubt he had respect to the covenant, since
the Israelites had perished a hundred times over without any help from
the name of God unless he had adopted them. It was necessary, therefore,
that God should spare them, since their preservation was connected with
his sacred name and regard for his covenant. It now follows —

<span id="ix.xiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#015)<span id="ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p2"></span>**15.** Yet also I lifted up my hand unto
them in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which
I had given *them*, flowing with milk and honey, which *is* the glory of
all lands;

<span id="ix.xiv-p3"></span>**15.** Atque etiam ego manure meam sustuli
ipsis in deserto, ne inducerem eos in terram quam dederam ipsis fluentem
lacte et melle, quae desiderium est cunctis terris.  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264)

<span id="ix.xiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xiv-p6"></span><span id="ix.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p7"></span>God here shows that his threats were
ineffectual, even when he inflicted severe punishment, yet the people
were not broken down and subdued: and this is a sign of a most perverse
disposition. The foolish are at length corrected with rods, but when
those who are chastised become worse instead of repenting, they betray
their desperate character. God therefore here signifies that the
Israelites were of an abandoned disposition, because there were no means
of bringing them back to good conduct. At first he enticed them by his
mercy, then gave them the law, and added a sacrament, as we have seen;
but this proved wholly useless: what remained then, except to terrify
them partly by threats and partly by punishments? He tried both, for he
threatened them when they sinned, without any advantage: then he showed
them in reality that theirs was no vain terror, since all those died in
the desert who had refused to go forward when he called them into the
land of Canaan. (<span id="ix.xiv-p7.1"></span>[Nu
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#010)<span id="ix.xiv-p7.1"></span>.)
Since, they were not bent by those signs of God’s wrath, their contumacy
appears so great, that they ought to perish a hundred times over. *I
also,* says he*, raised my hand;* he doubtless means that he swore, as
we gather from Moses and from the Psalms, I swore in my wrath if they
should enter into my rest. (<span id="ix.xiv-p7.2"></span>[Ps
95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011)<span id="ix.xiv-p7.2"></span>.)
He says then *that he raised his hand*; we have explained whence the
simile is taken, *that I would not bring them into the land which I had
given them.* Here God emphatically shows how formidable that punishment
was, as it deprived them of that sure heritage which he had bestowed on
them: for before they were born they were lords of the land of Canaan —
since four hundred years before it was promised to Abraham in their
name. Since they cast themselves off from this inheritance, they plainly
displayed their slothfulness: *I had given them an inheritance*, says
he, for they compelled me to swear: *I swore* that they should not reach
it. He adds, *a land flowing with milk and honey, desired by all
nations.* By these words he enlarges upon the people’s ingratitude,
since they despised no mean benefit, but a land in which they might
dwell happily. For God had so enriched it with his gifts, that they
might have been as it were in paradise. Since then such fertility did
not attract them to obey God, hence it appears, that they were in every
way refractory. It afterwards follows —

<span id="ix.xv"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#016)<span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p2"></span>**16.** Because they despised my judgments,
and walked not in my statutes, but polluted my sabbaths: for their heart
went after their idols.

<span id="ix.xv-p3"></span>**16.** Propterea quod in judiciis meis
spreverunt:  <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) in decretis meis
non ambularunt et sabbatha mea polluerunt,  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) quia post idola sua  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) cot eorum ambulavit.

<span id="ix.xv-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.xv-p8"></span><span id="ix.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p9"></span>The reason of the oath of which mention has
been made is expressed by Moses, because being frightened by a false
report they wished to return to Egypt: but here a cause is assigned to
their superstitions. (<span id="ix.xv-p9.1"></span>[Num.
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#033)<span id="ix.xv-p9.1"></span>, and
<span id="ix.xv-p9.2"></span>[Nu
14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001)<span id="ix.xv-p9.2"></span>.)
But it suits each case well, since if they had been sincerely obedient
to God, they would never have refused to remove their camp, and
fearlessly to proceed where he commanded them. But since they first
detested the land, and then terror and despair seized their minds so
that they rejected the inestimable blessing of God, it is clear that not
a drop of piety existed in their hearts. Although therefore the special
reason why they did not enter the land of Canaan was their refusing to
obey the call of God, yet the Prophet adds also their superstitions. For
impiety and contempt of God was the reason why they so boldly, proudly,
and furiously rejected the grace of God, and wished even to stone Moses,
and then when penitent they encouraged each other to return to live
again under the tyranny of Egypt. We see, therefore, how the Prophet
here lays down general causes from which that impious dislike of the
land proceeded, as well as the rejection of the grace of God. He says,
therefore, *because they had despised my judgments and had not walked in
my statutes*. He here inverts the order: he had formerly said that they
had not walked in his statutes and had despised my judgments; but now he
begins with the contempt: *and have polluted my Sabbaths, because their
hearts went after their idols.* The sense is, that they always treated
God deceitfully: and although they held that he was to be worshipped
formally, yet they were always addicted to various superstitions: as
also Stephen reproves them, (<span id="ix.xv-p9.3"></span>[Ac
7:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#040)<span id="ix.xv-p9.3"></span>,)
for he agrees entirely with our Prophet. As he puts Sabbaths in the
plural number, I do not interpret it so strictly as some do, thinking
that the Prophet means Sabbaths of years, and afterwards the jubilee:
for there were three Sabbaths among the Jews; that is, every seventh day
was consecrated to God, and every seventh year, and every fiftieth.
Although it is true that years were sabbatical as well as days, yet I do
not think that the Prophet is making any subtle distinctions here but I
take Sabbath to mean the seventh day. It now follows —

<span id="ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#017)<span id="ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p2"></span>**17.** Nevertheless mine eye spared them
from destroying them, neither did I make an end of them in the
wilderness.

<span id="ix.xvi-p3"></span>**17.** Et pepercit oculus meus super ipsos
 <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) ne perderem ipsos, et ne
facerem ipsos  <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) consumptionem in
deserto.

<span id="ix.xvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvi-p7"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p8"></span>This is added, because God often afflicted
the people with heavy punishments, but he restrained himself, that he
should not utterly destroy both their persons and their name. He says,
then, *that he spared them* through respect for his own name, as he
formerly said, *that he should not execute consumption on them*; that
is, that he should not utterly blot out the memory of them. He did not
spare them entirely to foster their depravity by his indulgence, but as
we shall afterwards see, he withdrew his hand that he should not consume
them, as he might most justly have done. It now follows —

<span id="ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#018)<span
id="ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p2"></span>**18.** But I said unto their children in
the wilderness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither
observe their judgments, nor defile yourselves with their idols:

<span id="ix.xvii-p3"></span>**18.** Et dixi ad filios ipsorum in
deserto, In decretis,  <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) patrum
vestrorum ne ambuletis, et indicia ipsorum ne servetis: et in idolis
 <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) ipsorum ne polluamini.

<span id="ix.xvii-p6"></span>**19.** I *am* the LORD your God; walk in
my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them;

<span id="ix.xvii-p7"></span>**19.** Ego Iehovah Deus vester, in
decretis meis ambulate, et judicia mea servate, et facite ea.

<span id="ix.xvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvii-p9"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p10"></span>After God has shown that the obstinate
wickedness of the people was such that they profited by neither rigor
nor clemency, he now says that the sons were altogether like their
fathers. For when he says that he turned his discourse to their sons, he
obliquely indicates that he was so broken down by their disgust, that he
is unwilling to address the deaf. *I said*, therefore, *to their sons*:
why not to themselves? because they had become obdurate in their
impiety, and gave no hope of repentance. Since then God had experienced
their utmost obstinacy, he says *that he turned his discourse to their
sons; Do not walk in the statutes of your fathers, and do not observe
their judgments.* Here God does not speak of bad examples and of plain
and palpable crimes, but he uses words seemingly favorable — *judgments
and statutes*. If he had simply said that their fathers were wicked, and
hence the sons must take care not to imitate them, that would have been
ordinary teaching; but by adaptation he uses honorable expressions,
namely, *my statutes and judgments*. Meanwhile he forbids their
posterity to conform to the statutes and laws of their fathers, meaning
to their ceremonies and rites. Lest any should object that those
statutes were to be observed which tend to a right end, he adds, *that
you pollute not yourselves with their filth and defilements*. Here the
former language of accommodation is removed, and God as it were wipes
away the coloring, that it may be clearly apparent that those statutes
and precepts differed in nothing from thefts, robberies, and adulteries:
this is the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="ix.xvii-p11"></span>Besides, this passage is worthy of notice,
because we may learn from it how frivolous is the excuse of those who
boast of their fathers, and arrogantly predict that they will be
pardoned if they conform themselves to their example. For God not only
forbids us to imitate the gross and open wickedness of our parents, but
their laws, statutes, and ceremonies, and whatever is apparently
plausible, and seems to the common sense of mankind worthy of praise.
And thus the foolishness of the papists is detected, who think that they
lie safely concealed under the shield of Ajax, when they boast to us of
the examples of their fathers, and the value of antiquity: we clearly
see how plainly God’s Spirit refutes them when he pronounces that they
must obey his statutes and precepts, and not listen to open wickedness
only, but not even to good intentions, as they say, and devotions, and
the traditions of the fathers. But what is the worship of God in the
papacy in these days but a confused jumble, which they have thrown
together from numberless fictions? for whoever will examine all their
trifling, will find them fabricated by the will of man; and they are not
ashamed to oppose the traditions of their fathers to the word of God.
Now, therefore, we see the whole papacy laid prostrate, and all the
remarkable traditions of the fathers in which they boast, when the
Prophet says, *walk you not in the statutes of your fathers*. But since
antiquity deserves some reverence, it would be gross and barbarous
promiscuously to reject all the examples of the fathers: hence we need
prudence and selection here, and God’s Spirit suggests this to us when
he adds *pollution’s* or idols. Hence the traditions of the fathers must
be examined; and it is a mark of prudent discretion to observe what they
contain, and whence they proceed. If we discover that they have no other
tendency than to the pure worship of God, we may embrace them; but if
they draw us away from the pure and simple worship of God, if they
infect true and sincere religion by their own mixtures, we must utterly
reject them.

<span id="ix.xvii-p12"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p13"></span>Let us proceed then. *I,* says he, *am
Jehovah your God; walk you in my statutes, and observe my judgments*.
God confirms the former sentence, and at the same time provides a remedy
for all corruption’s when he says, *walk you in my precepts, because I
am your God:* for by these words he claims as peculiarly his own what
men commonly arrogate to themselves. They do not dare, indeed, to
despoil God of his authority, but they carry themselves as his allies,
and infect his law with their commentaries, as if it was not sufficient
for complete and solid wisdom. Here, therefore, God pronounces himself
to be the only lawgiver. If, therefore, *I am your God, walk you in. my
statutes.* Hence it follows, that we indirectly deny God when we turn
aside even a little from his law. The passage is remarkable, if we only
estimate the Prophet’s language aright. For the two clauses must be read
together, *because I am your God, therefore walk you in precepts,* and
thus show that you are my people. But if they are not content with God’s
precepts only, but mingle human comments with them, God indirectly
teaches that he is not acknowledged, since they deprive him of a portion
of his rights; for if God is one, he also is the only lawgiver. It
follows —

<span id="ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#020)<span id="ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p2"></span>**20.** And hallow my sabbaths; and they
shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I *am* the
LORD your God.

<span id="ix.xviii-p3"></span>**20.** Et sabbatha mea sanctificate, et
erunt in signum inter me et vos, ad cognoscendum  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) quod ego Iehovah Deus vester.

<span id="ix.xviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xviii-p6"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p7"></span>What he had said generally concerning the
commandments he now applies again to the Sabbath, and not without
reason. For, as we said yesterday, God not only wished by that day of
rest to exact from the people what was due to him, but he rather
commands it for another purpose, namely, *that his Sabbaths should be
sanctified.* But the manner of keeping it holy was formerly explained,
since mere rest was insufficient. God was not satisfied by the people’s
resting from their occupations, but the inward sanctification was always
the chief end in view. And for this reason he also repeats again, *that
they may be a sign between me and you to show you that I Jehovah am your
God*. In this passage God bears witness, that if the Jews rightly
observed their Sabbaths they should feel the effects of that favor which
he wished to be represented thereby. For we said that the Sabbath was a
sacrament of regeneration: now therefore he promises the efficacy of his
Spirit, if they did not shut the door by their own impiety and contempt.
Hence we see that sacraments are never destitute of the virtue of the
Spirit unless when men render themselves unworthy of the grace offered
them. When papists speak of the sacraments they say that they are
efficacious, if we only remove the obstacle of mortal sin: they make no
mention of faith. If a person is neither a thief, nor an adulterer, nor
a homicide, they say that the sacraments produce their own effect: for
example, if any one without a single particle of faith intrudes himself
at the table of Christ, they say that he receives not only his body and
blood, but the fruit of his death and resurrection, and only because he
has not committed mortal sin; that is, cannot be convicted of theft or
homicide. We see how they are steeped in blindness, according to God’s
just judgment. We must hold, therefore, that there is a mutual relation
between faith and the sacraments, and hence, that the sacraments are
effective through faith. Man’s unworthiness does not detract anything
from them, for they always retain their nature. Baptism is the laver of
regeneration, although the whole world should be incredulous (<span
id="ix.xviii-p7.2"></span>Titus 3:5:) the Supper of Christ is the
communication of his body and blood, (<span
id="ix.xviii-p7.3"></span>[1Co
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016)<span
id="ix.xviii-p7.3"></span>,) although there were not a spark of faith in
the world: but we do not perceive the grace which is offered to us; and
although spiritual things always remain the same, yet we do not obtain
their effect nor perceive their value, unless we cautious that our want
of faith should not profane what God has consecrated our salvation.
 <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273)

<span id="ix.xix"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since the doctrine of
thy Gospel sounds daily in our ears, when you invite us so kindly by thy
amazing clemency, and stretch out your hand by your only-begotten Son, —
Grant, I pray thee, that we may be of a teachable and flexible
disposition, and that we may sincerely submit to thee: and since thy law
contains so many dreadful examples of thy wrath, may we be moved by
them, and may we walk with fear and trembling in obedience to thy word,
that at length we may enjoy that inheritance which you have promised for
us in thy heavenly kingdom, by the same Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ix.xx"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Third.

<span id="ix.xxi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#021)<span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p2"></span>**21.** Notwithstanding the children
rebelled against me: they walked not in my statutes, neither kept my
judgments to do them, which *if* man do, he shall even live in them;
they polluted my sabbaths: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon
them, to accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness.

<span id="ix.xxi-p3"></span>**21.** Et rebelles fuerunt  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) me filii: in decretis meis non
ambulaverunt, et judicia mea non servarunt, ut ea facerent: quae qui
fecerit homo rivet in ipsis: sabbatha mea profanarunt: et dixi  <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) effundere iracundiam meam,  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) super eos ad complendum iram meam in
ipsis in deserto.

<span id="ix.xxi-p7"></span>**22.** Nevertheless I withdrew mine hand,
and wrought for my name’s sake, that it should not be polluted in the
sight of the heathen, in whose sight I brought them forth.

<span id="ix.xxi-p8"></span>**22.** Et retraxi  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) manure meam: et feci propter nomen
meum, ne profanaretur in oculis gentium e quarum oculis eduxeram eos.

<span id="ix.xxi-p10"></span>**23.** I lifted up mine hand unto them
also in the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the heathen, and
disperse them through the countries;

<span id="ix.xxi-p11"></span>**23.** Etiam ego levavi  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) ad disjiciendos ipsos inter gentes, et
spargendos per terras;

<span id="ix.xxi-p13"></span>**24.** Because they had not executed my
judgments, but had despised my statutes, and had polluted my sabbaths,
and their eyes were after their fathers’ idols.

<span id="ix.xxi-p14"></span>**24.** Eo quod judicia mea non fecerunt,
et statuta mea repudiarunt, et sabbatha mea violarunt, et post idola
patrum suorum fuerunt eorum oculi.

<span id="ix.xxi-p15"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxi-p16"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p17"></span>I join these four verses together, because
they have been already explained, and I do not wish to burden you with
useless repetitions. In short, God accuses the whole posterity, because
they were by no means more obedient than their fathers. Again, he
charges them with rebellion, since they neither obeyed His commands, nor
were persuaded by mild promises; for, on the one hand, he demanded the
worship due to him, and invited them softly by the promise of reward. He
complains that; neither plan succeeded. He adds, what we have already
seen, that he proposed to scatter them through various quarters of the
world, and utterly to dissipate them. He assigns as a reason for his
moderation his unwillingness that his name should be profaned among the
nations: he also announces that they had never restrained their impiety
from bursting forth, and hence it was only through his own incredible
patience and indulgence that they had not perished a hundred, nay, a
thousand times. The rest may be gathered from the previous context. It
follows —

<span id="ix.xxii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025)<span id="ix.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p2"></span>**25.** Wherefore I gave them also statutes
*that were* not good, and judgments whereby they should not live;

<span id="ix.xxii-p3"></span>**25.** Ego quoque dedi illis decreta non
bona, et judicia in quibus ton vivent.

<span id="ix.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p6"></span>Here God announces that he had taken
vengeance upon people so hard and obstinate, by permitting them to
endure another yoke, since they would not be ruled by the doctrine of
the law; for we saw that, when God imposed the law upon the Israelites,
they would have been extremely happy, had they only considered how
honorable it was to be in covenant with God, who deigned to bind them to
himself in mutual fidelity. This was a remarkable honor and privilege,
since God not only showed them what was right, but promised them a
reward which he by no means owed them. But what was the conduct of that
unteachable nation? It threw off the yoke of the law; hence it deserved
to experience a different government. *God*, therefore, *gave them laws
that were not good,* when he suffered them to be miserably subjected to
an immense heap of errors: such laws as these were not good. Some
writers have violently distorted this passage, by thinking the law
itself, as promulgated by Moses, “not good,” since Paul calls it deadly;
but they corrupt the Prophet’s sense, since God is comparing his law
with the superstitions of the Gentiles: others explain it of the
tributes which the people were compelled to pay to foreigners. But,
first of all, God does not speak here of only one age; nay, during the,
time of the Israelites’ freedom his vengeance was nevertheless severe.

<span id="ix.xxii-p7"></span>Thus, in the next verse, the Prophet
confirms what I have briefly touched on, namely, that *the laws called
not good* are all the fictions of men, by which they harass themselves,
while they think that God is worshipped acceptably in this way: for we
know how miserably men labor and distract themselves when Satan has
fascinated them with his toils, and when they anxiously invent numerous
rites, because there is no end of their superstitions; hence these
statutes are not good: for when they have undergone much labor in their
idolatry, no other reward awaits them than God’s appearance against them
as an avenger to punish the profanation of his own lawful worship. They
indeed by no means look for this, but they utterly deceive themselves;
hence they must hope for no reward but what is founded on the covenant
and promise of God; for all false and vicious forms of worship, all
adventitious rites, which men heap together from all sides, have no
promise from God, and hence they vainly trust to them for life. God
began to show them this in the wilderness; but in succeeding ages he did
not fail to exercise the same vengeance. We see how they fell in with
the superstitions of the Moabites; and why so? unless God blinded them
by his just judgments. (<span id="ix.xxii-p7.1"></span>[Nu
25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)<span
id="ix.xxii-p7.1"></span>.) He had experienced their untamed
dispositions, and so he set them free from control; and not only so, but
afterwards gave them up to Satan, and so he says *that he gave them laws
that were not good.* The Prophet might indeed have said, that they
despised God’s law through their own wisdom, that they foolishly and
rashly legislated for themselves: this was indeed true; but he wished to
express the penalty of which Paul speaks, when he says that the impious
were delivered to a reprobate mind, and to obedience to a lie, (<span
id="ix.xxii-p7.2"></span>[Ro
1:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024)<span
id="ix.xxii-p7.2"></span>,) since they did not submit to the truth, and
did not suffer themselves to be ruled by God, and thus were given up to
the tyranny of Satan and to the service of mere creatures. Now,
therefore, we understand the Prophet’s meaning, I have given them also,
says he, laws not good, as if he had said that the people so threw
themselves into various idolatries, that God desired in this way to
avenge their incredible obstinacy; for if the Jews had calmly acquiesced
in God’s sovereignty, he had not given them evil laws, that is, he had
not suffered them to be so tormented under Satan’s tyranny; but when
they were entangled in his snares, God openly shows them to be unworthy
of his government and care, since they were too refractory. It follows —

<span id="ix.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026)<span id="ix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p2"></span>**26.** And I polluted them in their own
gifts, in that they caused to pass through *the fire* all that openeth
the womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might
know that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p3"></span>**26.** Et contaminavi ipsos in suis
muneribus, trajiciendo quidquid aperit vulvam, ut perderem ipsos, ut
quod, (sed supervacuum est,) ut cognoscant quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p6"></span>There is no doubt that God here continues
the same doctrine’ hence we gather that injurious laws were given to the
people when they adopted various errors and worshipped idols of their
own fabrication instead of God: hence it is added, *I polluted them in
their gifts.* This, then, was added by the Prophet, lest the Jews should
object that they had not altogether rejected the worship of God; for
they mingled the ceremonies of the laws with the fictions of the
Gentiles, as we saw before, and the Prophet will shortly repeat: in this
way they thought they discharged their duty to God, though they added
mixtures of their own. Here the Prophet meets them, and cuts off all
occasion for turning aside, since they were polluted in their gifts, and
nothing was pure or sincere when they thus corrupted God’s precepts by
their comments. However, they daily offered their gifts, and professed
to present them to the true God; yet they obtained no advantage, because
God abominated mixtures of this kind, as we have previously said; for he
cannot bear to be worshipped by the will of men, but wishes his children
to be simply content with his commands. Now, we perceive the meaning of
the Prophet — *God pollutes them in their gifts*; that is, renders their
gifts polluting whenever they think that they discharge their duty; —
but how? why, he says, *when they cause whatever opens the womb to pass
through.*  <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) Here the Prophet
touches on only one kind of superstition, but, by a figure of speech, he
means all kinds, by which the Jews vitiated God’s pure worship; for this
superstition was very detestable, to pass their sons through the fire,
and to consecrate them to idols. But in this passage God speaks only of
the first-born, so as greatly to exaggerate the crime: that ceremony was
indeed general; but since God claimed the first-born as his own, and
wished them to be redeemed at a fixed price, (<span
id="ix.xxiii-p7.1"></span>[Ex
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002)<span id="ix.xxiii-p7.1"></span>,
<span id="ix.xxiii-p7.2"></span>[Ex
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029)<span id="ix.xxiii-p7.2"></span>,
and <span id="ix.xxiii-p7.3"></span>[Exod.
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#020)<span id="ix.xxiii-p7.3"></span>,)
and by this act wished the remembrance of their redemption to be kept
up, since all the first-born of Israel, as well as of animals, had
escaped, while those of the Egyptians perished, (<span
id="ix.xxiii-p7.4"></span>[Nu
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#013)<span id="ix.xxiii-p7.4"></span>,
and <span id="ix.xxiii-p7.5"></span>[Nu
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#016)<span id="ix.xxiii-p7.5"></span>,)
was it not monstrous to pass through the fire, and to offer to idols
those who were specially devoted and sacred to God? We see, then, that
the Prophet does not speak in vain of the first-born.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p8"></span>*That I should destroy thou,* says he*,
and they should know that I am Jehovah.* God here shows that he had
proceeded gradually to the final vengeance; and for this reason the
people were the more convicted of stupidity, since they never perceived
God’s judgments manifest. If God had suddenly and impetuously issued his
vengeance from heaven, men’s astonishment would not have been wonderful;
but when he grants them space of time and a truce that they may weigh
the matter at leisure, and admonishes them to repentance, not once only,
but often; and then if they remain always the same and are not effected,
they show themselves utterly desperate by this slothfulness, as the
Prophet now asserts. But when he adds, *that they may know that I am
Jehovah*, he means that as he was not acknowledged as a father by the
Jews, he would be their judge, and compel them whether they would or not
to feel the formidable nature of that power which they despised. Since
we have treated this subject fully before, we now pass it by more
lightly. Yet we must notice this, that God is recognized by the
reprobate, since, when his fatherly goodness has been for a long time
despised by them, he at length appears as a judge, and draws them
against their will to his tribunal, and executes his vengeance, so that
they cannot escape. It follows —

<span id="ix.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#027)<span
id="ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p2"></span>**27.** Therefore, son of man, speak unto
the house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus says the Lord GOD; Yet in
this your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed a
trespass against me.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p3"></span>**27.** Propterea loquere ad domum Israel,
fili hominis, et dic illis, Sic dicit Dominator Iehovah: Adhuc in hoc
contumeliosi in me fuerunt me, patres vestri praevaricando in me
praevaricatione.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p4"></span>**28.** *For* when I had brought them into
the land, *for* the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to them, then
they saw every high hill, and all the thick trees, and they offered
there their sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of
their offering: there also they made their sweet savour, and poured out
there their drink-offerings.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p5"></span>**28.** Nam introduxi  <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) in terram pro qua sustuleram manum
meam ad dandum eam ipsis: et viderunt omnem collem excelsum, et omnem
arborem frondosam: et sacrificarunt illic sacrificia sua, et obtulerunt
illic irritationem oblationis suae, et posuerunt illic odorem bonae
fragrantiae suae, et fuderunt illic sua libamina.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxiv-p8"></span><span id="ix.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p9"></span>He now descends to the wickedness of the
people, by which God was provoked after they had taken possession of the
land of Canaan, since they despised God after being so carefully warned.
He complains, therefore, that this was very disgraceful, since, after he
had put them in possession of the land of promise, they had never
desisted from purposely insulting him. This disgrace was intolerable,
since he had profited nothing by them in the wilderness: this witnessing
was sufficiently serious to stir them up. “Walk you not in the decrees
of your fathers: I am your God, observe you my law.” Since. therefore,
God drew them under obedience to himself, what a mark of pride it was
not to attend to that witness-bearing, but to pursue their own mad
career? In truth, the crime was the more atrocious when at length they
entered the land of Canaan, and had obtained so many victories, that
they did not learn by experience how God declared his pourer for the
very purpose of binding them closer to himself. For the numerous
benefits which God had conferred upon them were but so many bonds by
which they were bound more closely to him. This expostulation, then, is
not in vain, when he reproaches them by saying, *when they dishonored
me*, or rebelled against me. This was not a single crime, or simple
perfidy, but a continual delight in wantonly insulting him; for <span
id="ix.xxiv-p9.1"></span>גדף, *gedef*, signifies to reject, treat
contumeliously, or disdain. God, therefore, by this word wishes to
express the deliberate insolence of the people, while they rose so
wickedly against him as if they would spit in his face. The full meaning
is, that they were not only breakers of treaties and rebels when they
contaminated the land of Canaan with their superstitions, but were so
petulant that they professedly threw scorn upon God.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p10"></span><span id="ix.xxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p11"></span>Hence, *after I had brought them into the
land for which*, or concerning which, *I had lifted up my hand to give
it them, they saw,* says he, *every high hill, and every green* or
branching tree*, and there they sacrificed.* God wished to have one
altar built for himself, and sacrifices to be offered in one place; nay,
before the people had any certain and fixed station, God was unwilling
that any altar should be built to him of polished stones, that no trace
of it should remain; but a mound only was to be made of either turf or
rough stones. (<span id="ix.xxiv-p11.1"></span>[Ex
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#025)<span id="ix.xxiv-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.xxiv-p11.2"></span>[Deut.
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#006)<span id="ix.xxiv-p11.2"></span>.)
Now he says, whenever hills and branching trees were lying before them,
there they found enticements to superstition. This, therefore, is the
reproach which God now complains was offered to him. But this passage,
like many others, teaches, that not only is God’s worship corrupted when
his honor is transferred to idols, but also when men heap up their own
fictions, and contaminate God’s commands by the mixture. We must
remember, then, that there are two kinds of idolatries; the one being
grossest when idols are worshipped openly, and Moloch, or any Baal, is
substituted for the living God: that is a palpable superstition, because
God is in some sense cast down from his throne. But the other kind of
idolatry, although more hidden, is abominable before God, namely, when,
under the disguise of a name, men boldly mingle whatever comes into
their minds, and invent various modes of worship; as at present we see
in the papacy statues adored, and dead men invoiced, and God’s honor
violated in various ways. Hence, however, the papists chatter, they are
self-convicted, and the wonder is that they are not utterly silenced,
since their superstitions are so gross that even boys perceive them. But
there are other superstitions more specious and refined; for when they
have invented many things in honor of God, they will not bring forward
the names of either St. Barbara or St. Christopher, but the name of God
covers all those abominations. But we see that this excuse is frivolous,
when men assert that they have nothing else in their mind than the
worship of God. Not only does God wish worship to be offered to himself
alone, but that it should be without any dependence on human will: he
wishes the law to be the single rule of true worship; and thus he
rejects all fictitious rites. Hence the Prophet deservedly excuses the
Israelites, *because they turned their eyes towards every high hill and
every branching tree, and there offered the provocation of their
offering.* He calls it *the provocation of their offering,* since they
not only foolishly poured forth much money on those vitiated rites, but
also provoked God to anger. We see, therefore, that men not only lose
their labor when they decline from God’s commands, and rashly fatigue
themselves with their own superstitions, but they provoke God to a
contest, because they snatch from him the right of a lawgiver: for it is
in his power to determine how he ought to be worshipped; and when men
claim this power to themselves, it is like ascending to the very throne
of God. But if they follow the inventions of others, still it is setting
them up as lawgivers, while God is degraded from his tribunal. Thus it
is not surprising if God’s wrath is provoked by any sacrifices, besides
those which the law prescribes. And this is expressed very clearly by
Isaiah, when God announces that he will do what will frighten them all
as an unexpected prodigy: I will blind the eyes of the wise, says he,
and I will take away prudence from the aged. (<span
id="ix.xxiv-p11.3"></span>[Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)<span
id="ix.xxiv-p11.3"></span>.) And why so? because they worship me by the
precepts of men.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p12"></span>It follows, *And they offered their sweet
odor*, or agreeable fragrance. These two things seem contrary to each
other, that their offerings inflamed God’s wrath, and yet their savor
was sweet. But the Prophet. speaks ironically when he says, *their
incense was sweet-smelling*. By conceding this he derides them, since
they falsely supposed God was appeased in this way, although he reproves
them at the same time for defiling, by their corruption’s, that incense
which ought to have been of delightful fragrance. For the language of
Moses is repeated: The scent shall reach God’s nostrils, and he shall be
appeased. (<span id="ix.xxiv-p12.1"></span>[De
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010)<span
id="ix.xxiv-p12.1"></span>.) Since, then, the incense of the law was
sweet-smelling, God here bitterly reproaches the Jews for infecting that
good odor with their foulness. Hence the phrase is used in a sense
contrary to its direct meaning. Lastly, he says, *they have poured out
their drink-offerings there.* Here God reviews the various kinds of
oblations which he had fully prescribed in the law but he shows that the
Jews were rebellious against them all; and he further detects their
unbridled petulance, since they had not only violated the law in one
point, but had left no part untouched by their superstitions. God had
commanded sacrifices, but these they rendered polluting: he added
various oblations, yet all these they defiled: he desired libations to
be made, and will to be poured out, but this part of the service was not
kept pure from superstitions. Thus he shows that the people purposely
took all means of declaring war against God, when they falsely pretended
that nothing more was prescribed than to worship him as they pleased. It
follows —

<span id="ix.xxv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#029)<span id="ix.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p2"></span>**29.** Then I said unto them, What *is* the
high place whereunto ye go? And the name thereof is called Bamah unto
this day.

<span id="ix.xxv-p3"></span>**29.** Et dixi illis, ut quid  <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) excelsum quod vos ingredimini?  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) et vocatum fuit nomen ejus excelsum
usque ad hunc diem.

<span id="ix.xxv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxv-p7"></span><span id="ix.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p8"></span>Although there is no ambiguity in the
Prophet’s words, yet the sentence seems frigid, and interpreters, in my
judgment, have not understood the Prophet’s meaning. It may seem
spiritless, that God should ask*, what is the high place?* But it means
that they were not deceived through ignorance, since he had often
cautioned them against profaning the true and genuine worship, for he
often endeavored to draw them back again when he saw them wandering
after their own superstitions. Hence they are continually rebuked by the
prophets; and their obstinacy is the more apparent, since, nevertheless,
they followed their own perverseness. But because all these reproaches
were useless, God here enlarges upon their crime, since they were deaf.
*I have said*, therefore; that is, by means of prophets. For we know how
constantly the prophets discharged their duty, by urging them to worship
at one altar only. For this reason the people’s wickedness was greater;
whence God says, What is this? and why do you so greatly desire your
high places when they displease me, and you know my commands? your ears
are deaf, and obstructed by wickedness. On the whole, he asks how could
such madness seize upon them as to approach these high places, since he
had pointed out a place where he was to be sought and invoked. My
temple, says he, is neglected; meanwhile you run to high places, and
*yet it is known by the name of a high place.* There is no mystery in
this word; but God means that no reproaches or threats of his prophets
could prevent the people from worshipping on these high places. He says,
then, that the name was still used, since the same dignity and religious
regard for them still flourished, when their remembrance ought to be
utterly abolished. If God had only once pronounced that those high
places were not approved by him, all ought to have changed their course
instantly: he, exclaimed against them long and vehemently by his
prophets, and yet the name “high places” was constantly in everybody’s
mouth; it was famous among them, as if God ought to be sought there. Now
therefore we see that the Jews were condemned for too much pride,
because they not only failed to desert their high places when repeatedly
admonished, but they perniciously wished to oppose those places to God’s
sanctuary, although they were so many pollution’s. Hence we gather the
condemnation of the people’s obstinate malice, since fathers handed down
the name to their sons, so that through a continued posterity they
opposed these high places to the only sanctuary of God. It follows —

<span id="ix.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#030)<span id="ix.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p2"></span>**30.** Wherefore say unto the house of
Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Are ye polluted after the manner of
your fathers? and commit ye whoredom after their abominations?

<span id="ix.xxvi-p3"></span>**30.** Propterea dic ad domum Israel, Sic
dicit Dominator Iehovah, An in via patrum vestrorum vos polluti estis?
et post idola ipsorum  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) vos
scortamini?

<span id="ix.xxvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxvi-p6"></span><span id="ix.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p7"></span>Now at length the Prophet openly attacks
those by whom he was consulted. After showing that they sprang from
impure fathers — which was sufficiently manifest from their never
ceasing to provoke God in every age from the very beginning to the end —
he turns their own language against them, and asks, *whether they were
polluted after the superstitions of their fathers?* The old
interpretation is “truly;” but <span id="ix.xxvi-p7.1"></span>ה, *he*,
the mark of interrogation, does not allow of that. I am surprised at the
rendering of some expositors, are you not polluted?” as if the word were
<span id="ix.xxvi-p7.2"></span>הלוא, *hel-va*, for in my opinion they
pervert the Prophet’s sense, for this would make him ask absurdly,
*what? are you polluted in the way of your fathers? and are you gone
astray after their idols?* For when they were in exile, that
disinheriting ought to subdue them although they had been endued with a
more than iron pride: and then they pretended to piety, when they came
to the Prophet and desired to receive some consolation from him. Since,
therefore, they pretended to some modesty, God here asks them *how they
could pollute themselves in the way of their fathers?* what could it all
mean? the things are quite contrary: you approach my servant as if you
intended to submit your minds and your senses to my word; but when you
so feign yourselves to be attentive to my answers, *how does it happen
that you pollute yourselves in the way of your fathers?* This seems to
me the Spirit’s meaning. *You shall say*, then, *are you polluted in the
way of your fathers?* that is, are you so obstinate as not to reflect
upon your course, and never to look back? for you see how severely God
was revenged on your obstinacy: you now seek me in appearance, as if
this were your only refuge; then how is it that *you pollute yourselves
in the way of your fathers? and why do you commit fornication after
their idols?* It now follows —

<span id="ix.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031)<span id="ix.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvii-p2"></span>**31.** For when ye offer your gifts, when
ye make your sons pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all
your idols, even unto this day: and shall I be inquired of by you, O
house of Israel? *As* I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will not be inquired
of by you.

<span id="ix.xxvii-p3"></span>**31.** Et offerendo dona vestra,  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) et trajiciendo filios vestros per
ignem vos polluimini in omnibus idolis vestris usque hodie: et ego
inquirar a vobis, domus Israel? Vivo ego dicit Dominator Iehovah, si
inquirar a vobis.

<span id="ix.xxvii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxvii-p6"></span><span id="ix.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvii-p7"></span>He follows up the same sentiment, that it
was a monstrous sin that they so perniciously remained fixed in the
perverse imitation of their fathers: for they had been drawn off from
their lusts by God’s numerous chastisements, and then they pretended to
be afterwards disposed to obedience: God therefore here says, *why,
then, by offering your gifts, do you make your sons pass through the
fire, and pollute yourselves with all your idols even to this day?* For
this question concerns what is quite incredible and worthy of the
greatest surprise, since there was no way of reconciling the sufferings
of the Israelites in exile with their remaining obstinate in their
wickedness. But the Prophet here again deprives them of that vain
pretense with which they covered themselves in offering their gifts: he
concedes to them what was true, yet, at the same time, he objects, that
*they passed their sons through the fire, and were polluted in all their
idols*. He adds, at length, *shall I be inquired of by you?* I have
elsewhere explained that clause, which is now for the third time
repeated. Many take it in a different sense, that God will not deign to
answer them any more: but, in my opinion, he simply reproaches their
perfidy, because, when they approached the Prophet, they wished to blind
his eyes. *Shall I,* says he*, be inquired of you?* For <span
id="ix.xxvii-p7.1"></span>דרש, *deresh*, means to seek, and to attain
the end of our search, when the person asked answers, and the person
sought presents himself. But here God simply shows that they do not come
in a right mind, and that nothing else was imposed on them except
seeking him. But because that was almost incredible, hence he swears
that they were merely hypocritical in pretending to true piety in
suppliantly applying to the Prophet for an answer in God’s name, and
then wantonly deriding it, and impiously and wickedly using his name,
and thus profaning it.

<span id="ix.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ix.xxviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you do not
cease thy daily exhortations to repentance, but indulge us, and bear
with us, while you correct us by thy word and thy chastisements, that we
may not remain obstinate, but may learn to submit ourselves to thee:
Grant, I pray thee, that we may not offer ourselves as thy disciples
with feigned repentance, but be so sincerely and cordially devoted to
thee, that we may desire nothing else than to progress more and more in
the knowledge of thy heavenly doctrine, till at length we enjoy that
full light which we hope for through our Lord Jesus Christ. — Amen.

<span id="ix.xxix"></span>

<span id="ix.xxix-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Fourth.

<span id="ix.xxx"></span>

<span id="ix.xxx-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#032)<span id="ix.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxx-p2"></span>**32.** And that which cometh into your mind
shall not be at all, that ye say, We will be as the heathen, as the
families of the countries, to serve wood and stone.

<span id="ix.xxx-p3"></span>**32.** Et ascendit  <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) super spiritum vestrum non erit, quia
vos dixistis,  <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) Erimus sicut
gentes, sicut familiae terrarum, ut serviamus ligno et lapidi.

<span id="ix.xxx-p6"></span>**33.** *As* I live, says the Lord GOD,
surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury
poured out, will I rule over you:

<span id="ix.xxx-p7"></span>**33.** Vivo ego, dicit Dominator Iehovah,
Si non in manu robusta et brachio extento, et excandescentia effusa
dominabor super vos.

<span id="ix.xxx-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxx-p9"></span><span id="ix.xxx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxx-p10"></span>Now God discloses what those old men had in
their minds who, as well as the rest of the captives, came to the
Prophet for the purpose of inquiry, namely, a feeling of despair, since
they thought nothing would be more useful to themselves than to revolt
utterly from God, and to form themselves after the manner and rites of
the Gentiles; for they found themselves specially hated by the profane
nations, because they worshipped a peculiar God. Since, therefore, the
law separated them from all the rest of the world, that they might
escape that hatred and envy, they encouraged the perverse intention of
deserting God’s worship and passing over to the Gentiles. For they hoped
that those who had been formerly hostile would have shown themselves
favor-able. Now God not only announces that he would not suffer it, but
he asserts with an oath, *what you are thinking of shall not come to
pass, since I will draw you back with a strong hand, and with an
extended arm, and poured out wrath*. The meaning is, that although those
miserable captives desired to throw off God’s yoke and to mingle
themselves with the profane nations, yet God would have respect to his
covenant and not suffer them to be snatched away from him, just as a
master fetches back his fugitive slave; or like a prince who might
destroy the perfidious and rebellious, yet only chastises them that they
may groan under a hard slavery: this is the complete sense.

<span id="ix.xxx-p11"></span>But this passage is worthy of observation,
since in the present day the same thought makes many anxious; for the
name of sincere piety distresses them, and so they consult their love of
ease, and satisfy both themselves and others by uniting with the rest of
the world, and avoiding the hatred of mankind in consequence of their
religion. Others again desire to escape in any way from God, because
they feel him hostile to them, for the condition of the Church seems to
them much worse than that of the world at large. And truly as God takes
special care of it, so he chastises its faults more severely. We see
then how he spares unbelievers and foreigners, as if he connived at
their crimes: meanwhile his hand is always extended to chastise all who
profess to be in the number of the pious. But some would desire to bid
farewell to God, if they could choose for themselves. Hence I said we
must observe this passage. The Israelites thought that nothing would be
better than to be joined to the Gentiles and to become in all respects
like them, since they imagined that in this way they would enjoy
relaxation, since God was more lenient to the Gentiles than he had been
to them, and because they perceived themselves exposed to many dangers
and troubles, harassed by assaults and subject to daily threats. Hence
that perverse deliberation which is here reproved; — *what arises in
your mind,* says he*, shall not come to pass, because you say we shall
be as the nations and the families of the earth.* But we must also
consider the end, because the people’s folly was so great that they
thought they would be free from God’s chastisements, if they utterly
rejected all religion. God therefore denies that he would suffer it. Now
a clearer explanation follows: As I live, says he, *if I will not rule
over you with a strong hand and a stretched-out arm;* in this sense —
when they had removed all refuges he would yet be an avenger of his
rights and empire, so as to compel them to return to him, as we have
said, and thus violently to bring back the fugitives. We now see the
great stupidity of the people in thinking the only remedy for their
troubles to be in declining from true piety. Let us then be careful that
we do not harden ourselves when God chastises us, and desire to withdraw
from his power and dominion. Meanwhile God shows that he will rule, but
in some other way; because we know with what humanity he treated his
people, and what patience he exercised towards them, when they so often
provoked his wrath. He now announces *that he would be the Lord, but
with a strong hand and a stretched-out arm,* since he would forget his
former clemency and subject them to perverse bondage. As when a master
sees that he cannot obtain voluntary obedience from his slaves, he
compels them to the galleys, or other laborious works, until they become
half dead. God denounces that such will be the condemnation which he
will use against them, since they never profited by either clemency or
pardon. It follows —

<span id="ix.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#034)<span id="ix.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p2"></span>**34.** And I will bring you out from the
people, and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are
scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with
fury poured out.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p3"></span>**34.** Et educam vos e populis, et
colligam vose terris per quas fuistis dispersi, in manu valida, (*vel
robusta*,) et brachio extento, et excandescentia effusa.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxi-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p6"></span>He confirms the same sentiment, and at the
same time marks out the manner of his dominion. For when the Jews were
dispersed in captivity, they were like strangers to God’s jurisdiction:
they were mingled with the Gentiles, and their condition seemed very
like an exemption from God’s power. Now God signifies when he wishes to
recover his right, that he had a place at hand, *since he will bring
them out from the Gentiles, and gather them from the lands through which
they were dispersed*. We are aware, as we have often said before, that
it was a kind of abdication, when God expelled the ten tribes from the
land of Canaan and a part also of that of Judea. Since then they were
disinherited, they thought themselves free on their part, and they no
longer regarded the authority of God, since they ceased to be his
peculiar heritage when they were deprived of the promised land. Here God
reminds them that although he had emancipated them for the time, yet
they were in some sense under his hand, since he would collect them
again, and so subdue them, that they should not escape his authority. *I
will draw you back,* says he*, and gather you with an outstretched arm
and with a strong hand.* But what he adds concerning the fury of his
wrath does not seem consistent with this. For it was a sign of favor to
collect them again, although hard and sorrowful slavery awaited them;
yet they might perceive some taste of the divine goodness in gathering
them from exile. For we know the bitterness of their captivity;
especially under the Chaldaeans, by whom they were subdued. But the
phrase *wrath* may relate as much to the Gentiles as to the Israelites
themselves: yet I explain it more willingly of the Israelites, because
although God in reality shows that he did not altogether neglect them,
yet he asserts his right as a master grievously offended. Just as a
person who had lost his slave may afterwards receive him into his house,
and yet that house may be like a sepulcher, because he is either thrust
into a deep dungeon, or three or four times as much is exacted of him as
he can bear. So therefore God pronounces, although he may gather the
Israelites again under his hand, yet they shall feel him to be
displeased with them, since he nevertheless will require the punishment
of their impiety; and this will be better understood from the context.

<span id="ix.xxxii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#035)<span
id="ix.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p2"></span>**35.** And I will bring you into the
wilderness of the people, and there will I plead with you face to face.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p3"></span>**35.** Et introducem vos in desertum
gentium, et judicabor vobiscum illic  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) facie ad faciem.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p5"></span>**36.** Like as I pleaded with your
fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with
you, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p6"></span>**36.** Quemadmodum judicatus sum  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) cum patribus vestris in deserto terrae
Ægypti, sic disceptabo vobiscum dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxii-p9"></span><span id="ix.xxxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p10"></span>He specially marks this reason here,
which is a medium between rejection and reconciliation to favor: for
God’s bringing the Israelites out of Chaldaea might seem a sign of
favor, as if he were again their deliverer. But he here defines why he
intended to bring them forth, *namely, to plead with them in the desert
as with their fathers*. We know that when the people came out of Egypt
they did not possess the promised land, because they shut the door
against themselves by their ingratitude: but if there had been no hope
left, it was better for the people to spend their time under the tyranny
of Egypt than to pine away in the desert. For it was a kind of life
scarcely human to wander in a wilderness and to behold nothing pleasant
or agreeable; a mere solitude instead of cultivated fields, and nothing
but discomfort instead of beautiful flowers and trees and undulating
ground: and besides this, to feed on nothing but manna, to taste no
wine, to drink only water from the rock, and to endure heat and cold in
the, open air. Such freedom then was by no means agreeable, unless they
had hoped to become possessors of the land of Canaan. But a whole
generation was deprived of that advantage through their ingratitude. God
therefore appositely compares them to their fathers, who had gone forth
into the wilderness, and he says, *I will make you pass into the desert
of the nations.* Here he compares the desert of Egypt to that of the
Gentiles. Although the passage from the land of Canaan to Chaldaea is
partly across an unfruitful wilderness, yet I do not doubt that God here
metaphorically points out the state of the people after their return
from exile.

<span id="ix.xxxii-p11"></span>The complete meaning is, as he surrounded
their fathers throughout their whole life in the wilderness, so after
they were brought back from Chaldaea their life should be as solitary as
if they were banished to an obscure corner of the world, and to a
miserable and deserted land. Here, therefore, another region is not
intended, but the state of the people when dwelling in the land of
Canaan; although he speaks not only of that small band which returned to
their country, but of the liberty promiscuously given to all. He calls
that state a *desert of the Gentiles*, to which all were subjected,
whether they remained in distant regions or returned home. We must hold,
then, that God would be so far the deliverer of the people that the
benefit would reach only a few, since, when the multitude wandered in
the desert, they perished there, and did not enjoy the promised
inheritance. We now see how God established his sway over the
Israelites, when he did not suffer them to be perpetually captive, and
yet did not show himself appeased when he brought them back, since he
still remained a severe judge. *I will bring you,* therefore*, into the
desert of the nations*; this is the heat of anger of which he had
spoken, *and I will judge you*, or plead with you, *face to face*. He
signifies by these words, that although their return to Judea was
evident, yet he was not propitious, since he met them as an adversary.
*There*, says he, *I will meet with you face to face*, as when
contention is rife, adversaries become opposed, and contend hand to
hand: thus God here points out the extremity of rigor when he says*,
that he will dispute with them face to face*. But he says, that *he was
a pleader in the desert of Egypt,* and the sense extends to the future;
not that it ought to be understood that God descended to plead a cause,
and place himself at another’s tribunal; still it was a kind of pleading
when the people were compelled to feel that their impiety and obstinacy
was not excusable; and also when experience at the same time taught them
that God was by no means appeased, since his wrath was again stirred up.
Isaiah’s language is slightly different: Come you, says he, let us
reason together, I will plead with you. (<span
id="ix.xxxii-p11.1"></span>[Isa 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000)<span
id="ix.xxxii-p11.1"></span>.) He is there prepared to argue his cause,
as if with an equal. But the case is soon closed and the sentence
passed, since it is evident that the people are deservedly punished by
God on account of their sins. Thus he pleaded with their fathers in the
Egyptian desert when he deprived them all of entrance into the promised
land. And afterwards he often punished them for their murmurs, perverse
cravings, lusts, idolatries, and other crimes. Hence, let us learn that
God is pleading with us whenever any signs of his anger appear; for we
cannot derive any advantage from obstinate resistance: and hence nothing
remains but to accuse ourselves for our faults. It follows —

<span id="ix.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#037)<span id="ix.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p2"></span>**37.** And I will cause you to pass
under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant:

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p3"></span>**37.** Et transire faciam vos sub virga,
et adducam vos in vinculo foederis.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p6"></span>He follows up the same kind of
instruction, that the people were not permitted to perish because they
belonged to him, as if he had said that they should be always his,
whether they liked it or not. And yet he seems to promise here what was
very agreeable, that he would always esteem them as his flock. This is
the meaning of *to pass under the rod*; for <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>שבט, *shebet*, does not mean a scepter here,
nor a staff by which a delinquent is struck, but it means a shepherd’s
crook. It is, then, a simile taken from a shepherd who numbers and marks
his flock; and this phrase often recurs. It means, because God has once
acquired the people as his own, he cannot be rightly deprived of them.
The exiles, indeed, had imagined themselves free if they could blot out
of their minds and memories the name of the true God, and pollute
themselves with the defilement’s of the Gentiles. But God, on the other
hand, pronounces, that as a shepherd notices his sheep, and counts their
number, and makes them pass under his staff, like a king reviewing his
army, so he would reckon up his people, and not suffer any one to snatch
them from him, since he claims authority over them all without
exception. Now, therefore, we understand the sense of the words: whence
we gather again, that abandoned men gain nothing by their obstinacy, but
God’s really showing that the dominion which he has once assumed cannot
by any means be snatched away from him. So this passage teaches us the
kind of reward which awaits all apostates who think themselves
emancipated when they brutally indulge in impiety, because *God at
length will make them pass under the rod*, that is, he will call and
compel them to render an account, as if their profession of faith was
like a brand burnt in to their hearts.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p7"></span>He says, *in the bonds of a covenant*,
but in a different sense from what Hosea denominates a bond of
affection. (<span id="ix.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>[Ho
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#004)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>.) He is there treating of reconciliation;
but in this passage God pronounces that he will no longer be en-treated
by the Israelites. Hence, *the bond of the covenant* means the constancy
of his covenant, as far as he is concerned: and the, simile is suitable,
because God had bound his people to himself, on the condition that they
should be always surrounded with these bonds. Hence, when they
petulantly wandered like untamed beasts, yet God had hidden bonds of his
covenant: that is, he persevered in his own covenant, so that he
collected them all again to himself, not to rule over them as a father,
but to punish their revolt more severely. Here is a tacit comparison
between the Israelites and the Gentiles; for the Gentiles, through their
never approaching nearer to God, wandered away in their licentiousness
without restraint. But the state of the elect people was different,
since the end of their covenant was this, that God held them bound to
him, even if the whole world should escape from him. It follows —

<span id="ix.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#038)<span id="ix.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p2"></span>**38.** And I will purge out from among
you the rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them
forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter
into the land of Israel: and ye shall know that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p3"></span>**38.** Et purgabo  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) e vobis rebelles et perfidos in me: e
terra habitationum suarum educam impios, et ad terrain Israel non
ingredientur: et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p6"></span><span id="ix.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p7"></span>He continues the discourse which he had
commenced, namely, that God would not suffer the exiles to withdraw
themselves from him from the time he had adopted them. Then, since they
were bound by the blessing of redemption, although they thought
themselves far removed from the sight of God, after they were cast into
exile, he says he would be present *to gather them from the land of
their dwellings;* that is, wherever they were dispersed to bring them
out. Some suppose the phrase to include a promise of favor, because it
is said, I will purge you; but the word to choose, as I prefer to render
it, or to discern, means, that God will drag to light those who think
they have obtained hiding-places in which they can escape his eyes.
Although, therefore, they promise themselves complete exemption from
God’s authority, he, on the other hand, pronounces them deceived, since
he would collect them all together *from the land of their habitations,*
although they were dispersed in different places. God’s threatenings are
sufficiently evident from the second clause of the verse, *they shall
not come*, says he*, into the land of Israel, and you shall know that I
am Jehovah*. He confirms what we saw before, that when liberty was
granted them, they did not on that account become God’s Church, since he
had another reason for ruling over them, namely, to chastise them
severely for their wickedness. *They shall not come*, therefore, *into
the land of Israel*; that is, they shall remain, and grow corrupt in the
desert, as we know that to be a most severe punishment, when God swore,
that except two persons, Caleb and Joshua, no one should enter the land
of Canaan. (<span id="ix.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>[Num.
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024)<span id="ix.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>.)
So also in this passage, I will free you, that is, when your return to
your country shall be evident, a new light shall seem to have shone
forth, but yet reflect on what happened to your fathers; for although
redeemed, they perished in the desert, and never possessed the land of
Canaan. The same thing shall happen to you also:, since your return is
only a prelude to my favor: but you shall never return to the land of
Israel. But this is extended to those who returned and dwelt in their
native land. But we said that Judea was a place of exile since the
course of God’s favor was broken off, and God begun to plead with them
afresh, even when he had led them from their captivity at Babylon *And
you shall know that I am Jehovah:* as we said yesterday, God is
recognized by the reprobate, while they are compelled to acknowledged a
judge whose fatherly clemency they had despised. It follows —

<span id="ix.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#039)<span id="ix.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p2"></span>**39.** As for you, O house of Israel, thus
saith the Lord GOD; Go ye, serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter
*also*, if ye will not hearken unto me: but pollute ye my holy name no
more with your gifts, and with your idols.

<span id="ix.xxxv-p3"></span>**39.** Et vos domus Israel, sic dicit
Dominator Iehovah, Quisque idolis suis ite servite, postquam non auditis
me, et nomen sanctitatis meae,  <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290)
ne profanetis amplius in muneribus vestris, et idolis vestris.

<span id="ix.xxxv-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxv-p6"></span><span id="ix.xxxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p7"></span>Now again God expressly bears witness that
he rejects the Israelites because they infected the pure worship of the
law with their mixtures; for we said that they were deceived by a vain
imagination when they thought God pleased with their obedience, while
they worshipped him only half-heartedly. When they heaped up fictions,
they thought this diligence would be pleasing to God, because they
professed to acknowledge the true God as their redeemer. Here again he
announces that he rejects all half-worship, since he wished to have the
entire affections, and to admit no rival: *Now,* says he*, O house of
Israel, thus says Jehovah, Go each of you and serve your idols*, just as
if he would cast them off from his family. And yet we see that they were
always under his dominion; and thus some kind of inconsistency arises
when God rejects them from his sway, and yet retains them as his right.
But the liberty which is now granted is to show them that it is in vain
to worship God by halves.

<span id="ix.xxxv-p8"></span>This passage is peculiarly remarkable,
since at this time many are deceived, while they rest upon their own
inventions, and think that they best discharge their duty towards God
when they partially obey his commandments, and then pile up a great heap
of superstitions, partly received from their fathers and partly
fabricated by themselves. Again, scarcely one in a hundred will be found
who does not think it better partially to worship God than entirely to
devote themselves to idols; and this indeed is true as far as man is
concerned; for the impiety is more foul and detestable when men openly
reject God, and divorce themselves from him, and devote themselves to
idols, than if they partly worshipped God and partly idols. But in the
meantime, we see that God pronounces that he cannot bear this
profanation; and we must diligently notice the reason which is added;
for when gross and palpable impiety is indulged in, God’s name is not so
profaned as when clever men reconcile the pure worship of God with
superstitions: and for this reason, that monstrous Indecision  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) was in God’s sight worse than the
papacy; and why so? for although the papists profane God’s name, yet
their madness is at present so detected, that it openly appears that
they are idolaters; but that invention mingled darkness with light, and
infected the pure doctrine with its leaven. But God here exclaims that
he could not endure this deception when men profess to worship him, for
they defile themselves with superstitions, since profaneness is added to
impiety, and both are the result of hypocrisy. The rest tomorrow.

<span id="ix.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.xxxvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since you have once
redeemed us by the death of your only-begotten Son, that we may not
interrupt the course of thy favor by our ingratitude; but may we so
proceed in obedience to thy Gospel, that we may be brought at length to
the perfection of that grace which is commenced within us, and may
proceed more and more every day in true piety, till at length we are
gathered into thy heavenly kingdom, and enjoy the inheritance promised
and obtained for us by the same Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ix.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-Fifth.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p2"></span>We yesterday saw the reason why God
prefers that men should be entirely devoted to their superstitions
rather than mingle them with the resemblance of true piety, since this
is but a profanation of his holy name. He wishes to be kept separate
from all idols. Hence it is not surprising that he loosens the reins
from the Israelites, that they should cast themselves entirely on their
idolatries; and he repeats again what he had said, that his name was
profaned by gifts and idols, since the unbelievers pretended to worship
him, but at the same time transferred his glory to idols. Hence he does
not suffer himself to be trifled with in this way; so wherever offerings
and idols occur, we should notice that all mixtures by which the pure
simplicity of lawful worship is corrupted are condemned. It now follows
—

<span id="ix.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p1"></span><span
id="ix.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p2"></span>**40.** For in mine holy mountain, in
the mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, there shall
all the house of Israel, all of them in the land, serve me: there will I
accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the
firstfruits of your oblations, with all your holy things.

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p3"></span>**40.** Quia in monte sanctitatis meae,
in monte excelso Israel, dicit Dominator Iehovah, illic colent me tota
domus Israel, tota inquam in terra, illic propitius ero illis:  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) et illic requiram oblationes vestras
et primitias donorum vestrorum in omnibus sanctificationibus vestris.

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p6"></span><span id="ix.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p7"></span>God now directs his address to the
elect, or the remnant in whom he wished his Church to survive. Thus far
he has spoken of the whole body of the people: he says, although he
should free them from the hand of the Gentiles, yet that redemption
would be but partial, because they should perish in the desert, and
never enjoy the promised land. On the whole, he shows that those to whom
a free return to their own country was given were no less strangers than
if they had been exiles at the time, and always remained outlaws, since
their impiety prevented their restoration. God now addresses the true
Israelites, who were not only naturally descended from their fathers,
but were genuine and spiritual children, as Paul distinguishes between
those sons of Abraham born according to the flesh and to promise. (<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>[Ro
9:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>.) For this reason also it is said in <span
id="ix.xxxviii-p7.2"></span>[Ps
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#000)<span id="ix.xxxviii-p7.2"></span>.
— And surely God is good to Israel — to those who are upright in heart
for the Prophet here asserts that God is gracious towards the
Israelites; but since many hypocrites boast themselves to be members of
the Church, for the sake of correcting them, he restricts the sentence,
and does not reckon any, as true Israelites except the upright in heart.
So the same thing is repeated in <span id="ix.xxxviii-p7.3"></span>[Ps
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#000)<span id="ix.xxxviii-p7.3"></span>
and <span id="ix.xxxviii-p7.4"></span>[Ps
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#000)<span id="ix.xxxviii-p7.4"></span>.
— Who shall ascend into the mount of the Lord? But the perfidious and
the wicked did mingle themselves with the sincere worshipers; yet the
Prophet excludes them from the list of the faithful, since he says that
none should have a fixed station in God’s sanctuary unless the sound in
heart and the clean in hand. In the same sense also the Prophet formerly
taught, that although hypocrites proudly boasted themselves to be God’s
people, yet their names were not written in the secret catalogue of the
righteous. (<span id="ix.xxxviii-p7.5"></span>[Eze
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p7.5"></span>.) We now see how well those things which
seem inconsistent agree together, namely, that the Lord’s redeeming
Israel from the tyranny of the Gentiles would not profit them, and yet,
that they should come into the mountain of Israel and worship him
sincerely. Israel is here placed before us in a twofold light: for many
were Israelites in name; but here the Prophet is treating of the elect,
whom Paul calls a remnant of grace. (<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p7.6"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span
id="ix.xxxviii-p7.6"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p8"></span>*In the mountain,* says he, *of my
holiness, in the lofty mountain of Israel.* He does not call the
mountain high, because it was loftier than others, for we know that
there were many lofty mountains in the land of Judea; and Zion was but a
small hill; but we have elsewhere seen that it was preferred to lofty
mountains, because it excelled in dignity. Here our Prophet does not
regard the height of Mount Zion, but the singular glory with which it
was adorned; as if he had said that God resided there, and his glory
shone forth over all the loftiness of the world. Meanwhile I do not
doubt that this epithet is obliquely opposed to the high places, which
were consecrated everywhere, as we saw before. Since, therefore, the
people had erected altars in all elevated places of all kinds, here God
opposes one lofty mountain to all these, whose height had deceived those
wretched men who thought themselves when there, nearer to heaven. This,
therefore, is the reason why he calls it a high mountain. He says,
*there shall the whole house of Israel worship me, the whole,* I say,
*in the land*. It is not surprising that the whole house of Israel is
placed here without exception, because, as I have said, the Prophet does
not comprehend all those who boasted in that title, but he only means
the pure worshipers of God, who were the spiritual children of Abraham.
But here God describes the agreement in faith among all the faithful, as
if he had said that the people would be fresh, and would not follow
various speculations, as they formerly wandered, each after his own
superstitions, but there should be one common rule for all. So we are
taught by this passage that our worship does not please God except we
are bent upon a simple agreement of faith, and the celebration of his
name with our mouth. The impious often subscribe to different modes of
belief, but they have no regard to God: but, here we must hold the
principle, that God cannot be worshipped unless the doctrine of his law
flourishes. *The whole house of Israel*, I say, *in the land.* He
signifies by these words that the whole land of Israel, so long
contaminated by much filth, should be so sacred that the pure and
perfect worship of God should alone be beheld there. *In the land*,
then, purged from all defilement’s by which it was before polluted, he
adds a promise, *there will I be propitious to you.* We formerly saw
that all the people’s sacrifices were rejected, and that for one reason,
because they mixed them with their own inventions. Now, God pronounces
that he would be propitious to them, because he will be purely
worshipped, and his service shall no longer be vitiated by the perverse
comments of men. We here see, therefore, that God’s complacency or favor
is accompanied with a detestation of all superstitions, as we have often
mentioned previously. As, therefore, God abominates whatever is added to
the simple teaching of the law, so he asserts that he will be propitious
where he is purely worshipped according to the law. He adds, *and there
will I require your oblations*: the person is changed, but the sense
flows on readily: he says, *I will require* *your oblations*: he puts
one kind of oblation, but he includes them all, as will be seen at the
end of the verse. Although I confess that two different kinds of
offering are signified by the words, <span
id="ix.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>תרומה, *theromeh*, and, <span
id="ix.xxxviii-p8.2"></span>תנופה, *thenopheh*, yet they are often taken
for any kind of offering when used separately, a part being put for the
whole, as I have said. He says, then, that the offerings were grateful
to him, and he implies that by the word requiring, because we have seen
that the people’s gifts were refused when corrupted by foreign
superstitions, and God is said to exact the gifts which he approves.
*And the first-fruits of your gifts*, he says, that is, the flower or
excellence of your gifts, *in all your sanctifications*, that is, in all
my worship. It signifies, on the whole, when the Israelites betake
themselves to the simple doctrine of the law, their obedience is so
grateful to God, that their gifts please him, their offerings are taken
into account, and their whole worship is accepted. It now follows —

<span id="ix.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#041)<span id="ix.xxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p2"></span>**41.** I will accept you with your sweet
savour, when I bring you out from the people, and gather you out of the
countries wherein ye have been scattered; and I will be sanctified in
you before the heathen.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p3"></span>**41.** In odore bonae fragrantiae
propitius ero vobis cum eduxero vos e populis, et collegero vos ex
terris, per quas dispersi eritis, et sanctificabor in vobis in oculis
gentium.

<span id="ix.xxxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxix-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxix-p6"></span>He continues the same sentiment, namely,
that the people’s worship would be acceptable, when those who had
formerly been deceived by their superstitions had bidden them farewell,
and follow the law only. He uses the word “savor,” according to the
customary legal form, not because incense was pleasing to God, but
because external ceremonies were no vain discipline for the people when
they retained the truth. For surely incense of itself is of no
consequence, but God wished in a palpable manner to testify that he did
not reject the sacrifices which he had commanded. Hence, by these forms
of speech, the Holy Spirit signifies that God was truly appeased when
men approach him with sincere faith and repentance, and desire to be
reconciled, and suppliantly pray for pardon by ingenuous confession of
sin, and look up to Christ this is the savor which Moses everywhere
teaches was sweet, to God. But as the incense of the law was always
sweet, so all others were offensive, as we have already seen. The
Prophet, therefore, adds nothing new here, but confirms his former
teaching, that God delights in the pure and sincere worship of the
faithful, when they try nothing but by his law. *Afterwards,* says he*,
I will lead you out frown the people, and will collect you frown the
lands through which you have been dispersed*. He repeats the same words
which were formerly used, but with another sense and purpose; since,
while he redeems alike the hypocrites and his elect, the offered liberty
does not profit the hypocrites: because, wherever they might dwell,
their station was in the wilderness; and even in the very bosom of the
land of Canaan they were exiles, and their life was erratic, and they
were without any enjoyment of the promised inheritance, but wandered in
the desert, and through distant regions. For although they dwelt in the
midst of a crowd, yet such was their condition that God had deservedly
threatened them with remaining in the wilderness of the Gentiles even
till death. But now, when he speaks of the elect and the faithful, he
makes a difference between them and the hypocrites. For a question might
otherwise arise, since all were apparently alike, What was the tendency
of the promise, that some should be exiles and others return to their
inheritance? For Daniel never returned to his country, and there is no
doubt that other pious worshipers of God were at, the same time held
back: but we know how sinful a multitude returned to Judea when the
edict of Cyrus permitted them. For all were afterwards attentive to
their own private business: the temple was neglected; God was defrauded
of his first-fruits and offerings; they married strange wives; and
mingled polygamy with their sacrifices. (<span
id="ix.xxxix-p6.1"></span>[Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004)<span id="ix.xxxix-p6.1"></span>.)
We have already seen how sharply and severely the three last prophets
inveigh against them. Since many returned into the land of Canaan in
their unchanged state, and who had better remained in Chaldaea: for this
reason the Prophet directs his discourse to the elect, and says that
they should not only be brought back, but when restored, as if by
stealth, their worship would be pleasing to God in the land. *When,*
therefore*, I shall have brought you forth, I shall be sanctified in you
before the eyes of the Gentiles.* God was in some sense sanctified in
the wicked, because they became an illustrious specimen of his power
when the Chaldaeans were slain, and his temple erected a second time.
But here the Prophet, as I have said, separates the elect from the
reprobate, since God was sanctified in them in a special manner, when a
new Church emerged again, in which piety, true religion, and holiness of
life flourished. When, therefore, such a spectacle was offered to the
eyes of the Gentiles, then God asserted his glory among his faithful
ones. Lastly, these passages are to be read conjointly, *that he will be
propitious to them, and will be pleased with their first-fruits and
offerings, and he will be sanctified in the eyes of the Gentiles:* as it
is said in <span id="ix.xxxix-p6.2"></span>[Ps
114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002)<span id="ix.xxxix-p6.2"></span>,
When Israel went out of Egypt, Israel was God’s power, and Judea his
sanctification, or sanctity. It follows —

<span id="ix.xl"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p1"></span><span id="ix.xl-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#042)<span id="ix.xl-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p2"></span>**42.** And ye shall know that I *am* the
LORD, when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country
*for* the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to your fathers.

<span id="ix.xl-p3"></span>**42.** Et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah, cum
vos introduxero in terrain Israel, in terram  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) pro qua levavi manum meam, ut darem
ipsam patribus vestris.

<span id="ix.xl-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xl-p6"></span><span id="ix.xl-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p7"></span>For the sake of frightening them, he
threatened that he would be conspicuous to the reprobate, saying, *you
shall know that I am Jehovah*, — meaning, that he would be their judge:
hence he was known to the reprobate by proofs of his anger or wrath. But
now another kind of knowledge is denoted, namely, that which brings a
sweet taste of paternal love: *you shall know*, says he*, that I am,
Jehovah your God, when I shall have brought you in again*. He here shows
his full and complete benefit towards the faithful, which we saw before
was withheld from the reprobate. For they were brought back, because,
without exception, all were permitted to return to their country; for
then the yoke of an imperious tyranny was broken when they were freed
from the dominion of the Chaldees, and the king of the Medes had
permitted them to build the temple, and to dwell in the land of Canaan.
All were set at liberty, as I have said; but that was the only favor
conferred upon the wicked, since they all perished in the desert of the
Gentiles: but God’s elect were led by the hand to the land of Israel,
and there they really possessed the promised inheritance, since they
dwelt there as sons and lawful heirs. The hypocrites returned, as I have
said, but they never possessed the land by right of inheritance, for
they wandered hither and thither in the desert, and although they
resided at home, were always wandering exiles. We see, then, that a
singular privilege is intended when it is said, *I will be known by you,
when I shall have brought you back from the nations and the lands
through which you were dispersed, into the land concerning which I swore
that I would give it to your fathers*. Here a mark is inscribed, that
the faithful may know that this promise was not common to all: for the
dwelling in the land of Canaan of itself was not a matter of much
consequence, but here a value is expressed, that they should arrive at
that land as God’s heirs, and succeed their sacred fathers, to whom the
inheritance was promised. *As God swore that he would give* the land to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, this ought not to be restricted to them
personally, as we very well know; and yet they were its true heirs and
lords, as their sepulchers bear witness. They suffered vexation by
constantly changing their settlements, and were never at rest in one
residence. During life they were strangers, but their sepulcher was a
proof of true and lawful dominion: and in this way they transmitted the
hope of the promised inheritance to their posterity. Now, therefore, we
see with what intention the Prophet here says that the land was promised
to their fathers, that its value might raise the minds of the faithful
to consider the magnitude of the benefit. It follows —

<span id="ix.xli"></span>

<span id="ix.xli-p1"></span><span id="ix.xli-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#043)<span id="ix.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xli-p2"></span>**43.** And there shall ye remember your
ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall
lothe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have
committed.

<span id="ix.xli-p3"></span>**43.** Et recordabimini illic viarum
vestrarum, et omnium operum vestrorum, in quibus polluti estis: et
eritis excisi  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) in faciebus
vestris, in cunctis sceleribus vestris quae perpetrastis.

<span id="ix.xli-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xli-p6"></span><span id="ix.xli-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xli-p7"></span>Here God shows that he would at length be
propitious to his elect when they repented. Thus he signifies that there
was no other means of reconciliation than by the intervention of
repentance. And we must carefully remark this, as I have previously
mentioned. For we know with what security all men usually indulge
themselves, nor are the pious themselves affected with grief
sufficiently serious, when God invites them to the hope of safety and at
the same time offers pardon. They embrace indeed greedily what they
hear, but meanwhile they bury their sins. But God wishes us to taste his
goodness, that the remembrance of our crimes should be bitter, and also
that every one should judge himself that he may obtain pardon from him.
Now, therefore, we understand the Prophet’s intention. We saw a similar
passage in Jeremiah: this teaching occurs throughout the Prophets,
*there*, says he, *you shall remember me*. The circumstance of place is
to be noticed, because the Prophet means that after the elect shall have
returned to God’s favor, and he shall account them as true Members of
his Church, then they thought to be mindful of their former life and to
repent of their sins. As if he had said, as long as God afflicts you and
you remain under the tyranny of the Gentiles in exile, the sense of your
evils will compel you to groan, so the remembrance of your sins should
return, since, whether you will or not, their punishment will ever be
before your eyes, since they would be easily persuaded that their
sentence was usual and common. But he shows them that the sons of God
were not only mindful of their sins, when they feel themselves chastised
by him, and experience shows his hostility, but when received into favor
and in the enjoyment of their inheritance, they live under God’s wings,
and he cherishes them as a tender offspring: when, therefore, the
faithful are treated so humanely by God, yet the Prophet shows that in
their condition they ought to be mindful of their sins, *and all your
works in which you have been polluted*, says he. He now shows to what
purpose they were to be mindful. For the wicked are compelled to call
their sins to remembrance when God, by forcibly turning their attention
to them, draws them to consider what they desire to bury in oblivion.
But it is here said, *you shall be confounded in your own sight*. Since
the Hebrew word <span id="ix.xli-p7.1"></span>קוט, *kot*, signifies to
cut off, many interpreters take it for “ye shall be cut off;” that is,
you shall judge yourselves worthy of destruction among those whom God
will cut off and blot out of the earth. But this seems forced. Since the
same word sometimes signifies to litigate, and to become abominable, I
willingly take this meaning*, that they shall be abominable*, or
contemptible, *in their own sight*: that is, they shall be so ashamed,
as willingly and fully to acknowledge themselves utterly disgraced.
Hence Ezekiel means that the faithful should suffer voluntary disgrace,
that they may glorify God by the pure and genuine confession of their
shame. If any one prefers to expound it, you shall be condemned or
convinced, that sense will suit well enough; but I have already brought
forward what seemed more simple. For I said that this was the fruit of
penitence, when we he confounded before God and are vile and despicable
in our own eyes, and when we not only suffer ourselves to be condemned
by others, but inwardly reflect upon our own disgrace, and so of our own
accord prostrate ourselves before God. This then is the fruit of
penitence, this is true humility, flowing from genuine shame. At length
it follows —

<span id="ix.xlii"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#044)<span id="ix.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p2"></span>**44.** And ye shall know that I *am* the
LORD, when I have wrought with you for my name’s sake, not according to
your wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of
Israel, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="ix.xlii-p3"></span>**44.** Et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah,
cum fecero vobiscum propter nomen meum, non secundum vias vestras malas,
et secundum opera vestra corrupta, domus Israel, dicit Dominator
Iehovah.

<span id="ix.xlii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xlii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlii-p6"></span>Here at length God pronounces that his
glory would be chiefly conspicuous in the pity which he bestowed upon
those who were desperate and abandoned, gratuitously and solely with
respect to his own name. Hence Paul so specially celebrates; the grace
of God in the first chapter of the epistle to the Ephesians, as that
mercy by which God deigns to call his own elect in a peculiar sense —
his glory; for his glory extends farther than his pity. (<span
id="ix.xlii-p6.1"></span>[Eph. 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span id="ix.xlii-p6.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xlii-p7"></span>As thy name, so thy praise is extended
through all lands,  
(<span id="ix.xlii-p7.2"></span>[Ps
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#010)<span id="ix.xlii-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="ix.xlii-p8"></span>for God deserves no less glory when he
destroys the wicked than when he pities his own people. But Paul calls
that gratuitous favor glory *par excellence*, by which God embraced his
own elect when he adopted them. So also it is said in this passage,
*then you shall know that I am Jehovah, since I shall deal with you on
behalf of my name, and not according to your sins.* But when God wishes
his glory to shine conspicuously in gratuitous pity, hence we gather
that the enemies of his glory were too gross and open, who obscure his
mercy, or extenuate it, or as far as they can, endeavor to reduce it to
nothing. But we know the teaching of the papacy to be that God’s
gratuitous goodness either is buried or enfolded in dark obscurity, or
utterly vanish away: for they have invented a system of general merits
which they oppose to God’s gratuitous favor. For they distinguish merits
into preparations, good works acquiring God’s favor, and satisfactions,
by which they buy off the penalties to which they were subjected.
Afterwards they add what they call the suffrages of the saints; for they
fabricate for themselves numberless patrons, and various reasonings are
concocted for the purpose of obscuring God’s glory, or at least of
allowing only a few sparks to be visible. Since therefore the whole
papacy tends that way, we see that they professedly oppose God’s glory,
and those who defend such abominations are sworn enemies of God’s glory.

<span id="ix.xlii-p9"></span>For ourselves, then, let. us learn that we
cannot otherwise worship God with acceptance unless we adopt whatever
pleases him as pertaining to our salvation. For if we wish to come to a
debtor and creditor account, or to consider that he is in the slightest
degree indebted to us, we in this way diminish his glory, and as far as
is in our power we despoil ourselves of that inestimable privilege which
the Prophet now commends. Hence let us desire to acknowledge God in this
way, since he treats us with amazing clemency and pity out of regard for
his own name, and not according to our sins. And since that was said to
his ancient people because they returned to the land of Canaan, how much
more ought God’s gratuitous goodness to be extolled by us, when his
heavenly kingdom is at this day open to us, and when he openly calls us
to himself in heaven, and to the hope of that happy immortality which
has been obtained for us through Christ?

<span id="ix.xliii"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.xliii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we have already
entered in hope upon the threshold of our eternal inheritance, and know
that there is a certain mansion for us in heaven after Christ has been
received there, who is our head, and the first-fruits of our salvation:
Grant, I say, that we may proceed more and more in the course of thy
holy calling until at length we reach the goal, and so enjoy that
eternal glory of which you afford us a taste in this world, by the same
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ix.xliii-p3"></span>PRAISE TO GOD.

<span id="ix.xliii-p4"></span>After finishing this last Lecture, that
most illustrious man, John Calvin, the Divine, who had previously been
sick, then began to be so much weaker that he was compelled to recline
on a couch, and could no longer proceed with the explanation of Ezekiel.
This accounts for his stopping at the close of the Twentieth Chapter,
and not finishing the work so auspiciously begun. Nothing remains, kind
Reader, but that you receive most favorably and graciously what is now
sent forth to the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc23008.htm#fr_255) <span
id="ix.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span> Or, “before me.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc23008.htm#fr_256) <span
id="ix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span> That is, “to consult me.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc23008.htm#fr_257) <span
id="ix.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span> Or, “explain.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc23008.htm#fr_258) <span
id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span> That is, “which is a desire, or desirable.”
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc23008.htm#fr_259) <span
id="ix.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span> Though it signifies also “foulness or
pollution” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc23008.htm#fr_260) <span
id="ix.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p4"></span> “Statutes.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc23008.htm#fr_261) <span
id="ix.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p4"></span> Or, “were bitter against me.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc23008.htm#fr_262) <span
id="ix.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p5"></span> We have often spoken of this word. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc23008.htm#fr_263) <span
id="ix.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p6"></span> That is, “I have decreed.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc23008.htm#fr_264) <span
id="ix.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p4"></span> Or, “is desirable.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc23008.htm#fr_265) <span
id="ix.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p4"></span> That is, “they have despised my judgments
and my decrees.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc23008.htm#fr_266) <span
id="ix.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p5"></span> Violated, profaned: the word <span
id="ix.xv-p5.1"></span>חלל, *chelel*, is the same. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc23008.htm#fr_267) <span
id="ix.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p6"></span> Or, “filth, defilement,” as I have elsewhere
said. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc23008.htm#fr_268) <span
id="ix.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p4"></span> “My eye took no notice of them.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc23008.htm#fr_269) <span
id="ix.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p5"></span> “And I did not execute on them.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc23008.htm#fr_270) <span
id="ix.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p4"></span> Or, “statutes.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc23008.htm#fr_271) <span
id="ix.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p5"></span> Or, “pollution’s.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc23008.htm#fr_272) <span
id="ix.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p4"></span> That is, “that you may recognize, or
know.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc23008.htm#fr_273) <span
id="ix.xviii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p8"></span> At a period when the controversy
concerning the efficacy of sacraments is revived with all its former
virulence, and the authority of Calvin is often called in to decide
between conflicting statements, the language of this passage is worthy
of special notice. It would startle some of our modern critics to find
Calvin calling the Sabbath “a Sacrament of regeneration.” In treating
this class of subjects, it is essential to ascertain the exact ideas of
the medieval controversialists, and to perceive how very different they
were from our own. For example, Protestants of the present day would
pronounce any man unsound who allowed of more sacraments than two, while
Romanists would require all men to admit them to be seven; yet Calvin
would have no objection to the assertion that there are seventy. He used
the word for what is now currently expressed by the phrase “the means of
grace.” All aids and helps to the cultivation of the life of God in the
soul have been termed sacramental; and by using the word in a
comprehensive sense, the assertion is strictly true. Sabbaths are to us,
as well as to the Jews, means of grace, conducive to regeneration.
Calvin also asserts that these means of grace are never destitute of the
Holy Spirit’s virtue, except we render ourselves unworthy of the grace
which they contain. He differs from the papists, not with reference to
what a sacrament is in itself, but as to the need of faith in the
recipient for the personal advantage to be derived from it. The opinion
is absolutely expressed, that they always retain their nature, on the
principle that spiritual things always remain the same: man’s unbelief
is said to make no difference as to the reality of the grace inherent in
the sacrament; it only affects our reception of it. The spiritual
blessing is there: our want of faith is the only cause why the blessing
does not pass by the appointed channel to the unworthy recipient. As the
sentiments of our Reformer are sometimes quoted in support of views very
different from this, the reader’s attention is particularly directed to
his commentary on this verse, since the greatest errors arise from
interpreting controversial phrases by the modern meaning which the words
have acquired.

<span id="ix.xviii-p9"></span>The history of opinions which have
formerly prevailed on subjects deeply interesting to ourselves is always
serviceable towards the formation of accurate opinions. Hence we may
here refer to Dr. Lawrence’s Bampton Lectures for the year 1804, in
which the lecturer has distinctly stated the different views taken by
the Papists and the Schoolmen, the Lutherans and the followers of
Zwingle and Calvin. In Sermon 6, page 123, he makes the same statement
with reference to the papists as Calvin does in his comment on this
verse, viz., “asserting, among other extravagancies, that the Sacraments
are in themselves efficacious by virtue of their own operation,
exclusively of all merit in the recipient.” In notes on Sermon 3, page
276, he adds, “The Lutherans contended that the Holy Spirit was
efficacious in baptism;” and quotes Calvin’s letter to Melancthon,
“<span id="ix.xviii-p9.1"></span>non inanes esse figuras sed reipsa
praestari, quidquid figurant. In baptismo adesse spiritus efficaciam, ut
nos abluat et regeneret.” See also his opinion on the state of the
children of Christians dying unbaptized. Instit., lib. 4. cap. 15,
section 22. The view of Zwingle will be found in his <span
id="ix.xviii-p9.2"></span>*Declaratio de peccato originali*, Op., volume
2 page 118; and <span id="ix.xviii-p9.3"></span>Epist. Urbano Regio,
volume 1, p. 383; and of Bullinger, in his treathese <span
id="ix.xviii-p9.4"></span>*adversus Cala-baptistarum prava dogmata*,
page 57. It will not be expected that the admirers of Calvin will be
satisfied with Dr. Lawrence’s reasonings and conclusions; but the notes
to his discourses form a most valuable digest of the views of the
Schoolmen and the various Reformers of celebrity, selected with judgment
from the voluminous disputations of those stirring times. See also the
Dissertation on this verse at the end of this volume.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc23008.htm#fr_274) <span
id="ix.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p4"></span> Or, “irritated,” or, “exasperated me.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc23008.htm#fr_275) <span
id="ix.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p5"></span> That is I decreed.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc23008.htm#fr_276) <span
id="ix.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p6"></span> “Still I drew back” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc23008.htm#fr_277) <span
id="ix.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p9"></span> Or, “my burning wrath.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc23008.htm#fr_278) <span
id="ix.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p12"></span> Or, “against them.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc23008.htm#fr_279) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p7"></span> Supply “the fire,” as in the authorized
version.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc23008.htm#fr_280) <span
id="ix.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p6"></span> “For the copula ought to be resolved in
this way.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc23008.htm#fr_281) <span
id="ix.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p4"></span> “Wither,” or, “of what kind.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc23008.htm#fr_282) <span
id="ix.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p5"></span> Or, “why do you go there?” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc23008.htm#fr_283) <span
id="ix.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvi-p4"></span> Or, “filthiness.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc23008.htm#fr_284) <span
id="ix.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxvii-p4"></span> “By tendering your oblations.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc23008.htm#fr_285) <span
id="ix.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxx-p4"></span> We must understand the relative, “that
which arises.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc23008.htm#fr_286) <span
id="ix.xxx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxx-p5"></span> It is the participle, “you say.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc23008.htm#fr_287) <span
id="ix.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p4"></span> That is, “I will plead with you by
right.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc23008.htm#fr_288) <span
id="ix.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxii-p7"></span> That is, “I have pleaded.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc23008.htm#fr_289) <span
id="ix.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiv-p4"></span> Or, “I will choose.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc23008.htm#fr_290) <span
id="ix.xxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p4"></span> Verbally, meaning “my holy name.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc23008.htm#fr_291) <span
id="ix.xxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p9"></span> Calvin’s language is here rather
remarkable. He calls the clinging to the worship of God, while bowing
down to idols, <span id="ix.xxxv-p9.1"></span>*illud prodigiosum*
Interim, which is in the French translation <span
id="ix.xxxv-p9.2"></span>*ce beau monstre* D’interim. The same idea is
also expressed by the word <span id="ix.xxxv-p9.3"></span>*commentum*,
translated <span id="ix.xxxv-p9.4"></span>*ceste belle invention ainsi
forgee*.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc23008.htm#fr_292) <span
id="ix.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxviii-p4"></span> Or, “I will embrace them with my
favor.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc23008.htm#fr_293) <span
id="ix.xl-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xl-p4"></span> He had used <span
id="ix.xl-p4.1"></span>אדמה, *admeh*, before, but he now uses <span
id="ix.xl-p4.2"></span>ארף, *aretz*. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc23008.htm#fr_294) <span
id="ix.xli-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xli-p4"></span> Or, “abominable.” — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes and Comments](cc23009)
