[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc23010)  [Next](cc23012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 23: Ezekiel, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>A LIST OF THE CHIEF INTERPRETERS,  
ANCIENT AND MODERN.

<span id="xii-p2"></span>1. Jewish Commentators.

<span id="xii-p3"></span>**Schelomoh Jarchi Ben Jizchak,** commonly
called Solomon Jarchi, son of Isaac, known to the Jews by the word
*Raschi*, made up of the initials of <span id="xii-p3.1"></span>רבי שלמה
ירחי, *Rabbi Schelomoh Jarchi*, was an eminent commentator on the whole
of the Old Testament. the was born at Troyes, in Champagne, a province
of France, and died A.D. 1180. His chief value arises from his having
collected the best traditionary interpretations of his ancestors from
the earliest times.

<span id="xii-p4"></span>**David Kimchi**, son of Joseph, known to the
Jews by the name of *Radak*, from the initial letters of <span
id="xii-p4.1"></span>רבי דור קמחי, *Rabbi David Kimchi*, was a Spaniard.
Though he lived so lately as the twelfth ten bury, his interpretation is
much valued by both Jews and. Christians for its grammatical accuracy.
His commentary on Ezekiel is found in the Rabbinical Writings, edited by
Buxtorf, A. D. 1618. Basil, 2 volumes.; and also 1724, Amsterdam.

<span id="xii-p5"></span>**Isaac Abarbanel**, a Portuguese Jew, born at
Lisbon, A.D. 1437, and died in Apulia, A.D. 1508. His comments on
Ezekiel appeared first at Pesaro, in Italy, A.D. 1520; and then again at
Amsterdam, A.D. 1641. He is highly esteemed for his extensive erudition
and his clear style.

<span id="xii-p6"></span>**Shelomoh Ben Melech**, a Spaniard, who lived
at Constantinople in the middle of the sixteenth century. Under the
title, *The Perfection of Beauty*, he wrote an elaborate commentary on
the Old Testament, Constantinople, A.D. 1554, It was reprinted at
Amsterdam, A.D. 1661 and 1685, fol., with the additions of Jacob
Abendana. Tympius and Danzius have illustrated the manner in which he
has improved upon or misunderstood D. Kimchi, according to Wolf,
Bibliothec. Hebr., volume 4 pages 989, 991.

<span id="xii-p7"></span>These references to Jewish interpreters will
enable the reader to judge how far their opinion on the sense of a
passage is decisive. It must be remembered that they all lived more than
a thousand years after the Christian era., and that consequently they
are not to be esteemed of decisive authority.

<span id="xii-p8"></span>Further information may be obtained from Jo.
Christ. Wolf’s Bibliotheca Hebraee, volume 2, page 368, and elsewhere.
Le Long and Boerner’s Bib. Sac. ab. A. G. Masch, pt. 1, p. 135; and De
Rossi’s Annal. Hebrews Typ., Parmae, 1795, page 131; and Hartwell Horne,
volume 2, part 2, where he has chiefly followed Carpzov.

<span id="xii-p9"></span>2. The Early Fathers.

<span id="xii-p10"></span>**Origin** (between A.D. 185 and 254) appears
to have commented very voluminously on Ezekiel, as, from the fragments
which remain, it appears that the twentieth volume only reached to chap.
11. Jerome has translated fourteen homilies of Origen’s on Ezekiel into
Latin, which are found in his works. *Edit*., Vallarsii, Venet. 1736,
tom. 5 page 877; and in *De La Rue’s* collected edition of Origen’s
Works, volume 3, page 325.

<span id="xii-p11"></span>**Ephrem** of Edessa, who lived about A.D.
370, wrote a Commentary on this Prophet in Syriac, which is found in
volume H of his works, as edited by Pet. Benedict, in Syriac and Latin,
at Rome, 1740, fol.

<span id="xii-p12"></span>**Eusebius Hieronymus** — the well-known
Jerome — wrote fourteen books of Comments on Ezekiel. See his works,
edit. Martiani, volume 3, and Valarsii, volume 5 Rosenmuller esteems his
interpretations highly, and often quotes them at length. Smith’s
Biographical Dictionary, Art. Ineronymus, page 465, states, that the
fourteen books of his Comments on this Prophet were written at
intervals, between A.D. 411 and 414, having been commenced immediately
after his Comments on Isaiah, but repeatedly broken off. See also the
prolegomena to the 126th Epistle to Marcellinus, etc.; the Benedictine
edition, volume 3, page 1072.

<span id="xii-p13"></span>**Theodoret**, Bishop of Cyrus, in Syria, who
lived about A.D. 420, wrote a Commentary on Ezekiel, found in his works,
edited by Jac. Sirmond, volume 2 page 300; and in the edit. Halen.,
volume 2 part 2.

<span id="xii-p14"></span>3. Commentators of the  
Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries.

<span id="xii-p15"></span>**Jo. Cecolampadh** <span
id="xii-p15.1"></span>Commentarius in Ezekielem. Argentorati, 1534, 4to;
Basileae, 1548, fol.

<span id="xii-p16"></span>**Victorini Strigelh** <span
id="xii-p16.1"></span>Ezechiel Propheta ad Ebraicam veritatem
recognitus, et argumentis atque scholiis illustratus. Lipsiae, 1564,
1575, 1579, 8vo.

<span id="xii-p17"></span>**Hectoris Pinti** <span
id="xii-p17.1"></span>Commentarius in Ezechielem. Salmanticae, 1568,
fol.; Antverp, 1570, 1582; Lugduni, 1581, 4to; Ibid. 1584, fol.; Colon.,
1615, 4to.

<span id="xii-p18"></span>**Phil. Heilbrunner** <span
id="xii-p18.1"></span>Ezechielis Prophetae vaticinia illustrata.
Lavingae, 1587, 8vo.

<span id="xii-p19"></span>**Hieron. Padri Et Jo. Bapt. Villalpandi**, in
Ezechielem Explanationes. Romae, 1596, 3 vols. fol.

<span id="xii-p20"></span>This work is much praised and quoted by
Rosenmuller. The first volume contains the Comments of Pradus on the
first six-and-twenty chapters: he died before it was published; so that
his coadjutor edited it, and compiled the two latter volumes. They had
access to a <span id="xii-p20.1"></span>*Catena Patrum Graecorum in
Ezechielem*, preserved in the Vatican Library, which they inserted,
translated into Latin by a member of their own order; and they enriched
their work with valuable illustrations of the city and temple at
Jerusalem. A full description of the work will be found in <span
id="xii-p20.2"></span>*den Nachrichten von einer Hallischen* Bibliothek,
part 8 page 18, and foll.

<span id="xii-p21"></span>**Amandi Polani A Polansdorf** <span
id="xii-p21.1"></span>Commentaria in Ezechielem. Basileae, 1601, 4to;
and 1608, 4to.

<span id="xii-p22"></span>A digest of public lectures delivered in the
old Academy at Basil.

<span id="xii-p23"></span>**Franc. Junh** <span
id="xii-p23.1"></span>Commentaria in Ezechielem Prophetam. Genevae,
1609, fol.; and 1610, 8vo.

<span id="xii-p24"></span>**Jo. Maldonati** <span
id="xii-p24.1"></span>Commentarii in Ezechielem. Moguntiae, 1611, small
4to.

<span id="xii-p25"></span>This work, by a learned Jesuit, is very
explanatory. The Latin translation is good, and the Jewish
interpretations freely used. Many Hebrew words we have found well
explained.

<span id="xii-p26"></span>**Gasper Sancth** <span
id="xii-p26.1"></span>Commentarius in Ezechielem. Lugduni, 1612, 1619,
fol.

<span id="xii-p27"></span>**Jac. Brandmulleri** <span
id="xii-p27.1"></span>Commentarius in Ezechielem. Basil. 1621, 4to.

<span id="xii-p28"></span>An Exposition of the Prophecy of Ezekiel. By
GEORGE GREENHILL. London, 1645. 5 vols. 4to.

<span id="xii-p29"></span>Doctrinal and practical lectures delivered to
a congregation at Stepney by the writer, a member of the Westminster
Assembly of Divines. Excellent of its kind, but not critical. Various
editions, originally published at different times, from 1645 to 1658.

<span id="xii-p30"></span>**Jo. Cocceh** <span
id="xii-p30.1"></span>Commentarius in Ezekielem. 1668, 4to.

<span id="xii-p31"></span>4. Later Commentators.

<span id="xii-p32"></span>**George Calixti** <span
id="xii-p32.1"></span>Scholae Propheticae ex Prelectionibus
in...Ezekielem collectae. Quedlinburgi, 1715, 4to.

<span id="xii-p33"></span><span id="xii-p33.1"></span>Das Zeugniss Iesu
aus dem Propheten Ezechiel durch den Geist der Weissagung dargethan von
Wilhelm Petersen. Francofurti, 1719, 4to.

<span id="xii-p34"></span>**Jo. Frid. Starckh, V.D.M**., <span
id="xii-p34.1"></span>Francofurtani, Commentarius in Prophetam
Ezechielem. Francof. ad Moen., 1731, 4to.

<span id="xii-p35"></span>A laborious, useful, and practical Commentary.

<span id="xii-p36"></span>**George Costard** <span
id="xii-p36.1"></span>Dissertationes H. Critico-Sacrae quarum prima
explicata Ezech. ch. 13:18. Oxon. 1752, 8vo.

<span id="xii-p37"></span><span id="xii-p37.1"></span>Ezechiel aufs Neue
aus dem Hebraischen ubersetzt, und mit kurgen Anmerkungen fur unstudirte
Leser begleitet von Joh. Carl. Volborth. Goett. 1787.

<span id="xii-p38"></span>For an account of this work, see Eichhorn’s
Allgem. Biblioth. der Bib. Lit., volume 1, page 807.

<span id="xii-p39"></span>An Attempt towards an Improved Version, a
Metrical Arrangement, and an Explanation of the Prophet Ezekiel. By Wm.
Newcome, D.D., Bishop of Waterford, and afterwards Archbishop of Armagh.
Dublin, 1788, 4to.

<span id="xii-p40"></span>This is an invaluable work: to the mere
English reader of this Prophet. Tegg, in his edition of 1836, 1 volume
8vo, page 294, has rendered it very accessible: it is safe, sound, and
judicious, with excellent notes. See also Eichhorn Bibl., volume 2, page
131; and J. D. Michaelis Neue orient. u. exeget. Bibli., pt. 6 page 87.

<span id="xii-p41"></span>**Hermanni Venema** <span
id="xii-p41.1"></span>Lectiones Academicae ad Ezechielem. Part 1 usque
ad cap. 21 Edidit. Jo. Hen. Verschuir. Leovard, 1790, 4to, 2 parts. See
again, Eich. Bibl., volume 3, page 694.

<span id="xii-p42"></span>**Jo. Godofr** <span
id="xii-p42.1"></span>Eichhorn die Biblischen Propheten, volume 2 and
volume 3. Ezekielis Vaticinia. Gotting. 1818, 1819.

<span id="xii-p43"></span>The Temple of Ezekiel; viz., an Elucidation of
the 40th and following Chapters. By Solomon Bennett, R.A., of Berlin.
London, 1824. 4to.

<span id="xii-p44"></span>**Em. F. Rosenmuller’s** <span
id="xii-p44.1"></span>Scholia in Ezekielem. 2 vols. 8vo, 2d edition.
1826. Lipsiae.

<span id="xii-p45"></span>Invaluable. The Editor is much indebted to it
for many references to other valuable works.

<span id="xii-p46"></span>**Havernick’s** Introduction to Ezekiel,
translated from the German by the Revelation F.W. Gotch, M.A. See
Kitto’s Journal of Sacred Literature, No. 1, January 1848; also the
Article “Ezekiel” — Kitto’s Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ancient Versions and Codexes](cc23012)
