<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst09)  [Next](myst11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VII. Mysticism and Magic

<span id="an_iii.vii"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p1"></span>It<span id="an_iii.vii-p1.1"></span> is
unnecessary to examine in detail the mistakes—in ecclesiastical
language, the heresies—into which men have been led by a feeble, a
deformed, or an arrogant mystical sense. The number of these mistakes is
countless; their wildness almost inconceivable to those who have not
been forced to study them. Too often the loud voices and strange
declarations of their apostles have drowned the quieter accents of the
orthodox.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p2"></span>It seems as though the moment of puberty
were far more critical in the spiritual than it is in the physical life:
the ordinary dangers of adolescence being intensified when they appear
upon the higher levels of consciousness. In the condition of psychic
instability which is characteristic of his movement to new states, man
is unusually at the mercy of the suggestions and impressions which he
receives. Hence in every period of true mystical activity we find an
outbreak of occultism, illuminism, or other perverted spirituality
and—even more dangerous and confusing for the student—a borderland
region where the mystical and psychical meet. In the youth of the
Christian Church, side by side with genuine mysticism descending from
the Johannine writings or brought in by the Christian Neoplatonists, we
have the arrogant and disorderly transcendentalism of the Gnostics:
their attempted fusion of the ideals of mysticism and magic. During the
Middle Ages and the Renaissance there are the spurious mysticism of the
<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_150"></span>
Brethren of the Free Spirit, the occult propaganda of Paracelsus, the
Rosicrucians, the Christian Kabalists; and the innumerable pantheistic,
Manichean, mystery-making, and Quietist heresies which made war upon
Catholic tradition. In the modern world, Theosophy in its various forms
is probably the most widespread and respectable representative of the
occult tradition.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p3"></span>The root idea from which these varied
beliefs and practices develop is always the same; and, since right
doctrine is often most easily defined by contrast with its opposite, its
study is likely to help us to fix more precisely the true characters of
mysticism. Leaving therefore the specifically mystical error of Quietism
until we come to the detailed discussion of the contemplative states, we
will consider here some of those other supernormal activities of the
self which we have already agreed to classify as magic: and learn
through them more of those hidden and half-comprehended forces which she
has at her command.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p4"></span>The word “magic” is out of fashion,
though its spirit was never more widely diffused than at the present
time. Thanks to the gradual debasement of the verbal currency, it
suggests to the ordinary reader the production of optical illusions and
other parlour tricks. It has dragged with it in its fall the terrific
verb “to conjure,” which, forgetting that it once undertook to compel
the spirits of men and angels, is now content to produce rabbits from
top-hats. These facts would have little importance, were it not that
modern occultists—annoyed, one supposes, by this abuse of their ancient
title—constantly arrogate to their tenets and practices the name of
“Mystical Science.” Vaughan, in his rather supercilious survey of the
mystics, classed all forms of white magic, alchemy, and occult
philosophy as “theurgic mysticism,”  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) and, on the other side of the shield,
the occultists display an increasing eagerness to claim the mystics as
masters in their school.  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) Even
the “three-fold way” of mysticism has been adopted by them and
relabelled “Probation, Enlightenment, Initiation.”  <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p8"></span>In our search for the characteristics of
mysticism we have already marked the boundary which separates it from
magic: and tried to define the true nature and intention of occult
philosophy.  <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) We saw that it
represented the instinctive human “desire to know more” applied to
suprasensible things. For good or ill this desire, and the occult
sciences and magic arts which express it, have haunted humanity from the
earliest times. No student of man <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>
<span id="an_iii.vii-Page_151"></span> can neglect their investigation,
however distasteful to his intelligence their superficial absurdities
may be. The starting-point of all magic, and of all magical religion—the
best and purest of occult activities—is, as in mysticism, man’s
inextinguishable conviction that there are other planes of being than
those which his senses report to him; and its proceedings represent the
intellectual and individualistic results of this conviction—his craving
for the hidden knowledge. It is, in the eyes of those who really
practise it, a *moyen de parvenir*: not the performance of illicit
tricks, but a serious attempt to solve the riddle of the world. Its
result, according to a modern writer upon occult philosophy, “comprises
an actual, positive, and realizable knowledge concerning the worlds
which we denominate invisible, because they transcend the imperfect and
rudimentary faculties of a partially developed humanity, and concerning
the latent potentialities which constitute—by the fact of their
latency—the interior man. In more strictly philosophical language, the
Hermetic science is a method of transcending the phenomenal world and
attaining to the reality which is behind phenomena.”  <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p11"></span>Though fragments of this enormous claim
seem able to justify themselves in experience, the whole of it cannot be
admitted. The last phrase in particular is identical with the promise
which we have seen to be characteristic of mysticism. It presents magic
as a pathway to reality; a promise which it cannot fulfil, for the mere
transcending of phenomena does not entail the attainment of the
Absolute. Magic even at its best extends rather than escapes the
boundaries of the phenomenal world. It stands, where genuine, for that
form of transcendentalism which does abnormal things, but does not lead
anywhere: and we are likely to fall victims to some kind of magic the
moment that the declaration “I want to know” ousts the declaration “I
want to be” from the chief place in our consciousness. The true “science
of ultimates” must be a science of pure Being, for reasons which the
reader is now in a position to discover for himself. But magic is merely
a system whereby the self tries to assuage its transcendental curiosity
by extending the activities of the will beyond their usual limits;
sometimes, according to its own account, obtaining by this means an
experimental knowledge of planes of existence usually—but
inaccurately—regarded as “supernatural.”

<span id="an_iii.vii-p12"></span>Even this modified claim needs
justification. For most persons who do not specialize in the eccentric
sciences the occultist can only be said to exist in either the
commercial or the academic sense. The fortune-teller represents one
class; the annotator of improper *grimoires* the other. In neither
department is the thing supposed <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span
id="an_iii.vii-Page_152"></span> to be taken seriously: it is merely the
means of obtaining money, or of assuaging a rather morbid curiosity.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p13"></span>Such a view is far from accurate. In
magic, whether regarded as a superstition or a science, we have at any
rate the survival of a great and ancient tradition, the true meaning of
whose title should hardly have been lost in a Christian country; for it
claims to be the science of those Magi whose quest of the symbolic
Blazing Star brought them once, at least, to the cradle of the Incarnate
God. Its laws, and the ceremonial rites which express those laws, have
come down from immemorial antiquity. They appear to enshrine a certain
definite knowledge, and a large number of less definite theories,
concerning the sensual and supersensual worlds, and concerning powers
which man, according to occult thinkers, may develop if he will.
Orthodox persons should be careful how they condemn the laws of magic:
for they unwittingly conform to many of them whenever they go to church.
All ceremonial religion contains some elements of magic. The art of
medicine will never wholly cast it off: many centuries ago it gave birth
to that which we now call modern science. It seems to possess
inextinguishable life. This is not surprising when we perceive how
firmly occultism is rooted in psychology: how perfectly it is adapted to
certain perennial characteristics of the human mind—its curiosity, its
arrogance, its love of mystery.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p14"></span>Magic, in its uncorrupted form, claims
to be a practical, intellectual, highly individualistic science; working
towards the declared end of enlarging the sphere on which the human will
can work, and obtaining experimental knowledge of planes of being
usually regarded as transcendental. It is the last descendant of a long
line of teaching—the whole teaching, in fact, of the mysteries of Egypt
and Greece—which offered to initiate man into a certain secret knowledge
and understanding of things. “In every man,” says a modern occultist,
“there are latent faculties by means of which he can acquire for himself
knowledge of the higher worlds . . . as long as the human race has
existed there have always been schools in which those who possessed
these higher faculties gave instruction to those who were in search of
them. Such are called the occult schools, and the instruction which is
imparted therein is called esoteric science or the occult teaching.”
 <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p16"></span>These occult schools, as they exist in
the present day, state their doctrine in terms which seem distressingly
prosaic to the romantic inquirer; borrowing from physics and psychology
theories of vibration, attraction, mental suggestion and subconscious
activity which can be reapplied for their own purposes. According to its
modern teachers, magic is simply an extension of the theory <span
id="page_153">p. 153</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_153"></span> and
practice of volition beyond the usual limits. The will, says the
occultist, is king, not only of the House of Life, but of the universe
outside the gates of sense. It is the key to “man limitless” the true
“ring of Gyges,” which can control the forces of nature known and
unknown. This aspect of occult philosophy informs much of the cheap
American transcendentalism which is so lightly miscalled mystical by its
teachers and converts; Menticulture, “New” or “Higher Thought,” and the
scriptures of the so-called “New Consciousness.” The ingenious authors
of “Volo,” “The Will to be Well,” and “Just How to Wake the Solar
Plexus,” the seers who assure their eager disciples that by
“Concentration” they may acquire not only health, but also that wealth
which is “health of circumstance,” are no mystics. They are magicians;
and teach, though they know it not, little else but the cardinal
doctrines of Hermetic science, omitting only their picturesque
ceremonial accompaniments.  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p18"></span>These cardinal doctrines, in fact, have
varied little since their first appearance early in the world’s history:
though, like the doctrines of theology, they have needed re-statement
from time to time. In discussing them I shall quote chiefly from the
works of Eliphas Lévi; the pseudonym under which Alphonse Louis
Constant, the most readable occult philosopher of the nineteenth
century, offered his conclusions to the world.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p19"></span>The tradition of magic, like most other
ways of escape which man has offered to his own soul, appears to have
originated in the East. It was formulated, developed, and preserved by
the religion of Egypt. It made an early appearance in that of Greece. It
has its legendary grand master in Hermes Trismegistus, who gave to it
its official name of Hermetic Science, and whose status in occultism is
much the same as that occupied by Moses in the tradition of the Jews.
Fragmentary writings attributed to this personage and said to be derived
from the Hermetic books, are the primitive scriptures of occultism: and
the probably spurious Table of Emerald, which is said to have been
discovered in his tomb, ranks as the magician’s Table of Stone.  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) In Gnosticism, in the allegories of
the Kabalah, in theosophy, in secret associations which still exist in
England, France, and Germany—and even in certain practices embedded in
the ceremonial of the Christian Church—<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>
<span id="an_iii.vii-Page_154"></span> the main conceptions which
constitute the “secret wisdom” of magical tradition have wandered down
the centuries. The baser off-shoots of that tradition are but too well
known, and need not be particularized.  <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p22"></span>Like the world which it professes to
interpret, magic has a body and a soul: an outward vesture of words and
ceremonies and an inner doctrine. The outward vesture, which is all that
the uninitiated are permitted to perceive, consists of a series of
confusing and often ridiculous symbolic veils: of strange words and
numbers, grotesque laws and ritual acts, personifications and
mystifications. The outward vestures of our religious, political, and
social systems—which would probably appear equally irrational to a
wholly ignorant yet critical observer—offer an instructive parallel to
this aspect of occult philosophy. Stripped of these archaic formulae,
symbols, and mystery-mongerings, however, magic as described by its
apologists, is found to rest upon three fundamental axioms which can
hardly be dismissed as ridiculous by those who listen respectfully to
the ever-shifting hypotheses of psychology and physics.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p23"></span>(1) The first axiom declares the
existence of an imponderable “medium” or “universal agent,” which is
described as beyond the plane of our normal sensual perceptions yet
interpenetrating and binding up the material world. This agent, which is
not luminous and has nothing to do with the stars, is known to the
occultists by the unfortunate name of “Astral Light”: a term originally
borrowed from the Martinists by Eliphas Lévi. To live in conscious
communication with the “Astral Light” is to live upon the “Astral
Plane,” or in the Astral World: to have achieved, that is to say, a new
level of consciousness. The education of the occultist is directed
towards this end.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p24"></span>This doctrine of the Astral Plane, like
most of our other diagrams of the transcendent, possesses a respectable
ancestry, and many prosperous relations in the world of philosophic
thought. Traces of it may even be detected under veils in the
speculations of orthodox physics. It is really identical with the
“Archetypal World” or *Yesod* of the Kabalah—the “Perfect Land” of old
Egyptian religion—in which the true or spirit forms of all created
things are held to exist. It may be connected with the “real world”
described by such visionaries as Boehme and Blake, many of whose <span
id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_155"></span>
experiences are far more occult than mystical in character.  <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) A persistent tradition as to the
existence of such a plane of being or of consciousness is found all over
the world: in Indian, Greek Egyptian, Celtic, and Jewish thought. “Above
this visible nature there exists another, unseen and eternal, which,
when all things created perish, does not perish,” says the Bhagavad
Gita. According to the Kabalists it is “the seat of life and vitality,
and the nourishment of all the world.”  <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) Vitalism might accept it as one of
those aspects of the universe which can be perceived by a more extended
rhythm than that of normal consciousness. Various aspects of the Astral
have been identified with the “Burning Body of the Holy Ghost” of
Christian Gnosticism and with the Odic force of the old-fashioned
spiritualists.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p27"></span>Further, the Astral Plane is regarded
as constituting the “Cosmic Memory,” where the images of all beings and
events are preserved, as they are preserved in the memory of man.

> <span id="an_iii.vii-p27.1"></span> “The high that proved too high,
> the heroic for earth too hard  
> The passion that left the ground to lose itself in the sky”—  

<span id="an_iii.vii-p28"></span>all are living in the Astral World.
There too the concepts of future creation are present in their
completeness in the Eternal Now before being brought to birth in the
material sphere. On this theory prophecy, and also clairvoyance—one of
the great objects of occult education—consist in opening the eyes of the
mind upon this timeless Astral World: and spiritualists, evoking the
phantoms of the dead, merely call them up from the recesses of universal
instead of individual remembrance. The reader who feels his brain to be
whirling amidst this medley of solemn statement and unproven fairy tale
must remember that the dogmatic part of the occult tradition can only
represent the attempt of an extended or otherwise abnormal consciousness
to find an explanation of its own experiences.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p29"></span>Further, our whole selves—not merely
our sentient selves—are regarded as being bathed in the Astral Light, as
in the ether of physics. Hence in occult language it is a “universal
agent” connecting soul with soul, and becomes the possible vehicle of
hypnotism, telepathy, clairvoyance, and all those supernormal phenomena
which are the subject-matter of “psychical research.” This hypothesis
also accounts for the confusing fact of an initial similarity of
experience in many of the proceedings of mystic and occultist. Both must
pass through the plane of consciousness which the concept of the
“Astral” represents, because this plane <span id="page_156">p.
156</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_156"></span> of perception is the
one which lies “next beyond” our normal life. The transcendental
faculties may become aware of this world; only, in the case of the
mystic, to pass through it as quickly as they can. But the occultist,
the medium, the psychic, rest in the “Astral” and develop their
perceptions of this aspect of the world. It is the medium in which they
work.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p30"></span>From earliest times, occult philosophy
has insisted on the existence of this medium: as a scientific fact,
outside the range of our normal senses, but susceptible of verification
by the trained powers of the “initiate.” The possessor of such trained
powers, not the wizard or the fortune-teller, is regarded as the true
magician: and it is the declared object of occult education, or
initiation, to actualize this supersensual plane of experience, to give
the student the power of entering into conscious communion with it, and
teach him to impose upon its forces the directive force of his own will,
as easily as he imposes that will upon the “material” things of senses.
 <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p32"></span>(2) This brings us to the second axiom
of magic, which also has a curiously modern air: for it postulates
simply the limitless power of the disciplined human will. This dogma has
been “taken over” without acknowledgment from occult philosophy to
become the trump card of menticulture, “Christian Science,” and “New
Thought.” The preachers of “Joy Philosophy” and other dilute forms of
mental discipline, the Liberal Catholic “priest” producing “a vast
bubble of etheric astromental matter, a thought-edifice, ethereal,
diaphanous, a bubble which just includes the congregation—“  <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) these are the true hierophants of
magic in the modern world.  <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p35"></span>The first lesson of the would-be magus
is self-mastery. “By means of persevering and gradual athletics,” says
Eliphas Lévi, “the powers of the body can be developed to an amazing
extent. It is the same with the powers of the soul. Would you govern
yourself and others? Learn how to will. How may one learn how to will?
This is the first secret of magical initiation; and it was to make the
foundations of this secret thoroughly understood that the antique
keepers of the mysteries surrounded the approach to the sanctuary with
so many terrors and illusions. They did not believe in a will until it
had given its proofs; and they were right. <span id="page_157">p.
157</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_157"></span> Strength cannot prove
itself except by conquest. Idleness and negligence are the enemies of
the will, and this is the reason why all religions have multiplied their
practices and made their cults difficult and minute. The more trouble
one gives oneself for an idea, the more power one acquires in regard to
that idea. . . . Hence the power of religions resides entirely in the
inflexible will of those who practise them.”  <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p37"></span>This last sentence alone is enough to
define the distinction between mysticism and magic, and clear the minds
of those who tend to confuse the mystical and magical elements of
religion. In accordance with it, real “magical initiation” is in essence
a form of mental discipline, strengthening and focussing the will. This
discipline, like that of the religious life, consists partly in physical
austerities and a deliberate divorce from the world, partly in the
cultivation of will-power: but largely in a yielding of the mind to the
influence of suggestions which have been selected and accumulated in the
course of ages because of their power over that imagination which
Eliphas Lévi calls “The eye of the soul.” There is nothing supernatural
about it. Like the more arduous, more disinterested self-training of the
mystic, it is character-building with an object, conducted upon an
heroic scale. In magic the “will to know” is the centre round which the
personality is rearranged. As in mysticism, unconscious factors are
dragged from the hiddenness to form part of that personality. The
uprushes of thought, the abrupt intuitions which reach us from the
subliminal region, are developed, ordered, and controlled by rhythms and
symbols which have become traditional because the experience of
centuries has proved, though it cannot explain, their efficacy: and
powers of apprehension which normally lie below the threshold may thus
be liberated and enabled to report their discoveries.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p38"></span>“The fundamental principle,” says A. E.
Waite, speaking of occult evocations, “was in the exercise of a certain
occult force resident in the magus, and strenuously exerted for the
establishment of such a correspondence between two planes of nature as
would effect his desired end. This exertion was termed the evocation,
conjuration, or calling of the spirit, but *that which in reality was
raised was the energy of the inner man* ; tremendously developed and
exalted by combined will and aspiration, this energy germinated by sheer
force a new intellectual faculty of sensible psychological perception.
To assist and stimulate this energy into the most powerful possible
operation, artificial means were almost invariably used. . . . The
synthesis of these methods and processes <span id="page_158">p.
158</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_158"></span> was called Ceremonial
Magic, which in effect was a tremendous forcing-house of the latent
faculties of man’s spiritual nature.”  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p40"></span>This is the psychological explanation
of those apparently absurd rituals of preparation, doctrines of signs
and numbers, pentacles, charms, angelical names, the “power of the word”
which made up ceremonial magic. The power of such artifices is known
amongst the Indian mystics; who, recognizing in the *Mantra,* or occult
and rhythmic formula, consciously held and repeated, an invaluable help
to the attainment of the true ecstatic state, are not ashamed to borrow
from the magicians. So, too, the modern American schools of mental
healing and New Thought recommend concentration upon a carefully
selected word as the starting-point of efficacious meditation. This fact
of the psychical effect of certain verbal combinations, when allowed to
dominate the field of consciousness, may have some bearing upon that
need of a formal liturgy which is felt by nearly every great religion;
for religion, on its ceremonial side, has certain affinities with magic.
It, too, seeks by sensible means to stimulate supra-sensible energies.
The true magic “word” or spell is untranslatable; because its power
resides only partially in that outward sense which is apprehended by the
reason, but chiefly in the rhythm, which is addressed to the subliminal
mind. Symbols, religious and other, and symbolic acts which appear
meaningless when judged by the intellect alone, perform a similar
office. They express the deep-seated instinct of the human mind that it
must have a focus on which to concentrate its volitional powers, if
those powers are to be brought to their highest state of efficiency. The
nature of the focus matters little: its office matters much.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p41"></span>“. . . All these figures, and acts
analogous to them,” says Lévi, “all these dispositions of numbers and of
characters \[ *i.e.* sacred words, charms, pentacles, etc.\] are, as we
have said, but instruments for the education of the will, of which they
fix and determine the habits. They serve also to concentrate in action
all the powers of the human soul, and to strengthen the creative power
of the imagination. . . . A practice, even though it be superstitious
and foolish, may be efficacious because it is a realization of the will.
. . . We laugh at the poor woman who denies herself a ha’porth of milk
in the morning, that she may take a little candle to burn upon the magic
triangle in some chapel. But those who laugh are ignorant, and the poor
woman does not pay too dearly for the courage and resignation which she
thus obtains.  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) <span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_159"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p43"></span>Magic symbols, therefore, from penny
candles to Solomon’s seal, fall in modern technical language into two
classes. The first contains instruments of self-suggestion, exaltation,
and will direction. To this belong all spells, charms, rituals,
perfumes: from the magician’s vervain wreath to the “Youth! Health!
Strength!” which the student of New Thought repeats when she is brushing
her hair in the morning. The second class contains *autoscopes: i.e.* ,
material objects which focus and express the subconscious perceptions of
the operator. The dowser’s divining rod, fortuneteller’s cards, and
crystal-gazer’s ball, are characteristic examples. Both kinds are
rendered necessary rather by the disabilities of the human than by the
peculiarities of the superhuman plane: and the great adept may attain
heights at which he dispenses with these “outward and visible signs.”
“Ceremonies being, as we have said, artificial methods of creating
certain habits of the will, they cease to be necessary when these habits
have become fixed.”  <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) These
facts, now commonplaces of psychology, have long been known and used by
students of magic. Those who judge the philosophy by the apparent
absurdity of its symbols and ceremonies should remember that the
embraces, gestures, grimaces, and other ritual acts by which we all
concentrate, liberate, or express love, wrath, or enthusiasm, will ill
endure the cold revealing light of a strictly rational inquiry.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p45"></span>(3) The dogmas of the “Astral Light” or
universal agent and the “power of the will” are completed by a third:
the doctrine of Analogy, of an implicit correspondence between
appearance and reality, the microcosm of man and the macrocosm of the
universe the seen and the unseen worlds. In this, occultism finds the
basis of its transcendental speculations. <span
id="an_iii.vii-p45.1"></span> *Quod superius sicut quod inferius* —the
first words of that Emerald Table which was once attributed to Hermes
Trismegistus himself—is an axiom which must be agreeable to all
Platonists. It plays a great part in the theory of mysticism; which,
whilst maintaining an awed sense of the total “otherness” and
incomprehensibility of the Divine, has always assumed that the path of
the individual soul towards loving union with the Absolute is somehow
analogous with the path on which the universe moves to its consummation
in God.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p46"></span>The notion of analogy ultimately
determines the religious concepts of every race, and resembles the
verities of faith in the breadth of its application. It embraces alike
the appearances of the visible world—which thus become the mirrors of
the invisible—the symbols of religion, the tiresome arguments of
Butler’s “Analogy,” the allegories of the Kabalah and the spiritual
alchemists, and that childish “doctrine of signatures” on which <span
id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_160"></span> much
of mediaeval science was built. “Analogy,” says Lévi,  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) “is the last word of science and the
first word of faith . . . the *sole possible mediator* between the
visible and the invisible, between the finite and the infinite.” Here
Magic clearly defines her own limitations; stepping incautiously from
the useful to the universal, and laying down a doctrine which no mystic
could accept—which, carried to its logical conclusion, would turn the
adventure of the infinite into a guessing game.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p48"></span>The argument by analogy is carried by
the occultists to lengths which cannot be described here. Armed with
this torch, they explore the darkest, most terrible mysteries of life:
and do not hesitate to cast the grotesque shadows of these mysteries
upon the unseen world. The principle of correspondence is no doubt sound
so long as it works within reasonable limits. It was admitted into the
system of the Kabalah, though that profound and astute philosophy was
far from giving to it the importance which it assumes in Hermetic
“science.” It has been eagerly accepted by many of the mystics. Boehme
and Swedenborg availed themselves of its method in presenting their
intuitions to the world. It is implicitly acknowledged by thinkers of
many other schools: its influence permeates the best periods of
literature. Sir Thomas Browne spoke for more than himself when he said,
in a well-known passage of the “Religio Medici”: “The severe schools
shall never laugh me out of the philosophy of Hermes \[ *i.e.* ,
Trismegistus\] that this visible world is but a picture of the
invisible, wherein, as in a portrait, things are not truly but in
equivocal shapes, and as they counterfeit some real substance in that
invisible framework.” Such a sense of analogy, whatever the “severe
schools” may say, is indeed the foundation of every perfect work of art.
“Intuitive perception of the hidden analogies of things,” says Hazlitt
in “English Novelists,” “or, as it may be called, his *instinct of the
imagination,* is perhaps what stamps the character of genius on the
productions of art more than any other circumstance.”

<span id="an_iii.vii-p49"></span>The central doctrine of magic may now
be summed up thus:—

<span id="an_iii.vii-p50"></span>(1) That a supersensible and real
“cosmic medium” exists, which interpenetrates, influences, and supports
the tangible and apparent world, and is amenable to the categories both
of philosophy and of physics.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p51"></span>(2) That there is an established
analogy and equilibrium between the real and unseen world, and the
illusory manifestations which we call the world of sense.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p52"></span>(3) That this analogy may be discerned,
and this equilibrium controlled, by the disciplined will of man, which
thus becomes master of itself and of fate. <span id="page_161">p.
161</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_161"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p53"></span>We must now examine in more detail the
third of these propositions—that which ascribes abnormal powers to the
educated and disciplined will—for this assumption lies at the root of
all magical practices, old and new. “Magical operations,” says Eliphas
Lévi, “are the exercise of a power which is natural, but superior to the
ordinary powers of nature. They are the result of a science, and of
habits, which exalt the human will above its usual limits.”  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) This power of the will is now
recognized as playing an important part both in the healing of the body
and the healing of the soul; for our most advanced theories on these
subjects are little more than the old wine of magic in new bottles. The
ancient occultists owed much of their power, and also of their evil
reputation, to the fact that they were psychologists before their time.
Effective methods of suggestion, recipes for the alteration and
exaltation of personality and enhancement of will-power, the artificial
production of hypnotic states, photisms, automatism and ecstasy, with
the opening up of the subliminal field which accompanies these
phenomena—concealed from the profane by a mass of confusing allegories
and verbiage—form the backbone of all genuine occult rituals. Their
authors were aware that ceremonial magic has no objective importance,
but depends solely on its effect upon the operator’s mind. That this
effect might be enhanced, it was given an atmosphere of sanctity and
mystery; its rules were strict, its higher rites difficult of
attainment. These rules and rites constituted at once a test of the
student’s earnestness and a veil guarding the sanctuary from the
profane. The long and difficult preparations, majestic phrases, and
strange ceremonies of an evocation had power, not over the spirit of the
dead, but over the consciousness of the living; who was thus caught up
from the world of sense to a new plane of perception. Thus, according to
its apologists, the education of the genuine occult student tends to
awaken in him a new view and a new attitude. It adjusts the machinery of
his cinematograph to the registering of new intervals in the stream of
things, which passed it by before; and thus introduces new elements into
that picture by which ordinary men are content to know and judge the—or
rather *their—* universe.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p55"></span>So much for the principles which govern
occult education. Magic therapeutics, or as it is now called, “mental
healing,” is but the application of these principles upon another plane.
It results, first, from a view of humanity which sees a difference only
of degree between diseases of body and of soul, and can state seriously
and in good faith that “moral maladies are more contagious than
physical, and there are some triumphs of infatuation and fashion which
are comparable to leprosy or cholera.”  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) Secondly, it is <span id="page_162">p.
162</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_162"></span> worked by that
enhancement of will power, that ability to alter and control weaker
forms of life, which is claimed as the reward of the occult discipline.
“All the power of the occult healer lies in his conscious will and all
his art consists in producing faith in the patient.”  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p58"></span>This simple truth was in the possession
of occult thinkers at a time when Church and State saw no third course
between the burning or beatification of its practitioners. Now, under
the polite names of mental hygiene, suggestion, and psycho-therapeutics,
it is steadily advancing to the front rank of medical shibboleths. Yet
it is still the same “magic art” which has been employed for centuries,
with varying ritual accompaniments, by the adepts of occult science. The
methods of Brother Hilarian Tissot, who is described as curing lunacy
and crime by “the unconscious use of the magnetism of Paracelsus,” who
attributed his cases “either to disorder of the will or to the perverse
influence of external wills,” and would “regard all crimes as acts of
madness and treat the wicked as diseased,”  <span
id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) anticipated in many respects those of
the most modern psychologists.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p60"></span>The doctrine of magic which has here
been described shows us the “Secret Wisdom” at its best and sanest. But
even on these levels, it is dogged by the defects which so decisively
separate the occultist from the mystic. The chief of these is the
peculiar temper of mind, the cold intellectual arrogance, the intensely
individual point of view which occult studies seem to induce by their
conscious quest of exclusive power and knowledge, their implicit neglect
of love. At bottom, every student of occultism is striving towards a
point at which he may be able to “touch the button” and rely on the
transcendental world “springing to do the rest.” In this hard-earned
acquirement of power over the Many, he tends to forget the One. In
Levi’s words, “Too deep a study of the mysteries of nature may estrange
from God the careless investigator, in whom mental fatigue paralyses the
ardours of the heart.”  <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) When he
wrote this sentence Lévi stood, as the greater occultists have often
done, at the frontiers of mysticism. The best of the Hermetic
philosophers, indeed, are hardly ever without such mystical hankerings,
such flashes of illumination; as if the transcendental powers of man,
once roused from sleep, cannot wholly ignore the true end for which they
were made.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p62"></span>In Levi’s case, as is well known, the
discord between the occult and mystical ideals was resolved by his
return to the Catholic Church. Characteristically, he “read into”
Catholicism much <span id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span
id="an_iii.vii-Page_163"></span> that the orthodox would hardly allow;
so that it became for him, as it were, a romantic gloss on the occult
tradition. He held that the Christian Church, nursing mother of the
mystics, was also the heir of the magi; and that popular piety and
popular magic veiled the same ineffable truths. He had more
justification than at first appears probable for this apparently wild
and certainly heretical statement. Religion, as we have seen, can never
entirely divorce herself from magic: for her rituals and sacraments must
have, if they are to be successful in their appeal to the mind, a
certain magical character. All persons who are naturally drawn towards
the ceremonial aspect of religion are acknowledging the strange power of
subtle rhythms, symbolic words and movements, over the human will. An
“impressive service” conforms exactly to the description which I have
already quoted of a magical rite: it is “a tremendous forcing-house of
the latent faculties of man’s spiritual nature.” Sacraments, too,
however simple their beginnings, always tend, as they evolve, to assume
upon the phenomenal plane a magical aspect—a fact which does not
invalidate their claim to be the vehicles of supernatural grace. Those
who have observed with understanding, for instance, the Roman rite of
baptism, with its spells and exorcisms, its truly Hermetic employment of
salt, anointing chrism and ceremonial lights, must have seen in it a
ceremony far nearer to the operations of white magic than to the simple
lustrations practiced by St. John the Baptist.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p63"></span>There are obvious objections to the
full working out of this subject in a book which is addressed to readers
of all shades of belief; but any student who is interested in this
branch of religious psychology may easily discover for himself the
occult elements in the liturgies of the Christian—or indeed of any
other—Church. There are invocative arrangements of the Names of God
which appear alike in *grimoire* and in Missal. Sacred numbers, ritual
actions, perfumes, purifications, words of power, are all used, and
rightly used by institutional religion in her work of opening up the
human mind to the messages of the suprasensible world. In certain minor
observances, and charm-like prayers, we seem to stand on the very
borderland between magician and priest.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p64"></span>It is surely inevitable that this
should be so. The business of the Church is to appeal to the whole man,
as she finds him living in the world of sense. She would hardly be
adequate to this task did she neglect the powerful weapons which the
occultist has developed for his own ends. She, who takes the simplest
and most common gifts of nature and transmutes them into heavenly food,
takes also every discovery which the self has made concerning its own
potentialities, and turns them to her own high purposes. Founding her
external system on sacraments and symbols, on <span id="page_164">p.
164</span> <span id="an_iii.vii-Page_164"></span> rhythmic invocations
and ceremonial acts of praise, insisting on the power of the pure and
self-denying will and the “magic chain” of congregational worship, she
does but join hands with those Magi whose gold, frankincense, and myrrh
were the first gifts that she received.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p65"></span>But she pays for this; sharing some of
the limitations of the system which her Catholic nature has compelled
her to absorb. It is true, of course, that she purges it of all its
baser elements—its arrogance, its curiosity—true also that she is bound
to adopt it, because it is the highest common measure which she can
apply to the spirituality of that world to which she is sent. But she
cannot—and her great teachers have always known that she cannot—extract
finality from a method which does not really seek after ultimate things.
This method may and does teach men goodness, gives them happiness and
health. It can even induce in them a certain exaltation in which they
become aware, at any rate for a moment, of the existence of the
supernatural world—a stupendous accomplishment. But it will not of
itself make them citizens of that world: give to them the freedom of
Reality.

<span id="an_iii.vii-p66"></span>“The work of the Church in the world,”
says Patmore, “is not to teach the mysteries of life, so much as to
persuade the soul to that arduous degree of purity at which God Himself
becomes her teacher. The work of the Church ends when the knowledge of
God begins.”  <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329)

<span id="an_iii.vii-p68"></span><span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="an_iii.vii-Page_165"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_305"></span>[150:306](myst10.htm#fr_305) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p5"></span> R. A. Vaughan, “Hours with the
Mystics,” vol. i. bk. i. ch. v.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[150:307](myst10.htm#fr_306) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p6"></span> In a list published by Papus from the
archives of the Martinists, we find such diverse names as Averroes, St.
Thomas Aquinas, Vincent of Beauvais, and Swedenborg, given as followers
of the occult tradition!

<span id="fn_307"></span>[150:308](myst10.htm#fr_307) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p7"></span> See R. Steiner, “The Way of
Initiation,” p. 111.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[150:309](myst10.htm#fr_308) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p9"></span> *Supra,* pp. 70 *seq* .

<span id="fn_309"></span>[151:310](myst10.htm#fr_309) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p10"></span> A. E. Waite, “The Occult Sciences,” p.
1.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[152:311](myst10.htm#fr_310) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p15"></span> Steiner, “The Way of Initiation,” p.
66.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[153:312](myst10.htm#fr_311) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p17"></span> See E. Towne, “Joy Philosophy” (1903)
and “Just How to Wake the Solar Plexus” (1904); R. D. Stocker, “New
Thought Manual” (1906) and “Soul Culture” (1905); Floyd Wilson, “Man
Limitless” (1905). The literature of these sects is enormous. For a
critical and entertaining account, see C. W. Ferguson, ‘The Confusion of
Tongues.” (1929).

<span id="fn_312"></span>[153:313](myst10.htm#fr_312) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p20"></span> It must here be pointed out that the
genuine “Hermetica”—a body of ancient philosophic and religious pieces
collected under this general title—are entirely unconnected with
occultism. Cf. “Hermetica,” ed. with English translation by W. Scott. 3
vols. 1924-8.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[154:314](myst10.htm#fr_313) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p21"></span> A. E. Waite, a life-long student of
these byeways of thought, gives, as the main channels by which “an
arcane knowledge is believed to have been communicated to the West,”
Magic, Alchemy, Astrology, the occult associations which culminated in
Freemasonry, and, finally, “an obscure sheaf of hieroglyphs known as
Tarot cards.” He places in another class “the bewitchments and other
mummeries of Ceremonial Magic.” (“The Holy Kabbalah,” pp. 518-19.)

<span id="fn_314"></span>[155:315](myst10.htm#fr_314) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p25"></span> For a discussion of the Gnostic and
Theosophic elements in Blake’s work see D. Surat, “Blake and Modern
Thought” (1929).

<span id="fn_315"></span>[155:316](myst10.htm#fr_315) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p26"></span> A. E. Waite, “Doctrine and Literature
of the Kabbalah,” p. 48.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[156:317](myst10.htm#fr_316) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p31"></span> I offer no opinion as to the truth or
falsity of these “occult” claims. For a more detailed discussion the
reader is referred to Steiner’s curious little book, “The Way of
Initiation.”

<span id="fn_317"></span>[156:318](myst10.htm#fr_317) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p33"></span> C. W. Leadbeater, “The Science of the
Sacraments,” p. 38.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[156:319](myst10.htm#fr_318) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p34"></span> Compare the following: “Imagine that
all the world and the starry hosts are waiting, alert and with shining
eyes, to do your bidding. Imagine that you are to touch the button now,
and instantly they will spring to do the rest. The instant you say, ‘I
*can and I will,’* the entire powers of the universe are to be set in
motion” (E. Towne, “Joy Philosophy,” p. 52).

<span id="fn_319"></span>[157:320](myst10.htm#fr_319) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p36"></span> “Rituel de la Haute Magie,” pp. 35,
36.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[158:321](myst10.htm#fr_320) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p39"></span> “The Occult Sciences,” p. 14. But
references in Mr. Waite’s most recent work to “the puerilities and
imbecility of ceremonial magic” suggest that he has modified his views.
Cf. “The Holy Kabbalah” (1929), p. 521.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[158:322](myst10.htm#fr_321) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p42"></span> “Rituel de la Haute Magie,” p. 71.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[159:323](myst10.htm#fr_322) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p44"></span> “Rituel de la Haute Magie,” p. 139.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[160:324](myst10.htm#fr_323) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p47"></span> “Dogme de la Haute Magie,” p. 361 *et
seq.*

<span id="fn_324"></span>[161:325](myst10.htm#fr_324) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p54"></span> “Rituel de la Haute Magie,” p. 32.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[161:326](myst10.htm#fr_325) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p56"></span> “Dogme de la Haute Magie,” p. 129.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[162:327](myst10.htm#fr_326) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p57"></span> “Rituel,” p. 312.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[162:328](myst10.htm#fr_327) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p59"></span> “Dogma,” p. 134.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[162:329](myst10.htm#fr_328) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p61"></span> “Histoire de la Magie,” p. 514.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[164:330](myst10.htm#fr_329) <span
id="an_iii.vii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vii-p67"></span> “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,”
“Knowledge and Science,” xxii.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Two: The Mystic Way](myst11)

</div>
