<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst11)  [Next](myst13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I. Introductory

<span id="an_iv.i"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p1"></span>We<span id="an_iv.i-p1.1"></span> are now
to turn from general principles and study those principles in action: to
describe the psychological process, or “Mystic Way,” by which that
peculiar type of personality which is able to set up direct relations
with the Absolute is usually developed. The difficulty of this
description will lie in the fact that all mystics differ one from
another; as all the individual objects of our perception, “living” and
“not living,” do. The creative impulse in the world, so far as we are
aware of it, appears upon ultimate analysis to be free and original not
bound and mechanical: to express itself, in defiance of the
determinists, with a certain artistic spontaneity. Man, when he picks
out some point of likeness as a basis on which to arrange its
productions in groups, is not discovering its methods; but merely making
for his own convenience an arbitrary choice of one or two—not
necessarily characteristic—qualities, which happen to appear in a
certain number of different persons or things. Hence the most scientific
classification is a rough-and-ready business at the best.  <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330)

<span id="an_iv.i-p3"></span>When we come to apply such classification
to so delicate and elusive a series of psychological states as those
which accompany the “contemplative life,” all the usual difficulties are
increased. No one mystic can be discovered in whom all the observed
characteristics of the transcendental consciousness are resumed, and
<span id="page_168">p. 168</span> <span id="an_iv.i-Page_168"></span>
who can on that account be treated as typical. Mental states which are
distinct and mutually exclusive in one case, exist simultaneously in
another. In some, stages which have been regarded as essential are
entirely omitted: in others, their order appears to be reversed. We seem
at first to be confronted by a group of selves which arrive at the same
end without obeying any general law.

<span id="an_iv.i-p4"></span>Take, however, a number of such definitely
mystical selves and make of them, so to speak, a “composite portrait”:
as anthropologists do when they wish to discover the character of a
race. From this portrait we may expect a type to emerge, in which all
the outstanding characteristics contributed by the individual examples
are present together, and minor variations are suppressed. Such a
portrait will of course be conventional: but it will be useful as a
standard, which can be constantly compared with, and corrected by,
isolated specimens.

<span id="an_iv.i-p5"></span>The first thing we notice about this
composite portrait is that the typical mystic seems to move towards his
goal through a series of strongly marked oscillations between “states of
pleasure” and “states of pain.” The existence and succession of these
states—sometimes broken and confused, sometimes crisply defined—can be
traced, to a greater or less degree, in almost every case of which we
possess anything like a detailed record. <span id="an_iv.i-p5.1"></span>
*Gyrans gyrando radii spiritus* . The soul, as it treads the ascending
spiral of its road towards reality, experiences alternately the sunshine
and the shade. These experiences are “constants” of the transcendental
life. “The Spiritual States of the Soul are all Eternal,” said Blake,
with the true mystical genius for psychology.  <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331)

<span id="an_iv.i-p7"></span>The complete series of these states—and it
must not be forgotten that few individuals present them all in
perfection, whilst in many instances several are blurred or appear to be
completely suppressed—will be, I think, most conveniently arranged under
five heads. This method of grouping means, of course, the abandonment of
the time-honoured threefold division of the Mystic Way, and the apparent
neglect of St. Teresa’s equally celebrated Seven Degrees of
Contemplation; but I think that we shall gain more than we lose by
adopting it. The groups, however, must be looked upon throughout as
diagrammatic, and only as answering loosely and generally to experiences
which seldom present themselves in so rigid and unmixed a form. These
experiences, largely conditioned as they are by surroundings and by
temperament, exhibit all the variety and spontaneity which are
characteristic of life in its highest manifestations: and, like
biological specimens, they lose something of their essential reality in
being prepared for scientific investigation. Taken all together, they
constitute phases in a <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span
id="an_iv.i-Page_169"></span> single process of growth; involving the
movement of consciousness from lower to higher levels of reality, the
steady remaking of character in accordance with the “independent
spiritual world.” But as the study of physical life is made easier for
us by an artificial division into infancy, adolescence, maturity, and
old age, so a discreet indulgence of the human passion for map-making
will increase our chances of understanding the nature of the Mystic Way.

<span id="an_iv.i-p8"></span>Here, then, is the classification under
which we shall study the phases of the mystical life.

<span id="an_iv.i-p9"></span>(1) The awakening of the Self to
consciousness of Divine Reality. This experience, usually abrupt and
well-marked, is accompanied by intense feelings of joy and exaltation.

<span id="an_iv.i-p10"></span>(2) The Self, aware for the first time of
Divine Beauty, realizes by contrast its own finiteness and imperfection,
the manifold illusions in which it is immersed, the immense distance
which separates it from the One. Its attempts to eliminate by discipline
and mortification all that stands in the way of its progress towards
union with God constitute *Purgation:* a state of pain and effort.

<span id="an_iv.i-p11"></span>(3) When by Purgation the Self has become
detached from the “things of sense,” and acquired those virtues which
are the “ornaments of the spiritual marriage,” its joyful consciousness
of the Transcendent Order returns in an enhanced form. Like the
prisoners in Plato’s “Cave of Illusion,” it has awakened to knowledge of
Reality, has struggled up the harsh and difficult path to the mouth of
the cave. Now it looks upon the sun. This is *Illumination:* a state
which includes in itself many of the stages of contemplation, “degrees
of orison,” visions and adventures of the soul described by St. Teresa
and other mystical writers. These form, as it were, a way within the
Way: a *moyen de parvenir*, a training devised by experts which will
strengthen and assist the mounting soul. They stand, so to speak, for
education; whilst the Way proper represents organic growth. Illumination
is the “contemplative state” *par excellence.* It forms, with the two
preceding states, the “first mystic life.” Many mystics never go beyond
it; and, on the other hand, many seers and artists not usually classed
amongst them, have shared, to some extent, the experiences of the
illuminated state. Illumination brings a certain apprehension of the
Absolute, a sense of the Divine Presence: but not true union with it. It
is a state of happiness.

<span id="an_iv.i-p12"></span>(4) In the development of the great and
strenuous seekers after God, this is followed—or sometimes
intermittently accompanied—by the most terrible of all the experiences
of the Mystic Way: the final and complete purification of the Self,
which is called by some contemplatives the “mystic pain” or “mystic
death,” <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="an_iv.i-Page_170"></span> by others the Purification of the Spirit
or *Dark Night of the Soul.* The consciousness which had, in
Illumination, sunned itself in the sense of the Divine Presence, now
suffers under an equally intense sense of the Divine Absence: learning
to dissociate the personal satisfaction of mystical vision from the
reality of mystical life. As in Purgation the senses were cleansed and
humbled, and the energies and interests of the Self were concentrated
upon transcendental things: so now the purifying process is extended to
the very centre of I-hood, the will. The human instinct for personal
happiness must be killed. This is the “spiritual crucifixion” so often
described by the mystics: the great desolation in which the soul seems
abandoned by the Divine. The Self now surrenders itself, its
individuality, and its will, completely. It desires nothing, asks
nothing, is utterly passive, and is thus prepared for

<span id="an_iv.i-p13"></span>(5) *Union:* the true goal of the mystic
quest. In this state the Absolute Life is not merely perceived and
enjoyed by the Self, as in Illumination: but is *one* with it. This is
the end towards which all the previous oscillations of consciousness
have tended. It is a state of equilibrium, of purely spiritual life;
characterized by peaceful joy, by enhanced powers, by intense certitude.
To call this state, as some authorities do, by the name of Ecstasy, is
inaccurate and confusing: since the term Ecstasy has long been used both
by psychologists and ascetic writers to define that short and rapturous
trance—a state with well-marked physical and psychical accompaniments—in
which the contemplative, losing all consciousness of the phenomenal
world, is caught up to a brief and immediate enjoyment of the Divine
Vision. Ecstasies of this kind are often experienced by the mystic in
Illumination, or even on his first conversion. They cannot therefore be
regarded as exclusively characteristic of the Unitive Way. In some of
the greatest mystics—St. Teresa is an example—the ecstatic trance seems
to diminish rather than increase in frequency after the state of union
has been attained: whilst others achieve the heights by a path which
leaves on one side all abnormal phenomena.

<span id="an_iv.i-p14"></span>Union must be looked upon as the true goal
of mystical growth; that permanent establishment of life upon
transcendent levels of reality, of which ecstasies give a foretaste to
the soul. Intense forms of it, described by individual mystics, under
symbols such as those of Mystical Marriage, Deification, or Divine
Fecundity, all prove on examination to be aspects of this same
experience “seen through a temperament.”

<span id="an_iv.i-p15"></span>It is right, however, to state here that
Oriental Mysticism insists upon a further stage beyond that of union,
which stage it regards as the real goal of the spiritual life. This is
the total annihilation or reabsorption of the individual soul in the
Infinite. <span id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span
id="an_iv.i-Page_171"></span> Such an annihilation is said by the Sufis
to constitute the “Eighth Stage of Progress,” in which alone they truly
attain to God. Thus stated, it appears to differ little from the
Buddhist’s Nirvana, and is the logical corollary of that pantheism to
which the Oriental mystic always tends. Thus Jalalu d’Din:

> <span id="an_iv.i-p15.1"></span> “O, let me not exist! for
> Non-Existence  
> Proclaims in organ tones, ‘To Him we shall return.’”  <span
> id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332)  

<span id="an_iv.i-p17"></span>It is at least doubtful, however, whether
the interpretation which has been put by European students upon such
passages as this be correct. The language in which Al Ghazzali attempts
to describe the Eighth Stage is certainly more applicable to the Unitive
Life as understood by Christian contemplatives, than to the Buddhistic
annihilation of personality. “The end of Sufi-ism,” he says, “is total
absorption in God. This is at least the relative end to that part of
their doctrine which I am free to reveal and describe. But *in reality
it is but the beginning* of the Sufi life, for those intuitions and
other things which precede it are, so to speak, but the porch by which
they enter. . . . In this state some have imagined themselves to be
amalgamated with God, others to be identical with Him, others again to
be associated with Him: but *all this is sin* .”  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333)

<span id="an_iv.i-p19"></span>The doctrine of annihilation as the end of
the soul’s ascent, whatever the truth may be as to the Moslem attitude
concerning it, is decisively rejected by all European mystics, though a
belief in it is constantly imputed to them by their enemies: for their
aim is not the suppression of life, but its intensification, a change in
its form. This change, they say in a paradox which is generally
misunderstood, consists in the perfecting of personality by the utter
surrender of self. It is true that the more Orientally-minded amongst
them, such as Dionysius the Areopagite, do use language of a negative
kind which seems almost to involve a belief in the annihilation rather
than the transformation of the self in God: but this is because they are
trying to describe a condition of supersensible vitality from the point
of view of the normal consciousness to which it can only seem a Nothing,
a Dark, a Self-loss. Further it will be found that this language is
often an attempt to describe the conditions of transitory perception,
not those of permanent existence: the characteristics, that is to say,
of the Ecstatic Trance, in which for a short time the whole self is
lifted to transcendent levels, and the Absolute is apprehended by a
total suspension of the surface consciousness. Hence the Divine Dark,
the Nothing, is not a state of non-being to which the mystic aspires
<span id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span id="an_iv.i-Page_172"></span> to
attain: it is rather a paradoxical description of his experience of that
Undifferentiated Godhead, that Supernal Light whence he may, in his
ecstasies, bring down fire from heaven to light the world.

<span id="an_iv.i-p20"></span>In the mystics of the West, the highest
forms of Divine Union impel the self to some sort of active, rather than
of passive life: and this is now recognized by the best authorities as
the true distinction between Christian and non-Christian mysticism. “The
Christian mystics,” says Delacroix, “move from the Infinite to the
Definite; they aspire to infinitize life and to define Infinity; they go
from the conscious to the subconscious, and from the subconscious to the
conscious. The obstacle in their path is not consciousness in general,
but *self* -consciousness, the consciousness of the Ego. The Ego is the
limitation, that which opposes itself to the Infinite: the states of
consciousness free from self, lost in a vaster consciousness, may become
modes of the Infinite, and states of the Divine Consciousness.”  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) So Starbuck: “The individual learns to
transfer himself from a centre of self-activity into an organ of
revelation of universal being, and to live a life of affection for and
one-ness with, the larger life outside.”  <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335)

<span id="an_iv.i-p23"></span>Hence, the ideal of the great
contemplatives, the end of their long education, is to become “modes of
the Infinite.” Filled with an abounding sense of the Divine Life, of
ultimate and adorable reality, sustaining and urging them on, they wish
to communicate the revelation, the more abundant life, which they have
received. Not spiritual marriage, but divine fecundity is to be their
final state. In a sense St. Teresa in the Seventh Habitation, Suso when
his great renunciation is made, have achieved the quest, yet there is
nothing passive in the condition to which they have come. Not Galahad,
but the Grail-bearer is now their type: and in their life, words or
works they are impelled to exhibit that “Hidden Treasure which desires
to be found.”

<span id="an_iv.i-p24"></span>“You may think, my daughters,” says St.
Teresa, “that the soul in this state \[of union\] should be so absorbed
that she can occupy herself with nothing. You deceive yourselves. She
turns with greater ease and ardour than before to all that which belongs
to the service of God, and when these occupations leave her free again,
she remains in the enjoyment of that companionship.”  <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336)

<span id="an_iv.i-p26"></span>No temperament is less slothful than the
mystical one; and the “quiet” to which the mystics must school
themselves in the early stages of contemplation is often the hardest of
their tasks. The abandonment of bodily and intellectual activity is only
<span id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span id="an_iv.i-Page_173"></span>
undertaken in order that they may, in the words of Plotinus, “energize
enthusiastically” upon another plane. Work they must but this work may
take many forms—forms which are sometimes so wholly spiritual that they
are not perceptible to practical minds. Much of the misunderstanding and
consequent contempt of the contemplative life comes from the narrow and
superficial definition of “work” which is set up by a muscular and
wage-earning community.

<span id="an_iv.i-p27"></span>All records of mysticism in the West,
then, are also the records of supreme human activity. Not only of
“wrestlers in the spirit” but also of great organizers, such as St.
Teresa and St. John of the Cross; of missionaries preaching life to the
spiritually dead, such as St. Francis of Assisi, St. Ignatius Loyola,
Eckhart, Suso Tauler, Fox; of philanthropists, such as St. Catherine of
Genoa or St. Vincent de Paul; poets and prophets, such as Mechthild of
Magdeburg, Jacopone da Todi and Blake, finally, of some immensely virile
souls whose participation in the Absolute Life has seemed to force on
them a national destiny. Of this St. Bernard, St. Catherine of Siena,
and Saint Joan of Arc are the supreme examples. “The soul enamoured of
My Truth,” said God’s voice to St. Catherine of Siena, “never ceases to
serve the whole world in general.”  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337)

<span id="an_iv.i-p29"></span>Utterly remade in the interests of
Reality, exhibiting that dual condition of fruition and activity which
Ruysbroeck described as the crowning stage of human evolution, the
“Supreme summit of the Inner Life,”  <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) all these lived, as it were, with both
hands towards the finite and towards the Infinite, towards God and man.
It is true that in nearly every case such “great actives” have first
left the world, as a necessary condition of establishing communion with
that Absolute Life which reinforced their own: for a mind distracted by
the many cannot apprehend the One. Hence something equivalent to the
solitude of the wilderness is an essential part of mystical education.
But, having established that communion, re-ordered their inner lives
upon transcendent levels—being united with their Source not merely in
temporary ecstasies, but in virtue of a permanent condition of the soul,
they were impelled to abandon their solitude; and resumed, in some way,
their contact with the world in order to become the medium whereby that
Life flowed out to other men. To go up alone into the mountain and come
back as an ambassador to the world, has ever been the method of
humanity’s best friends. This systole-and-diastole motion of retreat as
the preliminary to a return remains the true ideal of Christian
Mysticism in its highest development. Those in <span id="page_174">p.
174</span> <span id="an_iv.i-Page_174"></span> whom it is not found,
however great in other respects they may be, must be considered as
having stopped short of the final stage.

<span id="an_iv.i-p31"></span>Thus St. Catherine of Siena spent three
years in hermit-like seclusion in the little room which we still see in
her house in the Via Benincasa, entirely cut off from the ordinary life
of her family. “Within her own house,” says her legend, “she found the
desert; and a solitude in the midst of people.”  <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) There Catherine endured many
mortifications, was visited by ecstasies and visions: passed, in fact,
through the states of Purgation and Illumination, which existed in her
case side by side. This life of solitude was brought to an abrupt end by
the experience which is symbolized in the vision of the Mystic Marriage,
and the Voice which then said to her, “Now will I wed thy soul, which
shall ever be conjoined and united to Me!” Catherine, who had during her
long retreat enjoyed illumination to a high degree, now entered upon the
Unitive State, in which the whole of her public life was passed. Its
effect was immediately noticeable. She abandoned her solitude, joined in
the family life, went out into the city to serve the poor and sick,
attracted and taught disciples, converted sinners, and began that career
of varied and boundless activity which has made her name one of the
greatest in the history of the fourteenth century. Nor does this mean
that she ceased to live the sort of life which is characteristic of
mystical consciousness: to experience direct contact with the
Transcendental World, to gaze into “the Abyss of Love Divine.” On the
contrary, her practical genius for affairs, her immense power of ruling
men, drew its strength from the long series of visions and ecstasies
which accompanied and supported her labours in the world. She “descended
into the valley of lilies to make herself more fruitful,” says her
legend.  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) The conscious vehicle
of some “power not herself,” she spoke and acted with an authority which
might have seemed strange enough in an uneducated daughter of the
people, were it not justified by the fact that all who came into contact
with her submitted to its influence.

<span id="an_iv.i-p34"></span>Our business, then, is to trace from its
beginning a gradual and complete change in the equilibrium of the self.
It is a change whereby that self turns from the unreal world of sense in
which it is normally immersed, first to apprehend, then to unite itself
with Absolute Reality: finally, possessed by and wholly surrendered to
this Transcendent Life, becomes a medium whereby the spiritual world is
seen in a unique degree operating directly in the world of sense. In
other words, we are to see the human mind advance from the mere
perception of phenomena, through the <span id="page_175">p. 175</span>
<span id="an_iv.i-Page_175"></span> intuition—with occasional contact—of
the Absolute under its aspect of Divine Transcendence, to the entire
realization of, and union with, Absolute Life under its aspect of Divine
Immanence.

<span id="an_iv.i-p35"></span>The completed mystical life, then, is more
than intuitional: it is theopathetic. In the old, frank language of the
mystics, it is the *deified life* .

<span id="an_iv.i-p36"></span><span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span
id="an_iv.i-Page_176"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_330"></span>[167:331](myst12.htm#fr_330) <span
id="an_iv.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p2"></span> Science seems more and more inclined to
acquiesce in this judgment. See especially A. N. Whitehead: “Man and the
Modern World” and “Religion in the Making.”

<span id="fn_331"></span>[168:332](myst12.htm#fr_331) <span
id="an_iv.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p6"></span> “Jerusalem,” pt. iii.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[171:333](myst12.htm#fr_332) <span
id="an_iv.i-p15.4"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p16"></span> Quoted by R. A. Nicholson, “The Mystics
of Islam,” p. 168.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[171:334](myst12.htm#fr_333) <span
id="an_iv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p18"></span> Schmölders, “Les Écoles Philosophiques
chez les Arabes,” p. 61.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[172:335](myst12.htm#fr_334) <span
id="an_iv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p21"></span> “Études sur le Mysticisme,” p. 235.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[172:336](myst12.htm#fr_335) <span
id="an_iv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p22"></span> “The Psychology of Religion,” p. 147.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[172:337](myst12.htm#fr_336) <span
id="an_iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p25"></span> “El Castillo Interior,” Moradas Sétimas,
cap. i.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[173:338](myst12.htm#fr_337) <span
id="an_iv.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p28"></span> Dialogo, cap. vii.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[173:339](myst12.htm#fr_338) <span
id="an_iv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p30"></span> “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” I. ii.
cap. lxxiii.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[174:340](myst12.htm#fr_339) <span
id="an_iv.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p32"></span> E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena,” p.
15.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[174:341](myst12.htm#fr_340) <span
id="an_iv.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.i-p33"></span> S. Catherine Senensis Vitae (Acta SS.
Aprilis t. iii.), ii. ii. § 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Awakening of the Self](myst13)

</div>
