<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst13)  [Next](myst15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III. The Purification of the Self

<span id="an_iv.iii"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p1"></span>Here<span id="an_iv.iii-p1.1"></span>,
then, stands the newly awakened self: aware, for the first time, of
reality, responding to that reality by deep movements of love and of
awe. She sees herself, however, not merely to be thrust into a new
world, but set at the beginning of a new road. Activity is now to be her
watchword, pilgrimage the business of her life. “That a quest there is,
and an end, is the single secret spoken.” Under one symbol or another,
the need of that long slow process of transcendence, of character
building, whereby she is to attain freedom, become capable of living
upon high levels of reality, is present in her consciousness. Those in
whom this growth is not set going are no mystics, in the exact sense in
which that word is here used; however great their temporary illumination
may have been.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p2"></span>What must be the first step of the self
upon this road to perfect union with the Absolute? Clearly, a getting
rid of all those elements of normal experience which are not in harmony
with reality: of illusion, evil, imperfection of every kind. By false
desires and false thoughts man has built up for himself a false
universe: as a mollusk by the deliberate and persistent absorption of
lime and rejection of all else, can build up for itself a hard shell
which shuts it from the external world, and only represents in <span
id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_199"></span> a
distorted and unrecognisable form the ocean from which it was obtained.
This hard and wholly unnutritious shell, this one-sided secretion of the
surface-consciousness, makes as it were a little cave of illusion for
each separate soul. A literal and deliberate getting out of the cave
must be for every mystic, as it was for Plato’s prisoners, the first
step in the individual hunt for reality.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p3"></span>In the plain language of old-fashioned
theology “man’s sin is stamped upon man’s universe.” We see a sham world
because we live a sham life. We do not know ourselves; hence do not know
the true character of our senses and instincts; hence attribute wrong
values to their suggestions and declarations concerning our relation to
the external world. That world, which we have distorted by identifying
it with our own self-regarding arrangements of its elements, has got to
reassume for us the character of Reality, of God. In the purified sight
of the great mystics it did reassume this character: their shells were
opened wide, they knew the tides of the Eternal Sea. This lucid
apprehension of the True is what we mean when we speak of the
Illumination which results from a faithful acceptance of the trials of
the Purgative Way.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p4"></span>That which we call the “natural” self as
it exists in the “natural” world—the “old Adam” of St. Paul—is wholly
incapable of supersensual adventure. All its activities are grouped
about a centre of consciousness whose correspondences are with the
material world. In the moment of its awakening, it is abruptly made
aware of this disability. It knows itself finite. It now aspires to the
infinite. It is encased in the hard crust of individuality: it aspires
to union with a larger self. It is fettered: it longs for freedom. Its
every sense is attuned to illusion: it craves for harmony with the
Absolute Truth. “God is the only Reality,” says Patmore, “and we are
real only as far as we are in His order and He is in us.”  <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) Whatever form, then, the mystical
adventure may take it, must begin with a change in the attitude of the
subject; a change which will introduce it into the order of Reality, and
enable it to set up permanent relations with an Object which is not
normally part of its universe. Therefore, though the end of mysticism is
not adequately defined as goodness, it entails the acquirement of
goodness. The virtues are the “ornaments of the spiritual marriage”
because that marriage is union with the Good no less than with the
Beautiful and the True.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p6"></span>Primarily, then, the self must be purged
of all that stands between it and goodness: putting on the character of
reality instead of the character of illusion or “sin.” It longs ardently
to do this from the first moment in which it sees itself in the
all-revealing radiance of the Uncreated Light. “When love <span
id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_200"></span>
openeth the inner eyes of the soul for to see this truth,” says Hilton,
“with other circumstances that come withal then beginneth the soul for
sooth to be vastly meek. For then by the sight of God it feeleth and
seeth itself as it is, and then doth the soul forsake the beholding and
leaning to itself.”  <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p8"></span>So, with Dante, the first terrace of the
Mount of Purgatory is devoted to the cleansing of pride and the
production of humility: the inevitable—one might almost say
mechanical—result of a vision, however fleeting, of Reality, and an
undistorted sight of the earthbound self. All its life that self has
been measuring its candlelight by other candles. Now for the first time
it is out in the open air and sees the sun. “This is the way,” said the
voice of God to St. Catherine of Siena in ecstasy. “If thou wilt arrive
at a perfect knowledge and enjoyment of Me, the Eternal Truth, thou
shouldst never go outside the knowledge of thyself; and by humbling
thyself in the valley of humility thou wilt know Me and thyself, from
which knowledge thou wilt draw all that is necessary. . . . In self
knowledge, then, thou wilt humble thyself; seeing that, in thyself, thou
dost not even exist.”  <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p10"></span>The first thing that the self observes,
when it turns back upon itself in that awful moment of lucidity—enters,
as St. Catherine says, into “the cell of self-knowledge,”—is the
horrible contrast between its clouded contours and the pure sharp
radiance of the Real; between its muddled faulty life, its perverse
self-centred drifting, and the clear onward sweep of that Becoming in
which it is immersed. It is then that the outlook of rapture and awe
receives the countersign of repentance. The harbinger of that new self
which must be born appears under the aspect of a desire: a passionate
longing to escape from the suddenly perceived hatefulness of selfhood,
and to conform to Reality, the Perfect which it has seen under its
aspect of Goodness, of Beauty, or of Love—to be worthy of it, in fact to
be *real.* “This showing,” says Gerlac Petersen of that experience, “is
so vehement and so strong that the whole of the interior man, not only
of his heart but of his body, is marvellously moved and shaken, and
faints within itself, unable to endure it. And by this means, his
interior aspect is made clear without any cloud, and conformable in its
own measure to Him whom he seeks.”  <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p12"></span>The lives of the mystics abound in
instances of the “vehemence of this showing”: of the deep-seated sense
of necessity which urges the newly awakened self to a life of discomfort
and conflict, often to intense poverty and pain, as the only way of
replacing false experience by true. Here the transcendental
consciousness, exalted <span id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_201"></span> by a clear intuition of its goal, and
not merely “counting” but *perceiving* the world to be obviously well
lost for such a prize, takes the reins. It forces on the unwilling
surface mind a sharp vision of its own disabilities, its ugly and
imperfect life; and the thirst for Perfection which is closely bound up
with the mystic temperament makes instant response. “No more sins!” was
the first cry of St. Catherine of Genoa in that crucial hour in which
she saw by the light of love her own self-centred and distorted past.
She entered forthwith upon the Purgative Way, in which for four years
she suffered under a profound sense of imperfection, endured fasting,
solitude and mortification; and imposed upon herself the most repulsive
duties in her efforts towards that self-conquest which should make her
“conformable in her own measure” to the dictates of that Pure Love which
was the aspect of reality that she had seen. It is the inner conviction
that this conformity—this transcendence of the unreal—is possible and
indeed normal which upholds the mystic during the terrible years of
Purgation: so that “not only without heaviness, but with a joy
unmeasured he casts back all thing that may him let.”  <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p14"></span>To the true lover of the Absolute,
Purgation no less than Illumination is a privilege, a dreadful joy. It
is an earnest of increasing life. “Let me suffer or die!” said St.
Teresa: a strange alternative in the ears of common sense, but a forced
option in the spiritual sphere. However harsh its form, however painful
the activities to which it spurs him, the mystic recognizes in this
breakup of his old universe an essential part of the Great Work: and the
act in which he turns to it is an act of loving desire, no less than an
act of will. “Burning of love into a soul truly taken all vices purgeth:
. . . for whilst the true lover with strong and fervent desire into God
is borne, all things him displease that from the sight of God
withdrawn.”  <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) His eyes once
opened, he is eager for that costly ordering of his disordered loves
which alone can establish his correspondences with Transcendental Life.
“Teach me, my only joy,” cries Suso, “the way in which I may bear upon
my body the marks of Thy Love.” “Come, my soul, depart from outward
things and gather thyself together into a true interior silence, that
thou mayst set out with all thy courage and bury and lose thyself in the
desert of a deep contrition.”  <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p17"></span>It is in this torment of contrition,
this acute consciousness of unworthiness, that we have the first swing
back of the oscillating self from the initial state of mystic pleasure
to the complementary state of pain. It is, so to speak, on its
transcendental side, the reflex <span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_202"></span> action which follows the first touch of
God. Thus, we read that Rulman Merswin, “swept away by the transports of
Divine Love,” did not surrender himself to the passive enjoyment of this
first taste of Absolute Being, but was impelled by it to diligent and
instant self-criticism. He was “seized with a hatred of his body, and
inflicted on himself such hard mortifications that he fell ill.”  <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) It is useless for lovers of
healthy-mindedness to resent this and similar examples of
self-examination and penance: to label them morbid or mediaeval. The
fact remains that only such bitter knowledge of wrongness of relation,
seen by the light of ardent love, can spur the will of man to the hard
task of readjustment.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p19"></span>“I saw full surely,” says Julian of
Norwich, “that it behoveth needs to be that we should be in longing and
in penance, until the time that we be led so deep into God that we
verily and truly know our own soul.”  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p21"></span>Dante’s whole journey up the Mount of
Purgation is the dramatic presentation of this one truth. So, too, the
celebrated description of Purgatory attributed to St. Catherine of Genoa
 <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) is obviously founded upon its
author’s inward experience of this Purgative Way. In it, she applies to
the souls of the dead her personal consciousness of the necessity of
purification; its place in the organic process of spiritual growth. It
is, as she acknowledges at the beginning, the projection of her own
psychological adventures upon the background of the spiritual world: its
substance being simply the repetition after death of that eager and
heroic acceptance of suffering, those drastic acts of purification,
which she has herself been compelled to undertake under the whip of the
same psychic necessity—that of removing the rust of illusion, cleansing
the mirror in order that it may receive the divine light. “It is,” she
says, “as with a covered object, the object cannot respond to the rays
of the sun, not because the sun ceases to shine—for it shines without
intermission—but because the covering intervenes. Let the covering be
destroyed, and again the object will be exposed to the sun, and will
answer to the rays which beat against it in proportion as the work of
destruction advances. Thus the souls are covered by a rust—that is, by
sin—which is gradually consumed away by the fire of purgatory. The more
it is consumed, the more they respond to God their true Sun. Their
happiness increases as the rust falls off and lays them open to the
divine ray . . . the instinctive tendency to seek happiness in <span
id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_203"></span> God
develops itself, and goes on increasing through the fire of love which
draws it to its end with such impetuosity and vehemence that any
obstacle seems intolerable; and the more clear its vision, the more
extreme its pain.”  <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p24"></span><span
id="an_iv.iii-p24.1"></span>“Mostratene la via di gire al monte!” cry
the souls of the newly-dead in Dante’s vision,  <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) pushed by that “instinctive tendency”
towards the purifying flames. Such a tendency, such a passionate desire,
the aspiring self must have. No cool, well-balanced knowledge of the
need of new adjustments will avail to set it on the Purgative Way. This
is a heroic act, and demands heroic passions in the soul.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p26"></span>“In order to overcome our desires,” says
St. John of the Cross, who is the classic authority upon this portion of
the mystic quest, “and to renounce all those things, our love and
inclination for which are wont so to inflame the will that it delights
therein, we require a more ardent fire and a nobler love—that of the
Bridegroom. Finding her delight and strength in Him, the soul gains the
vigour and confidence which enable her easily to abandon all other
affections. It was necessary, in her struggle with the attractive force
of her sensual desires, not only to have this love for the Bridegroom,
but also to be filled with a burning fervour, full of anguish . . . if
our spiritual nature were not on fire with other and nobler passions we
should never cast off the yoke of the senses, nor be able to enter on
their night, neither should we have the courage to remain in the
darkness of all things, and in denial of every desire.”  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p28"></span>“We must be filled with a burning
fervour full of anguish.” Only this deep and ardent passion for a
perceived Object of Love can persuade the mystic to those unnatural acts
of abnegation by which he kills his lesser love of the world of sense,
frees himself from the “remora of desire,” unifies all his energies
about the new and higher centre of his life. His business, I have said,
is transcendence: a mounting up, an attainment of a higher order of
reality. Once his eyes have been opened on Eternity, his instinct for
the Absolute roused from its sleep, he sees union with that Reality as
his duty no less than his joy: sees too, that this union can only be
consummated on a plane where illusion and selfhood have no place.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p29"></span>The inward voice says to him
perpetually, at the least seasonable moments, <span
id="an_iv.iii-p29.1"></span>“Dimitte omnia transitoria, quaere aeterna.”
 <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) Hence the purgation of the
senses, and of the character which they have helped to build is always
placed first in order in the Mystic Way; though sporadic flashes of
illumination and ecstasy may, and often <span id="page_204">p.
204</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_204"></span> do, precede and
accompany it. Since spiritual no less than physical existence, as we
know it, is an endless Becoming, it too has no end. In a sense the whole
of the mystical experience in this life consists in a series of
purifications, whereby the Finite slowly approaches the nature of its
Infinite Source: climbing up the cleansing mountain pool by pool, like
the industrious fish in Rulman Merswin’s vision, until it reaches its
Origin. The greatest of the contemplative saints, far from leaving
purgation behind them in their progress, were increasingly aware of
their own inadequateness, the nearer they approached to the unitive
state: for the true lover of the Absolute, like every other lover, is
alternately abased and exalted by his unworthiness and his good fortune.
There are moments of high rapture when he knows only that the banner
over him is Love: but there are others in which he remains bitterly
conscious that in spite of his uttermost surrender there is within him
an ineradicable residuum of selfhood, which “stains the white radiance
of eternity.”

<span id="an_iv.iii-p31"></span>In this sense, then, purification is a
perpetual process. That which mystical writers mean, however, when they
speak of the Way of Purgation, is rather the slow and painful completion
of Conversion. It is the drastic turning of the self from the unreal to
the real life: a setting of her house in order, an orientation of the
mind to Truth. Its business is the getting rid, first of self-love; and
secondly of all those foolish interests in which the
surface-consciousness is steeped.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p32"></span>“The essence of purgation,” says Richard
of St. Victor, “is self-simplification.” Nothing can happen until this
has proceeded a certain distance: till the involved interests and
tangled motives of the self are simplified, and the false complications
of temporal life are recognized and cast away.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p33"></span>“No one,” says another authority in this
matter, “can be enlightened unless he be first cleansed or purified and
stripped.”  <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) Purgation, which is
the remaking of character in conformity with perceived reality, consists
in these two essential acts: the cleansing of that which is to remain,
the stripping of that which is to be done away. It may best be studied,
therefore, in two parts: and I think that it will be in the reader’s
interest if we reverse the order which the “Theologia Germanica” adopts,
and first consider Negative Purification, or self-stripping, and next
Positive Purification, or character-adjustment. These, then, are the
branches into which this subject will here be split. (1) The Negative
aspect, the stripping or purging away of those superfluous, unreal, and
harmful things which dissipate the precious energies of the self. This
is the business of Poverty, or *Detachment* . (2) The Positive aspect:
<span id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_205"></span>
a raising to their highest term, their purest state, of all that
remains—the permanent elements of character. This is brought about by
*Mortification,* the gymnastic of the soul: a deliberate recourse to
painful experiences and difficult tasks.

#### <span id="an_iv.iii-p34.1"></span>I. Detachment

<span id="an_iv.iii-p35"></span>Apart from the plain necessity of
casting out imperfection and sin, what is the type of “good character”
which will best serve the self in its journey towards union with the
Absolute?

<span id="an_iv.iii-p36"></span>The mystics of all ages and all faiths
agree in their answer. Those three virtues which the instinct of the
Catholic Church fixed upon as the necessities of the cloistered life—the
great Evangelical counsel of voluntary Poverty with its departments,
Chastity, the poverty of the senses, and Obedience, the poverty of the
will—are also, when raised to their highest term and transmuted by the
Fire of Love, the essential virtues of the mystical quest.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p37"></span>By *Poverty* the mystic means an utter
self-stripping, the casting off of immaterial as well as material
wealth, a complete detachment from all finite things. By *Chastity* he
means an extreme and limpid purity of soul, cleansed from personal
desire and virgin to all but God: by *Obedience,* that abnegation of
selfhood, that mortification of the will, which results in a complete
self-abandonment, a “holy indifference” to the accidents of life. These
three aspects of perfection are really one: linked together as
irrevocably as the three aspects of the self. Their common
characteristic is this: they tend to make the subject regard itself, not
as an isolated and interesting individual, possessing desires and
rights, but as a scrap of the Cosmos, an ordinary bit of the Universal
Life, only important as a part of the All, an expression of the Will
Divine. Detachment and purity go hand in hand, for purity is but
detachment of the heart; and where these are present they bring with
them that humble spirit of obedience which expresses detachment of will.
We may therefore treat them as three manifestations of one thing: which
thing is Inward Poverty. “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven,” is the motto of all pilgrims on this road.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p38"></span>“God is pure Good in Himself,” says
Eckhart, “therefore will He dwell nowhere but in a pure soul. There He
can pour Himself out: into that He can wholly flow. What is Purity? It
is that a man should have turned himself away from all creatures and
have set his heart so entirely on the Pure Good that no creature is to
him a comfort, that he has no desire for aught creaturely, save so far
as he may apprehend therein the Pure Good, which is God. And as little
as the bright eye can endure aught foreign in it, so <span
id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_206"></span> little
can the pure soul bear anything in it, any stain on it, that comes
between it and God. To it all creatures are pure to enjoy; for it
enjoyeth all creatures in God, and God in all creatures.”  <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p40"></span>“To it all creatures are pure to enjoy!”
This is hardly the popular concept of the mystic; which credits him, in
the teeth of such examples as St. Francis, St. Mechthild of Magdeburg,
Rolle, Suso, and countless others, with a hearty dread of natural
things. Too many examples of an exaggerated asceticism—such as the
unfortunate story told of the holy Curé d’Ars, who refused to smell a
rose for fear of sin—have supported in this respect the vulgar belief;
for it is generally forgotten that though most mystics have practised
asceticism as a means to an end, all ascetics are not mystics. Whatever
may be the case with other deniers of the senses, it is true that the
soul of the great mystic, dwelling on high levels of reality, his eyes
set on the Transcendental World, is capable of combining with the
perfection of detachment that intense and innocent joy in natural
things, as veils and vessels of the divine, which results from seeing
“all creatures in God and God in all creatures.” “Whoso knows and loves
the nobleness of My Freedom,” said the voice of God to Mechthild of
Magdeburg, “cannot bear to love Me alone, he must love also Me in the
creatures.”  <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) That all-embracing
love is characteristic of the illumination which results from a faithful
endurance of the Purgative Way; for the corollary of “blessed are the
pure in heart” is not merely a poetic statement. The annals of mysticism
prove it to be a psychological law.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p42"></span>How then is this contradiction to be
resolved: that the mystic who has declared the fundamental necessity of
“leaving all creatures” yet finds them pure to enjoy? The answer to the
riddle lies in the ancient paradox of Poverty: that we only enjoy true
liberty in respect of such things as we neither possess nor desire.
“That thou mayest have pleasure in everything, seek pleasure in nothing.
That thou mayest know everything, seek to know nothing. That thou mayest
possess all things, seek to possess nothing. . . . In detachment the
spirit finds quiet and repose, for coveting nothing, nothing wearies it
by elation, and nothing oppresses it by dejection, because it stands in
the centre of its own humility. For as soon as it covets anything, it is
immediately fatigued thereby.”  <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p44"></span>It is not love but lust—the possessive
case, the very food of selfhood—which poisons the relation between the
self and the external world and “immediately fatigues” the soul. Divide
the world into “mine” and “not mine,” and unreal standards are <span
id="page_207">p. 207</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_207"></span> set
up, claims and cravings begin to fret the mind. We are the slaves of our
own property. We drag with us not a treasure, but a chain. “Behold,”
says the “Theologia Germanica,” “on this sort must we cast all things
from us and strip ourselves of them: we must refrain from claiming
anything for our own. When we do this, we shall have the best, fullest,
clearest, and noblest knowledge that a man can have, and also the
noblest and purest love and desire.”  <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) “Some there are,” says Plotinus, “that
for all their effort have not attained the Vision. . . . They have
received the authentic Light, all their soul has gleamed as they have
drawn near, but they come with a load on their shoulders which holds
them back from the place of Vision. They have not ascended in the pure
integrity of their being, but are burdened with that which keeps them
apart. They are not yet made one within.”  <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) Accept Poverty, however, demolish
ownership, the verb “to have” in every mood and tense, and this downward
drag is at an end. At once the Cosmos belongs to you, and you to it. You
escape the heresy of separateness, are “made one,” and merged in “the
greater life of the All.” Then, a free spirit in a free world, the self
moves upon its true orbit; undistracted by the largely self-imposed
needs and demands of ordinary earthly existence.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p47"></span>This was the truth which St. Francis of
Assisi grasped, and applied with the energy of a reformer and the
delicate originality of a poet to every circumstance of the inner and
the outer life. This noble liberty it is which is extolled by his
spiritual descendant, Jacopone da Todi, in one of his most magnificent
odes:—

> <span id="an_iv.iii-p47.1"></span> “Povertá, alto sapere,  
> a nulla cosa sojacere,  
> en desprezo possedere  
> tutte le cose create. . . .  
> Dio non alberga en core stretto,  
> tant’é grande quant’ hai affetto,  
> povertate ha si gran petto  
> che ci alberga deitate. . . .  
> Povertate è nulla avere  
> e nulla cosa poi volere;  
> ad omne cosa possedere  
> en spirito de libertate.”  <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411)  

<span id="an_iv.iii-p51"></span><span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_208"></span> “My little sisters the birds,” said St.
Francis, greatest adept of that high wisdom, “Brother Sun, Sister Water,
Mother Earth.”  <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) Not my servants,
but my kindred and fellow-citizens; who may safely be loved so long as
they are not desired. So, in almost identical terms, the dying Hindu
ascetic:—

> <span id="an_iv.iii-p52.1"></span> “Oh Mother Earth, Father Sky,  
> Brother Wind, Friend Light, Sweetheart Water,  
> Here take my last salutation with folded hands!  
> For to-day I am melting away into the Supreme  
> Because my heart became pure,  
> And all delusion vanished,  
> Through the power of your good company.”  

<span id="an_iv.iii-p53"></span>It is the business of Lady Poverty to
confer on her lovers this freedom of the Universe, to eradicate
delusion, cut out the spreading growth of claimfulness, purify the
heart, and initiate them into the “great life of the All.” Well might
St. Francis desire marriage with that enchantress, who gives back
ten-fold all that she takes away. “Holy poverty,” he said, “is a
treasure so high excelling and so divine that we be not worthy to lay it
up in our vile vessels; since this is that celestial virtue whereby all
earthly things and fleeting are trodden underfoot, and whereby all
hindrances are lifted from the soul, so that freely she may join herself
to God Eternal.”  <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p55"></span>Poverty, then, prepares man’s spirit for
that union with God to which it aspires. She strips off the clothing
which he so often mistakes for himself, transvaluates all his values,
and shows him things as they are. “There are,” says Eckhart, “four
ascending degrees of such spiritual poverty. 1. The soul’s contempt of
all things that are not God. 2. Contempt of herself and her own works.
3. Utter self-abandonment. 4. Self-loss in the incomprehensible Being of
God.”  <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) So, in the “Sacrum
Commercium,” when the friars, climbing “the steeps of the hill,” found
Lady Poverty at the summit “enthroned only in her nakedness,” she
“preventing them with the blessings of sweetness,” said, “Why hasten ye
so from the vale of tears to the mount of light? If, peradventure, it is
me that ye seek, lo, I am but as you behold, a little poor one, stricken
with storms and far from any consolation.” Whereto the brothers answer,
“ *Only admit us to thy peace; and we shall be saved* .”  <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p58"></span>The same truth: the saving peace of
utter detachment from everything but Divine Reality—a detachment which
makes those <span id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_209"></span> who have it the citizens of the world,
and enabled the friars to say to Lady Poverty as they showed her from
the hill of Assisi the whole countryside at her feet, <span
id="an_iv.iii-p58.1"></span>“Hoc est claustrum nostrum, Domina,”  <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) —is taught by Meister Eckhart in a
more homely parable.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p60"></span>“There was a learned man who, eight
years long, desired that God would show him a man who would teach him
the truth. And once when he felt a very great longing, a voice from God
came to him and said, ‘Go to the church, and there shalt thou find a man
who shalt show thee the way to blessedness.’ And he went thence and
found a poor man whose feet were torn and covered with dust and dirt:
and all his clothes were hardly worth three farthings. And he greeted
him, saying:—

<span id="an_iv.iii-p61"></span>“‘God give you good day!’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p62"></span>“He answered: ‘I have never had a bad
day.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p63"></span>“‘God give you good luck.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p64"></span>“‘I have never had ill luck.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p65"></span>“‘May you be happy! but why do you
answer me thus?’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p66"></span>“‘I have never been unhappy.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p67"></span>“‘Pray explain this to me, for I cannot
understand it.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p68"></span>“The poor man answered, ‘Willingly. You
wished me good day. I never had a bad day; for if I am hungry I praise
God; if it freezes, hails, snows, rains, if the weather is fair or foul,
still I praise God; am I wretched and despised, I praise God, and so I
have never had an evil day. You wished that God would send me luck. But
I never had ill luck, for I know how to live with God, and I know that
what He does is best; and what God gives me or ordains for me, be it
good or ill, I take it cheerfully from God as the best that can be, and
so I have never had ill luck. You wished that God would make me happy. I
was never unhappy; for my only desire is to live in God’s will, and I
have so entirely yielded my will to God’s, that what God wills, I will.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p69"></span>“‘But if God should will to cast you
into hell,’ said the learned man, ‘what would you do then?’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p70"></span>“‘Cast me into hell? His goodness
forbids! But if He did cast me into hell, I should have two arms to
embrace Him. One arm is true humility, that I should lay beneath Him,
and be thereby united to His holy humanity. And with the right arm of
love, which is united with His holy divinity, I should so embrace Him
that He would have to go to hell with me. And I would rather be in hell
and have God, then in heaven and not have God.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p71"></span>“Then the Master understood that true
abandonment with utter humility is the nearest way to God.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p72"></span>“The Master asked further: ‘Whence are
you come?’ <span id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_210"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p73"></span>“‘From God.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p74"></span>“‘Where did you find God?’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p75"></span>“‘When I forsook all creatures.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p76"></span>“‘Where have you left God?’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p77"></span>“‘In pure hearts, and in men of good
will.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p78"></span>“The Master asked: ‘What sort of man are
you?’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p79"></span>“‘I am a king.’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p80"></span>“‘Where is your kingdom?’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p81"></span>“‘My soul is my kingdom, for I can so
rule my senses inward and outward, that all the desires and power of my
soul are in subjection, and this kingdom is greater than a kingdom on
earth.’  <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p83"></span>“‘What brought you to this perfection?’

<span id="an_iv.iii-p84"></span>“‘My silence, my high thoughts, and my
union with God. For I could not rest in anything that was less than God.
Now I have found God; and in God have eternal rest and peace.’”  <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p86"></span>Poverty, then, consists in a breaking
down of man’s inveterate habit of trying to rest in, or take seriously,
things which are “less than God”: *i.e.* , which do not possess the
character of reality. Such a habit is the most fertile of all causes of
“world-weariness,” disillusion and unrest: faults, or rather spiritual
diseases, which the mystics never exhibit, but which few who are without
all mystic feeling can hope to escape. Hence the sharpened perceptions
of the contemplatives have always seen poverty as a counsel of prudence,
a higher form of common sense. It was not with St. Francis, or any other
great mystic, a first principle, an end in itself. It was rather a
logical deduction from the first principle of their science—the
paramount importance to the soul of an undistracted vision of reality.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p87"></span>Here East and West are in agreement:
“Their science,” says Al Ghazzali of the Sufis, who practised, like the
early Franciscans, a complete renunciation of worldly goods, “has for
its object the uprooting from the soul of all violent passions, the
extirpation from it of vicious desires and evil qualities; so that the
heart may become detached from all that is not God, and give itself for
its only occupation meditation upon the Divine Being.”  <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p89"></span>All those who have felt themselves urged
towards the attainment of this transcendental vision, have found that
possessions interrupt the view; that claims, desires, attachments become
centres of conflicting interest in the mind. They assume a false air of
importance, force themselves upon the attention, and complicate <span
id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_211"></span> life.
Hence, in the interest of self-simplification, they must be cleared
away: a removal which involves for the real enthusiast little more
sacrifice than the weekly visit of the dustman. “Having entirely
surrendered my own free-will,” says Al Ghazzali of his personal
experience,” my heart no longer felt any distress in renouncing fame,
wealth, or the society of my children.”  <span
id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p91"></span>Others have reconciled self-surrender
with a more moderate abandonment of outward things; for possessions take
different rank for almost every human soul. The true rule of poverty
consists in giving up those things which enchain the spirit, divide its
interests, and deflect it on its road to God—whether these things be
riches, habits, religious observances, friends, interests, distastes, or
desires—not in mere outward destitution for its own sake. It is
attitude, not act, that matters; self-denudation would be unnecessary
were it not for our inveterate tendency to attribute false value to
things the moment they become our own. “What is poverty of spirit but
meekness of mind, by which a man knows his own infirmity?” says Rolle,
“seeing that to perfect stableness he may not come but by the grace of
God, all thing that him might let from that grace he forsakes, and only
in joy of his Maker he sets his desire. And as of one root spring many
branches, so of wilful poverty on this wise taken proceed virtues and
marvels untrowed. Not as some, that change their clothes and not their
souls; riches soothly it seems these forsake, and vices innumerable they
cease not to gather. . . . If thou truly all thing for God forsake, *see
more what thou despised than what thou forsaketh.* ”  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p93"></span>The Poverty of the mystics, then, is a
mental rather than a material state. Detachment of the will from all
desire of possessions is the inner reality, of which Franciscan poverty
is a sacrament to the world. It is the poor in spirit, not the poor in
substance, who are to be spiritually blessed. “Let all things be
forsaken of me,” says Gerlac Petersen, “so that being poor I may be able
in great inward spaciousness, and without any hurt, to suffer want of
all those things which the mind of man can desire; out of or excepting
God Himself.”  <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p95"></span>“The soul,” says St. John of the Cross,
“is not empty, so long as the desire for sensible things remains. But
the absence of this desire for things produces emptiness and liberty of
soul; even when there is an abundance of possessions.”  <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p97"></span>Every person in whom the mystical
instinct awakes soon discovers in himself certain tastes or qualities
which interrupt the <span id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_212"></span> development of that instinct. Often
these tastes and qualities are legitimate enough upon their own plane;
but they are a drain upon the energy of the self, preventing her from
attaining that intenser life for which she was made and which demands
her undivided zest. They distract her attention, fill the field of
perception, stimulate her instinctive life: making of the
surface-consciousness so active a thing that it can hardly be put to
sleep. “Where can he have that pure and naked vision of unchangeable
Truth whereby he see into all things,” says Petersen again, “who is so
busied in other things, not perhaps evil, which operate . . . upon his
thoughts and imagination and confuse and enchain his mind . . . that his
sight of that unique One in Whom all things are is overclouded?”  <span
id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p99"></span>The nature of these distracting factors
which “confuse and enchain the mind” will vary with almost every
individual. It is impossible to predict what those things will be which
a self must give up, in order that the transcendental consciousness may
grow. “It makes little difference whether a bird be held by a slender
thread or by a rope; the bird is bound, and cannot fly until the cord
that holds it is broken. It is true that a slender thread is more easily
broken; still notwithstanding, if it is not broken the bird cannot fly.
This is the state of a soul with particular attachments: it never can
attain to the liberty of the divine union, whatever virtues it may
possess. Desires and attachments affect the soul as the remora is said
to affect a ship; that is but a little fish, yet when it clings to the
vessel it effectually hinders its progress.”  <span
id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p101"></span>Thus each adventurer must discover and
extirpate all those interests which nourish selfhood, however innocent
or even useful these interests may seem in the eyes of the world. The
only rule is the ruthless abandonment of everything which is in the way.
“When any man God perfectly desires to love, all things as well inward
as outward that to God’s love are contrary and from His love do let, he
studies to do away.”  <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426) This may
mean the prompt and utter self-stripping of St. Francis of Assisi, who
cast off his actual clothing in his relentless determination to have
nothing of his own:  <span id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) the
reluctant bit-by-bit renunciations which at last set his follower Angela
of Foligno free, or the drastic proceedings of Antoinette Bourignan, who
found that a penny was enough to keep her from God.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p104"></span>“Being one night in a most profound
Penitence,” says the biographer of this extraordinary woman, “she said
from the bottom <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_213"></span> of her Heart, ‘O my Lord! what must I do
to please Thee? For I have nobody to teach me. Speak to my soul and it
will hear Thee.’” At that instant she heard, as if another had spoken
within her “Forsake all earthly things. Separate thyself from the love
of the creatures. Deny thyself.” From this time, the more she entered
into herself the more she was inclined to abandon all. But she had not
the courage necessary for the complete renunciation towards which her
transcendental consciousness was pressing her. She struggled to adjust
herself to the inner and the outer life, but without success. For such a
character as hers, compromise was impossible. “She asked always
earnestly, When shall I be perfectly thine, O my God? and she thought He
still answered her, *When thou shalt no longer possess anything, and
shalt die to thyself.* And where shall I do that, Lord? He answered, *In
the Desert.”* At last the discord between her deeper and her superficial
self became intolerable. Reinforced by the miseries of an unsympathetic
home, still more by a threat of approaching marriage, the impulse to
renunciation got its way. She disguised herself in a hermit’s dress—she
was only eighteen, and had no one to help or advise her—and “went out of
her chamber about Four in the Morning, taking nothing but one Penny to
buy Bread for that Day and it being said to her in the going out, *Where
is thy Faith? In a Penny?* she threw it away. . . . Thus she went away
wholly delivered from the heavy burthen of the Cares and Good Things of
this World.”  <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p106"></span>An admirable example of the mystic’s
attitude towards the soul-destroying division of interests, the natural
but hopeless human struggle to make the best of both worlds, which sucks
at its transcendental vitality, occurs in St. Teresa’s purgative period.
In her case this war between the real and the superficial self extended
over many years; running side by side with the state of Illumination,
and a fully developed contemplative life. At last it was brought to an
end by a “Second Conversion” which unified her scattered interests and
set her firmly and for ever on the Unitive Way. The virile strength of
Teresa’s character, which afterwards contributed to the greatness of her
achievement, opposed the invading transcendental consciousness; disputed
every inch of territory; resisted every demand made upon it by the
growing spiritual self. Bit by bit it was conquered, the sphere of her
deeper life enlarged; until the moment came in which she surrendered,
once for all, to her true destiny.  <span
id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429) <span id="page_214">p. 214</span>
<span id="an_iv.iii-Page_214"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p108"></span>During the years of inward stress, of
penance and growing knowledge of the Infinite, which she spent in the
Convent of the Incarnation, and which accompanied this slow remaking of
character, Teresa’s only self-indulgence—as it seems, a sufficiently
innocent one—was talking to the friends who came down from Avila to the
convent-parlour, and spoke to her through the *grille.* Her confessors,
unaccustomed to the education of mystical genius, saw nothing
incompatible between this practice and the pursuit of a high
contemplative life. But as her transcendental consciousness, her states
of orison grew stronger, Teresa felt more and more the distracting
influence of these glimpses of the outer world. They were a drain upon
the energy which ought to be wholly given to that new, deep, more real
life which she felt stirring within her, and which could only hope to
achieve its mighty destiny by complete concentration upon the business
in hand. No genius can afford to dissipate his energies: the mystic
genius least of all. Teresa knew that so long as she retained these
personal satisfactions, her life had more than one focus; she was not
whole-hearted in her surrender to the Absolute. But though her inward
voices, her deepest instincts, urged her to give them up, for years she
felt herself incapable of such a sacrifice. It was round the question of
their retention or surrender that the decisive battle of her life was
fought.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p109"></span>“The devil,” says her great Augustinian
eulogist, Fray Luis de Leon, in his vivid account of these long interior
struggles, “put before her those persons most sympathetic by nature; and
God came, and in the midst of the conversation discovered Himself
aggrieved and sorrowful. The devil delighted in the conversation and
pastime, but when she turned her back on them and betook herself to
prayer, God redoubled the delight and favours, as if to show her how
false was the lure which charmed her at the grating, and that His
sweetness was the veritable sweetness. . . . So that these two
inclinations warred with each other in the breast of this blessed woman,
and the authors who inspired them each did his utmost to inflame her
most, and the oratory blotted out what the grating wrote, and at times
the grating vanquished and diminished the good fruit produced by prayer,
causing agony and grief which disquieted and perplexed her soul: for
though she was resolved to belong entirely to God, she knew not how to
shake herself free from the world: and at times she persuaded herself
that she could enjoy both, which ended mostly, as she says, in complete
enjoyment of neither. For the amusements of the locutorio were
embittered and turned into wormwood by the memory of the secret and
sweet intimacy with God; and in the same way when she retired to be with
God, and commenced to speak with Him, <span id="page_215">p. 215</span>
<span id="an_iv.iii-Page_215"></span> the affections and thoughts which
she carried with her from the grating took possession of her.”  <span
id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p111"></span>Compare with these violent oscillations
between the superficial and mystical consciousness—characteristic of
Teresa’s strong volitional nature, which only came to rest after psychic
convulsions which left no corner of its being unexplored—the symbolic
act of renunciation under which Antoinette Bourignan’s “interior self”
vanquished the surface intelligence and asserted its supremacy. Teresa
must give up her passionate delight in human friendship. Antoinette,
never much tempted in that direction, must give up her last penny. What
society was to Teresa’s generous, energetic nature, prudence was to the
temperamentally shrewd and narrow Antoinette: a distraction, a check on
the development of the all-demanding transcendental genius, an
unconquered relic of the “lower life.”

<span id="an_iv.iii-p112"></span>Many a mystic, however, has found the
perfection of detachment to be consistent with a far less drastic
renunciation of external things than that which these women felt to be
essential to their peace. The test, as we have seen, does not lie in the
nature of the things which are retained, but in the reaction which they
stimulate in the self. “Absolute poverty is thine,” says Tauler, “when
thou canst not remember whether anybody has ever owed thee or been
indebted to thee for anything; just as all things will be forgotten by
thee in the last journey of death.”  <span
id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431) Poverty, in this sense, may be
consistent with the habitual and automatic use of luxuries which the
abstracted self never even perceives. Thus we are told that St. Bernard
was reproached by his enemies with the inconsistency of preaching
evangelical poverty whilst making his journeys from place to place on a
magnificently caparisoned mule, which had been lent to him by the
Cluniac monks. He expressed great contrition: but said that he had never
noticed what it was that he rode upon.  <span
id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p115"></span>Sometimes, the very activity which one
self has rejected as an impediment becomes for another the channel of
spiritual perception. I have mentioned the Curé d’Ars, who, among other
inhibitions, refused to allow himself to smell a rose. Yet St. Francis
preached to the flowers,  <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433) and
ordered a plot to be set aside for their cultivation when the convent
garden was made, “in order that all who saw them might remember the
Eternal Sweetness.”  <span id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434) <span
id="page_216">p. 216</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_216"></span> So,
too, we are told of his spiritual daughter, St. Douceline, that “out of
doors one day with her sisters, she heard a bird’s note. ‘What a lovely
song!’ she said: and the song drew her straight way to God. Did they
bring her a flower, *its* *beauty had a like effect* .”  <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435) “To look on trees, water, and
flowers,” says St. Teresa of her own beginnings of contemplation,
“helped her to recollect the Presence of God.”  <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) Here we are reminded of Plato. “The
true order of going is to use the beauties of Earth as steps along which
one mounts upwards for the sake of that other Beauty.” This, too, is the
true order of Holy Poverty: the selfless use, not the selfish abuse of
lovely and natural things.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p120"></span>To say that some have fallen short of
this difficult ideal and taken refuge in mere abnegation is but to say
that asceticism is a human, not a superhuman art, and is subject to “the
frailty of the creature.” But on the whole, these excesses are mainly
found amongst saintly types who have not exhibited true mystic
intuition. This intuition, entailing as it does communion with intensest
Life, gives to its possessors a sweet sanity, a delicate balance, which
guards them, as a rule, from such conceptions of chastity as that of the
youthful saint who shut himself in a cupboard for fear he should see his
mother pass by: from the obedience which identifies the voice of the
director with the voice of God; from detachment such as that exhibited
by the Blessed Angela of Foligno, who, though a true mystic, viewed with
almost murderous satisfaction the deaths of relatives who were
“impediments.”  <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) The detachment
of the mystic is just a restoration to the liberty in which the soul was
made: it is a state of joyous humility in which he cries, “Nought I am,
nought I have, nought I lack.” To have arrived at this is to have
escaped from the tyranny of selfhood: to be initiated into the purer air
of that universe which knows but one rule of action—that which was laid
down once for all by St. Augustine when he said, in the most memorable
and misquoted of epigrams: “Love, and do what you like.”

#### <span id="an_iv.iii-p121.1"></span>2. Mortification

<span id="an_iv.iii-p122"></span>By mortification, I have said, is to be
understood the positive aspect of purification: the remaking in relation
to reality of the permanent elements of character. These elements, so
far, have <span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_217"></span> subserved the interests of the old self,
worked for it in the world of sense. Now they must be adjusted to the
needs of the new self and to the transcendent world in which it moves.
Their focal point is the old self; the “natural man” and his
self-regarding instincts and desires. The object of mortification is to
kill that old self, break up his egoistic attachments and cravings, in
order that the higher centre, the “new man,” may live and breathe. As
St. Teresa discovered when she tried to reconcile the claims of worldly
friendships and contemplation, one or other must go: a house divided
against itself cannot stand. “Who hinders thee more,” says Thomas a
Kempis, “than the unmortified affections of thy own heart? . . . if we
were perfectly dead unto ourselves, and not entangled within our own
breasts, then should we be able to taste Divine things, and to have some
experience of heavenly contemplation.”  <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p124"></span>In psychological language, the process
of mortification is the process of setting up “new paths of neural
discharge.” That is to say, the mystic life has got to express itself in
action: and for this new paths must be cut and new habits formed—all, in
spite of the new self’s enthusiasm, “against the grain”—resulting in a
complete sublimation of personality. The energy which wells up
incessantly in every living being must abandon the old road of least
resistance and discharge itself in a new and more difficult way. In the
terms of the hormic psychology, the conative drive of the psyche must be
concentrated on new objectives; and the old paths, left to themselves,
must fade and die. When they are dead, and the new life has triumphed,
Mortification is at an end. The mystics always know when this moment
comes. Often an inner voice then warns them to lay their active penances
aside.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p125"></span>Since the greater and stronger the
mystic, the stronger and more stubborn his character tends to be, this
change of life and turning of energy from the old and easy channels to
the new is often a stormy matter. It is a period of actual battle
between the inharmonious elements of the self, its lower and higher
springs of action: of toil, fatigue, bitter suffering, and many
disappointments. Nevertheless, in spite of its etymological
associations, the object of mortification is not death but life: the
production of health and strength, the health and strength of the human
consciousness viewed <span id="an_iv.iii-p125.1"></span> *sub specie
aeternitatis* . “In the truest death of all created things, the sweetest
and most natural life is hidden.”  <span
id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p127"></span>“This dying,” says Tauler again, “has
many degrees, and so has this life. A man might die a thousand deaths in
one day and find at once a joyful life corresponding to each of them.
This is as <span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_218"></span> it must be: God cannot deny or refuse
this to death. The stronger the death the more powerful and thorough is
the corresponding life; the more intimate the death, the more inward is
the life. Each life brings strength, and strengthens to a harder death.
When a man dies to a scornful word, bearing it in God’s name, or to some
inclination inward or outward, acting or not acting against his own
will, be it in love or grief, in word or act, in going or staying; or if
he denies his desires of taste or sight, or makes no excuses when
wrongfully accused; or anything else, whatever it may be, to which he
has not yet died, it is harder at first to one who is unaccustomed to it
and unmortified than to him who is mortified. . . . A great life makes
reply to him who dies in earnest even in the least things, a life which
strengthens him immediately to die a greater death; a death so long and
strong, that it seems to him hereafter more joyful, good and pleasant to
die than to live, for he finds life in death and light shining in
darkness.”  <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p129"></span>No more than detachment, then, is
mortification an end in itself. It is a process, an education directed
towards the production of a definite kind of efficiency, the adjustment
of human nature to the demands of its new life. Severe, and to the
outsider apparently unmeaning—like their physical parallels the
exercises of the gymnasium—its disciplines, faithfully accepted, do
release the self from the pull of the lower nature, establish it on new
levels of freedom and power. “Mortification,” says the Benedictine
contemplative Augustine Baker, “tends to subject the body to the spirit
and the spirit to God. And this it does by crossing the inclinations of
sense, which are quite contrary to those of the Divine Spirit . . . by
such crossing and afflicting of the body, self-love and self-will (the
poison of our spirits) are abated, and in time in a sort destroyed; and
instead of them there enter into the soul the Divine love and Divine
will, and take possession thereof.”  <span
id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) This transformation accomplished,
mortification may end, and often does, with startling abruptness. After
a martyrdom which lasted sixteen years, says Suso—speaking as usual in
the third person—of his own experience, “On a certain Whitsun Day a
heavenly messenger appeared to him, and ordered him in God’s name to
continue it no more. He at once ceased, and threw all the instruments of
his sufferings \[irons, nails, hair-shirt, etc.\] into a river.”  <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) From this time onward, austerities of
this sort had no part in Suso’s life.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p132"></span>The Franco-Flemish mystic who wrote,
and the English contemplative <span id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_219"></span> who translated, “The Mirror of Simple
Souls,” have between them described and explained in bold and accurate
language the conditions under which the soul is enabled to abandon that
“hard service of the virtues” which has absorbed it during the Purgative
Way. The statement of the “French Book” is direct and uncompromising:
well calculated to startle timid piety. “Virtues, I take leave of you
for evermore!” exclaims the Soul. “Now shall mine heart be more free and
more in peace than it hath been before. I wot well your service is too
travaillous. . . . Some time I laid mine heart in you without any
dissevering: ye wot well this: I was in all things to you obedient. O I
was then your servant, but now I am delivered out of your thraldom.”

<span id="an_iv.iii-p133"></span>To this astounding utterance the
English translator has added a singularly illuminating gloss. “I am
stirred here,” he says, “to say more to the matter, as thus: First: when
a soul giveth her to perfection, she laboureth busily day and night to
get virtues, by counsel of reason, and striveth with vices at every
thought, at every word and deed that she perceiveth cometh of them, and
busily searcheth vices, them to destroy. Thus the virtues be mistresses,
and every virtue maketh her to war with its contrary, the which be
vices. Many sharp pains and bitterness of conscience feeleth the soul in
this war. . . . But so long one may bite on the bitter bark of the nut,
that at last he shall come to the sweet kernel. Right so, ghostly to
understand, it fareth by these souls that be come to peace. They have so
long striven with vices and wrought by virtues, that they be come to the
nut kernel, that is, to the love of God, which is sweetness. And when
the soul hath deeply tasted this love, so that this love of God worketh
and hath his usages in her soul, then the soul is wondrous light and
gladsome. . . . Then is she mistress and lady over the virtues, for she
hath them all within herself. . . . And then this soul taketh leave of
virtues, as of the thraldom and painful travail of them that she had
before, and now she is lady and sovereign, and they be subjects.”  <span
id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p135"></span>Jacopone da Todi speaks to the same
effect:—

> <span id="an_iv.iii-p135.1"></span> “La guerra è terminata  
> de le virtu battaglia,  
> de la mente travaglia  
> cosa nulla contende”.  <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444)  

<span id="an_iv.iii-p137"></span>Thus, St. Catherine of Genoa, after a
penitential period of four years, during which she was haunted by a
constant sense of sin, and occupied by incessant mortifications, found
that “all thought <span id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_220"></span> of such mortifications was *in an
instant* taken from her mind: in such a manner that, had she even wished
to continue such mortifications, she would have been unable to do so . .
. the sight of her sins was now taken from her mind, so that henceforth
she did not catch a glimpse of them: it was as though they had all been
cast into the depths of the sea.”  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445) In other words, the new and higher
centre of consciousness, finally established, asserted itself and
annihilated the old. <span id="an_iv.iii-p138.1"></span>“La guerra e
teminata,”all the energy of a strong nature flows freely in the new
channels; and mortification ceases, mechanically, to be possible to the
now unified, sublimated, or “regenerated” self.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p139"></span>Mortification takes its name from the
reiterated statement of all ascetic writers that the senses, or “body of
desire,” with the cravings which are excited by different aspects of the
phenomenal world, must be mortified or killed; which is, of course, a
description of psychological necessities from their special point of
view. All those self-regarding instincts—so ingrained that they have
become automatic—which impel the self to choose the more comfortable
part, are seen by the awakened intuition of the embryo mystic as gross
infringements of the law of love. “This is the travail that a man
behoveth, to draw out his heart and his mind from the fleshly love and
the liking of all earthly creatures, from vain thoughts and from fleshly
imaginations, and out from the love and the vicious feeling of himself,
that his soul should find no rest in no fleshly thought, nor earthly
affection.”  <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) The rule of Poverty
must be applied to the temper of normal consciousness as well as to the
tastes and possessions of the self. Under this tonic influence, real
life will thrive, unreal life will wither and die.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p141"></span>This mortifying process is necessary,
not because the legitimate exercise of the senses is opposed to Divine
Reality, but because those senses have usurped a place beyond their
station; become the focus of energy, steadily drained the vitality of
the self. “The dogs have taken the children’s meat.” The senses have
grown stronger than their masters, monopolized the field of perception,
dominated an organism which was made for greater activities, and built
up those barriers of individuality which must be done away if true
personality is to be achieved, and with it some share in the boundless
life of the One. It is thanks to this wrong distribution of energy, this
sedulous feeding of the cuckoo in the nest, that “in order to approach
the Absolute, mystics must withdraw from everything, even themselves.”
 <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) “The soul is plunged in utter
<span id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_221"></span>
ignorance, when she supposes that she can attain to the high estate of
union with God before she casts away the desire of all things, natural
and supernatural, which she may possess,” says St. John of the Cross,
“because the distance between them and that which takes place in the
state of pure transformation in God is infinite.”  <span
id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448) Again, “until the desires be lulled to
sleep by the mortification of sensuality, and sensuality itself be
mortified in them, so that it shall war against the spirit no more, the
soul cannot go forth in perfect liberty to union with the Beloved.”
 <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p145"></span>The death of selfhood in its narrow
individualistic sense is, then, the primary object of mortification. All
the twisted elements of character which foster the existence of this
unreal yet complex creature are to be pruned away. Then, as with the
trees of the forest, so with the spirit of man, strong new branches will
spring into being, grow towards air and light. “I live, yet not I” is to
be the declaration of the mystic who has endured this “bodily death.”
The self-that-is-to-be will live upon a plane where her own prejudices
and preferences are so uninteresting as to be imperceptible. She must be
weaned from these nursery toys: and weaning is a disagreeable process.
The mystic, however, undertakes it as a rule without reluctance: pushed
by his vivid consciousness of imperfection, his intuition of a more
perfect state, necessary to the fulfilment of his love. Often his
entrance upon the torments of the Purgative Way, his taking up of the
spiritual or material instruments of mortification, resembles in ardour
and abruptness that “heroic plunge into Purgatory” of the newly dead
when it perceives itself in the light of Love Divine, which is described
in the “Treatise” of St. Catherine of Genoa as its nearest equivalent.
“As she, plunged in the divine furnace of purifying love, was united to
the Object of her love, and satisfied with all he wrought in her, so she
understood it to be with the souls in Purgatory.”  <span
id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p147"></span>This “divine furnace of purifying love”
demands from the ardent soul a complete self-surrender, and voluntary
turning from all impurity, a humility of the most far-reaching kind: and
this means the deliberate embrace of active suffering, a self-discipline
in dreadful tasks. As gold in the refiner’s fire, so “burning of love
into a soul truly taken all vices purgeth.” Detachment may be a counsel
of prudence, a practical result of seeing the true values of things; but
the pain of mortification is seized as a splendid opportunity, a love
token, timidly offered by the awakened spirit to that all-demanding
Lover from Whom St. Catherine of Siena heard the terrible words “I,
Fire, the Acceptor of sacrifices, ravishing <span id="page_222">p.
222</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_222"></span> away from them their
darkness, give the light.”  <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451)
“Suffering is the ancient law of love,” says the Eternal Wisdom to Suso,
“there is no quest without pain, there is no lover who is not also a
martyr. Hence it is inevitable that he who would love so high a thing as
Wisdom should sometimes suffer hindrances and griefs.”  <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p150"></span>The mystics have a profound conviction
that Creation, Becoming, Transcendence, is a painful process at the
best. Those who are Christians point to the Passion of Christ as a proof
that the cosmic journey to perfection, the path of the Eternal Wisdom,
follows of necessity the Way of the Cross. That law of the inner life,
which sounds so fantastic and yet is so bitterly true—“No progress
without pain”—asserts itself. It declares that birth pangs must be
endured in the spiritual as well as in the material world: that adequate
training must always hurt the athlete. Hence the mystics’ quest of the
Absolute drives them to an eager and heroic union with the reality of
suffering, as well as with the reality of joy.  <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p152"></span>This divine necessity of pain, this
necessary sharing in the travail of a World of Becoming, is beautifully
described by Tauler in one of those “internal conversations” between the
contemplative soul and its God, which abound in the works of the mystics
and are familiar to all readers of “The Imitation of Christ.” “A man
once thought,” says Tauler, “that God drew some men even by pleasant
paths, while other were drawn by the path of pain. Our Lord answered him
thus, ‘What think ye can be pleasanter or nobler than to be made most
like unto Me? that is by suffering. Mark, to whom was ever offered such
a troubled life as to Me? And in whom can I better work in accordance
with My true nobility than in those who are most like Me? They are the
men who suffer. . . . Learn that My divine nature never worked so nobly
in human nature as by suffering; and because suffering is so
efficacious, it is sent out of great love. I understand the weakness of
human nature at all times, and out of love and righteousness I lay no
heavier load on man than he can bear. The crown must be firmly <span
id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_223"></span>
pressed down that is to bud and blossom in the Eternal Presence of of My
Heavenly Father. He who desires to be wholly immersed in the fathomless
sea of My Godhead must also be deeply immersed in the deep sea of bitter
sorrow. I am exalted far above all things, and work supernatural and
wonderful works in Myself: the deeper and more supernaturally a man
crushes himself beneath all things the more supernaturally will he be
drawn far above all things.’”  <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p154"></span>Pain, therefore, the mystics always
welcome and often court: sometimes in the crudely physical form which
Suso describes so vividly and horribly in the sixteenth chapter of his
Life, more frequently in those refinements of torture which a sensitive
spirit can extract from loneliness, injustice, misunderstanding—above
all, from deliberate contact with the repulsive accidents of life. It
would seem from a collation of the evidence that the typical mystical
temperament is by nature highly fastidious. Its passionate apprehension
of spiritual beauty, its intuitive perception of divine harmony, is
counterbalanced by an instinctive loathing of ugliness, a shrinking from
the disharmonies of squalor and disease. Often its ideal of refinement
is far beyond the contemporary standards of decency: a circumstance
which is alone enough to provide ample opportunity of wretchedness. This
extreme sensitiveness, which forms part of the normal psychophysical
make-up of the mystic, as it often does of the equally highly-strung
artistic type, is one of the first things to be seized upon by the
awakened self as a disciplinary instrument. Then humility’s axiom,
“Naught is too low for love” is forced to bear the less lovely gloss,
“Naught must be too disgusting.”

<span id="an_iv.iii-p155"></span>Two reasons at once appear for this.
One is the contempt for phenomena, nasty as well as nice—the longing to
be free from all the fetters of sense—which often goes with the passion
for invisible things. Those mystics to whom the attractions of earth are
only illusion, are inconsistent if they attribute a greater reality to
the revolting and squalid incidents of life. St. Francis did but carry
his own principles to their logical conclusion, when he insisted that
the vermin were as much his brothers as the birds. Real detachment means
the death of preferences of all kinds: even of those which seem to other
men the very proofs of virtue and fine taste.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p156"></span>The second reason is nobler. It is
bound up with that principle of self-surrender which is the mainspring
of the mystic life. To the contemplative mind, which is keenly conscious
of unity in multiplicity—of Gods in the world—all disinterested service
is service of the Absolute which he loves: and the harder it is, the
more opposed to his self-regarding and aesthetic instincts, the <span
id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_224"></span> more
nearly it approaches his ideal. The point to which he aspires—though he
does not always know it—is that in which all disharmony, all appearance
of vileness, is resolved in the concrete reality which he calls the Love
of God. Then, he feels dimly, everything will be seen under the aspect
of a cosmic and charitable beauty; exhibiting through the woof of
corruption the web of eternal life.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p157"></span>It is told of St. Francis of Assisi, in
whom the love of lovely things was always paramount, how he forced
himself to visit the lepers whose sight and smell disgusted him: how he
served them and even kissed them.  <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) “Then as he departed, in very truth
that which had aforetime been bitter unto him, to wit, the sight and
touch of lepers, now changed into sweetness. For, as he confessed, the
sight of lepers had been so grievous unto him that he had been minded to
avoid not only seeing them, but even going nigh their dwelling. And if
at any time he chanced to pass their abodes, or to see them, albeit he
were moved by compassion to do them an alms through another person, yet
alway would he turn aside his face, stopping his nostrils with his hand.
But through the grace of God he became so intimate a friend of the
lepers that, even as he recorded in his will, he did sojourn with them
and did humbly serve them.”

<span id="an_iv.iii-p159"></span>Also, after his great renunciation of
all property, he, once a prosperous young man who had been “dainty in
his father’s home,” accustomed himself to take a bowl and beg scraps of
food from door to door: and here too, as in the case of the lepers, that
which at first seemed revolting became to him sweet. “And when he would
have eaten that medley of various meats,” says the legend, “at first he
shrank back, for that he had never been used willingly even to see, much
less to eat, such scraps. At length, conquering himself, he began to
eat; and it seemed to him that in eating no rich syrup had he ever
tasted aught so delightsome.”  <span id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p161"></span>The object, then, of this
self-discipline is, like the object of all purgation, freedom: freedom
from the fetters of the senses, the “remora of desire,” from the results
of environment and worldly education, from pride and prejudice,
preferences and distaste: from selfhood in every form. Its effect is a
sharp reaction to the joy of self-conquest. The very act that had once
caused in the enchained self a movement of loathing becomes not merely
indifferent, but an occasion of happiness. So Margery Kempe “had great
mourning and sorrowing if she might not kiss a leper when she met them
in the way for the love of our Lord, *which was all* <span
id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_225"></span>
*contrary to her disposition* in the years of her youth and prosperity,
for then she abhorred them most.”  <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p163"></span>I spare the sensitive reader a detailed
account of the loathsome ordeals by which St. Catherine of Genoa and
Madame Guyon strove to cure themselves of squeamishness and acquire this
liberty of spirit.  <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) They, like
St. Francis, St. Elizabeth of Hungary, and countless other seekers for
the Real, sought out and served with humility and love the sick and the
unclean; deliberately associated themselves with life in its meanest
forms; compelled themselves to contact with the most revolting
substances; and mortified the senses by the traditional ascetic
expedient of deliberately opposing all—even their most natural and
harmless—inclinations. “In the first four years after she received the
sweet wound from her Lord,” says the Life of St. Catherine of Genoa, she
“made great penances: so that all her senses were mortified. And first,
so soon as she perceived that her nature desired anything at once she
deprived it thereof, and did so that it should receive all those things
that it abhorred. She wore harsh hair, ate no meat nor any other thing
that she liked; ate no fruit, neither fresh nor dried . . . and she
lived greatly submitted to all persons, and always sought to do all
those things which were contrary to her own will; in such a way that she
was always inclined to do more promptly the will of others than her
own.” . . . “And while she worked such and so many mortifications of all
her senses it was several times asked of her ‘Why do you do this?’ And
she answered ‘I do not know, but I feel myself drawn inwardly to do this
. . . and I think it is God’s will.’”  <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p166"></span>St. Ignatius Loyola, in the world a
highly bred Spanish gentleman of refined personal habits, found in those
habits an excellent opportunity of mortification. “As he was somewhat
nice about the arrangement of his hair, as was the fashion of those days
and became him not ill, he allowed it to grow naturally, and neither
combed it nor trimmed it nor wore any head covering by day or night. For
the same reason he did not pare his finger or toe nails; for on these
points he had been fastidious to an extreme.”  <span
id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p168"></span>Madame Guyon, a delicate girl of the
leisured class, accustomed to the ordinary comforts of her station,
characteristically chose the most crude and immoderate forms of
mortification in her efforts towards the acquirement of “indifference.”
But the peculiar psychic constitution which afterwards showed itself in
the forms <span id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_226"></span> of automatism and clairvoyance, seems to
have produced a partial anesthesia. “Although I had a very delicate
body, the instruments of penitence tore my flesh without, as it seemed
to me, causing pain. I wore girdles of hair and of sharp iron, I often
held wormwood in my mouth.” “If I walked, I put stones in my shoes.
These things, my God, Thou didst first inspire me to do, in order that I
might be deprived even of the most innocent satisfactions.”  <span
id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p170"></span>In the earlier stages of their
education, a constant *agere contra*, even in apparently indifferent
things, seems essential to the mystics; till the point is reached at
which the changes and chances of mortal life are accepted with a true
indifference and do not trouble the life of the soul. This established
ascendancy of the “interior man,” the transcendental consciousness, over
“sensitive nature”—the self in its reactions to the ups and downs and
manifold illusions of daily life—is the very object of Purgation. It is,
then, almost impossible that any mystic, whatever his religion,
character or race, should escape its battles: for none at the beginning
of their growth are in a position to dispense with its good offices.
Neoplatonists and Mahommedans, no less than the Christian ascetics, are
acquainted with the Purgative Way. All realize the first law of
Spiritual Alchemy, that you must tame the Green Lion before you give him
wings. Thus in ‘Attar’s allegory of the Valleys, the valley of
self-stripping and renunciation comes first.  <span
id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) So too Al Ghazzali, the Persian
contemplative, says of the period immediately following his acceptance
of the principles of Sufi ism and consequent renunciation of property,
“I went to Syria, where I remained more than two years; without any
other object than that of living in seclusion and solitude, conquering
my desires, struggling with my passions, striving to purify my soul, to
perfect my character, and to prepare my heart to meditate upon God.” At
the end of this period of pure purgation circumstances forced him to
return to the world; much to his regret, since he “had not yet attained
to the perfect ecstatic state, unless it were in one or two isolated
moments.”  <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p173"></span>Such gleams of ecstatic vision,
distributed through the later stages of purification, seem to be normal
features of mystical development. Increasing control of the lower
centres, of the surface intelligence and its scattered desires, permits
the emergence of the transcendental perceptions. We have seen that Fox
in his early stages displayed just such an alternation between the light
and shade of the mystic way.  <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) So
too did that least ascetic of visionaries, Jacob Boehme. “Finding within
myself a <span id="page_227">p. 227</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_227"></span> powerful contrarium, namely the desires
that belong to the flesh and blood,” he says, “I began to fight a hard
battle against my corrupted nature, and with the aid of God I made up my
mind to overcome the inherited evil will, to break it, and to enter
wholly into the Love of God. . . . This, however, was not possible for
me to accomplish, but I stood firmly by my earnest resolution, and
fought a hard battle with myself. Now while I was wrestling and
battling, being aided by God, a wonderful light arose within my soul. It
was a light entirely foreign to my unruly nature, but in it I recognized
the true nature of God and man, and the relation existing between them,
a thing which heretofore I had never understood, and for which I would
never have sought.”  <span id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p176"></span>In these words Boehme bridges the gap
between Purgation and Illumination: showing these two states or ways as
coexisting and complementary one to another, the light and dark sides of
a developing mystic consciousness. As a fact, they do often exist side
by side in the individual experience:  <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) and any treatment which exhibits them
as sharply and completely separated may be convenient for purposes of
study, but becomes at best diagrammatic if considered as a
representation of the mystic life. The mystical consciousness, as we
have seen, belongs—from the psychological point of view—to that mobile
or “unstable” type in which the artistic temperament also finds a place.
It sways easily between the extremes of pleasure and pain in its
gropings after transcendental reality. It often attains for a moment to
heights in which it is not able to rest: is often flung from some
rapturous vision of the Perfect to the deeps of contrition and despair.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p178"></span>The mystics have a vivid metaphor by
which to describe that alternation between the onset and the absence of
the joyous transcendental consciousness which forms as it were the
characteristic intermediate stage between the bitter struggles of pure
Purgation, and the peace and radiance of the Illuminative Life. They
call it <span id="an_iv.iii-p178.1"></span> *Ludus Amoris* *,* the “Game
of Love” which God plays with the desirous soul. It is the “game of
chess,” says St. Teresa, “in which game Humility is the Queen without
whom none can checkmate the Divine King.”  <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) “Here,” says Martensen, “God plays a
blest game with the soul.”  <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) The
“Game of Love” is a reflection in consciousness of that state of
struggle, oscillation and unrest which precedes the first unification of
the self. It ceases when this has taken place and the new level of
reality has been <span id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_228"></span> attained. Thus St. Catherine of Siena,
that inspired psychologist, was told in ecstasy, “With the souls who
have arrived at perfection, I play no more the Game of Love, which
consists in leaving and returning again to the soul; though thou must
understand that it is not, properly speaking, I, the immovable GOD, Who
thus elude them, but rather the sentiment that My charity gives them of
Me.”  <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) In other terms, it is the
imperfectly developed spiritual perception which becomes tired and
fails, throwing the self back into the darkness and aridity whence it
has emerged. So we are told of Rulman Merswin  <span
id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) that after the period of harsh
physical mortification which succeeded his conversion came a year of
“delirious joy alternating with the most bitter physical and moral
sufferings.” It is, he says, “the Game of Love which the Lord plays with
His poor sinful creature.” Memories of all his old sins still drove him
to exaggerated penances: morbid temptations “made me so ill that I
feared I should lose my reason.” These psychic storms reacted upon the
physical organism. He had a paralytic seizure, lost the use of his lower
limbs, and believed himself to be at the point of death. When he was at
his worst, however, and all hope seemed at an end, an inward voice told
him to rise from his bed. He obeyed, and found himself cured. Ecstasies
were frequent during the whole of this period. In these moments of
exaltation he felt his mind to be irradiated by a new light, so that he
knew, intuitively, the direction which his life was bound to take, and
recognized the inevitable and salutary nature of his trials. “God showed
Himself by turns harsh and gentle: to each access of misery succeeded
the rapture of supernatural grace.” In this intermittent style, torn by
these constant fluctuations between depression and delight, did Merswin,
in whom the psychic instability of the artistic and mystic types is
present in excess, pass through the purgative and illuminated states.
 <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) They appear to have coexisted
in his consciousness, first one and then the other emerging and taking
control. Hence he did not attain the peaceful condition which is
characteristic of full illumination, and normally closes the “First
Mystic Life”; but passed direct from these violent alternations of
mystical pleasure and mystical pain to the state which he calls “the
school of suffering love.” This, as we shall see when we come to its
consideration, is strictly analogous to that <span id="page_229">p.
229</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_229"></span> which other mystics
have called the “Dark Night of the Soul,” and opens the “Second Mystic
Life” or Unitive Way.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p184"></span>Such prolonged coexistence of
alternating pain and pleasure states in the developing soul, such delay
in the attainment of equilibrium, is not infrequent, and must be taken
into account in all analyses of the mystic type. Though it is convenient
for purposes of study to practise a certain dissection, and treat as
separate states which are, in the living subject, closely intertwined,
we should constantly remind ourselves that such a proceeding is
artificial. The struggle of the self to disentangle itself from illusion
and attain the Absolute is a life-struggle. Hence, it will and must
exhibit the freedom and originality of life: will, as a process, obey
artistic rather than scientific laws. It will sway now to the light and
now to the shade of experience: its oscillations will sometimes be
great, sometimes small. Mood and environment, inspiration and
information, will all play their part.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p185"></span>There are in this struggle three
factors.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p186"></span>(1) The unchanging light of Eternal
Reality: that Pure Being “which ever shines and nought shall ever dim.”

<span id="an_iv.iii-p187"></span>(2) The web of illusion, here thick,
there thin; which hems in, confuses, and allures the sentient self.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p188"></span>(3) That self, always changing, moving,
struggling—always, in fact, *becoming—* alive in every fibre, related at
once to the unreal and to the real; and, with its growth in true being,
ever more conscious of the contrast between them.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p189"></span>In the ever-shifting relations between
these three factors, the consequent energy engendered, the work done, we
may find a cause of the innumerable forms of stress and travail which
are called in their objective form the Purgative Way. One only of the
three is constant: the Absolute to which the soul aspires. Though all
else may fluctuate, that goal is changeless. That Beauty so old and so
new, “with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning,” which is
the One of Plotinus, the All of Eckhart and St. John of the Cross, the
Eternal Wisdom of Suso, the Unplumbed Abyss of Ruysbroeck, the Pure Love
of St. Catherine of Genoa, awaits yesterday, to-day, and for ever the
opening of Its creature’s eyes.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p190"></span>In the moment of conversion those eyes
were opened for an instant: obtained, as it were, a dazzling and
unforgettable glimpse of the Uncreated Light. They must learn to stay
open: to look steadfastly into the eyes of Love: so that, in the
beautiful imagery of the mystics, the “faithful servant” may become the
“secret friend.”  <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) Then it is,
says Boehme, that “the divine glimpse and <span id="page_230">p.
230</span> <span id="an_iv.iii-Page_230"></span> beam of joy ariseth in
the soul, being a new eye, in which the dark, fiery soul conceiveth the
Ens and Essence of the divine light.”  <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) So hard an art is not at once acquired
in its perfection. It is in accordance with all that we know of the
conditions of development that a partial achievement should come first;
bewildering moments of lucidity, splendid glimpses, whose brevity is due
to the weakness of the newly opened and unpractised “eye which looks
upon Eternity,” the yet undisciplined strength of the “eye which looks
upon Time.” Such is that play of light and dark, of exaltation and
contrition, which often bridges the gap between the Purgative and the
Illuminative states. Each by turn takes the field and ousts the other;
for “these two eyes of the soul of man cannot both perform their work at
once.”  <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p194"></span>To use another and more domestic
metaphor, that Divine Child which was, in the hour of the mystic
conversion, born in the spark of the soul, must learn like other
children to walk. Though it is true that the spiritual self must never
lose its sense of utter dependence on the Invisible; yet within that
supporting atmosphere, and fed by its gifts, it must “find its feet.”
Each effort to stand brings first a glorious sense of growth, and then a
fall: each fall means another struggle to obtain the difficult balance
which comes when infancy is past. There are many eager trials, many
hopes, many disappointments. At last, as it seems suddenly, the moment
comes: tottering is over, the muscles have learnt their lesson, they
adjust themselves automatically, and the new self suddenly finds
itself—it knows not how—standing upright and secure. That is the moment
which marks the boundary between the purgative and the illuminative
states.

<span id="an_iv.iii-p195"></span>The process of this passage of the
“new” or spiritual man from his awakening to the illuminated life, has
been set out by Jacob Boehme in language which is at once poetic and
precise. “When Christ the Corner-Stone \[ *i.e.* , the divine principle
latent in man\] stirreth himself in the extinguished Image of Man in his
hearty Conversion and Repentance,” he says, “then Virgin Sophia
appeareth in the stirring of the Spirit of Christ in the extinguished
Image, in her Virgin’s attire before the Soul; at which the Soul is so
amazed and astonished in its Uncleanness that all its Sins immediately
awake in it, and it trembleth before her; for then the judgment passeth
upon the Sins of the Soul, so that it even goeth back in its
unworthiness, being ashamed in the Presence of its fair Love, and
entereth into itself, feeling and acknowledging itself utterly unworthy
to receive such a Jewel. This is understood by those who are of our
tribe and have tasted of this heavenly <span id="page_231">p. 231</span>
<span id="an_iv.iii-Page_231"></span> Gift, and by none else. But the
noble Sophia draweth near in the Essence of the Soul, and kisseth it in
friendly Manner, and tinctureth its dark Fire with her Rays of Love, and
shineth through it with her bright and powerful Influence. Penetrated
with the strong Sense and Feeling of which, the Soul skippeth in its
Body for great Joy, and in the strength of this Virgin Love exulteth,
and praiseth the great God for his blest Gift of Grace. I will set down
here a short description how it is when the Bride thus embraceth the
Bridegroom, for the consideration of the Reader, who perhaps hath not
yet been in this wedding chamber. It may be he will be desirous to
follow us, and to enter into the Inner Choir, where the Soul joineth
hands and danceth with Sophia, or the Divine Wisdom.”  <span
id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475)

<span id="an_iv.iii-p197"></span><span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="an_iv.iii-Page_232"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_391"></span>[199:392](myst14.htm#fr_391) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p5"></span> “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,”
“Magna Moralia,” xxii.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[200:393](myst14.htm#fr_392) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p7"></span> “The Scale of Perfection,” bk. ii. cap.
xxxvii.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[200:394](myst14.htm#fr_393) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p9"></span> Dialogo, cap. iv.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[200:395](myst14.htm#fr_394) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p11"></span> “Ignitum cum Deo Soliloquium.” cap. xi.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[201:396](myst14.htm#fr_395) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p13"></span> Richard Rolle, “The Mending of Life,”
cap. i.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[201:397](myst14.htm#fr_396) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p15"></span> *Ibid* ., “The Fire of Love,” bk. i.
cap, xxiii.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[201:398](myst14.htm#fr_397) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p16"></span> “Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit,”
cap. v.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[202:399](myst14.htm#fr_398) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p18"></span> Jundt, “Rulman Merswin,” p. 19.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[202:400](myst14.htm#fr_399) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p20"></span> Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. lvi.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[202:401](myst14.htm#fr_400) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p22"></span> I offer no opinion upon the question of
authorship. Those interested may consult Von Hügel, “The Mystical
Element of Religion,” vol. i., Appendix. Whoever may be responsible for
its present form, the Treatise is clearly founded upon first-hand mystic
experience: which is all that our present purpose requires.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[203:402](myst14.htm#fr_401) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p23"></span> “Trattato di Purgatorio,” caps. ii. and
iii.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[203:403](myst14.htm#fr_402) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p25"></span> Purg. ii., 60.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[203:404](myst14.htm#fr_403) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p27"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo I. i. cap.
xiv.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[203:405](myst14.htm#fr_404) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p30"></span> “De Imitatione Christi,” I. iii. cap.
i.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[204:406](myst14.htm#fr_405) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p34"></span> “Theologia Germanica,” cap. xiv.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[206:407](myst14.htm#fr_406) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p39"></span> Meister Eckhart, quoted by Wackernagel,
“Altdeutsches Lesebuch,” p. 891.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[206:408](myst14.htm#fr_407) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p41"></span> “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit.”
pt. vi., cap. 4.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[206:409](myst14.htm#fr_408) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p43"></span> St. John of the Cross, “Subida del
Monte Carmelo,” bk. i. cap. xiii.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[207:410](myst14.htm#fr_409) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p45"></span> “Theologia Germanica,” cap. v.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[207:411](myst14.htm#fr_410) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p46"></span> Ennead vi. 9.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[207:412](myst14.htm#fr_411) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p47.14"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p48"></span> “Oh Poverty, high wisdom! to be subject
to nothing, and by despising all to possess all created things. . . .

<span id="an_iv.iii-p49"></span>God will not lodge in a narrow heart;
and it is as great as thy love. Poverty has so ample a bosom that Deity
Itself may lodge therein. . . .

<span id="an_iv.iii-p50"></span>Poverty is naught to have, and nothing
to desire: but all things to possess in the spirit of liberty.”—
*Jacopone da Todi.* Lauda lix.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[208:413](myst14.htm#fr_412) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p52"></span> “Fioretti,” cap. xvi., and “Speculum,”
cap. cxx.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[208:414](myst14.htm#fr_413) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p54"></span> *Ibid* ., cap. xiii. (Arnold’s
translation).

<span id="fn_414"></span>[208:415](myst14.htm#fr_414) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p56"></span> Pfeiffer, Tractato x. (Eng.
translation., p, 348).

<span id="fn_415"></span>[208:416](myst14.htm#fr_415) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p57"></span> “Sacrum Commercium Beati Francisci cum
Domina Paupertate,” caps. iv. and v. (Rawnsley’s translation).

<span id="fn_416"></span>[209:417](myst14.htm#fr_416) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p59"></span> *Op. cit* ., cap. xxii.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[210:418](myst14.htm#fr_417) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p82"></span> So Ruysbroeck, “Freewill is the king of
the soul . . . he should dwell in the chief city of that kingdom: that
is to say, the desirous power of the soul” (“De Ornatu Spiritalium
Nuptiarum,” I. i. cap. xxiv.).

<span id="fn_418"></span>[210:419](myst14.htm#fr_418) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p85"></span> Meister Eckhart. Quoted in Martensen’s
monograph, p. 107.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[210:420](myst14.htm#fr_419) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p88"></span> Schmölders, “Essai sur les Écoles
Philosophiques chez les Arabes,” p. 54.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[211:421](myst14.htm#fr_420) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p90"></span> Schmölders, “Essai sur les Écoles
Philosophiques chez les Arabes,” *op. cit.,* p. 58.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[211:422](myst14.htm#fr_421) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p92"></span> Richard Rolle, “The Mending of Life,”
cap. iii.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[211:423](myst14.htm#fr_422) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p94"></span> “Ignitum cum Deo Soliloquium,” cap. i.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[211:424](myst14.htm#fr_423) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p96"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” I. i. cap.
iii.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[212:425](myst14.htm#fr_424) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p98"></span> Gerlac Petersen, *op. cit.,* cap. xi.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[212:426](myst14.htm#fr_425) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p100"></span> St. John of the Cross, *op. cit* .,
cap. xi.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[212:427](myst14.htm#fr_426) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p101.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p102"></span> Richard Rolle, “The Fire of Love,” bk.
i. cap. xix.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[212:428](myst14.htm#fr_427) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p103"></span> Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap.
vi.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[213:429](myst14.htm#fr_428) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p104.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p105"></span> “An Apology for Mrs. Antoinette
Bourignan,” pp. 269-70.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[213:430](myst14.htm#fr_429) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p107"></span> St. Teresa’s mystic states are
particularly difficult to classify. From one point of view these
struggles might be regarded as the preliminaries of conversion. She was,
however, proficient in contemplation when they occurred, and I therefore
think that my arrangement is the right one.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[215:431](myst14.htm#fr_430) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p109.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p110"></span> Quoted by G. Cunninghame Graham,
“Santa Teresa,” vol. i. p. 139. For St. Teresa’s own account, see Vida,
caps. vii-ix.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[215:432](myst14.htm#fr_431) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p112.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p113"></span> Sermon on St. Paul (“The Inner Way,”
p. 113).

<span id="fn_432"></span>[215:433](myst14.htm#fr_432) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p113.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p114"></span> Cotter Morison, “Life and Times of St.
Bernard,” p. 68.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[215:434](myst14.htm#fr_433) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p115.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p116"></span> Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap.
xxix.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[215:435](myst14.htm#fr_434) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p116.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p117"></span> *Ibid* ., Legenda Secunda, cap. cxxiv.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[216:436](myst14.htm#fr_435) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p118"></span> Anne Macdonell, “St. Douceline,” p.
30.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[216:437](myst14.htm#fr_436) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p118.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p119"></span> Vida, cap. ix., p. 6.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[216:438](myst14.htm#fr_437) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p121"></span> “In that time and by God’s will there
died my mother, who was a great hindrance unto me in following the way
of God: soon after my husband died likewise, and also all my children.
And because I had commenced to follow the Aforesaid Way, and had prayed
God that He would rid me of them, I had great consolation of their
deaths. (Ste Angèle de Foligno: “Le Livre de l’Expérience des Vrais
Fidèles.” Ed. M. J. Ferry p. 10.)

<span id="fn_438"></span>[217:439](myst14.htm#fr_438) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p123"></span> “De Imitatione Christi,” I. i. caps.
iii. and ix.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[217:440](myst14.htm#fr_439) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p125.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p126"></span> Tauler, Sermon on St. Paul (“The Inner
Way,” p. 114).

<span id="fn_440"></span>[218:441](myst14.htm#fr_440) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p127.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p128"></span> Tauler, Second Sermon for Easter Day.
(This is not included in either of the English collections.)

<span id="fn_441"></span>[218:442](myst14.htm#fr_441) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p129.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p130"></span> Augustine Baker, “Holy Wisdom,”
Treatise ii. Sect. i., cap. 3.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[218:443](myst14.htm#fr_442) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p131"></span> Suso, Leben. cap. xvii.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[219:444](myst14.htm#fr_443) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p133.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p134"></span> “The Mirror of Simple Souls,” edited
by Clare Kirchberger, p. 12.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[219:445](myst14.htm#fr_444) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p135.6"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p136"></span> “The war is at an end: in the battle
of virtues, in travail of mind, there is no more striving” (Lauda xci.).

<span id="fn_445"></span>[220:446](myst14.htm#fr_445) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p137.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p138"></span> “Vita e Dottrina,” cap. v.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[220:447](myst14.htm#fr_446) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p139.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p140"></span> Walter Hilton “The Scale of
Perfection,” bk. i. cap. 8, xlii.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[220:448](myst14.htm#fr_447) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p141.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p142"></span> Récéjac, “Fondements de la
Connaissance Mystique,” p. 78. This, however, is to be understood of the
initial training of the mystic; not of his final state.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[221:449](myst14.htm#fr_448) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p142.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p143"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” I. i. cap.
v.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[221:450](myst14.htm#fr_449) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p143.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p144"></span> *Op. cit.,* bk. i. cap. xv.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[221:451](myst14.htm#fr_450) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p145.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p146"></span> S. Caterina di Genova, “Trattato di
Purgatorio,” cap. i.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[222:452](myst14.htm#fr_451) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p147.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p148"></span> Dialogo, cap. lxxxv.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[222:453](myst14.htm#fr_452) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p148.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p149"></span> Leben, cap. iv.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[222:454](myst14.htm#fr_453) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p150.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p151"></span> “This truth, of which she was the
living example,” says Huysmans of St. Lydwine, “has been and will be
true for every period. Since the death of Lydwine, there is not a saint
who has not confirmed it. Hear them formulate their desires. Always to
suffer, and to die! cries St. Teresa; always to suffer, yet not to die,
corrects St. Magdalena dei Pazzi; yet more, oh Lord, yet more! exclaims
St. Francis Xavier, dying in anguish on the coast of China; I wish to be
broken with suffering in order that I may prove my love to God, declares
a seventeenth century Carmelite, the Ven. Mary of the Trinity. The
desire for suffering is itself an agony, adds a great servant of God of
our own day, Mother Mary Du Bourg; and she confided to her daughters in
religion that ‘if they sold pain in the market she would hurry to buy it
there.’” (J. K. Huysmans, “Sainte Lydwine de Schiedam,” 3rd edition, p.
225).Examples can be multiplied indefinitely from the lives and works of
the mystics of all periods.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[223:455](myst14.htm#fr_454) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p152.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p153"></span> Tauler, Sermon on St. Paul (“The Inner
Way,” p. 114).

<span id="fn_455"></span>[224:456](myst14.htm#fr_455) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p157.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p158"></span> Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap.
vii.; 3 Soc. cap. iv.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[224:457](myst14.htm#fr_456) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p159.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p160"></span> 3 Soc. cap. vii.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[225:458](myst14.htm#fr_457) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p161.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p162"></span> “A Short Treatise of Contemplation
taken out of the boke of Margery Kempe ancresse of Lynne.” London, 1521.
Reprinted and ed. by F. Gardner in “The Cell of Self-Knowledge,” 1910,
p. 49.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[225:459](myst14.htm#fr_458) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p163.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p164"></span> The curious are referred to the
original authorities. For St. Catherine chapter viii. of the “Vita e
Dottrina”: for Madame Guyon, Vie, pt. i. ch. x.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[225:460](myst14.htm#fr_459) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p164.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p165"></span> “Vita e Dottrina,” cap. v.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[225:461](myst14.htm#fr_460) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p166.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p167"></span> Testament, cap. ii. (Rix’s
translation).

<span id="fn_461"></span>[226:462](myst14.htm#fr_461) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p168.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p169"></span> Vie, pt. i. cap. x.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[226:463](myst14.htm#fr_462) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p170.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p171"></span> *Supra* , p. 131.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[226:464](myst14.htm#fr_463) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p171.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p172"></span> Schmölders, “Essay sur les Écoles
Philosophiques chez les Arabes,” p. 59.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[226:465](myst14.htm#fr_464) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p173.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p174"></span> *Supra* , p. 177.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[227:466](myst14.htm#fr_465) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p174.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p175"></span> Hartmann, “Life and Doctrines of Jacob
Boehme,” p. 50.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[227:467](myst14.htm#fr_466) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p176.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p177"></span> Compare the case of St. Teresa already
cited, *supra* , p. 213.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[227:468](myst14.htm#fr_467) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p178.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p179"></span> “Camino de Perfeccion,” cap. xvii.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[227:469](myst14.htm#fr_468) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p179.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p180"></span> Martensen, “Meister Eckhart,” p. 75.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[228:470](myst14.htm#fr_469) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p180.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p181"></span> Dialogo, cap. lxxviii.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[228:471](myst14.htm#fr_470) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p181.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p182"></span> Jundt, “Rulman Merswin,” pp. 10 and
20.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[228:472](myst14.htm#fr_471) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p182.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p183"></span> We recognize here the chief symptoms
of the “cyclic type” of mentality, with its well-marked alternations of
depression and exaltation. This psychological type is found frequently,
but not invariably, among the mystics: and its peculiarities must be
taken into account when studying their experiences. For a technical
description, see W. McDougall: “An Introduction to Abnormal Psychology,”
caps. xxii and xxviii.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[229:473](myst14.htm#fr_472) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p190.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p191"></span> See Ruysbroeck, “De Calculo,” cap.
vii. The metaphor is an ancient one and occurs in many patristic and
mediaeval writers.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[230:474](myst14.htm#fr_473) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p191.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p192"></span> “The Epistles of Jacob Boehme,” p. 19.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[230:475](myst14.htm#fr_474) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p192.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p193"></span> “Theologia Germanica,” cap. vii.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[231:476](myst14.htm#fr_475) <span
id="an_iv.iii-p195.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iii-p196"></span> Jacob Boehme, “The Way to Christ,” pt.
i. p. 23 (vol. iv. of the complete English translation of Boehme’s
works).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Illumination of the Self](myst15)

</div>
