<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst07)  [Next](myst09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V. Mysticism and Theology

<span id="an_iii.v"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p1"></span>In<span id="an_iii.v-p1.1"></span> the
last chapter we tried to establish a distinction between the mystic who
tastes supreme experience and the mystical philosopher who cogitates
upon the data so obtained. We have now, however, to take account of the
fact that often the true mystic is also a mystical philosopher; though
there are plenty of mystical philosophers who are not and could never be
mystics.

<span id="an_iii.v-p2"></span>Because it is characteristic of the human
self to reflect upon its experience, to use its percepts as material for
the construction of a concept, most mystics have made or accepted a
theory of their own adventures. Thus we have a mystical philosophy or
theology—the comment of the intellect on the proceedings of spiritual
intuition—running side by side with true or empirical mysticism:
classifying its data, criticizing it, explaining it, and translating its
vision of the supersensible into symbols which are amenable to
dialectic.

<span id="an_iii.v-p3"></span>Such a philosophy is most usually founded
upon the formal creed which the individual mystic accepts. It is
characteristic of him that in so far as his transcendental activities
are healthy he is generally an acceptor and not a rejector of such
creeds. The view which regards the mystic as a spiritual anarchist
receives little support from history; which shows us, again and again,
<span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span id="an_iii.v-Page_96"></span> the
great mystics as faithful sons of the great religions. Almost any
religious system which fosters unearthly love is potentially a nursery
for mystics: and Christianity, Islam, Brahmanism, and Buddhism each
receives its most sublime interpretation at their hands. Thus St. Teresa
interprets her ecstatic apprehension of the Godhead in strictly Catholic
terms, and St. John of the Cross contrives to harmonize his intense
transcendentalism with incarnational and sacramental Christianity. Thus
Boehme believed to the last that his explorations of eternity were
consistent with the teaching of the Lutheran Church. The Sufis were good
Mohammedans, Philo and the Kabalists were orthodox Jews. Plotinus even
adapted—though with what difficulty—the relics of paganism to his
doctrine of the Real.

<span id="an_iii.v-p4"></span>Attempts, however, to limit mystical
truth—the direct apprehension of the Divine Substance—by the formula of
any one religion, are as futile as the attempt to identify a precious
metal with the die which converts it into current coin. The dies which
the mystics have used are many. Their peculiarities and excrescences are
always interesting and sometimes highly significant. Some give a far
sharper, more coherent, impression than others. But the gold from which
this diverse coinage is struck is always the same precious metal: always
the same Beatific Vision of a Goodness, Truth, and Beauty which is
*one.* Hence its substance must always be distinguished from the
accidents under which we perceive it: for this substance has an
absolute, and not a denominational, importance.

<span id="an_iii.v-p5"></span>Nevertheless, if we are to understand the
language of the mystics, it is evident that we must know a little of
accident as well as of substance: that is to say, of the principal
philosophies or religions which they have used in describing their
adventures to the world. This being so, before we venture to apply
ourselves to the exploration of theology proper, it will be well to
consider the two extreme forms under which both mystics and theologians
have been accustomed to conceive Divine Reality: that is to say, the
so-called “emanation-theory” and “immanence-theory” of the
transcendental world.

<span id="an_iii.v-p6"></span>Emanation and Immanence are formidable
words; which though perpetually tossed to and fro by amateurs of
religious philosophy, have probably, as they stand, little actuality for
practical modern men. They are, however, root-ideas for the maker of
mystical diagrams: and his best systems are but attempts towards their
reconciliation. Since the aim of every mystic is union with God, it is
obvious that the vital question in his philosophy must be the place
which this God, the Absolute of his quest, occupies in the scheme.
Briefly, He has been conceived—or, it were better to say, <span
id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="an_iii.v-Page_97"></span>
presented—by the great mystics under two apparently contradictory modes.

<span id="an_iii.v-p7"></span>(1) The opinion which is represented in
its most extreme form by the theory of *Emanations,* declares His utter
transcendence. This view appears early in the history of Greek
philosophy. It is developed by Dionysius, by the Kabalists, by Dante:
and is implied in the language of Rulman Merswin, St. John of the Cross
and many other Christian ecstatics.

<span id="an_iii.v-p8"></span>The solar system is an almost perfect
symbol of this concept of Reality; which finds at once its most rigid
and most beautiful expression in Dante’s “Paradiso.”  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) The Absolute Godhead is conceived as
removed by a vast distance from the material world of sense; the last or
lowest of that system of dependent worlds or states which, generated by
or emanating from the Unity or Central Sun, become less in spirituality
and splendour, greater in multiplicity, the further they recede from
their source. That Source—the Great Countenance of the Godhead—can
never, say the Kabalists, be discerned by man. It is the Absolute of the
Neoplatonists, the Unplumbed Abyss of later mysticism: the Cloud of
Unknowing wraps it from our sight. Only by its “emanations” or
manifested attributes can we attain knowledge of it. By the outflow of
these same manifested attributes and powers the created universe exists,
depending in the last resort on the <span id="an_iii.v-p12.1"></span>
*latens Deitas:* Who is therefore conceived as external to the world
which He illuminates and vivifies.

<span id="an_iii.v-p13"></span>St. Thomas Aquinas virtually accepts the
doctrine of Emanations when he writes:  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) “As all the perfections of Creatures
descend in order from God, who is the height of perfection, man should
begin from the lower creatures and ascend by degrees, and so advance to
the knowledge of God. . . . And because in that roof and crown of all
things, God, we find the most perfect unity, and everything is stronger
and more excellent the more thoroughly it is one; it follows that
diversity and variety increase in things, the further they are removed
from Him who is the first principle of all.” Suso, whose mystical
system, like that of most Dominicans, is entirely consistent with
Thomist philosophy, is really glossing Aquinas when he writes: “The
supreme and superessential Spirit has ennobled man by illuminating him
with a ray from the Eternal Godhead. . . . Hence from out the great ring
which represents the <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_98"></span> Eternal Godhead there flow forth . . .
little rings, which may be taken to signify the high nobility of natural
creatures.”  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)

<span id="an_iii.v-p16"></span>Obviously, if this theory of the Absolute
be accepted the path of the soul’s ascent to union with the divine must
be literally a transcendence: a journey “upward and outward,” through a
long series of intermediate states or worlds till, having traversed the
“Thirty-two paths of the Tree of Life,” she at last arrives, in
Kabalistic language, at the Crown: fruitive knowledge of God, the Abyss
or Divine Dark of the Dionysian school, the Neoplatonic One. Such a
series of worlds is symbolized by the Ten Heavens of Dante, the
hierarchies of Dionysius, the Tree of Life or Sephiroth of the Kabalah:
and receives its countersign in the inward experience, in the long
journey of the self through Purgation and Illumination to Union. “We
ascend,” says St. Augustine, “thy ways that be in our heart, and sing a
song of degrees; we glow inwardly with thy fire, with thy good fire, and
we go, because we go upwards to the peace of Jerusalem.”  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184)

<span id="an_iii.v-p18"></span>This theory postulates, under normal and
non-mystical conditions, the complete separation of the human and the
divine; the temporal and the eternal worlds. “Never forget,” says St.
John of the Cross, “that God is inaccessible. Ask not therefore how far
your powers may comprehend Him, your feeling penetrate Him. Fear thus to
content yourself with too little, and deprive your soul of the agility
which it needs in order to mount up to Him.”  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) The language of pilgrimage, of exile,
comes naturally to the mystic who apprehends reality under these terms.
To him the mystical adventure is essentially a “going forth” from his
normal self and from his normal universe. Like the Psalmist “in his
heart he hath disposed to ascend by steps in this vale of tears” from
the less to the more divine. He, and with him the Cosmos—for to mystical
philosophy the soul of the individual subject is the microcosm of the
soul of the world—has got to retrace the long road to the Perfection
from which it originally came forth; as the fish in Rulman Merswin’s
Vision of Nine Rocks must struggle upwards from pool to pool until they
reach their Origin.

<span id="an_iii.v-p20"></span>Such a way of conceiving Reality accords
with the type of mind which William James called the “sick soul.”  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) It is the mood of the penitent; of the
utter humility which, appalled by the sharp contrast between itself and
the Perfect which it contemplates, can only cry “out of the depths.” It
comes naturally to the temperament which leans to pessimism, which sees
a “great gulf fixed” between itself and its desire, and is above all
things sensitive <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_99"></span> to the elements of evil and imperfection
in its own character and in the normal experience of man. Permitting
these elements to dominate its field of consciousness, wholly ignoring
the divine aspect of the World of Becoming, such a temperament
constructs from its perceptions and prejudices the concept of a material
world and a normal self which are very far from God.

<span id="an_iii.v-p22"></span>(2) *Immanence.* At the opposite pole
from this way of sketching Reality is the extreme theory of Immanence,
which plays so large a part in modern theology. To the holders of this
theory, who commonly belong to James’s “healthy minded” or optimistic
class, the quest of the Absolute is no long journey, but a realization
of something which is implicit in the self and in the universe: an
opening of the eyes of the soul upon the Reality in which it is bathed.
For them earth is literally “crammed with heaven.” “Thou wert I, but
dark was my heart, I knew not the secret transcendent,” says Téwekkul
Bég, a Moslem mystic of the seventeenth century.  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) This is always the cry of the
temperament which leans to a theology of immanence, once its eyes are
opened on the light. “God,” says Plotinus, “is not external to anyone,
but is present with all things, though they are ignorant that He is so.”
 <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) In other and older words, “The
Spirit of God is within you.” The Absolute Whom all seek does not hold
Himself aloof from an imperfect material universe, but dwells within the
flux of things: stands as it were at the very threshold of consciousness
and knocks awaiting the self’s slow discovery of her treasures. “He is
not far from any one of us, for in Him we live and move and have our
being,” is the pure doctrine of Immanence: a doctrine whose teachers are
drawn from amongst the souls which react more easily to the touch of the
Divine than to the sense of alienation and of sin, and are naturally
inclined to love rather than to awe.

<span id="an_iii.v-p25"></span>Unless safeguarded by limiting dogmas,
the theory of Immanence, taken alone, is notoriously apt to degenerate
into pantheism; and into those extravagant perversions of the doctrine
of “deification” in which the mystic holds his transfigured self to be
identical with the Indwelling God. It is the philosophical basis of that
practice of introversion, the turning inward of the soul’s faculties in
contemplation, which has been the “method” of the great practical
mystics of all creeds. That God, since He is in all—in a sense, *is*
all—may most easily be found within ourselves, is the doctrine of these
adventurers;  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) who, denying or
ignoring the existence of those intervening “worlds” or “planes” between
the material <span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_100"></span> world and the Absolute, which are
postulated by the theory of Emanations, claim with Ruysbroeck that “by a
simple introspection in fruitive love” they “meet God without
intermediary.”  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) They hear the
Father of Lights “saying eternally, without intermediary or
interruption, in the most secret part of the spirit, the one, unique,
and abysmal Word.”  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191)

<span id="an_iii.v-p29"></span>This discovery of a “divine” essence or
substance, dwelling, as Ruysbroeck says, at the apex of man’s soul is
that fundamental experience—found in some form or degree in all genuine
mystical religion—which provides the basis of the New Testament doctrine
of the indwelling spirit. It is, variously interpreted, the “spark of
the soul” of Eckhart, the “ground” of Tauler, the Inward Light of the
Quakers, the “Divine Principle” of some modern transcendentalists; the
fount and source of all true life. At this point logical exposition
fails mystic and theologian alike. A tangle of metaphors takes its
place. We are face to face with the “wonder of wonders”—that most real,
yet most mysterious, of all the experiences of religion, the union of
human and divine, in a nameless *something* which is “great enough to be
God, small enough to be me.” In the struggle to describe this
experience, the “spark of the soul,” the point of juncture, is at one
moment presented to us as the divine to which the self attains: at
another, as that transcendental aspect of the self which is in contact
with God. On either hypothesis, it is here that the mystic encounters
Absolute Being. Here is his guarantee of God’s immediate presence in the
human heart; and, if in the human heart, then in that universe of which
man’s soul resumes in miniature the essential characteristics.

<span id="an_iii.v-p30"></span>According to the doctrine of Immanence,
creation, the universe, could we see it as it is, would be perceived as
the self-development, the self-revelation of this indwelling Deity. The
world is not projected from the Absolute, but immersed in God. “I
understood,” says St. Teresa, “how our Lord was in all things, and how
He was in the soul: and the illustration of a sponge filled with water
was suggested to me.”  <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) The
world-process, then, is the slow coming to fruition of that Divine Spark
which is latent alike in the Cosmos and in man. “If,” says Boehme, “thou
conceivest a small minute circle, as small as a grain of mustard seed,
yet the Heart of God is wholly and perfectly therein: and if thou art
born in God, then there is in thyself (in the circle of thy life) the
whole <span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_101"></span> Heart of God undivided.”  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) The idea of Immanence has seldom been
more beautifully expressed.

<span id="an_iii.v-p33"></span>It is worth noticing that both the
theological doctrines of reality which have been acceptable to the
mystics implicitly declare, as science does, that the universe is not
static but dynamic; a World of Becoming. According to the doctrine of
Immanence this universe is free, self-creative. The divine action floods
it: no part is more removed from the Godhead than any other part. “God,”
says Eckhart, “is nearer to me than I am to myself; He is just as near
to wood and stone, but they do not know it.”  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194)

<span id="an_iii.v-p35"></span>These two apparently contradictory
explanations of the Invisible have both been held, and that in their
extreme form, by the mystics: who have found in both adequate, and
indeed necessary, diagrams by which to suggest something of their rich
experience of Reality.  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) Some of
the least lettered and most inspired amongst them—for instance, St.
Catherine of Siena, Julian of Norwich—and some of the most learned, as
Dionysius the Areopagite and Meister Eckhart, have actually used in
their rhapsodies language appropriate to both the theories of Emanation
and of Immanence. It would seem, then, that both these theories convey a
certain truth; and that it is the business of a sound mystical
philosophy to reconcile them. It is too often forgotten by quarrelsome
partisans of a concrete turn of mind that at best all these
transcendental theories are only symbols, methods, diagrams; feebly
attempting the representation of an experience which in its fullness is
always the same, and of which the dominant characteristic is
ineffability. Hence they insist with tiresome monotony that Dionysius
must be wrong if Tauler be right: that it is absurd to call yourself the
Friend of God if unknowableness be that God’s first attribute: that
Plato’s Perfect Beauty and St. Catherine of Siena’s Accepter of
Sacrifices cannot be the same: that the “courteous and dear-worthy Lord”
who said to Lady Julian, “My darling, I am glad that thou art come to
Me, in all thy woe I have ever been with thee,”  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) rules out the formless and impersonal
One of Plotinus, the “triple circle” of Suso and Dante. Finally, that if
God be truly immanent in the material world it is either sin or folly to
refuse that world in order that we may find Him; and if introversion be
right, a plan of the universe which postulates intervening planes
between Absolute Being and the phenomenal world must be wrong.

<span id="an_iii.v-p38"></span>Now as regards the mystics, of whom we
hold both these <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_102"></span> doctrines, these ways of seeing truth—for
what else is a doctrine but that?—it is well to remind ourselves that
their teaching about the relation of the Absolute to the finite, of God
to the phenomenal world, must be founded in the first instance on what
they know by experience of the relation between that Absolute and the
individual self. This experience is the valid part of mysticism, the
thing which gives to it its unique importance amongst systems of
thought, the only source of its knowledge. Everything else is really
guessing aided by analogy. When therefore the mystic, applying to the
universe what he knows to be true in respect of his own soul, describes
Divine Perfection as very far removed from the material world, yet
linked with it by a graduated series of “emanations”—states or qualities
which have each of them something of the godlike, though they be not
God—he is trying to describe the necessary life-process which he has
himself passed through in the course of his purgation and spiritual
ascent from the state of the “natural man” to that other state of
harmony with the spiritual universe, sometimes called “deification,” in
which he is able to contemplate, and unite with, the divine. We have in
the “Divina Commedia” a classic example of such a twofold vision of the
inner and the outer worlds: for Dante’s journey up and out to the
Empyrean Heaven is really an inward alchemy, an ordering and transmuting
of his nature, a purging of his spiritual sight till—transcending all
derived beatitude—it can look for an instant on the Being of God.

<span id="an_iii.v-p39"></span>The mystic assumes—because he tends to
assume an orderly basis for things—that there is a relation, an analogy,
between this microcosm of man’s self and the macrocosm of the
world-self. Hence his experience, the geography of the individual quest,
appears to him good evidence of the geography of the Invisible. Since he
must transcend his natural life in order to attain consciousness of God,
he conceives of God as essentially transcendent to the natural world.
His description of that geography, however—of his path in a land where
there is no time and space, no inner and no outer, up or down—will be
conditioned by his temperament, by his powers of observation, by the
metaphor which comes most readily to his hand, above all by his
theological education. The so-called journey itself is a psychological
and spiritual experience: the purging and preparation of the self, its
movement to higher levels of consciousness, its unification with that
more spiritual but normally unconscious self which is in touch with the
transcendental order, and its gradual or abrupt entrance into union with
the Real. Sometimes it seems to the self that this performance is a
retreat inwards to that “ground of the soul” where, as St. Teresa says,
“His Majesty awaits us”: sometimes <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>
<span id="an_iii.v-Page_103"></span> a going forth from the Conditioned
to the Unconditioned, the “supernatural flight” of Plotinus and
Dionysius the Areopagite. Both are but images under which the self
conceives the process of attaining conscious union with that God who is
“at once immanent and transcendent in relation to the Soul which shares
His life.”  <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197)

<span id="an_iii.v-p41"></span>He has got to find God. Sometimes his
temperament causes him to lay most stress on the length of the search;
sometimes the abrupt rapture which brings it to a close makes him forget
that preliminary pilgrimage in which the soul is “not outward bound but
rather on a journey to its centre.” The habitations of the Interior
Castle through which St. Teresa leads us to that hidden chamber which is
the sanctuary of the indwelling God: the hierarchies of Dionysius,
ascending from the selfless service of the angels, past the seraphs’
burning love, to the God enthroned above time and space: the mystical
paths of the Kabalistic Tree of Life which lead from the material world
of Malkuth through the universes of action and thought, by Mercy,
Justice and Beauty, to the Supernal Crown;  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) all these are different ways of
describing this same pilgrimage.

<span id="an_iii.v-p43"></span>As every one is born a disciple of either
Plato or Aristotle, so every human soul leans to one of these two ways
of apprehending reality. The artist, the poet, every one who looks with
awe and rapture on created things, acknowledges in this act the Immanent
God. The ascetic, and that intellectual ascetic the metaphysician,
turning from the created, denying the senses in order to find afar off
the uncreated, unconditioned Source, is really—though often he knows it
not—obeying that psychological law which produced the doctrine of
Emanations.

<span id="an_iii.v-p44"></span>A good map then, a good mystical
philosophy, will leave room for both these ways of interpreting our
experience. It will mark the routes by which many different temperaments
claim to have found their way to the same end. It will acknowledge both
the aspects under which the <span id="an_iii.v-p44.1"></span> *patria
splendida* Truth has appeared to its lovers: the aspects which have
called forth the theories of emanation and immanence and are enshrined
in the Greek and Latin names of God. *Deus,* whose root means day,
shining, the Transcendent Light; and *Theos,* whose true meaning is
supreme desire or prayer—the Inward Love—do not contradict, but complete
each other. They form, when taken together, an almost perfect definition
of that Godhead which is the object of the mystic’s desire: the Divine
Love which, immanent in the soul spurs on that soul to union with the
transcendent and Absolute <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_104"></span> Light—at once the source, the goal, the
life of created things.

<span id="an_iii.v-p45"></span>The true mystic—the person with a genius
for God—hardly needs a map himself. He steers a compass course across
the “vast and stormy sea of the divine.” It is characteristic of his
intellectual humility, however, that he is commonly willing to use the
map of the community in which he finds himself, when it comes to showing
other people the route which he has pursued. Sometimes these maps have
been adequate. More, they have elucidated the obscure wanderings of the
explorer; helped him; given him landmarks; worked out right. Time after
time he puts his finger on some spot—some great hill of vision, some
city of the soul—and says with conviction, *“Here* have I been.” At
other times the maps have embarrassed him, have refused to fit in with
his description. Then he has tried, as Boehme did and after him Blake,
to make new ones. Such maps are often wild in drawing, because good
draughtsmanship does not necessarily go with a talent for exploration.
Departing from the usual convention, they are hard—sometimes
impossible—to understand. As a result, the orthodox have been forced to
regard their makers as madmen or heretics: when they were really only
practical men struggling to disclose great matters by imperfect means.

<span id="an_iii.v-p46"></span>Without prejudice to individual beliefs,
and without offering an opinion as to the exclusive truth of any one
religious system or revelation—for here we are concerned neither with
controversy nor with apologetics—we are bound to allow as a historical
fact that mysticism, so far, has found its best map in Christianity.
Christian philosophy, especially that Neoplatonic theology which, taking
up and harmonizing all that was best in the spiritual intuitions of
Greece, India, and Egypt, was developed by the great doctors of the
early and mediaeval Church, supports and elucidates the revelations of
the individual mystic as no other system of thought has been able to do.

<span id="an_iii.v-p47"></span>We owe to the great fathers of the first
five centuries—to Clement of Alexandria and Irenaeus, Gregory of Nyssa
and Augustine; above all to Dionysius the Areopagite, the great
Christian contemporary of Proclus—the preservation of that mighty system
of scaffolding which enabled the Catholic mystics to build up the towers
and bulwarks of the City of God. The peculiar virtue of this Christian
philosophy, that which marks its superiority to the more coldly
self-consistent systems of Greece, is the fact that it re-states the
truths of metaphysics in terms of personality: thus offering a third
term, a “living mediator” between the Unknowable God, the unconditioned
Absolute, and the conditioned self. This was the priceless gift which
the Wise Men <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_105"></span> received in return for their gold,
frankincense, and myrrh. This solves the puzzle which all explorers of
the supersensible have sooner or later to face: <span
id="an_iii.v-p47.1"></span> *come si convenne l’imago al cerchio,*
 <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) the reconciliation of Infinite
and intimate, both known and felt, but neither understood. Such a third
term, such a stepping-stone, was essential if mysticism were ever to
attain that active union that fullness of life which is its object, and
develop from a blind and egoistic rapture into fruitful and
self-forgetting love.

<span id="an_iii.v-p49"></span>Where non-Christian mystics, as a rule,
have made a forced choice between the two great dogmatic expressions of
their experience, ( *a* ) the long pilgrimage towards a transcendent and
unconditioned Absolute, ( *b* ) the discovery of that Absolute in the
“ground” or spiritual principle of the self; it has been possible to
Christianity, by means of her central doctrine of the Trinity, to find
room for both of them and to exhibit them as that which they are in
fact—the complementary parts of a whole. Even Dionysius, the godfather
of the emanation doctrine, combines with his scheme of descending
hierarchies the dogma of an indwelling God: and no writer is more
constantly quoted by Meister Eckhart, who is generally considered to
have preached immanence in its most extreme and pantheistic form.

<span id="an_iii.v-p50"></span>Further, the Christian atmosphere is the
one in which the individual mystic has most often been able to develop
his genius in a sane and fruitful way; and an overwhelming majority of
the great European contemplatives have been Christians of a strong
impassioned and personal type. This alone would justify us in regarding
it as embodying, at any rate in the West, the substance of the true
tradition: providing the “path of least resistance” through which that
tradition flows. The very heretics of Christianity have often owed their
attraction almost wholly to the mystical element in their teachings. The
Gnostics, the Fraticelli, the Brethren of the Free Spirit, the
Quietists, the Quakers, are instances of this. In others, it was to an
excessive reliance on reason when dealing with the suprarational, and a
corresponding absence of trust in mystical intuition that heresy was
due. Arius and Pelagius are heretics of this type.

<span id="an_iii.v-p51"></span>The greatest mystics, however, have not
been heretics but Catholic saints. In Christianity the “natural
mysticism” which like “natural religion,” is latent in humanity, and at
a certain point of development breaks out in every race, came to itself;
and attributing for the first time true and distinct personality to its
Object, brought into focus the confused and unconditioned God which
Neoplatonism had constructed from the abstract concepts of philosophy
blended with the intuitions of Indian ecstatics, and <span
id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="an_iii.v-Page_106"></span> made
the basis of its meditations on the Real. It is a truism that the chief
claim of Christian philosophy on our respect does not lie in its
exclusiveness but in its Catholicity: in the fact that it finds truth in
a hundred different systems, accepts and elucidates Greek, Jewish, and
Indian thought, fuses them in a coherent theology, and says to
speculative thinkers of every time and place, “Whom therefore ye
ignorantly worship, Him declare I unto you.”

<span id="an_iii.v-p52"></span>The voice of that Truth which spoke once
for all on Calvary, and there declared the ground plan of the universe,
was heard more or less perfectly by all the great seers, the intuitive
leaders of men, the possessors of genius for the Real. There are few of
the Christian names of God which were not known to the teachers of
antiquity. To the Egyptians He was the Saviour, to the Platonists the
Good, Beautiful and True, to the Stoics the Father and Companion. The
very words of the Fourth Gospel are anticipated by Cleanthes.
Heracleitus knew the Energizing Fire of which St. Bonaventura and
Mechthild of Magdeburg speak. Countless mystics, from St. Augustine to
St. John of the Cross, echo again and again the language of Plotinus. It
is true that the differentia which mark off Christianity from all other
religions are strange and poignant: but these very differentia make of
it the most perfect of settings for the mystic life. Its note of close
intimacy, of direct and personal contact with a spiritual reality given
here and now—its astonishing combination of splendour and simplicity, of
the sacramental and transcendent—all these things minister to the needs
of the mystical type.

<span id="an_iii.v-p53"></span>Hence the Christian system, or some
colourable imitation of it, has been found essential by almost all the
great mystics of the West. They adopt its nomenclature, explain their
adventures by the help of its creed, identify their Absolute with the
Christian God. Amongst European mystics the most usually quoted
exception to this rule is Blake; yet it is curious to notice that the
more inspired his utterance, the more passionately and dogmatically
Christian even this hater of the Churches becomes:—

> <span id="an_iii.v-p53.1"></span> “We behold  
> Where Death eternal is put off eternally. O Lamb  
> Assume the dark satanic body in the Virgin’s womb!  
> O Lamb divine ! it cannot thee annoy! O pitying One  
> Thy pity is from the foundation of the world, and thy Redemption  
> Begins already in Eternity.”  <span
> id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200)  

<span id="an_iii.v-p55"></span>This is the doctrine of the Incarnation
in a nutshell: here St. Thomas himself would find little to correct. Of
the two following extracts from “Jerusalem,” the first is but a poet’s
gloss on <span id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_107"></span> the Catholic’s cry, <span
id="an_iii.v-p55.1"></span> *“O felix culpa!”* the second is an almost
perfect epitome of Christian theology and ethics:—

> <span id="an_iii.v-p55.2"></span> “If I were pure, never could I taste
> the sweets  
> Of the forgiveness of sins. If I were holy I never could behold the
> tears  
> Of Love . . . O Mercy! O divine Humanity!  
> O Forgiveness, O Pity and Compassion! If I were pure I should never  
> Have known Thee.”  
> “Wouldst thou love one who never died  
> For thee, or ever die for one who had not died for thee?  
> And if God dieth not for man, and giveth not Himself  
> Eternally for Man, Man could not exist, for Man is Love  
> As God is Love. Every kindness to another is a little death  
> In the Divine Image, nor can Man exist but by brotherhood.”  <span
> id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201)  

<span id="an_iii.v-p57"></span>Whether the dogmas of Christianity be or
be not accepted on the scientific and historical plane, then, those
dogmas are necessary to an adequate description of mystical
experience—at least, of the fully developed dynamic mysticism of the
West. We must therefore be prepared in reading the works of the
contemplatives for much strictly denominational language; and shall be
wise if we preface the encounter by some consideration of this language,
and of its real meaning for those who use and believe it.

<span id="an_iii.v-p58"></span>No one needs, I suppose, to be told that
the two chief features of Christian schematic theology are the dogmas of
the Trinity and the Incarnation. They correlate and explain each other:
forming together, for the Christian, the “final key” to the riddle of
the world. The history of practical and institutional Christianity is
the history of the attempt to exhibit their meaning in space and time.
The history of mystical philosophy is the history—still incomplete—of
the demonstration of their meaning in eternity.

<span id="an_iii.v-p59"></span>Some form of Trinitarian dogma is found
to be essential, as a method of describing observed facts, the moment
that mysticism begins either ( *a* ) to analyse its own psychological
conditions, or ( *b* ) to philosophize upon its intuitive experience of
God. It must, that is to say, divide the aspects under which it knows
the Godhead, if it is to deal with them in a fruitful or comprehensible
way. The Unconditioned One, which is, for Neoplatonic and Catholic
mystic alike, the final object of their quest, cannot of itself satisfy
the deepest instincts of humanity: for man is aware that diversity in
unity is a necessary condition if perfection of character is to be
expressed. Though the idea of unity alone may serve to define the
End—and though the mystics return to it again and again as a relief from
that “heresy of multiplicity” by which they are oppressed—it cannot by
itself be adequate to the description of the All. <span id="page_108">p.
108</span> <span id="an_iii.v-Page_108"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p60"></span>The first question, then, must be—How
many of such aspects are necessary to a satisfactory presentment of the
mystic’s position? How many faces of Reality does he see? We observe
that his experience involves at least a twofold apprehension. ( *a* )
That Holy Spirit within, that Divine Life by which his own life is
transfused and upheld, and of which he becomes increasingly conscious as
his education proceeds. ( *b* ) That Transcendent Spirit without, the
“Absolute,” towards union with which the indwelling and increasingly
dominant spirit of love presses the developing soul. In his ecstasy, it
seems to the mystic that these two experiences of God become one. But in
the attempt to philosophize on his experiences he is bound to separate
them. Over and over again the mystics and their critics acknowledge,
explicitly or implicitly, the necessity of this discrimination for human
thought.

<span id="an_iii.v-p61"></span>Thus even the rigid monotheism of Israel
and Islam cannot, in the hands of the Kabalists and the Sufis, get away
from an essential dualism in the mystical experience. According to the
Zohar “God is considered as immanent in all that has been created or
emanated, and yet is transcendent to all.”  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) So too the Sufis. God, they say, is to
be contemplated *(a)* outwardly in the imperfect beauties of the earth;
(b) inwardly, by meditation. Further, since He is One, and in all
things, “to conceive one’s self as separate from God is an error: yet
*only when one sees oneself as separate from God, can one reach out to
God.* ”  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203)

<span id="an_iii.v-p64"></span>Thus Delacroix, speaking purely as a
psychologist, and denying to the mystical revelation—which he attributes
exclusively to the normal content of the subliminal mind—any
transcendental value, writes with entire approval of St. Teresa, that
she “set up externally to herself the definite God of the Bible, at the
same time as she set up within her soul the confused God of the
Pseudo-Areopagite: the One of Neoplatonism. The first is her guarantee
of the orthodoxy of the second, and prevents her from losing herself in
an indistinction which is non-Christian. The confused God within is
highly dangerous. . . . St. Teresa knew how to avoid this peril, and,
served by her rich subconscious life, by the exaltation of her mental
images, by her faculty of self-division on the one hand, on the other by
her *rare powers of unification,* she realized simultaneously a double
state in which the two Gods \[ *i.e.* , the two ways of apprehending
God, transcendence and immanence\] were guarantees of each other,
mutually consolidating and enriching one another: such is the
intellectual vision of the Trinity in the Seventh Habitation.”  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) <span id="page_109">p. 109</span>
<span id="an_iii.v-Page_109"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p66"></span>It is probable that St. Teresa,
confronted by this astonishing analysis, would have objected that her
Trinity, unlike that of her eulogist, consisted of three and not two
Persons. His language concerning confused interior and orthodox exterior
Gods would certainly have appeared to her delicate and honest mind both
clumsy and untrue: nor could she have allowed that the Unconditioned One
of the Neoplatonists was an adequate description of the strictly
personal Divine Majesty, Whom she found enthroned in the inmost
sanctuary of the Castle of the Soul. What St. Teresa really did was to
actualize in her own experience, apprehend in the “ground of her soul”
by means of her extraordinarily developed transcendental perceptions,
the three distinct and personal Aspects of the Godhead which are
acknowledged by the Christian religion.

<span id="an_iii.v-p67"></span>First, the Father, pure transcendent
Being, creative Source and Origin of all that Is: the Unconditioned and
Unknowable One of the Neoplatonists: Who is “neither This nor That” and
must be conceived, *pace* M. Delacroix, as utterly transcendent to the
subject rather than “set up within the soul.”

<span id="an_iii.v-p68"></span>Secondly, in the Person of Christ, St.
Teresa isolated and distinguished the Logos or Creative Word; the
expression, or outbirth, of the Father’s thought. Here is the point at
which the Divine Substance first becomes apprehensible by the spirit of
man; that mediating principle “raised up between heaven and earth” which
is at once the Mirror of Pure Being and the Light of a finite world. The
Second Person of the Christian Trinity is for the believer not only the
brightness or express image of Deity, but also the personal,
inexhaustible, and responsive Fount of all life and Object of all love:
Who, because of His taking up (in the Incarnation) of humanity into the
Godhead, has become the Bridge between finite and infinite, between the
individual and the Absolute Life, and hence in mystic language the “true
Bridegroom” of every human soul.

<span id="an_iii.v-p69"></span>Thirdly, she recognized within herself
the germ of that Absolute Life, the indwelling Spirit which is the
source of man’s transcendental consciousness and his link with the Being
of God. That is to say, the Holy Spirit of Divine Love, the Real
Desirous seeking for the Real Desired, without Whose presence any
knowledge of or communion with God on man’s part would be inconceivable.

<span id="an_iii.v-p70"></span>In the supreme Vision of the Trinity
which was vouchsafed to St. Teresa in the Seventh Habitation of the
soul, these three aspects became fused in One. In the deepest recesses
of her spirit, in that abyss where selfhood ceases to have meaning, and
the individual soul touches the life of the All, distinction vanished
and she “saw God in a point.” Such an experience, such an intuition of
simple and undifferentiated Godhead—the Unity—beyond <span
id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span id="an_iii.v-Page_110"></span> those
three centres of Divine Consciousness which we call the Trinity of
Persons, is highly characteristic of mysticism. The German
mystics—temperamentally miles asunder from St. Teresa—described it as
the attainment of the “still wilderness” or “lonely desert of Deity”:
the limitless Divine Abyss, impersonal, indescribable, for ever hid in
the Cloud of Unknowing, and yet the true Country of the Soul.  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205)

<span id="an_iii.v-p72"></span>These statements, which appear when thus
laid down to be hopelessly academic, violently divorced from life, were
not for St. Teresa or any other Christian mystic abstract propositions;
but attempts towards the description of first-hand experience.

<span id="an_iii.v-p73"></span>“By some mysterious manifestation of the
truth,” she says, “the three Persons of the most Blessed Trinity reveal
themselves, preceded by an illumination which shines on the spirit like
a most dazzling cloud of light. The three Persons are distinct from one
another; a sublime knowledge is infused into the soul, imbuing it with a
certainty of the truth that the Three are of one substance, power, and
knowledge, and are one God. Thus that which we hold as a doctrine of
faith, the soul now, so to speak, understands by sight, though it
beholds the Blessed Trinity neither by the eyes of the body nor of the
soul, this being no imaginary vision. All the Three Persons here
communicate Themselves to the soul, speak to it, and make it understand
the words of our Lord in the Gospel, that He and the Father and the Holy
Ghost will come and make their abode with the soul which loves Him and
keeps His commandments.

<span id="an_iii.v-p74"></span>O my God, how different from merely
hearing and believing these words is it to realize their truth in this
way! Day by day a growing astonishment takes possession of this soul,
for the three Persons of the Blessed Trinity seem never to depart; that
They dwell far within its own centre and depths; though for want of
learning it cannot describe how, it is conscious of the indwelling of
these divine Companions.”  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206)

<span id="an_iii.v-p76"></span>Mystical writers constantly remind us
that life as perceived by the human minds shows an inveterate tendency
to arrange itself in triads: that if they proclaim the number Three in
the heavens, they can also point to it as dominating everywhere upon the
earth. Here Christianity did but give form to a deep instinct of the
human mind: an instinct which made Pythagoras call Three the number of
God, because beginning, middle, and end were contained therein. Thus to
Hindu thought the Absolute Godhead was unknowable, but He disclosed
three faces to man—Brahma the <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_111"></span> Creator, Shiva the Destroyer, Krishna the
Repairer—and these three were One. So too the Neoplatonists
distinguished three worlds; the Sensible or Phenomenal, the Rational or
Intellectual, the Intelligible or Spiritual; and three aspects of
God—the Unconditioned Absolute, the Logos or Artificer, and the divine
Essence or Soul of the World which is both absolute and created. Perhaps
we have in such triads a first sketch of the Christian Trinity; though
falling far short of the requirements of man’s spiritual experience. The
dry bones await the breath of more abundant life. Corresponding with
this diagram of God’s nature the Platonists see also three grades of
beauty; the Corporeal, the Spiritual, and the Divine.

<span id="an_iii.v-p77"></span>Man, that “thing of threes,” of body,
soul and spirit, of understanding, memory and will, follows in his path
towards unity the Threefold Way: for “our soul,” says Lady Julian, “is
made-trinity like to the unmade blissful Trinity, known and loved from
without beginning, and in the making oned to the Maker.”  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) We still tend to analyse our psychic
life into emotional, volitional, and intellectual elements. Even the
Subject and Object implied in every experience required a third term,
the relation between them, without which no thought can be complete.
Thus the very principle of analogy imposes upon man a Trinitarian
definition of Reality as the one with which his mind is best able to
cope.  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) It is easy for the
hurried rationalist to demonstrate the absurdity of this fact but he
will find it a very different matter when it comes to disproving it.

<span id="an_iii.v-p80"></span>“I could wish,” says St. Augustine, “that
men would consider these three things that are in themselves . . . To
Be, to Know, and to Will. For I am, and I know, and I will, I am knowing
and willing, and I know myself to be and to will; and I will to be and
to know. In these three therefore let him who can, see how inseparable a
life there is—even one life, one mind, one essence: finally how
inseparable is the distinction, and yet a distinction. Surely a man hath
it before him: let him look into himself and see and tell me. But when
he discovers and can see anything of these, let him not think that he
has discovered that which is above these Unchangeable: which Is
unchangeably and Knows unchangeably and Wills unchangeably.”  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209)

<span id="an_iii.v-p82"></span>In a well-known passage, Julian of
Norwich tells us how she <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_112"></span> saw the Trinity of the Divine Nature
shining in the phenomenal as well as in the spiritual world. “He showed
me,” she says, “a little thing, the quantity of an hazel nut, in the
palm of my hand; and it was as round as a ball. I looked thereupon with
the eye of my understanding, and thought, *What may this be?* And it was
answered generally thus: *It is all that is made. . . .* In this Little
Thing I saw three properties. The first is that God made it, the second
is that God loveth it, the third is that God keepeth it. But what is to
me verily the Maker, the Keeper, and the Lover, I cannot tell.”  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210)

<span id="an_iii.v-p84"></span>Julian, a simple and deeply human
Englishwoman of middle age dwelling alone in her churchyard cell, might
well be called the poet of the Trinity. She treats this austere and
subtle dogma—of which the mediaeval mystics write with a passion little
understood by those who look upon it as “orthodoxy reduced to
mathematics”—with an intimacy and vigour which carry with them a
conviction of her own direct and personal apprehension of the
theological truth she struggles to describe. “I beheld,” she says of a
vision which is close to that of St. Teresa in the “Seventh Habitation
of the Soul,” and more lucidly if less splendidly expressed, “the
working of all the blessed Trinity: in which beholding, I saw and
understood these three properties: the property of the Fatherhood, the
property of the Motherhood, and the property of the Lordhood, in one
God. In our Father Almighty we have our keeping and our bliss as anent
our natural Substance,  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) which is
to us by our making, without beginning. And in the Second Person in wit
and wisdom we have our keeping as anent our Sense-soul: our restoring
and our saving; for He is our Mother, Brother, and Saviour. And in our
good Lord, the Holy Ghost, we have our rewarding and our meed-giving for
our living and our travail, and endless overpassing of all that we
desire, in His marvellous courtesy of His high plenteous grace. For all
our life is in *three:* in the first we have our Being, in the second we
have our Increasing, and in the third we have our Fulfilling; the first
is Nature, the second is Mercy, and the third is Grace.  <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) . . . The high Might of the Trinity is
our Father, and the deep Wisdom of the Trinity is our Mother, and the
great Love of the Trinity is our Lord: and all this we have in Nature
and in our Substantial Making.”  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213)

<span id="an_iii.v-p88"></span>Again, in a passage of exquisite
tenderness, “As verily as God <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_113"></span> is our Father, so verily God is our
Mother; and that shewed He in all \[her revelations\] and especially in
these sweet words where He saith: *I it am.* That is to say, *I it am,
the Might and the Goodness of the Fatherhood; I it am, the Wisdom of the
Motherhood, I it am the Light and the Grace that is all blessed Love. I
it am, the Trinity, I it am, the Unity: I am the sovereign Goodness of
all manner of things. I am that maketh thee to love. I am that maketh
thee to long: I it am, the endless fulfilling of all true desires.* ”
 <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214)

<span id="an_iii.v-p90"></span>So Christopher Hervey—

> <span id="an_iii.v-p90.1"></span> “The whole world round is not enough
> to fill  
> The heart’s three corners, but it craveth still.  
> Only the Trinity that made it can  
> Suffice the vast triangled heart of Man.”  <span
> id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215)  

<span id="an_iii.v-p92"></span>Any attempt towards a definition of God
which does not account for and acknowledge these three aspects is found
in experience to be incomplete. They provide objectives for the heart,
the intellect, and the will: for they offer to the Self material for its
highest love, its deepest thought, its act of supreme volition. Under
the familiar Platonic terms of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, they
represent the divine source and end of Ethics, Science, and Art, the
three supreme activities of man. Thus the ideals of artist, student, and
philanthropist, who all seek under different modes the same reality, are
gathered up in the mystic’s One; as the pilgrimage of the three kings
ended in the finding of one Star

<span id="an_iii.v-p93"></span>“What is God?” says St. Bernard. “Length,
breadth, height, and depth. ‘What,’ you say, ‘you do after all profess
to believe in the fourfold Godhead which was an abomination to you?’ Not
in the least. . . . God is designated One to suit our comprehension, not
to describe his character. *His character is capable of division, He
Himself is not.* The words are different, the paths are many, but one
thing is signified; the paths lead to one Person.”  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216)

<span id="an_iii.v-p95"></span>All possible ways of conceiving this One
Person in His living richness are found in the end to range themselves
under three heads. He is “above all and through all and in you all,”
 <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) said St. Paul, anticipating the
Councils in a flash of mystic intuition and giving to the infant Church
the shortest and most perfect definition of its Triune God. Being, which
is above all, manifests itself as Becoming; as the dynamic omnipresent
Word of Life. The Divine Love immanent in the heart and in the world
comes forth from, and returns to, the Absolute One. “Thou, my God, who
art <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_114"></span> Love,” says Nicolas of Cusa, “art Love
that loveth, and Love that is loveable, and Love that is the bond
between these twain.”  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) Thus is
completed “the Eternal Circle from Goodness, through Goodness, to
Goodness.” It is true that to these fundamental respects of the
perceived Godhead—that Being, Becoming, and Desire whereto the worlds
keep time—the mystics have given many and various names; for they have
something of the freedom of true intimates in treating of the Reality
which they love. In particular, those symbols of the Absolute which are
drawn from the great and formless forces of the universe, rather than
from the orthodox but necessarily anthropomorphic imagery of human
relationship, have always appealed to them. Their intense apprehension
of Spirit seems to find freer and more adequate expression in such
terms, than in those in which the notion of space is involved, or which
suggest a concrete picture to the mind. Though they know as well as the
philosophers that “there must always he something symbolic in our way of
expressing the spiritual life,” since “that unfathomable infinite whose
spiritual character is first recognized in our human experience, can
never reveal itself fully and freely under the limitations of our
earthly existence”;  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) yet they
ever seek, like the artists they are, some new and vital image which is
not yet part of the debased currency of formal religion, and conserves
its original power of stinging the imagination to more vivid life.

<span id="an_iii.v-p99"></span>Thus “the Kingdom of Heaven,” says Law,
“stands in this threefold life, where three are one, because it is a
manifestation of the Deity, which is Three and One; the Father has His
distinct manifestation in the Fire, which is always generating the
Light; the Son has His distinct manifestation in the Light, which is
always generated from the Fire; the Holy Ghost has His manifestation in
the Spirit, that always proceeds from both, and is always united with
them. It is this eternal unbeginning Trinity in Unity of Fire, Light,
and Spirit, that constitutes Eternal Nature, the Kingdom of Heaven, the
heavenly Jerusalem, the Divine Life, the Beatific Visibility, the
majestic Glory and Presence of God. Through this Kingdom of Heaven, or
Eternal Nature, is the invisible God, the incomprehensible Trinity,
eternally breaking forth and manifesting itself in a boundless height
and depth of blissful wonders, opening and displaying itself to all its
creatures as in an infinite variation and endless multiplicity of its
powers, beauties, joys, and glories.”  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) <span id="page_115">p. 115</span>
<span id="an_iii.v-Page_115"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p101"></span>Perhaps an easier, better, more
beautiful example of these abstract symbols of the Trinity than Law’s
Fire, Light, and Spirit is that of Light, Life, and Love: a threefold
picture of the Real which is constantly dwelt upon and elaborated by the
Christian mystics. Transcendent Light, intangible but unescapable, ever
emanating Its splendour through the Universe: indwelling, unresting, and
energizing Life: desirous and directive Love—these are cardinal aspects
of Reality to which they return again and again in their efforts to find
words which will express something of the inexpressible truth.

<span id="an_iii.v-p102"></span>( *a* ) LIGHT, ineffable and uncreated,
the perfect symbol of pure undifferentiated Being: above the intellect,
as St. Augustine reminds us, but known to him who loves.  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) This Uncreated Light is the “deep yet
dazzling darkness” of the Dionysian school, “dark from its surpassing
brightness . . . as the shining of the sun on his course is as darkness
to weak eyes.”  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) It is St.
Hildegarde’s <span id="an_iii.v-p104.1"></span> *lux vivens,* Dante’s
<span id="an_iii.v-p104.2"></span> *somma luce,* wherein he saw
multiplicity in unity, the ingathered leaves of all the universe  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) : the Eternal Father, or Fount of
Things. “For well we know,” says Ruysbroeck “that the bosom of the
Father is our ground and origin, wherein our life and being is begun.”
 <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224)

<span id="an_iii.v-p107"></span>( *b* ) LIFE, the Son, hidden Steersman
of the Universe, the Logos, Fire, or cosmic Soul of Things. This
out-birth or Concept of the Father’s Mind, which He possesses within
Himself, as Battista Vernazza was told in her ecstasy,  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) is that Word of Creation which since
It is alive and infinite, no formula can contain. the Word eternally
“spoken” or generated by the Transcendent Light. “This is why,” says
Ruysbroeck again, “all that lives in the Father unmanifested in the
Unity, is also in the Son actively poured forth in manifestation.”
 <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) This life, then, is the
flawless expression or character of the Father, <span
id="an_iii.v-p109.1"></span> *Sapientia Patris.* It is at once the
personal and adorable comrade of the mystic’s adventure and the inmost
principle, the sustaining power, of a dynamic universe; for that which
intellect defines as the Logos or Creative Spirit, contemplative love
*knows* as Wonderful, Counsellor, and Prince of Peace.

<span id="an_iii.v-p110"></span>Since Christ, for the Christian
philosopher, is Divine Life Itself—the drama of Christianity expressing
this fact and its implications “in a point”—it follows that His active
spirit is to be discerned, not symbolically, but in the most veritable
sense, in the ecstatic and abounding life of the world. In the rapturous
vitality <span id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_116"></span> of the birds, in their splendid glancing
flight: in the swelling of buds and the sacrificial beauty of the
flowers: in the great and solemn rhythms of the sea—there is somewhat of
Bethlehem in all these things, somewhat too of Calvary in their
self-giving pains. It was this re-discovery of Nature’s Christliness
which Blake desired so passionately when he sang—

> <span id="an_iii.v-p110.1"></span> “I will not cease from mental
> fight,  
> Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand  
> Till we have built Jerusalem  
> In England’s green and pleasant land.”  

<span id="an_iii.v-p111"></span>Here then it is, on this pinnacle of
faith, at the utmost boundaries of human speech, that mystical theology
suddenly shows herself—not as the puzzle-headed constructor of
impossible creeds, but as accepting and transmuting to a more radiant
life those two profound but apparently contradictory metaphysical
definitions of Reality which we have already discussed.  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) Eternal Becoming, God immanent and
dynamic, striving with and in His world: the unresting “flux of things”
of Heracleitus, the crying aloud of that Word “which is through all
things everlastingly”—the evolutionary world-process beloved of modern
philosophers—is here placed once for all in true relation with pure
transcendent and unmoved Being; the Absolute One of Xenophanes and the
Platonists. This Absolute is discerned by mystic intuition as the “End
of Unity” in whom all diversities must cease;  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) the Ocean to which that ceaseless and
painful Becoming, that unresting river of life, in which we are
immersed, tends to return: the Son going to the Father.

<span id="an_iii.v-p114"></span>( *c* ) LOVE, the principle of
attraction, which seems to partake at once of the transcendental and the
created worlds. If we consider the Father as Supreme Subject—“origin,”
as Aquinas says, “of the entire procession of Deity”  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) —and the Son or generated Logos as the
Object of His thought, in whom, says Ruysbroeck, “He contemplates
Himself and all things in an eternal Now”;  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) then this personal Spirit of Love,
<span id="an_iii.v-p116.1"></span> *il desiro e il velle,* represents
the relation between the two, and constitutes the very character of God.
“The heavenly Father,” says Ruysbroeck, “as a living Ground, with all
that lives in Him, is actively turned towards His Son as to His own
Eternal Wisdom. And that same Wisdom, with all that lives in it, is
actively turned back towards the Father, that is towards that very
ground from which it comes forth. And of this meeting is born the third
Person, between the Father and the <span id="page_117">p. 117</span>
<span id="an_iii.v-Page_117"></span> Son, that is the Holy Spirit, their
mutual Love.”  <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) Proceeding,
according to Christian doctrine, from Light and Life, the Father and
Son—implicit, that is, in both the Absolute Source and dynamic flux of
things—this divine spirit of desire is found enshrined in our very
selfhood; and is the agent by which that selfhood is merged in the
Absolute Self. “My love is my weight,” said St. Augustine.  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) It is the spiritual equivalent of that
gravitation which draws all things to their place. Thus Bernard Holland
says in his Introduction to Boehme’s “Dialogues,” “In a deep sense, the
desire of the Spark of Life in the Soul to return to its Original Source
is part of the longing desire of the universal Life for its own heart or
centre. Of this longing, the universal attraction striving against
resistance, towards a universal centre, proved to govern the phenomenal
or physical world, is but the outer sheath and visible working.” Again,
“Desire is everything in Nature; does everything. Heaven is Nature
filled with divine Life attracted by Desire.”  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233)

<span id="an_iii.v-p120"></span>“The best masters say,” says Eckhart,
“that the love wherewith we love is the Holy Spirit.  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) Some deny it. But this is always true:
all those motives by which we are moved to love, in these is nothing
else than the Holy Spirit.”  <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235)

<span id="an_iii.v-p123"></span>“God wills,” says Ruysbroeck, gathering
these scattered symbols to unity again, “that we should come forth from
ourselves in this Eternal Light; that we should reunite ourselves in a
supernatural manner with that image which is our true Life, and that we
should possess it with Him actively and fruitively in eternal
blessedness . . . this going forth of the contemplative is also in Love:
for by fruitive love he overpasses his created being and finds and
tastes the riches and delights which are God Himself, and which He
causes to pour forth without ceasing in the most secret chamber of the
soul, at that place where it is most like unto the nobility of God.”
 <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236)

<span id="an_iii.v-p125"></span>Here only, in the innermost sanctuary of
being, the soul’s “last habitation,” as St. Teresa said, is the truth
which these symbols express truly known: for “as to how the Trinity is
one and the Trinity in the Unity of the nature is one, whilst
nevertheless the Trinity comes forth from the Unity, this cannot be
expressed in <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_118"></span> words,” says Suso, “owing to the
simplicity of that deep abyss. Hither it is, into this intelligible
*where* that the spirit, spiritualizing itself, soars up; now flying in
the measureless heights, now swimming in the soundless deeps, of the
sublime marvels of the Godhead!”  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237)

<span id="an_iii.v-p127"></span>Mystical philosophy, then, has availed
itself gladly of the doctrine of the Trinity in expressing its vision of
the nature of that Absolute which is found, by those who attain the deep
Abyss of the Godhead, to be essentially One. But it is by the
complementary Christian dogma of the Incarnation that it has best been
able to describe and explain the nature of the inward and personal
mystic experience. The Incarnation, which is for traditional
Christianity synonymous with the historical birth and earthly life of
Christ, is for mystics of a certain type, not only this but also a
perpetual Cosmic and personal process. It is an everlasting bringing
forth, in the universe and also in the individual ascending soul, of the
divine and perfect Life, the pure character of God, of which the one
historical life dramatized the essential constituents. Hence the soul,
like the physical embryo, resumes in its upward progress the spiritual
life-history of the race. “The one secret, the greatest of all,” says
Patmore, is “the doctrine of the Incarnation, regarded not as an
historical event which occurred two thousand years ago, but as an event
which is renewed in the body of every one who is in the way to the
fulfilment of his original destiny.”  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238)

<span id="an_iii.v-p129"></span>We have seen that for mystical theology
the Second Person of the Trinity is the Wisdom of the Father, the Word
of Life. The fullness of this Word could therefore only be communicated
to the human consciousness by a Life. In the Incarnation this Logos,
this divine character of Reality, penetrated the illusions of the
sensual world—in other words, the illusions of all the selves whose
ideas compose that world—and “saved” it by this infusion of truth. A
divine, suffering, self-sacrificing Personality was then shown as the
sacred heart of a living, striving universe: and for once the Absolute
was exhibited in the terms of finite human existence. Some such event as
this breaking through of the divine and archetypal life into the
temporal world is perceived by the mystical philosopher to be a
necessity, if man was ever to see in terms of life that greatness of
life to which he belongs: learn to transcend the world of sense, and
rebuild his life upon the levels of reality. “For Thou art,” says
Nicolas of Cusa, “the Word of God humanified, and Thou art man deified.”
 <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) Thus it is that the <span
id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span id="an_iii.v-Page_119"></span>
Catholic priest in the Christmas Mass gives thanks, not for the setting
in hand of any commercial process of redemption, but for a revelation of
reality, “Quia per incarnati Verbi mysterium nova mentis nostrae oculis
lux tuae claritatis infulsit: ut dum visibiliter Deum cognoscimus, per
hunc in invisibilium amorem rapiamur.” The essence of mystical
Christianity seems to be summed up in these lovely words.  <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240)

<span id="an_iii.v-p132"></span>“The Son of God, the Eternal Word in the
Father, who is the glance, or brightness, and the power of the light
eternity” says Boehme, “must become man and be born in you, if you will
know God: otherwise you are in the dark stable and go about groping.”
 <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) “The Word,” says Ruysbroeck
finely, “is no other than See. And this is the coming forth and the
birth of the Son of the Eternal Light, in Whom all blessedness is seen
and known.”  <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) Once at any rate,
they say in effect, the measure of that which it was possible for the
Spirit of Life to do and for living creatures to be, was filled to the
brim. By this event, all were assured that the ladder of Creation was
made whole; in this hypostatic union, the breach between appearance and
reality, between God and man, was healed. The Bridge so made—to use St.
Catherine of Siena’s allegory again—is eternal, since it was “laid
before the foundation of the world” in the “Eternal Now.” Thus the voice
of the Father says to her in that vision, “I also wish thee to look at
the Bridge of My only-begotten Son, and see the greatness thereof, for
it reaches from Heaven to earth; that is, that the earth of your
humanity is joined to the greatness of the Deity thereby. I say, then,
that this Bridge reaches from Heaven to earth, and constitutes the union
which I have made with man. . . . So the height of the Divinity, humbled
to the earth, and joined with your humanity made the Bridge and reformed
the road. Why was this done? In order that man might come to his true
happiness with the angels. And observe that it is not enough, in order
that you should have life, that My son should have made you this Bridge,
unless you walk thereon.”  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) “Our
high Father God Almighty, which is Being,” says Lady Julian, “He knew
and loved us from afore any time. Of which knowing, in His marvellous
deep charity, and the foreseeing counsel of all the blessed Trinity, He
willed that the Second Person should become our Mother.”  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244)

<span id="an_iii.v-p137"></span>It is of course this assertion of the
quickening communication <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_120"></span> of grace to nature, of God to man—an
influx of ultimate reality, possible of assimilation by all—which
constitutes the strength of the Christian religion. Instead of the stony
diet of the philosophers, it offers to the self hungry for the Absolute
that <span id="an_iii.v-p137.1"></span> *Panis Angelorum,* the vivifying
principle of the world. That is to say, it gives concrete and
experimental knowledge of a supreme Personality—absorption into His
mystical body—instead of the artificial conviction produced by
concentration on an idea. It knits up the universe; shows the phenomenal
pierced in all directions by the real, the natural as the vehicle of the
supernatural. It provides a solid basis for mysticism, a basis which is
at once metaphysical and psychological: and shows that state towards
which the world’s deepest minds have always instinctively aspired, as a
part of the cosmic return through Christ to God.

> <span id="an_iii.v-p137.2"></span> “Quivi è la sapienza e la
> possanza  
> ch’ aprì le strade intra il cielo e la terra  
> onde fu già sì lunga disianza.”  <span
> id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245)  

<span id="an_iii.v-p139"></span>This is what the Christian mystics mean
to express when they declare over and over again that the return to the
Divine Substance, the Absolute, which is the end of the soul’s ascent,
can only be made through the humanity of Christ. The Son, the Word, is
the character of the Father: that in which the Ineffable Godhead knows
Himself, as we only know ourselves in our own characters. He is thus a
double link: the means of God’s self-consciousness, the means of man’s
consciousness of God. How then, asks mystic theology, could such a link
complete its attachments without some such process as that which the
Incarnation dramatized in time and space? The Principle of Life is also
the Principle of Restitution; by which the imperfect and broken life of
sense is mended and transformed into the perfect life of spirit. Hence
the title of Repairer applied by Boehme to the Second Person of the
Trinity.

<span id="an_iii.v-p140"></span>In the last resort, the doctrine of the
Incarnation is the only safeguard of the mystics against the pantheism
to which they always tend. The Unconditioned Absolute, so soon as it
alone becomes the object of their contemplation, is apt to be conceived
merely as Divine Essence; the idea of Personality evaporates. The union
of the soul with God is then thought of in terms of absorption. The
distinction between Creator and creature is obliterated and loving
communion is at an end. This is probably the reason why many of the
greatest contemplatives—Suso and St. Teresa are cases in point—have
found that deliberate meditation upon the humanity of Christ, difficult
and uncongenial as <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_121"></span> this concrete devotion sometimes is to
the mystical temperament, was a necessity if they were to retain a
healthy and well-balanced inner life.

<span id="an_iii.v-p141"></span>Further, these mystics see in the
historic life of Christ an epitome—or if you will, an exhibition—of the
essentials of all spiritual life. There they see dramatized not only the
cosmic process of the Divine Wisdom, but also the inward experience of
every soul on her way to union with that Absolute “to which the whole
Creation moves.” This is why the expressions which they use to describe
the evolution of the mystical consciousness from the birth of the divine
in the spark of the soul to its final unification with the Absolute Life
are so constantly chosen from the Drama of Faith. In this drama they see
described under veils the necessary adventures of the spirit. Its
obscure and humble birth, its education in poverty, its temptation,
mortification and solitude, its “illuminated life” of service and
contemplation, the desolation of that “dark night of the soul” in which
it seems abandoned by the Divine: the painful death of the self, its
resurrection to the glorified existence of the Unitive Way, its final
reabsorption in its Source—all these, they say, were lived once in a
supreme degree in the flesh. Moreover, the degree of closeness with
which the individual experience adheres to this Pattern is always taken
by them as a standard of the healthiness, ardour, and success of its
transcendental activities.

> <span id="an_iii.v-p141.1"></span> “Apparve in questa forma  
> Per dare a noi la norma.”  

<span id="an_iii.v-p142"></span>sang Jacopone da Todi. “And he who
vainly thinketh otherwise,” says the “Theologia Germanica” with
uncompromising vigour, “is deceived. And he who saith otherwise, lieth.”
 <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246)

<span id="an_iii.v-p144"></span>Those to whom such a parallel seems
artificial should remember that according to the doctrine of mysticism
that drama of the self-limitation and self-sacrifice of the Absolute
Life, which was once played out in the phenomenal world—forced, as it
were, upon the consciousness of dim-eyed men—is eternally going forward
upon the plane of reality. To them the Cross of Calvary is implicit in
the Rose of the World. The law of this Infinite Life which was in the
Incarnation expressing Its own nature in human terms, must then also be
the law of the finite life; in so far as that life aspires to transcend
individual limitations, rise to freedom, and attain union with Infinity.
It is this governing idea which justifies the apparently fanciful
allegorizations of Christian history which swarm in the works of the
mystics.

<span id="an_iii.v-p145"></span>To exhibit these allegorizations in
detail would be tedious. All <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_122"></span> that is necessary is that the principle
underlying them should be understood. I give, then, but one example:
that which is referred by mystical writers to the Nativity, and concerns
the eternal Birth or Generation of the Son or Divine Word.

<span id="an_iii.v-p146"></span>This Birth is in its first, or cosmic
sense, the welling forth of the Spirit of Life from the Divine Abyss of
the unconditioned Godhead. “From our proper Ground, that is to say from
the Father and all that which lives in Him, there shines,” says
Ruysbroeck, “an eternal Ray, the which is the Birth of the Son.”  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) It is of this perpetual generation of
the Word that Meister Eckhart speaks, when he says in his Christmas
sermon, “We are celebrating the feast of the Eternal Birth which God the
Father has borne and *never ceases to bear* in all Eternity: whilst this
birth also comes to pass in Time and in human nature. Saint Augustine
says this Birth is ever taking place.” At this point, with that strong
practical instinct which is characteristic of the mystics, Eckhart turns
abruptly from speculation to immediate experience, and continues “But if
it takes not place in me, what avails it? Everything lies in this, that
it should take place in me.”  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)
Here in a few words the two-fold character of this Mystic Birth is
exhibited. The interest is suddenly deflected from its cosmic to its
personal aspect; and the individual is reminded that in him, no less
than in the Archetypal Universe, real life must be born if real life is
to be lived. “When the soul brings forth the Son,” says Eckhart in
another place, “it is happier than Mary.”  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249)

<span id="an_iii.v-p150"></span>Since the soul, according to mystic
principles, can only perceive Reality in proportion as she is real, know
God by becoming Godlike, it is clear that this birth is the initial
necessity. The true and definitely directed mystical life does and must
open with that most actual, though indescribable phenomenon, the coming
forth into consciousness of man’s deeper, spiritual self, which
ascetical and mystical writers of all ages have agreed to call
Regeneration or Re-birth. Nothing that is within him is able of its own
power to achieve this. It must be evoked by an energy, a quickening
Spirit, which comes from beyond the soul, and “secretly initiates what
He openly crowns.”  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) <span
id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span id="an_iii.v-Page_123"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p152"></span>We nave already considered  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) the New Birth in its purely
psychological aspect, as the emergence of the transcendental sense. Here
its more profound and mystical side is exhibited. By a process which may
indifferently be described as the birth of something new or the coming
forth of something which has slept—since both these phrases are but
metaphors for another and more secret operation—the eye is opened on
Eternity, the self, abruptly made aware of Reality, comes forth from the
cave of illusion like a child from the womb and begins to live upon the
supersensual plane. Then she feels in her inmost part a new presence, a
new consciousness—it were hardly an exaggeration to say a new
Person—weak, demanding nurture, clearly destined to pass through many
phases of development before its maturity is reached; yet of so strange
a nature, that in comparison with its environment she may well regard it
as Divine.

<span id="an_iii.v-p154"></span>“This change, this upsetting, is called
re-birth. *To be born* simply means to enter into a world in which the
senses dominate, in which wisdom and love languish in the bonds of
individuality. To be *re-born* means to return to a world where the
spirit of wisdom and love governs and animal-man obeys.”  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) So Eckartshausen. It means, says Jane
Lead, “the bringing forth of a new-created Godlike similitude in the
soul.”  <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) He is brought forth,
says Eckartshausen again, in the stable previously inhabited by the ox
of passion and the ass of prejudice.  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) His mother, says Boehme, is the Virgin
Sophia, the Divine Wisdom, or Mirror of the Being of God. With the
emergence of this new factor into the conscious field—this spiritual
birth—the mystic life begins: as the Christian epoch began with the
emergence of Divine Spirit in the flesh. Paradise, says Boehme, is still
in the world, but man is not in Paradise unless he be born again. In
that case, he stands therein in the New Birth,  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) and tastes here and now that Eternal
Life for which he has been made.

<span id="an_iii.v-p159"></span>Here then are some characteristics of
the map which the Christian mystics are most inclined to use. There are,
of course, other great landmarks upon it: and these we shall meet as we
follow in detail the voyages of the questing soul. One warning, however,
must be given to amateur geographers before we go on. Like all other
maps, this one at its best can but represent by harsh outline and
conventional colour the living earth which those travellers trod and the
mysterious seas on which they sailed. It is a deliberately schematic
representation of Reality, a flat and sometimes arid symbol of great
landscapes, rushing rivers, awful peaks: <span id="page_124">p.
124</span> <span id="an_iii.v-Page_124"></span> dangerous unless these
its limitations be always kept in mind. The boy who defined Canada as
“very pink” was not much further off the track than those who would
limit the Adorable Trinity to the definitions of the “Athanasian” Creed;
however useful that chart may be, and is, within the boundaries imposed
by its form.

<span id="an_iii.v-p160"></span>Further, all such maps, and we who treat
of them, can but set down in cold blood and with a dreadful pretence of
precision, matters which the true explorers of Eternity were only able
to apprehend in the ardours of such a passion, in the transports of such
a union as we, poor finite slaves of our frittered emotions, could
hardly look upon and live. “If you would truly know how these things
come to pass,” says St. Bonaventura, in a passage which all students of
theology should ever keep in mind, “ask it of grace, not of doctrine; of
desire, not of intellect; of the ardours of prayer, not of the teachings
of the schools; of the Bridegroom, not of the Master; of God, not of
man; of the darkness, not of the day; not of illumination, but of that
Fire which enflames all and wraps us in God with great sweetness and
most ardent love. The which Fire most truly is God, and the hearth
thereof is in Jerusalem.”  <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256)

<span id="an_iii.v-p162"></span><span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="an_iii.v-Page_125"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_181"></span>[97:182](myst08.htm#fr_181) <span
id="an_iii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p9"></span> “La gloria di colui che tutto move

<span id="an_iii.v-p10"></span>per l’universo penetra, e resplende

<span id="an_iii.v-p11"></span>in una parte più e meno altrove” (Par. i.
1-3).

<span id="an_iii.v-p12"></span>The theological ground-plan of the
Cantica is epitomized in this introductory verse.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[97:183](myst08.htm#fr_182) <span
id="an_iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p14"></span> “Summa Contra Gentiles,” 1. iv. cap. 1.
(Rickaby’s translation).

<span id="fn_183"></span>[98:184](myst08.htm#fr_183) <span
id="an_iii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p15"></span> Leben, cap. lvi.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[98:185](myst08.htm#fr_184) <span
id="an_iii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p17"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. xi.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[98:186](myst08.htm#fr_185) <span
id="an_iii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p19"></span> Avisos y Sentencias Espirituales, N. 51.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[98:187](myst08.htm#fr_186) <span
id="an_iii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p21"></span> “Varieties of Religious Experience,”
Lecture vi.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[99:188](myst08.htm#fr_187) <span
id="an_iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p23"></span> Quoted by W. L. Lilly, “Many Mansions,”
p. 140.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[99:189](myst08.htm#fr_188) <span
id="an_iii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p24"></span> Ennead vi. 9.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[99:190](myst08.htm#fr_189) <span
id="an_iii.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p26"></span> Thus Aquinas says, “Since God is the
universal cause of all Being, in whatever region Being can be found,
there must be the Divine Presence” (“Summa Contra Gentiles,” 1. iii.
cap. lxviii.). And we have seen that the whole claim of the mystics
ultimately depends on man’s possession of pure being in “the spark of
the soul.”

<span id="fn_190"></span>[100:191](myst08.htm#fr_190) <span
id="an_iii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p27"></span> “De Ornatu Spiritualium Nuptiarum,” I.
ii. cap. lxvii.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[100:192](myst08.htm#fr_191) <span
id="an_iii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p28"></span> *Op. cit.,* I. iii. cap. i.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[100:193](myst08.htm#fr_192) <span
id="an_iii.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p31"></span> Relaccion ix. 10. But this image of a
sponge, which also suggested itelf to St. Augustine, proved an occasion
of stumbling to his more metaphysical mind: tending to confuse his idea
of the nature of God with the category of space. *Vide* Aug. Conf., bk.
vii. cap. v.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[101:194](myst08.htm#fr_193) <span
id="an_iii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p32"></span> “The Threefold Life of Man,” cap. vi. §
71.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[101:195](myst08.htm#fr_194) <span
id="an_iii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p34"></span> Eckhart, Pred, lxix. So too we read in
the Oxyrhyncus Papyri, “Raise the stone and there thou shalt find Me.
Cleave the wood and there am I.”

<span id="fn_195"></span>[101:196](myst08.htm#fr_195) <span
id="an_iii.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p36"></span> Compare above, cap. ii.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[101:197](myst08.htm#fr_196) <span
id="an_iii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p37"></span> “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. xl.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[103:198](myst08.htm#fr_197) <span
id="an_iii.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p40"></span> Boyce Gibson, “God with Us,” p. 24.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[103:199](myst08.htm#fr_198) <span
id="an_iii.v-p41.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p42"></span> See A. E. Waite, *“* TheDoctrine and
Literature of the Kabalah,” pp. 36-53.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[105:200](myst08.htm#fr_199) <span
id="an_iii.v-p47.2"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p48"></span> Par. xxxiii. 137.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[106:201](myst08.htm#fr_200) <span
id="an_iii.v-p53.8"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p54"></span> “Vala,” viii. 237.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[107:202](myst08.htm#fr_201) <span
id="an_iii.v-p55.14"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p56"></span> “Jerusalem,” lxi. 44 and xcv. 23.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[108:203](myst08.htm#fr_202) <span
id="an_iii.v-p61.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p62"></span> A. E. Waite, “The Doctrine and
Literature of the Kabalah,” p. 35.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[108:204](myst08.htm#fr_203) <span
id="an_iii.v-p62.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p63"></span> Palmer. “Oriental Mysticism,” pt. i.
cap. i

<span id="fn_204"></span>[108:205](myst08.htm#fr_204) <span
id="an_iii.v-p64.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p65"></span> Delacroix, “Études sur le Mysticisme,”
p. 75. The reference in the last sentence is to St. Teresa’s “Castillo
Interior.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[110:206](myst08.htm#fr_205) <span
id="an_iii.v-p70.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p71"></span> See Tauler, Sermon on St. John Baptist,
and Third Instruction (“ The Inner Way,” pp. 97 and 321); Suso,
“Buchlein von der Warheit,” cap. v.; Ruysbroeck, “De Ornatu Spiritalium
Nuptiarum,” 1. iii. caps, ii. and vi.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[110:207](myst08.htm#fr_206) <span
id="an_iii.v-p74.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p75"></span> St. Teresa, “El Castillo Interior,”
Moradas; Sétimas, cap. i.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[111:208](myst08.htm#fr_207) <span
id="an_iii.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p78"></span> Julian of Norwich, “Revelations of
Divine Love.” cap. lv. Julian here repeats a familiar Patristic
doctrine. So St. Thomas says (“Summa Contra Gentiles,” 1. iv. cap.
xxvi), “A likeness of the Divine Trinity is observable in the human
mind.”

<span id="fn_208"></span>[111:209](myst08.htm#fr_208) <span
id="an_iii.v-p78.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p79"></span> “The three Persons of the Trinity,” said
John Scotus Erigena, “are less modes of the Divine Substance than modes
under which our mind conceives the Divine Substance”—a stimulating
statement of dubious orthodoxy.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[111:210](myst08.htm#fr_209) <span
id="an_iii.v-p80.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p81"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. xi.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[112:211](myst08.htm#fr_210) <span
id="an_iii.v-p82.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p83"></span> *Op. cit.,* cap. v.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[112:212](myst08.htm#fr_211) <span
id="an_iii.v-p84.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p85"></span> *Substance* is here, of course, to be
understood in the scholastic sense, as the reality which underlies
merely phenomenal existence.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[112:213](myst08.htm#fr_212) <span
id="an_iii.v-p85.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p86"></span> *I.e.* , the Second Person of the
Christian Trinity is the redemptive, “fount of mercy,” the medium by
which Grace, the free gift of transcendental life, reaches and vivifies
human nature: “permeates it,” in Eucken’s words, “with the Infinite and
Eternal” (“Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens,” p. 181).

<span id="fn_213"></span>[112:214](myst08.htm#fr_213) <span
id="an_iii.v-p86.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p87"></span> “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap.
lviii.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[113:215](myst08.htm#fr_214) <span
id="an_iii.v-p88.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p89"></span> *Op. cit.* , cap. lix.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[113:216](myst08.htm#fr_215) <span
id="an_iii.v-p90.6"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p91"></span> “The School of the Heart,” Epigram x.
This book, which is a free translation of the “Scola Cordis” of Benedict
Haeften (1635), is often, but wrongly attributed to Francis Quarles.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[113:217](myst08.htm#fr_216) <span
id="an_iii.v-p93.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p94"></span> “De Consideratione,” bk. v. cap. viii.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[113:218](myst08.htm#fr_217) <span
id="an_iii.v-p95.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p96"></span> <span
id="an_iii.v-p96.1"></span>[Ephesians iv.
6](../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006)<span id="an_iii.v-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[114:219](myst08.htm#fr_218) <span
id="an_iii.v-p96.2"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p97"></span> “De Visione Dei,” cap. xvii.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[114:220](myst08.htm#fr_219) <span
id="an_iii.v-p97.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p98"></span> Eucken, “Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens,”
p. 131.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[114:221](myst08.htm#fr_220) <span
id="an_iii.v-p99.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p100"></span> “An Appeal to All who Doubt” (“Liberal
and Mystical Writings of William Law” p. 54). Law’s symbols are here
borrowed from the system of his master, Jacob Boehme. (See the “De
Signatura Rerum” of Boehme, cap. xiv.)

<span id="fn_221"></span>[115:222](myst08.htm#fr_221) <span
id="an_iii.v-p102.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p103"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[115:223](myst08.htm#fr_222) <span
id="an_iii.v-p103.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p104"></span> Tauler, 3rd Instruction (“The Inner
Way,” p. 324).

<span id="fn_223"></span>[115:224](myst08.htm#fr_223) <span
id="an_iii.v-p104.3"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p105"></span> Par. xxxiii 67, 85.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[115:225](myst08.htm#fr_224) <span
id="an_iii.v-p105.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p106"></span> “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” I.
iii. cap. iii.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[115:226](myst08.htm#fr_225) <span
id="an_iii.v-p107.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p108"></span> Von Hügel, “The Mystical Element of
Religion,” vol. i. p. 357.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[115:227](myst08.htm#fr_226) <span
id="an_iii.v-p108.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p109"></span> Ruysbroeck, *op. cit.* ., *loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_227"></span>[116:228](myst08.htm#fr_227) <span
id="an_iii.v-p111.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p112"></span> *Supra,* Cap. II.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[116:229](myst08.htm#fr_228) <span
id="an_iii.v-p112.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p113"></span> Tauler, *op. cit., loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_229"></span>[116:230](myst08.htm#fr_229) <span
id="an_iii.v-p114.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p115"></span> “Summa Contra Gentiles,” I. iv. cap.
xxvi.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[116:231](myst08.htm#fr_230) <span
id="an_iii.v-p115.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p116"></span> “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” I.
ii. cap. iv.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[117:232](myst08.htm#fr_231) <span
id="an_iii.v-p116.2"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p117"></span> *Op. cit.,* I. ii. cap. xxxvii.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[117:233](myst08.htm#fr_232) <span
id="an_iii.v-p117.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p118"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. ix.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[117:234](myst08.htm#fr_233) <span
id="an_iii.v-p118.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p119"></span> Introduction to “Three Dialogues of the
Supersensual Life,” p. xxx.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[117:235](myst08.htm#fr_234) <span
id="an_iii.v-p120.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p121"></span> The doctrine is found in St. Augustine,
and is frequently reproduced by the mediaeval mystics. Eckhart is
perhaps here quoting St. Thomas Aquinas, a usual source of his more
orthodox utterances. Compare “Summa Contra Gentiles,” I. iv. cap. xxiii:
“Since the Holy Ghost proceeds as the love wherewith God loves Himself,
and since God loves with the same love Himself and other beings for the
sake of His own goodness, it is clear that the love wherewith God loves
us belongs to the Holy Ghost. In like manner also the love wherewith we
love God.”

<span id="fn_235"></span>[117:236](myst08.htm#fr_235) <span
id="an_iii.v-p121.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p122"></span> Pred. xii.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[117:237](myst08.htm#fr_236) <span
id="an_iii.v-p123.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p124"></span> “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum “ I.
iii. cap. iii.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[118:238](myst08.htm#fr_237) <span
id="an_iii.v-p125.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p126"></span> Suso, Leben, cap. lvi.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[118:239](myst08.htm#fr_238) <span
id="an_iii.v-p127.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p128"></span> “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,”
“Homo,” xix.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[118:240](myst08.htm#fr_239) <span
id="an_iii.v-p129.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p130"></span> “De Visione Dei,” cap. xxiii.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[119:241](myst08.htm#fr_240) <span
id="an_iii.v-p130.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p131"></span> “Because by the mystery of the
Incarnate Word the new light of Thy brightness hath shone upon the eyes
of our mind: that we, knowing God seen of the eyes, by Him may be
snatched up into the love of that which eye hath not seen” (Missale
Romanum. Praefatio Solemnis de Nativitate).

<span id="fn_241"></span>[119:242](myst08.htm#fr_241) <span
id="an_iii.v-p132.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p133"></span> “The Threefold Life of Man, cap. iii. §
31.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[119:243](myst08.htm#fr_242) <span
id="an_iii.v-p133.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p134"></span> Ruysbroeck, *op. cit* ., 1. iii. cap.
i.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[119:244](myst08.htm#fr_243) <span
id="an_iii.v-p134.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p135"></span> Dialogo, cap. xxii.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[119:245](myst08.htm#fr_244) <span
id="an_iii.v-p135.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p136"></span> “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. lix.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[120:246](myst08.htm#fr_245) <span
id="an_iii.v-p137.6"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p138"></span> Par. xxiii. 37. “Here is the Wisdom and
the Power which opened the ways betwixt heaven and earth, for which
there erst had been so long a yearning.”

<span id="fn_246"></span>[121:247](myst08.htm#fr_246) <span
id="an_iii.v-p142.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p143"></span> “Theologia Germanica,” cap. xviii.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[122:248](myst08.htm#fr_247) <span
id="an_iii.v-p146.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p147"></span> “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” 1.
iii. cap. v. The extreme antiquity of this idea is illustrated by the
Catholic practice, dating from Patristic times, of celebrating three
Masses on Christmas Day. Of these the first, at midnight, commemorates
the Eternal Generation of the Son; the second, at dawn, His incarnation
upon earth; the third His birth in the heart of man. Compare the Roman
Missal: also Kellner, “Heortology” (English translation, London, 1908),
p. 156.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[122:249](myst08.htm#fr_248) <span
id="an_iii.v-p147.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p148"></span> Eckhart, Pred. i., “Mystische
Schriften,” p. 13. Compare Tauler, Sermon on the Nativity of Our Lady
(“The Inner Way,” p. 167).

<span id="fn_249"></span>[122:250](myst08.htm#fr_249) <span
id="an_iii.v-p148.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p149"></span> This idea of re-birth is probably of
Oriental origin. It can be traced back to Egypt, being found in the
Hermetic writings of the third century, B.C. See Petrie, “Personal
Religion in Egypt before Christianity,” p. 167.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[122:251](myst08.htm#fr_250) <span
id="an_iii.v-p150.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p151"></span> F. von Hügel, “The Life of Prayer,” p.
24.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[123:252](myst08.htm#fr_251) <span
id="an_iii.v-p152.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p153"></span> *Supra* , p. 53.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[123:253](myst08.htm#fr_252) <span
id="an_iii.v-p154.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p155"></span> “The Cloud upon the Sanctuary,” p. 77.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[123:254](myst08.htm#fr_253) <span
id="an_iii.v-p155.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p156"></span> The Enochian Walks with God,” p. 3.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[123:255](myst08.htm#fr_254) <span
id="an_iii.v-p156.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p157"></span> *Op. cit* ., p. 81.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[123:256](myst08.htm#fr_255) <span
id="an_iii.v-p157.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p158"></span> “De Signatura Rerum,” viii. 47.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[124:257](myst08.htm#fr_256) <span
id="an_iii.v-p160.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.v-p161"></span> “De Itinerado Mentis in Deo,” cap. vii.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Mysticism and Symbolism](myst09)

</div>
