[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Zuñi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](zft16)  [Next](zft18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HOW THE COYOTE DANCED WITH THE BLACKBIRDS

One late autumn day in the times of the ancients, a large council of
Blackbirds were gathered, fluttering and chattering, on the smooth,
rocky slopes of Gorge Mountain, northwest of Zuñi. Like ourselves, these
birds, as you are well aware, congregate together in autumn time, when
the harvests are ripe, to indulge in their festivities before going into
winter quarters; only we do not move away, while they, on strong wings
and swift, retreat for a time to the Land of Everlasting Summer.

Well, on this particular morning they were making a great noise and
having a grand dance, and this was the way of it: They would gather in
one vast flock, somewhat orderly in its disposition, on the sloping face
of Gorge Mountain,--the older birds in front, the younger ones
behind,--and down the slope, chirping and fluttering, they would hop,
hop, hop, singing:

"Ketchu, Ketchu, oñtilã, oñtilã,  
Ketchu, Ketchu, oñtilã, oñtilã!  
    Âshokta a yá-à-laa Ke-e-tchu,  
              Oñtilã,  
              Oñtilã!"--

Blackbirds, Blackbirds, dance away, O, dance away, O!  
Blackbirds, Blackbirds, dance away, O, dance away, O!  
    Down the Mountain of the Gorges, Blackbirds,  
              Dance away, O!  
              Dance away, O!--

{p. 238}

and, spreading their wings, with many a flutter, flurry, and scurry,
*keh keh*,--*keh keh*,--*keh keh*,--*keh keh*,--they would fly away into
the air, swirling off in a dense, black flock, circling far upward and
onward; then, wheeling about and darting down, they would dip themselves
in the broad spring which flows out at the foot of the mountain, and
return to their dancing place on the rocky slopes.

A Coyote was out hunting (as if he could catch anything, the beast!) and
saw them, and was enraptured.

"You beautiful creatures!" he exclaimed. "You graceful dancers! Delight
of my senses! How do you do that, anyway? Couldn't I join in your
dance--the first part of it, at least?"

"Why, certainly; yes," said the Blackbirds.

"We are quite willing," the masters of the ceremony said.

"Well," said the Coyote, "I can get on the slope of the rocks and I can
sing the song with you; but I suppose that when you leap off into the
air I shall have to sit there patting the rock with my paw and my tail
and singing while you have the fun of it."

"It may be," said an old Blackbird, "that we can fit you out so that you
can fly with us."

"Is it possible!" cried the Coyote, "Then by all means do so. By the
Blessed Immortals! Now, if I am only able to circle off into the air
like you fellows, I'll be the biggest Coyote in the world!"

"I think it will be easy," resumed the old Blackbird. {p. 239} "My
children," said he, "you are many, and many are your wing-feathers.
Contribute each one of you a feather to our friend." Thereupon the
Blackbirds, each one of them, plucked a feather from his wing.
Unfortunately they all plucked feathers from the wings on the same side.

"Are you sure, my friend," continued the old Blackbird, "that you are
willing to go through the operation of having these feathers planted in
your skin? If so, I think we can fit you out."

"Willing?--why, of course I am willing." And the Coyote held up one of
his arms, and, sitting down, steadied himself with his tail. Then the
Blackbirds thrust in the feathers all along the rear of his forelegs and
down the sides of his back, where wings ought to be. It hurt, and the
Coyote twitched his mustache considerably; but he said nothing. When it
was done, he asked: "Am I ready now?"

"Yes," said the Blackbirds; "we think you'll do."

So they formed themselves again on the upper part of the slope, sang
their songs, and hopped along down with many a flutter, flurry, and
scurry,--*Keh keh*, *keh keh*, *keh keh*,--and away they flew off into
the air.

The Coyote, somewhat startled, got out of time, but followed bravely,
making heavy flops; but, as I have said before, the wings he was
supplied with were composed of feathers all plucked from one side, and
therefore he flew slanting and spirally and brought up with a whack,
which nearly knocked the breath out of him, against the side of the

{p. 240}

mountain. He picked himself up, and shook himself, and cried out: "Hold!
Hold! Hold on, hold on, there!" to the fast-disappearing Blackbirds.
"You've left me behind!"

When the birds returned they explained: "Your wings are not quite thick
enough, friend; and, besides, even a young Blackbird, when he is first
learning to fly, does just this sort of thing that you have been
doing--makes bad work of it."

"Sit down again," said the old Blackbird. And he called out to the rest:
"Get feathers from your other sides also, and be careful to select a few
strong feathers from the tips of the wings, for by means of these we
cleave the air, guide our movements, and sustain our flight."

So the Blackbirds all did as they were bidden, and after the new
feathers were planted, each one plucked out a tail-feather, and the most
skilful of the Blackbirds inserted these feathers into the tip of the
Coyote's tail. It made him wince and "yip" occasionally; but he stood it
bravely and reared his head proudly, thinking all the while: "What a
splendid Coyote I shall be! Did ever anyone hear of a Coyote flying?"

The procession formed again. Down the slope they went, hopity-hop,
hopity-hop, singing their song, and away they flew into the air, the
Coyote in their midst. Far off and high they circled and circled, the
Coyote cutting more eager pranks than any of the rest. Finally they
returned, dipped themselves again into the spring, and settled on the
slopes of the rocks.

{p. 241}

There, now," cried out the Coyote, with a flutter of his feathery tail,
"I can fly as well as the rest of you.

"Indeed, you do well!" exclaimed the Blackbirds.

"Shall we try it again?"

"Oh, yes! Oh, yes! I'm a little winded," cried the Coyote, "but this is
the best fun I ever had."

The Blackbirds, however, were not satisfied with their companion. They
found him less sedate than a dancer ought to be, and, moreover, his
irregular cuttings-up in the air were not to their taste. So the old
ones whispered to one another: "This fellow is a fool, and we must pluck
him when he gets into the air. We'll fly so far this time that he will
get a little tired out and cry to us for assistance."

The procession formed, and hopity-hop, hopity-hop, down the mountain
slope they went, and with many a flutter and flurry flew off into the
air. The Coyote, unable to restrain himself, even took the lead. On and
on and on they flew, the Blackbirds and the Coyote, and up and up and
up, and they circled round and round, until the Coyote found himself
missing a wing stroke occasionally and falling out of line; and he cried
out: "Help! help, friends, help!"

"All right!" cried the Blackbirds. "Catch hold of his wings; hold him
up!" cried the old ones. And the Blackbirds flew at him; and every time
they caught hold of him (the old fool all the time thinking they were
helping) they plucked out a feather, until at last the feathers had
become so thin that he began to fall, and he fell and fell and

{p. 242}

fell,--flop, flop, flop, he went through the air,--the few feathers left
in his forelegs and sides and the tip of his tail just saving him from
being utterly crushed as he fell with a thud to the ground. He lost his
senses completely, and lay there as if dead for a long time. When he
awoke, he shook his head sadly, and, with a crestfallen countenance and
tail dragging between his legs, betook himself to his home over the
mountains.

The agony of that fall had been so great and the heat of his exertions
so excessive, that the feathers left in his forelegs and tail-tip were
all shrivelled up into little ugly black fringes of hair. His
descendants were many.

Therefore you will often meet coyotes to this day who have little black
fringes along the rear of their forelegs, and the tips of their tails
are often black. Thus it was in the days of the ancients.

Thus shortens my story.

{p. 243}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How The Turtle Out Hunting Duped The Coyote](zft18)
