[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Zuñi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](zft09)  [Next](zft11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BOY HUNTER WHO NEVER SACRIFICED TO THE DEER HE HAD SLAIN:

#### OR THE ORIGIN OF THE SOCIETY OF RATTLESNAKES

In very ancient times, there lived at Tâ'ia,' below the Zuñi Mountains,
an old *shíwani* or priest-chief, who had a young son named
Héasailuhtiwa ("Metal-hand"), famed throughout the land of the Zuñis for
his success in hunting.

When very young, this lad had said to his parents: "My old ones, let me
go away from the home of my fathers and dwell by myself."

"Why do you, a young boy, wish to go and dwell by yourself, my son? Know
you not that you would fare but badly, for you are careless and
forgetful? No, no! remain with us, that we may care for you."

But the boy answered: "Why should I fare badly? Can I not hunt my own
game and roast the meat over the fire? It is because you never care to
have me go forth alone that I wish to live by myself, for I long to
travel far and hunt deer in the mountains of many countries: yet
whenever I start forth you call me back, and it is painful to my longing
thoughts thus to be held back when I would go forward."

It was not until the lad had spoken thus again

\[1. The native name of the Zuñi town of Las Nutrias.\]

{p. 151}

and again, and once more, that the parents sadly yielded to his wish.
They insisted, however, much to the boy's displeasure, that his younger
sister, Waíasialuhtitsa, should go with him, only to look after his
house, and to remind him here and there, at times, of his forgetfulness.
So the brother and sister chose the lofty rooms of a high house in the
upper part of the pueblo and lived there.

The boy each day went out hunting and failed not each time to bring in
slain animals, while the sister cooked for him and looked after the
house. Yet, although the boy was a great hunter, he never sacrificed to
the Deer he had slain, nor to the Gods of Prey who delight in aiding the
hunter who renews them; for the lad was forgetful and careless of all
things.

One day he went forth over the mountain toward the north, until he came
to the Waters of the Bear.\[1\] There he started up a huge Buck, and,
finding the trail, followed it far toward the northward. Yet, although
swift of foot, the youth could not overtake the running Deer, and thus
it happened that he went on and on, past mesas, valleys, and mountains,
until he came to the brink of a great river which flows wcstwardly from
the north.\[2\] On the banks of this great river grew forests of
cottonwood, and into the thickets of these forests led the trail,
straight toward the river bank. just as the young man was about to
follow the track to the

\[1. Aínshik'yanakwin, or Bear Spring, where Fort Wingate now stands.

2\. Probably Green River, or some important tributary of the Colorado
Grande.\]

{p. 152}

bank, he thought he saw under a large tree in the midst of the thickets
the form of the Deer, so, bending very low, he ran around close to the
bank, and came up between the river and the thicket.

As he guardedly approached the tree, his eyes now following the track,
now glancing up, he discovered a richly dressed, handsome young man, who
called out to him: "How art thou these days, and whither art thou
going?"

The young man straightened up, and quickly drawing his breath, replied:
"I am hunting a Deer whose tracks I have followed all the way from the
Waters of the Bear."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the stranger, "and where has thy Deer gone?"

"I know not," replied the youth, "for here are his tracks." Then he
observed that they led to the place where the stranger was sitting, and
the latter at the same time remarked:

"I am the Deer, and it was as I would have it that I enticed thee
hither."

"*Hai-í!*" exclaimed the young man.

"Aye," continued the stranger. "Alas! alas! thou forgetful one! Thou
hast day after day chased my children over the plains and slain them;
thou hast made thyself happy of their flesh, and of their flesh added
unto thine own meat and that of thy kindred; but, alas! thou hast been
forgetful and careless, and not once hast thou given unto their souls
the comfort of that which they yearn for and need. Yet hast thou had
good fortune in the chase. At last the Sun-father

{p. 153}

has listened to the supplications of my children and commanded that I
bring thee here, and here have I brought thee. Listen! The Sun-father
commands that thou shalt visit him in his house at the western end of
the world, and these are his instructions."

"Indeed! Well, I suppose it must be, and it is well!" exclaimed the
young man.

"And," continued the Deer-being, "thou must hasten home and call thy
father. Tell him to summon his *Pithlan Shíwani* (Priest of the Bow, or
Warrior) and command him that he shall instruct his children to repair
to the rooms of sacred things and prepare plumed prayer-sticks for the
Sun-father, the Moon-mother, and the Great Ocean, and red plumes of
sacrifice for the Beings of Prey; that fully they must prepare
everything, for thou, their child and father, shalt visit the home of
the Sun-father, and in payment for thy forgetfulness and carelessness
shalt render him, and the Moon-mother, and the Beings of the Great
Ocean, plumes of sacrifice. Hasten home, and tell thy father these
things. Then tell thy sister to prepare sweetened meal of parched corn
to serve as the food of thy journey, and pollen of the flowers of corn;
and ask thy mother to prepare great quantities of new cotton, and,
making all these things into bundles, thou must summon some of thy
relatives, and come to this tree on the fourth day from this day. Make
haste, for thou art swift of foot, and tell all these things to thy
father; he, will understand thee, for

{p. 154}

is he not a priest-chief? Hast thou knives of flint?"

"Yes," said the young man, "my father has many."

"Select from them two," said the Deer-being--"a large one and a smaller
one; and when thou hast returned to this place, cut down with the larger
knife yonder great tree, and with the smaller knife hollow it out. Leave
the large end entire, and for the smaller end thou must make a round
door, and around the inside of the smaller end cut a notch that shall be
like a terrace toward the outside, but shall slope from within that thou
mayest close it from the inside with the round door; then pad the inside
with cotton, and make in the bottom a padding thicker than the rest; but
leave space that thou mayest lie thy length, or sit up and eat. And in
the top cut a hole larger inside than out, that thou mayest close it
from the inside with a plug of wood. Then when thou hast placed the
sweetened meal of parched corn inside, and the plumed prayer-sticks and
the sacred pollen of corn-flowers, then enter thyself and close the door
in the end and the hole in the top that thy people may roll thee into
the river. Thou wilt meet strange beings on thy way. Choose from amongst
them whom thou shalt have as a companion, and proceed, as thy companion
shall direct, to the great mountain where the Sun enters. Haste and tell
thy father these things." And ere the youth could say, "Be it well,"
and, "I will," the Deer-being had vanished, and he lifted up

{p. 155}

his face and started swiftly for the home of his fathers.

At sunset the sister looked forth from her high house-top, but nowhere
could she see her brother coming. She turned at last to enter, thinking
and saying to her breast: "Alas! what did we not think and guess of his
carelessness." But just as the country was growing dim in the darkness,
the young man ran breathlessly in, and, greeting his sister, sat down in
the doorway.

The sister wondered that he had no deer or other game, but placed a meal
before him, and, when he had done, herself ate. But the young man
remained silent until she had finished, then he said: "Younger sister, I
am weary and would sit here; do you go and call father, for I would
speak to him of many things."

So the sister cleared away the food and ran to summon the father. Soon
she returned with the old man, who, sighing, "*Ha hua!*" from the effort
of climbing, greeted his son and sat down, looking all about the room
for the fresh deer-meat; but, seeing none, he asked: "What and wherefore
hast thou summoned me, my son?"

"It is this," replied the son, and he related all that had been told him
by the Deer-being, describing the magnificent dress, the turquoise and
shell ear-rings, necklaces, and wristlets of the handsome stranger.

"Certainly," replied the father. "It is well; for as the Sun-father hath
directed the Deer-being, thus must it be done."

{p. 156}

Then he forthwith went away and commanded his Priest of the Bow, who,
mounting to the topmost house, directed the elders and priests of the
tribe, saying:

Ye, our children, listen!  
Ye I will this day inform,  
Our child, our father,  
He of the strong hand,  
He who so hunts the Deer,  
Goes unto the Sunset world,  
Goes, our Sun-father to greet  
Gather at the sacred houses,  
Bring thy prayer-sticks, twines, and feathers,  
And prepare for him,  
For the Sun-father,  
For the Moon-mother,  
For the Great Ocean,  
For the Prey-beings, plumes and treasures.  
Hasten, hasten, ye our children, in the morning!"

So the people gathered in the *kiwetsiwe* and sacred houses next morning
and began to make prayer-plumes, while the sister of the young man and
her relatives made sweet parched cornmeal and gathered pollen. Toward
evening all was completed. The young man summoned his relatives, and
chose his four uncles to accompany him. Then he spread enough
cotton-wool out to cover the floor, and, gathering it up, made it into a
small bundle. The sweet meal filled a large sack of buckskin, and he
took also a little sack of sacred red paint and the black warrior paint
with little shining particles in it. Then he bade farewell to his
lamenting people and rested for the evening journey.

{p. 157}

Next morning, escorted by priests, the young man, arrayed in garments of
embroidered white cotton and carrying his plumes in his arms, started
out of the town, and, accompanied only by his four uncles, set out over
the mountains. On the third day they reached the forest on the bank of
the great river and encamped.

Then the young man left the camp of his uncles and went alone into the
forest, and, choosing the greatest tree he could find, hacked midway
through it with his great flint knife. The next day he cut the other
half and felled it, when he found it partly hollow. So with his little
knife he began to cut it as he had been directed, and made the round
door for it and the hole through the top. With his bundle of cotton he
padded it everywhere inside until it was thickly coated and soft, and he
made a bed on the bottom as thick as himself.

When all was ready and he had placed his food and plumes inside, he
called his uncles and showed them the hollow log. "In this," said he, "I
am to journey to the western home of our Sun-father. When I have entered
and closed the round door tightly and put the plug into the upper hole
securely, do ye, never thinking of me, roll the log over and over to the
high brink of the river, and, never regarding consequences, push it into
the water."

Then it was that the uncles all lamented and tried to dissuade him; but
he persisted, and they bade him "Go," as forever, "for," said they,
"could one think of journeying even to the end of

{p. 158}

the earth and across the waters that embrace the world without
perishing?"

Then, hastily embracing each of them, the young man entered his log,
and, securely fastening the door from the inside, and the plug, called
out (they heard but faintly), "*Kesi!*" which means "All is ready."

Sorrowfully and gently they rolled the log over and over to the high
river bank, and, hesitating a moment, pushed it off with anxious eyes
and closed mouths into the river. Eagerly they watched it as it tumbled
end-over-end and down into the water with a great splash, and
disappeared under the waves, which rolled one after another across to
the opposite banks of the river. But for a long time they saw nothing of
it. After a while, far off, speeding on toward the Western Waters of the
World, they saw the log rocking along on the rushing waters until it
passed out of sight, and they sadly turned toward their homes under the
Mountains of the South.

When the log had ceased rocking and plunging, the young man cautiously
drew out the plug, and, finding that no water flowed in, peered out. A
ray of sunlight slanted in, and by that he knew it was not yet midday,
and he could see a round piece of sky and clouds through the hole.
By-and-by the ray of sunlight came straight down, and then after a while
slanted the other way, and finally toward evening it ceased to shine in,
and then the youth took out some of his meal and ate his supper. When
after a while he could see the stars, and later

{p. 159}

the Hanging Lines \[the sword-belt of Orion\], he knew it was time to
rest, so he lay down to sleep.

Thus, day after day, he travelled until he knew he was out on the Great
Waters of the World, for no longer did his log strike against anything
or whirl around, nor could he see, through the chink, leaves of
overhanging trees, nor rocks and banks of earth. On the tenth morning,
when he looked up through the hole, he saw that the clouds did not move,
and wondering at this, kicked at his log, but it would not move. Then he
peered out as far as he could and saw rocks and trees. When he tried to
rock his log, it remained firm, so he determined to open the door at the
end.

Now, in reality, his log had been cast high up on the shore of a great
mountain that rose out of the waters; and this mountain was the home of
the Rattlesnakes. A Rattlesnake maiden was roaming along the shore just
as the young man was about to open the door of his log. She espied the
curious vessel, and said to herself in thought: "What may this be? Ah,
yes, and who? Ah, yes, the mortal who was to come; it must be he!"
Whereupon she hastened to the shore and tapped on the log.

"Art thou come?" she asked.

"Aye," replied the youth. "Who may you be, and where am I?"

"You are landed on the Island of the Rattlesnakes, and I am one of them.
The other side of the mountain here is where our village is. Come out
and go with me, for my old ones have expected you long."

{p. 160}

"Is it dry, surely?" asked the young man.

"Why, yes! Here you are high above the waters."

Thereupon the young man opened from the inside his door, and peered out.
Surely enough, there he was high among the rocks and sands. Then he
looked at the Rattlesnake maiden, and scarcely believed she was what she
called herself, for she was a most beautiful young woman, and like a
daughter of men. Yet around her waist--she was dressed in cotton
mantles--was girt a rattlesnake-skin which was open at the breast and on
the crown of the head.

"Come with me," said the maiden; and she led the way over the mountain
and across to a deep valley, where terrible Serpents writhed and gleamed
in the sunlight so thickly that they seemed, with their hissing and
rattling, like a dry mat shaken by the wind. The youth drew back in
horror, but the maiden said: "Fear not; they will neither harm you nor
frighten you more, for they are my people." Whereupon she commanded them
to fall back and make a pathway for the young man and herself; and they
tamely obeyed her commands. Through the opening thus made they passed
down to a cavern, on entering which they found a great room. There were
great numbers of Rattlesnake people, old and young, gathered in council,
for they knew of the coming of the young man. Around the walls of their
houses were many pegs and racks with serpent skins hanging on
them--skins like the one the young girl wore as a girdle. The elders
arose and greeted the youth, saying: "Our child

{p. 161}

and our father, comest thou, comest thou happily these many days?"

"Aye, happily," replied the youth.

And after a feast of strange food had been placed before the young man,
and he had eaten a little, the elders said to him: "Knowest thou whither
thou goest, that the way is long and fearful, and to mortals unknown,
and that it will be but to meet with poverty that thou journeyest alone?
Therefore have we assembled to await thy coming and in order that thou
shouldst journey preciously, we have decided to ask thee to choose from
amongst us whom thou shalt have for a companion."

"It is well, my fathers," said the young man, and, casting his eyes
about the council to find which face should be kindest to him, he chose
the maiden, and said: "Let it be this one, for she found me and loved me
in that she gently and without fear brought me into your presence."

And the girl said: "It is well, and I will go."

Instantly the grave and dignified elders, the happy-faced youths and
maidens, the kind-eyed matrons, all reached up for their serpent skins,
and, passing them over their persons,--lo! in the time of the telling of
it, the whole place was filled with writhing and hissing Serpents and
the din of their rattles. In horror the young man stood against the wall
like a hollow stalk, and the Serpent maiden, going to each of the
members of the council, extracted from each a single fang, which she
wrapped together in a piece of fabric, until she

{p. 162}

had a great bundle. Then she passed her hand over her person, and lo!
she became a beautiful human maiden again, holding in her hand a
rattlesnake skin. Then taking up the bundle of fangs, she said to the
young man: "Come, for I know the way and will guide you,"--and the young
man followed her to the shore where his log lay.

"Now," said she, "wait while I fix this log anew, that it may be well,"
and she bored many little holes all over the log, and into these holes
she inserted the crooked fangs, so that they all stood slanting toward
the rear, like the spines on the back of a porcupine.

When she had done this, she said: "First I will enter, for there may not
be room for two, and in order that I may make myself like the space I
enter, I will lay on my dress again. Do you, when I have entered, enter
also, and with your feet kick the log down to the shore waters, when you
must quickly close the door and the waters will take us abroad upon
themselves."

In an instant she had passed into her serpent form again and crawled
into the log. The young man did as he was bidden, and as he closed the
door a wave bore them gently out upon the waters. Then, as the young man
turned to look upon his companion coiled so near him, he drew back in
horror.

"Why do you fear?" asked the Rattlesnake.

"I know not, but I fear you; perhaps, though you speak gently, you will,
when I sleep, bite me and devour my flesh, and it is with thoughts of
this that I have fear."

{p. 163}

"Ah, no!" replied the maiden, "but, that you may not fear, I will change
myself." And so saying, she took off her skin, and, opening the upper
part of the door, hung the skin on the fangs outside.

Finally, toward noon-time, the youth prepared his meal food, and placing
some before the maiden, asked her to eat.

"Ah, no! alas, I know not the food of mortals. Have you not with you the
yellow dust of the corn-flower?"

"Aye, that I have," said the young man, and producing a bag, opened it
and asked the girl: "How shall I feed it to you?"

"Scatter it upon the cotton, and by my knowledge I will gather it."

Then the young man scattered a great quantity on the cotton, wondering
how the girl would gather it up. But the maiden opened the door, and
taking down the skin changed herself to a serpent, and passing to and
fro over the pollen, received it all within her scales. Then she resumed
her human form again and hung the skin up as before.

Thus they floated until they came to the great forks of the Mighty
Waters of the World, and their floating log was guided into the southern
branch. And on they floated toward the westward for four months from the
time when the uncles had thrown him into the river.

One day the maiden said to the youth: "We are nearing our journey's end,
and, as I know the way, I will guide you. Hold yourself hard and

{p. 164}

ready, for the waters will cast our house high upon the shores of the
mountain wherein the Sun enters, and these shores are inaccessible
because so smooth."

Then the log was cast high above the slippery bank, and when the waters
receded there it remained, for the fangs grappled it fast.

Then said the maiden: "Let us now go out. Fear not for your craft, for
the fangs will hold it fast; it matters little how high the waves may
roll, or how steep and slippery the bank."

Then, taking in his arms the sacred plumes which his people had prepared
for him, he followed the girl far up to the doorway in the Mountain of
the Sea. Out of it grew a great ladder of giant rushes, by the side of
which stood an enormous basket-tray. Very fast approached the Sun, and
soon the Sun-father descended the ladder, and the two voyagers followed
down. They were gently greeted by a kind old woman, the grandmother of
the Sun, and were given seats at one side of a great and wonderfully
beautiful room.

Then the Sun-father approached some pegs in the wall and from them
suspended his bow and quiver, and his bright sun-shield, and his
wonderful travelling dress Behold! there stood, kindly smiling before
the youth and maiden, the most magnificent and gentle of beings in the
world-the Sun-father.

Then the Sun-father greeted them, and, turning to a great package which
he had brought in, opened it and disclosed thousands of shell beads, red
and

{p. 165}

white, and thousands more of brilliant turquoises. These he poured into
the great tray at the door-side, and gave them to the grandmother, who
forthwith began to sort them with great rapidity. But, ere she had done,
the Sun-father took them from her; part of them he took out with
unerring judgment and cast them abroad into the great waters as we cast
sacred prayer-meal. The others he brought below and gave them to the
grandmother for safe-keeping.

Then he turned once more to the youth and the maiden, and said to the
former: "So thou hast come, my child, even as I commanded. It is well,
and I am thankful." Then, in a stern and louder voice, which yet sounded
like the voice of a father, he asked: "Hast thou brought with thee that
whereby we are made happy with our children?"

And the young man said: "Aye, I have."

"It is well; and if it be well, then shalt thou precious be; for knowest
thou not that I recognize the really good from the evil,--even of the
thoughts of men,--and that I know the prayer and sacrifice that is
meant, from the words and treasures of those who do but lie in
addressing them to me, and speak and act as children in a joke? Behold
the treasure which I brought with me from the cities of mankind today!
Some of them I cherished preciously, for they are the gifts to me of
good hearts and I treasure them that I may return them in good fortune
and blessing to those who gave them. But some thou sawest I cast abroad
into the great waters that they may again be gathered up and

{p. 166}

presented to me; for they were the gifts of double and foolish hearts,
and as such cannot be treasured by me nor returned unto those who gave
them. Bring forth, my child, the plumes and gifts thou hast brought. Thy
mother dwelleth in the next room, and when she appeareth in this, thou
shalt with thine own hand present to her thy sacrifice."

So the youth, bowing his head, unwrapped his bundle and laid before the
Sun-father the plumes he had brought. And the Sun-father took them and
breathed upon them and upon the youth, and said: "Thanks, this day. Thou
hast straightened thy crooked thoughts."

And when the beautiful Mother of Men, the Moon-mother--the wife of the
Sun-father--appeared, the boy placed before her the plumes he had
brought, and she, too, breathed upon them, and said: "Thanks, this day,"
even as the Sun-father had.

Then the Sun-father turned to the youth and said: "Thou shalt join me in
my journey round the world, that thou mayest see the towns and nations
of mankind--my children; that thou mayest realize how many are my
children. Four days shalt thou join me in my journeyings, and then shalt
thou return to the home of thy fathers."

And the young man said: "It is well!" but he turned his eyes to the
maiden.

"Fear not, my child," added the Father, "she shall sit preciously in my
house until we have returned."

And after they had feasted, the Sun-father again enrobed himself, and
the youth he dressed

{p. 167}

in appearance as he himself was dressed. Then, taking the sun-dress from
the wall, he led the way down through the four great apartments of the
world, and came out into the Lower Country of the Earth.

Behold! as they entered that great world, it was filled with snow and
cold below, and the tracks of men led out over great white plains, and
as they passed the cities of these nether countries people strange to
see were clearing away the snow from their housetops and doorways.

And so they journeyed to the other House of the Sun, and, passing up
through the four great rooms, entered the home of the aunts of the
Sun-father; and here, too, the young man presented plumes of prayer and
sacrifice to the inmates, and received their thanks and blessings.

Again they started together on their journey; and behold! as they came
out into the World of Daylight, the skies below them were filled with
the rain of summer-time.

Across the great world they journeyed, and they saw city after city of
men, and many tribes of strange peoples. Here they were engaged in wars
and in wasting the lives of one another; there they were dying of famine
and disease; and more of misery and poverty than of happiness saw the
young man among the nations of men. "For," said the Sun-father, "these
be, alas! my children, who waste their lives in foolishness, or slay one
another in useless anger; yet they are brothers to one another, and I am
the father of all."

{p. 168}

Thus journeyed they four days; and each evening when they returned to
the home where the Sun-father enters, he gave to his grandmother the
great package of treasure which his children among men had sacrificed to
him, and each day he cast the treasures of the bad and double-hearted
into the great waters.

On the fourth day, when they had entered the western home of the
Sun-father, said the latter to the youth: "Thy task is meted out and
finished; thou shalt now return unto the home of thy fathers--my
children below the mountains of Shíwina. How many days, thinkest thou,
shalt thou journey?"

"Many days more than ten," replied the youth with a sigh.

"Ah! no, my child," said the Sun-father. "Listen; thou shalt in one day
reach the banks of the river whence thou camest. Listen! Thou shalt take
this, my shaft of strong lightning; thou shalt grasp its neck with firm
hands, and as thou extendest it, it will stretch out far to thy front
and draw thee more swiftly than the arrow's flight through the water.
Take with thee this quiver of unerring arrows, and this strong bow, that
by their will thou mayest seek life; but forget not thy sacrifices nor
that they are to be made with true word and a faithful heart. Take also
with thee thy guide and companion, the Rattlesnake maiden. When thou
hast arrived at the shore of the country of her people, let go the
lightning, and it will land thee high. On the morrow I will journey
slowly, that ere I be done rising thou mayest reach the

{p. 169}

home of the maiden. There thou must stop but briefly, for thy fathers,
the Rattle-tailed Serpents, will instruct thee, and to their counsel
thou must pay strict heed, for thus only will it be well. Thou shalt
present to them the plumes of the Prey-beings thou bringest, and when
thou hast presented these, thou must continue thy journey. Rest thou
until the morrow, and early as the light speed hence toward the home of
thy fathers. May all days find ye, children, happy." With this, the
Sun-father, scarce listening to the prayers and thanks of the youth and
maiden, vanished below.

Thus, when morning approached, the youth and the maiden entered the
hollow house and closed it. Scarce did the youth grasp the lightning
when, drawn by the bright shaft, the log shot far out into the great
waters and was skimming, too fast to be seen, toward the home of the
Rattle-tailed Serpents.

And the Sun had but just climbed above the mountains of this world of
daylight when the little tube was thrown high above the banks of the
great island whither they were journeying.

Then the youth and the maiden again entered the council of the
Rattlesnakes, and when they saw the shining black paint on his face they
asked that they too might paint their faces like his own; but they
painted their cheeks awkwardly, as to this day may be seen; for all
rattlesnakes are painted unevenly in the face. Then the young man
presented to each the plumes he had brought, and told the elders that he
would return with their maiden to the home of his father.

{p. 170}

"Be it well, that it may be well," they replied; and they thanked him
with delight for the treasure-plumes he had bestowed upon them.

"Go ye happily all days," said the elders. "Listen, child, and father,
to our words of advice. But a little while, and thou wilt reach the bank
whence thou started. Let go the shaft of lightning, and, behold, the
tube thou hast journeyed with will plunge far down into the river. Then
shalt thou journey with this our maiden three days. Care not to embrace
her, for if thou doest this, it will not be well. journey ye preciously,
our children, and may ye be happy one with the other."

So again they entered their hollow log and, before entering, the maiden
placed her rattlesnake skin as before on the fangs. With incredible
swiftness the lightning drew them up the great surging river to the
banks where the cottonwood forests grow, and when the lad pressed the
shaft it landed them high among the forest trees above the steep bank.
Then the youth pressed the lightning-shaft with all his might, and the
log was dashed into the great river. While yet he gazed at the bounding
log, behold! the fangs which the maiden had fixed into it turned to
living serpents; hence today, throughout the whole great world, from the
Land of Summer to the Waters of Sunset, are found the Rattlesnakes and
their children.

Then the young man journeyed with the maiden southward; and on the way,
with the bow and arrows the Sun-father had given him, he killed game,

{p. 171}

that they might have meat to eat. Nor did he forget the commandments of
his Sun-father. At night he built a fire in a forest of piñons, and made
a bower for the maiden near to it; but she could not sit there, for she
feared the fire, and its light pained her eyes. Nor could she eat at
first of the food he cooked for her, but only tasted a few mouthfuls of
it. Then the young man made a bed for her under the trees, and told her
to rest peacefully, for he would guard her through the night.

And thus they journeyed and rested until the fourth day, when at evening
they entered the town under the mountains of Shíwina and were happily
welcomed by the father, sister, and relatives of the young man. Blessed
by the old priest-chief, the youth and the maiden dwelt with the younger
sister Waíasialuhtitsa, in the high house of the upper part of the town.
And the boy was as before a mighty hunter, and the maiden at last grew
used to the food and ways of mortals.

After they had thus lived together for a long time, there were born of
the maiden two children, twins.

Wonderful to relate, these children grew to the power of wandering, in a
single day and night; and hence, when they appeared suddenly on the
housetops and in the plazas, people said to one another:

"Who are these strange people, and whence came they?"--and talked much
after the manner of our foolish people. And the other little children in
the town beat them and quarrelled with them,

{p. 172}

as strange children are apt to do with strange children.. And when the
twins ran in to their mother, crying and complaining, the poor young
woman was saddened; so she said to the father when he returned from
hunting in the evening:

"Ah!, 'their father,' it is not well that we remain longer here. No,
alas! I must return to the country of my fathers, and take with me these
little ones," and, although the father prayed her not, she said only:
"It must be," and he was forced to consent.

Then for four days the Rattlesnake woman instructed him in the prayers
and chants of her people, and she took him forth and showed him the
medicines whereby the bite of her fathers might be assuaged, and how to
prepare them. Again and again the young man urged her not to leave him,
saying: "The way is long and filled with dangers. How, alas! will you
reach it in safety?"

"Fear not," said she: "go with me only to the shore of the great river,
and my fathers will come to meet me and take me home."

Sadly, on the last morning, the father accompanied his wife and children
to the forests of the great river. There she said he must not follow but
as he embraced them he cried out:

"Ah, alas! my beautiful wife, my beloved children, flesh of my flesh,
how shall I not follow ye?"

Then his wife answered: "Fear not, nor trouble thyself with sad
thoughts. Whither we go thou

{p. 173}

canst not follow, for thou eatest cooked food (thou art a mortal); but
soon thy fathers and mine will come for thee, and thou wilt follow us,
never to return." Then she turned from him with the little children and
was seen no more, and the young man silently returned to his home below
the mountains of Shíwina.

It happened here and there in time that young men of his tribe were
bitten by rattlesnakes; but the young man had only to suck their wounds,
and apply his medicines, and sing his incantations and prayers, to cure
them. Whenever this happened, he breathed the sacred breath upon them,
and enjoined them to secrecy of the rituals and chants he taught them,
save only to such as they should choose and teach the practice of their
prayers.

Thus he had cured and taught eight, when one day he ascended the
mountains for wood. There, alone in the forest, he was met and bitten by
his fathers. Although he slowly and painfully crawled home, long ere he
reached his town he was so swollen that the eight whom he had instructed
tried in vain to cure him, and, bidding them cherish as a precious gift
the knowledge of his beloved wife, he died.

Immediately his fathers met his breath and being and took them to the
home of the Maiden of the Rattlesnakes and of his lost children. Need we
ask why he was not cured by his disciples?

Thus it was in the days of the ancients, and hence today we have fathers
amongst us to whom

{p. 174}

the dread bite of the rattlesnake need cause no sad thoughts,--the *Tchi
Kialikwe* (Society of the Rattlesnakes).

Thus much and thus shortened is my story.

{p. 175}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Áhaiyúta And Mátsailéma Stole The Thunder-Stone And The
Lightning-Shaft](zft11.md)
