[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Zuñi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](zft21)  [Next](zft23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HOW THE GOPHER RACED WITH THE RUNNERS OF K'IÁKIME

There was a time in the days of the ancients when the runners of
K'iákime were famed above those of all other cities in the Valley of
Shíwina for their strength, endurance, and swiftness of foot. In running
the *tikwa*, or kicked-stick race, they overcame, one after another, the
runners of Shíwina or Zuñi, of Mátsaki or the Salt City, of Pínawa or
the Town of the Winds, and in fact all who dared to challenge them or to
accept their challenges.

The people of Shíwina and Mátsaki did not give up easily. They ran again
and again, only to be beaten and to lose the vast piles of goods and
precious things which they had staked or bet; and at last they were
wholly disheartened and bereft of everything which without shame a man
might exhibit for betting.

So the people of the two towns called a council, and the old men and
runners gathered and discussed what could be done that the runners of
K'iákime might be overcome. They thought of all the wise men and wise
beings they knew of; one after another of them was mentioned, and at
last a few prevailed in contending that for both wisdom and cunning or
craft the Gopher took precedence over all those who had been mentioned.
Forthwith a young man was dispatched to find an

{p. 278}

old Gopher who lived on the side of the hill near which the race-course
began.

He was out sunning himself, and finishing a cellar, when the young man
approached him, and he called out: "Ha, grandson! Don't bother me this
morning; I am busy digging my cellars."

The young man insisted that he came with an important message from his
people. So the old Gopher ceased his work, and listened attentively
while the young man related to him the difficulties they were in.

Said he: "Go back, my grandson, and tell your people to challenge the
runners of K'iákime to run the race of the kicked stick with a runner
whom they have chosen, a single one, the fourth day from this day; and
tell your people, moreover, that I will run the race for them, providing
only that the runners of K'iákime will permit me to go my own way, on my
own road, which as you know runs underground."

The youth thanked the old Gopher and was about to retire when the
fat-sided, heavy-cheeked old fellow called to him to hold on a little.
"Mind you," said he. "Tell your people also that they shall bet for me
only two things--red paint and sacred yellow pollen. These shall, as it
were, be the payment for my exertions, if I win, as I prize this sort of
possession above all else."

The young man returned and reported what the Gopher had said. Thereupon
the people of Shíwina and Mátsaki sent a challenge to the people of
K'iákime for a race, saying: "We bet all that we

{p. 279}

have against what you have won from us from time to time that our
runner, the Gopher, who lives beside the beginning of our race-course,
will beat you in the race, which we propose shall be the fourth day from
this day. The only condition we name is, that the Gopher shall be
permitted to run in his own way, on his own road, which is underground."

Right glad were the runners of K'iákime to run against anyone proposed
by those whom they had so often beaten. They hesitated not a moment in
replying that they would run against the Gopher or any other friend of
the people of Mátsaki and Shíwina, stipulating only that the Gopher, if
he ran underground, should appear at the surface occasionally, that they
might know where he was. So it was arranged, and the acceptance of the
challenge was reported to the Gopher, and the stipulation also which was
named by the runners of K'iákime.

That night the old Gopher went to his younger brother, old like himself,
heavy-cheeked, gray-and-brown-coated, and dusty with diggings of his
cellars. "My younger brother," said the old Gopher, "the fourth day from
this day I am to run a race. I shall start at the beginning of the
race-course of the people of K'iákime over here, which is near my home,
as you know. There I shall dig two holes; one at the beginning of the
race-course, the other a little farther on. Now, here at your home, near
the Place of the Scratching Bushes, do you dig a hole, down below where
the race-course passes your place, off to one side of it, and another
hole a

{p. 280}

little beyond the first. The means by which I shall be distinguished as
a racer will be a red plume tied to my head. Do you also procure a red
plume and tie it to your head. When you hear the thundering of the feet
of the racers, run out and show yourself for a minute, and rush into the
other hole as fast as you can."

"I understand what you would have of me, and right gladly will I do it.
It would please me exceedingly to take down the pride of those haughty
runners of K'iákime, or at least to help in doing it," replied the
younger brother.

The old Gopher went on to the Sitting Space of the Red Shell, where
dwelt another of his younger brothers precisely like himself and the one
he had already spoken to, near whose home the race-course also ran. To
him he communicated the same information, and gave the same directions.
Then he went on still farther to the place called K'ópak'yan, where
dwelt another of his younger brothers. To him also he gave the same
directions; and to still another younger brother, who dwelt beneath the
base of the two broad pillars of Thunder Mountain, at the last
turning-point of the race-course; and to another brother, who dwelt at
the Place of the Burnt Log; and lastly to another brother quite as
cunning and inventive as himself, who dwelt just below K'iákime where
the racecourse turned toward its end. When all these arrangements had
been made, the old Gopher went back and settled himself comfortably in
his nest.

{p. 281}

Bright and early on the fourth day preparations were made for the race.
The runners of K'iákime had been fasting and training in the sacred
houses, and they came forth stripped and begirt for the racing, carrying
their stick. Then came the people of Mátsaki and Shíwina, who gathered
on the plain, and there they waited. But they waited not long, for soon
the old Gopher appeared close in their midst, popping out of the ground,
and on his head was a little red plume. He placed the stick which had
been prepared for him, on the ground, where he could grab it with his
teeth easily, saying: "Of course, you will excuse me if I do not kick my
stick, since my feet are so short that I could not do so. On the other
hand," he said to the runners, "you do not have to dig your way as I do.
Therefore, we are evenly matched."

The runners of K'iákime, contemptuously laughing, asked him why he did
not ask for some privilege instead of talking about things which meant
nothing to them.

At last the word was given. With a yell and a spring, off dashed the
racers of K'iákime, gaily kicking their stick before them. Grabbing his
stick in his teeth, into the ground plunged the old Gopher. Fearful lest
their runner should be beaten, the people of Shíwina and Mátsaki ran to
a neighboring hill, watching breathlessly for him to appear somewhere in
the course of the race above the plain. Away over the plain in a cloud
of dust swept the runners of K'iákime. They were already far off, when
suddenly, some distance before them,

{p. 282}

out of the ground in the midst of the race-course, popped the old
Gopher, to all appearance, the red plume dusty, but waving proudly on
his forehead. After looking round at the runners, into the ground he
plunged again. The people of Shíwina and Mátsaki yelled their applause.
The runners of K'iákime, astounded that the Gopher should be ahead of
them, redoubled their efforts. When they came near the Place of the Red
Shell, behold! somewhat muddy round the eyes and nose, out popped the
old Gopher again, to all appearance. Of course it was his brother, the
red plume somewhat heavy with dirt, but still waving on his forehead.

On rushed the runners, and they had no sooner neared K'ópak'yan than
again they saw the Gopher in advance of them, now apparently covered
with sweat,--for this cunning brother had provided himself with a little
water which he rubbed over his fur and made it all muddy, as though he
were perspiring and had already begun to grow tired. He came out of his
hole and popped into the other less quickly than the others had done;
and the runners, who were not far behind him, raised a great shout and
pushed ahead. When they thought they had gained on him, behold! in their
pathway, all bedraggled with mud, apparently the same old Gopher
appeared, moving with some difficulty, and then disappeared under the
ground again. And so on, the runners kept seeing the Gopher at
intervals, each time a little worse off than before, until they came to
the last turning-place; and just as they

{p. 283}

reached it, almost in their midst appeared the most bedraggled and worn
out of all the Gophers. They, seeing the red plume on his crest, almost
obscured by mud and all flattened out, regarded him as surely the same
old Gopher.

Finally, the original old Gopher, who had been quietly sleeping
meanwhile, roused himself, and besoaking himself from the tip of his
nose to the end of his short tail, wallowed about in the dirt until he
was well plastered with mud, half closing his eyes, and crawled out
before the astonished multitude at the end of the goal, a sorry-looking
object indeed, far ahead of the runners, who were rapidly approaching. A
great shout was raised by those who were present, and the runners of
K'iákime for the first time lost all of their winnings, and had the
swiftness, or at least all their confidence, taken out of them, as doth
the wind lose its swiftness when its legs are broken.

Thus it was in the days of the ancients. By the skill and cunning of the
Gopher--who, by digging his many holes and pitfalls, is the opponent of
all runners, great and small--was the race won against the swiftest
runners among the youth of our ancients. Therefore, to this day the
young runners of Zuñi, on going forth to prepare for a race, take with
them the sacred yellow pollen and red paint; and they make for the
gophers, round about the race-course in the country, beautiful little
plumes, and they speak to them speeches in prayer, saying: "Behold, O ye
Gophers of the plains and the

{p. 284}

trails, we race! And that we may have thy aid, we give ye these things,
which are unto ye and your kind most precious, that ye will cause to
fall into your holes and crannies and be hidden away in the dark and the
dirt the sticks that are kicked by our opponents."

Thus shortens my story.

{p. 285}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How The Rattlesnakes Came To Be What They Are](zft23)
