[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Zuñi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](zft20)  [Next](zft22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE PRAIRIE-DOGS AND THEIR PRIEST, THE BURROWING-OWL

Once, long, long ago, there stood in Prairie-dog Land a large
Prairie-dog village. Prairie-dog Land is south of Zuñi, beyond Grease
Mountain; and in the middle of that country, which is one of our smaller
meadows, stands a mountain, which is a little mound. All round about the
base of this mountain were the sky-holes and door-mounds and pathways of
the grandfathers of the Prairie-dogs. In the very top of the mount was
the house of an old Burrowing-owl and his wife.

One summer it rained and it rained and it rained, so that the fine
fields of *mitäliko* (wild portulaca) were kept constantly fresh, and
the Prairie-dogs had unfailing supplies of this, their favorite food.
They became fat and happy, and gloried in the rain-storms that had
produced such an abundant harvest for them. But still it kept raining,
until by-and-by, when they descended to their fields of *mitäliko*, they
found their feet were wet, which they did not like any more than
Prairie-dogs like it today.

Now, you know that in some parts of the meadow of Prairie-dog Land are
little hollows, in which the water collects when it rains hard. Just in
these places were the fields of *mitäliko*. And still it rained and
rained, until finally only the tops of the plants appeared above the
waters.

{p. 270}

Then the Prairie-dogs began to curse the rain and to fall off in flesh,
for they could no longer go to the fields to collect food, and the
stores in their granaries were running low. At last they grew very
hungry and lean and could hardly get about, for it rained and rained day
after day, so that they dare not go away from their holes, and their
stores were all gone.

The old ones among the Prairie-dogs, the grandfathers, called a great
council; three or four of them came out of their houses, stood up on the
mounds in front of their sky-holes, and called out "*Wek wek,--wek
wek,--wek wek,--wek wek!*" in shrill, squeaky voices, so that the women
and children in the holes round about exclaimed: "Goodness, gracious!
the old ones are calling a council!" And everybody trooped to the
council, which was gathered round the base of the Burrowing-owl's
mountain.

---Now," said the chief spokesman or counsellor, "you see those wretched
rainers keep dropping water until our fields of *mitäliko* are flooded.
They ought to know that we are short of leg, and that we can't go into
the lakes to gather food, and here we are starving. Our women are dying,
our children are crying, and we can scarcely go from door to door. Now,
what is to be done? How can we stop the rain?--that is the question."

They talked and talked; they devised many plans, which were considered
futile, most of them having been tried already. At last a wise old
gray-cheeked fellow suggested that it would be well to

{p. 271}

apply to their grandfather, the Burrowing-owl, who lived in the top of
the mountain.

"Hear! hear!" cried the council in one voice,--whereupon the old man who
had spoken was chosen as messenger to the Burrowing-owl.

He climbed to the top of the mountain, with many a rest, and at last got
near the doorway, and sitting down at a respectful distance, raised
himself on his haunches, folded his hands across his breast, then cried
out: "*Wek wek,--wek wek!*"

The old grandfather Burrowing-owl, not in very good humor, stepped out,
blinking his eyes and asked what was the matter. He said: "It isn't your
custom to come up to my house and make such a racket, though true enough
it is that I hear your rackets down below. It cannot be for nothing that
you come; therefore, what is your message?

"My grandfather," said the Prairie-dog, "in council we have considered
how to stop the irrepressible rainers; but all of our efforts and
devices are quite futile, so that we are forced to apply to you."

"Ah, indeed," said the old Owl, scratching the corner of his eye with
his claw. "Go down home, and I will see what I can do tomorrow morning.
As you all know very well, I am a priest. I will set aside four days for
fasting and meditation and sacred labors. Please await the result."

The old Prairie-dog humbly bade him farewell and departed for his
village below.

Next morning the Burrowing-owl said to his

{p. 272}

wife: "Put on a large quantity of beans, my old one, and cook them
well,--small beans, of the kind that smell not pleasantly." He then bade
her "Good morning," and left. He went about for a long time, hunting at
the roots of bushes. At last he found one of those ill-smelling Beetles,
with its head stuck way down in the midst of the roots. He grabbed him
up, notwithstanding the poor creature's remonstrances, and took him
home.

When he arrived there, said he: "My friend, it seems to me you are
making a great fuss about this thing, but I am not going to hurt you,
except in one way,--by the presentation to you of all the food you can
eat."

"Bless me!" said the Tip-beetle, bobbing his head down into the ground
and rearing himself into the air. Then he sat down quite relieved and
contented.

"Old woman," said the Burrowing-owl, "lay out a dish of the beans on the
floor." The wife complied. "My friend," said the Burrowing-owl to the
Tip-beetle, "fall to and satisfy yourself."

The Tip-beetle, with another tip, sat down before the bowl of beans. He
ate, and swallowed, and gulped until he had entirely emptied the dish,
and began to grow rather full of girth.

"Not yet satisfied?" asked the Owl. Old woman, lay out another bowl."

Another large bowl of the bean soup was placed before the Tip-beetle,
who likewise gulped and gulped at this, and at last diminished it to
nothing. Now, the Tip-beetle by this time looked like a

{p. 273}

well-blown-up paunch. Still, when the old Owl remarked "Is there left of
your capacity?" he replied: "Somewhat; by the favor of a little more, I
think I shall be satisfied."

"Old woman," said the Owl, "a little more."

The old woman placed another bowl before the Tip-beetle; and he ate and
ate, and swallowed and swallowed, and gulped and sputtered; but with all
the standing up and wiggling of his head that he could do he could not
finish the bowl; and at last, wiping the perspiration from his brow, he
exclaimed: "Thanks, thanks, I am satisfied."

"Ha, indeed!" said the Owl. Both the old woman and the Tip-beetle had
noticed, while the feast was going on, that the Owl had cut out a
good-sized round piece of buckskin, and he was running a thread round
about the edge of it, leaving two strings at either side, like the
strings with which one draws together a pouch. Just as the Tip-beetle
returned his thanks the old Owl had finished his work.

"My friend," said he, turning to the Tip-beetle, "you have feasted to
satisfaction, and it appears to me by your motions that you are
exceedingly uncomfortable, being larger of girth than is safe and well
for a Tip-beetle. Perhaps you are not aware that one who eats freely of
bean soup is likely to grow still larger. I would advise you, therefore,
when I lay this pouch on the floor, with the mouth of it toward you, to
run your head into it and exhale as much wind as possible; and to
facilitate this I will squeeze you slightly."

{p. 274}

The Tip-beetle was not very well pleased with the proposition; still he
by no means refused to comply.

"You see," continued the Owl, "you are at once to be relieved of the
serious consequences of your gluttony, while at the same time paying for
your food."

"Now, this is an excellent idea, upon my word," replied the Tip-beetle,
and forthwith he thrust himself into the bag. The old Owl embraced the
Tip-beetle and gently squeezed him, increasing the pressure as time went
on, until a large amount of his girth had been diminished; but behold!
the girth of the bag was swelled until it was so full with struggling
wind that it could hardly be tied up

Outside, the rain was rattling, rattling.

Said the old Owl to the Tip-beetle: "My friend, if you do not mind the
rain, which I dare say you do not, you may now return to your home. Many
thanks for your assistance."

The Tip-beetle, likewise with expression of thanks, took his departure.

When the morning of the fourth day came, and the rain still continued,
in fact increased, the old Owl took the bag of wind out to the mount
before his doorway.

Now, you know that if one goes near a Tip-beetle and disturbs him, that
Tip-beetle will rear himself on his hands and head and disgorge breath
of so pungent a nature that nobody can withstand it. Woe to the nose of
that man who is in the neighborhood! It will be so seared with this
over-powering odor

{p. 275}

that it cannot sneeze, though desiring never so much to do so. You know,
also, if you touch a Tip-beetle who is angry, all the good water in Zuñi
River will not remove from your fingers the memory of that Beetle,
whenever you chance to smell of them. And you know, also, how small
stewed beans with thick skins affect one. Conceive, then, the power of
the medicine contained in that little bag.

The old Owl, taking up a stick, hit the bag one whack. The clouds,
before so thick, glaring with lightning, trembling and swirling with
thunder, now began to thin out in the zenith and depart, and the
sunlight sifted through. The Owl hit the bag another stroke,--behold,
afar off scudded the clouds as before a fierce blast. Again the old Owl
hit the bag. The clouds were resting on the far away mountain-tops
before he had lowered his stick. Then, with one mighty effort, he gave
the bag a final whack, wholly emptying it of its contents, and the sky
was as clear as it is on a summer's day in the noon-time of a drought.
So potent was this all-penetrating and irresistible odor, that even the
Rain-gods themselves could not withstand it, and withdrew their forces
and retired before it.

Out from their holes trooped the Prairie-dogs, and sitting up on their
haunches all round about the mountain, they shouted at the tops of their
shrill voices, "*Wek wek,--wek wek,--wek wek!*" in praise of their great
priest, the Grandfather Burrowing-owl.

Behold, thus it was in the days of the ancients.

{p. 276}

And for that reason prairie-dogs and burrowing-owls have always been
great friends. And the burrowing-owls consider no place in the world
quite so appropriate for the bringing forth, hatching, and rearing of
their children as the holes of the prairie-dogs.

Thus shortens my story.

{p. 277}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How The Gopher Raced With The Runners Of K'iákime](zft22)
