[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app02)  [Next](app04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# ANCILLA TO

# THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

### 1. ORPHEUS

<span class="smallcaps">Orpheus</span> lived probably in Thrace, in
pre-Homeric times. Aristotle believed that he never existed; but to
other ancient writers he was a real person, though living in remote
antiquity.

Nothing is known of any ancient Orphic writings. It was believed that
Orpheus taught, but left no writings, and that the epic poetry
attributed to him was written in the sixth century by Onomacritus.

The Orphic literature current in the time of the Neo-Platonists (third
century A.D.) is now thought to be a collection of writings of different
periods and varying outlook, dating from the sixth century B.C. to the
beginning of the Christian era.

A large number of titles survive. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

There are also a number of gold plates from tombs, and a few papyrus
fragments, which give Orphic instruction to the dead.

1\. (<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>, *Philebus* 66C): In the sixth
generation, cease the ordered arrangement of your song!

2\. (<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>, *Cratylus* 402B, C): Ocean,
fair-flowing, first began marriage, he who married his full sister on
the mother's side, Tethys.

3\. (*ib*. 400B, C: *The Orphics explained the name 'sôma' for the body
with reference to the verb 'sôzesthai', to keep safe or guard, the
simile being that of a prison*).

4 (<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>, *Republic* 363C: *Orphic
doctrine on rewards and punishments in the next world, ascribed to
'Musaeus and his son': the just are given a life of feasting and
everlasting drunkenness, and some say they shall leave children and
grandchildren behind; the unjust are plunged into mud or made to carry
water in sieves*).

5\. (*ib*. 364E: *The Orphic books give instruction on purification,
both private and communal, by means of sacrifice both for the living and
the dead. These they call 'Teletai', 'rites of initiation', which if
performed will save us from hurt in the next world, whereas if we fail
to perform them, dire pains await us*).

5a. (<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>, Laws 669D: *on incompatible
elements in music. Poets who mixed up such elements in their
compositions would* 

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

*provoke the laughter of all men who, as Orpheus says) have come to the
time of enjoyment*.

6\. (*ib*. 715E: *as the ancient saying goes*) God holds the beginning
and end, and the middle of all existing things.

6a. (*ib*. 829D: *Nobody is to sing a song not approved by the
Guardians, not even if it be sweeter than the hymns of Thamyrus and
Orpheus*).

7\. (<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>, *Symposium* 218B: *Alcibiades
bids the uninitiated depart. Cp. the Orphic command*): Ye uninitiated,
close the doors!

8\. (<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>, *Timaeus* 40D: *the
'descendants of the gods', as the Orphics* <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) *call themselves, give the following account
of the origin of the other gods*): The children of Earth and Heaven were
Ocean and Tethys, and from these came Phorcys, Cronos and Rhea, and
their contemporaries; and from Cronos and Rhea came Zeus and Hera and
all those whom we know, said to be their brothers and sisters, and
others still, their offspring.

9\. (<span class="smallcaps">Aristotle</span>, *Metaphysics* 1071b;
1091b: *The Theologoi generate all things from Night. The ancient poets
agree that the Ruler is not Night and Heaven or Chaos or Ocean, but
Zeus*).

10\. (*ib*. 983B: *the ancient Theologoi made Ocean and Tethys the
parents of Creation, and the oath of the gods in Water, or Styx as they
called it*).

10a. (<span class="smallcaps">Aristotle</span>, *de gen. anim.* 734a:
*The so-called epic poems of Orpheus say that the various organs—heart,
lungs, liver, eyes, etc.—were formed successively: for he says therein
that the animals come into being in the same way as a net is woven*).

11\. (<span class="smallcaps">Aristotle</span>, *de anima*, 410b:
*Discussion on whether all living things, including plants, have Soul:
in the so-called Orphic poems, the poet says that Soul is borne along by
the winds, and enters from the Whole when the creatures inhale*).

12\. (<span class="smallcaps">Damascius</span>: *The Theologia in
Eudemus, attributed to Orpheus, says nothing about the Intelligible. He
gave Night as the original Element. In the current Orphic Rhapsôdiae,
the theology concerning the Intelligible is roughly as follows: for the
One original Element, Time; for the Two, Aether and Chaos; and in the
place* 

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

*of Being, the Egg; this triad come first. At the second stage comes
either the Egg Fertilised, as God, or the Bright Robe, or the Cloud;
from these comes Phanês. At the third stage come Mêtis as Intellect,
Erikepaios as Power, Phanês as Father*.

(<span class="smallcaps">Achilles</span>: *The Orphics say that the
Sphere is like an Egg, the vault of Heaven being the shell, and the
Aether the skin*).

13\. (<span class="smallcaps">Damascius</span>: *The Orphic theogony
given in Hieronymus and Hellanicus is not the same: it gives the first
two elements as Water and Earth. The third Element was begotten of these
two, and was a serpent having the heads of a bull and a lion with the
face of a god in between; it had wings, and was called Ageless Time, or
Unchanging Heracles. With him was united Necessity or Adrasteia, an
element having no body, and spread over the whole universe, fastening it
together. Time, the serpent, produced a three fold offspring: Aether,
Chaos and Erebus; in these, Time begat the Egg. At the third stage came
a god without body, with golden wings, and bulls’ heads on his flanks,
and on his head a huge changing serpent. This theogony sings of
Prôtogonos (First-born), and calls Zeus the Marshaller of All Things*).

(<span class="smallcaps">Athenagoras</span>: *Orpheus was the first
theologian. He gave Water as the beginning of the Whole; from Water came
Mud, and from both came a serpent, Heracles or Time. This Heracles
produced a huge Egg, which split into two, forming Gê (Earth) and
Ouranos (Heaven). Heaven united with Earth and produced the female
Fates, and the male Giants and Cyclôpês. Ouranos flung the males into
Tartarus, whereat Earth in anger produced the Titans*):

Lady Earth produced the sons of Ouranos, who are also called
Titans, <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) because they have been
punished by great starry Ouranos.

14\. (<span class="smallcaps">Ps.-Demosthenes</span>: *Implacable and
reverend Justice, which Orpheus, who revealed to us the most holy rites,
says is seated beside the throne of Zeus and looks upon all mortal
happenings*).

Is. (<span class="smallcaps">Marmor Parium</span>: *From the time when*
. . . <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) *son published his poem, the
Rape of Persephone and the search of Demeter and the gift of corn to
men*).

(<span class="smallcaps">Orphic Argonautica</span>: *The wandering of
Demeter, her sorrow for Persephone, and her lawgiving*).

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

15a. (*Berlin Papyrus: paraphrase of an Orphic version of the Hymn to
Demeter*):

*Orpheus was the son of Oiagros and the Muse Calliopê; and the Lord of
the Muses, Apollo, nodded towards him so that he became inspired and
wrote his Hymns, which to a slight extent Musaeus corrected and wrote
down, and he gave the sacred rites (orgies) of Orpheus to be revered by
Greeks and barbarians, being deeply concerned with rites, purifications
and oracles. The goddess Demeter . . . whom Orpheus gave as the sister
of Zeus, others as the mother. There is no need to recall these things
to the recollection of the pious*.

(<span class="smallcaps">Homer's</span> *Hymn to Demeter*, 418, 420-3
*follow*.)

*(After the Rape of Persephone) Demeter mourns for her daughter.
Calliope and Cleisidicê and Dêmonassa having come with the queen to get
water, inquire of Demeter as if she were a mortal—though Musaeus says in
his poems that she joined them because of some need.*

*(Demeter nurses Dêmophon, infant son of the queen Baubô: she anoints
him with oil and cradles him in the fire. Baubô sees this and screams.
Demeter says):*

*'Foolish and wretched mortals, having foreknowledge neither of the evil
nor of the good in prospect for you!'*

*(The baby is burnt up. The goddess reveals herself):*

*'I am Demeter, bringer of seasons, of bright gifts. What god of heaven,
or who among mortal men, has seized Persephone and reft her dear soul?'*

*(The homecoming of Celeus, and story of Triptolemus)*

*Whence it (the poem) is called 'The Descent' (into Hades)*.

16\. (<span class="smallcaps">Apollonius Rhodius</span>,
'*Argonautica*', I. 494: *Orpheus, having lifted up his lyre, tried his
song. He sang that Earth and Heaven and Sea formerly were fitted
together into one form, and separated through destructive Hate; and that
there are, as a perpetual sign in the Aether, the stars, the moon and
the paths of the sun; and how the mountains rose, and how the singing
rivers with their nymphs and all things that move were created. And he
sang how first of all Ophiôn and Eurynomê daughter of Ocean held sway on
snowy Olympus, and one was like Cronos in honour, with his power and
might, and the other like Rhea; but they fell into the streams of Ocean.
These then (Cronos and Rhea) for a while ruled over the Titans, blessed
gods, while Zeus was still young, still* 

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

*thinking as a child, and was dwelling in the Dictaean cave, and the
earth-born Cyclopes had not yet strengthened him with bolt, thunder and
lightning, which give glory to Zeus*.

*Gold plates from tombs in Italy and Crete*. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

17\. (*From Petelia, fourth-third century* B.C.)

You will find a spring on the left of the halls of Hades, and beside it
a white cypress growing. Do not even go near this spring. And you will
find another, from the Lake of Memory, flowing forth with cold water. In
front of it are guards. You must say, 'I am the child of Gê (Earth) and
of starry Ouranos (Heaven); this you yourselves also know. I am dry with
thirst and am perishing. Come, give me at once cold water flowing forth
from the Lake of Memory.' And they themselves will give you to drink
from the divine spring, and then thereafter you shall reign with the
other heroes.

17a. (*From Eleuthernae* (*Crete*), *second century* B.C.)

A I am dry with thirst and am perishing.

B Come, drink, I pray, from the ever-flowing spring on the right, where
the cypress is. Who are you, and whence?

A I am the son of Earth and starry Heaven.

18\. (*From Thurii, fourth-third century* B.C.)

I come from the pure, O pure Queen of the earthly ones, Euclês,
Eubouleus, and ye other immortal gods! I too claim to be of your blessed
race, but Fate and other immortal gods conquered me, (*and sent*) the
star-smiting thunder. And I flew out from the hard and deeply-grievous
circle, and stepped on to the crown with my swift feet, and slipped into
the bosom of the Mistress, the Queen of the Underworld. And I stepped
out from the crown with my swift feet.

'Happy and blessed one, you shall be a god instead of a mortal.'

I have fallen as a kid into milk.

19\. (*From Thurii: for a woman*)

I come pure from the pure, Queen of the Underworld, Euclês, Eubouleus
and all other gods! For I too claim to be

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of your race. And I have paid the penalty for unjust deeds, whether Fate
conquered me . . . with the thunderbolt and the lightning flash. Now a
suppliant I come to noble Persephone, that she may be kind and send me
to the seats of the pure.

19a. (*From Rome: for a woman*)

I come pure from the pure, Queen of the Underworld, Euclês, Eubouleus,
noble child of Zeus! And I have this gift of Memory prized by men.

'Caecilia Secundina, come, made divine by the Law!'

20\. (*From Thurii*)

But whenever a soul leaves the light of the sun—enter on the right where
one must if one has kept all (*the laws*) well and truly. Rejoice at the
experience! This you have never before experienced: you have become a
god instead of a man. You have fallen as a kid into milk. Hail, hail, as
you travel on the right, through the holy meadow and groves of
Persephone!

21\. (*From the same place*).

To Earth, first-born Mother, Cybelian Korê said: . . . Of Demeter . . .
All-seeing Zeus.

O Sun, Fire, you went through all towns, when you appeared with the
Victories and Fortunes and all-wise Fate, where you increase the
brightness of the festival with your lordship, O glorious deity! By you
are all things subdued, all things overpowered, all things smitten! The
decrees of Fate must everywhere be endured. O Fire, lead me to the
Mother, if the fast can endure, to fast for seven nights and days! For
there was a seven-day fast, O Olympian Zeus and all-seeing Sun . . .

22\. (<span class="smallcaps">Clement of Alexandria</span>: *Orphic
terms from the poem On Orpheus by Epigenes*).

Shuttles with bent carriages (*ploughs*)

Warp-threads (*furrows*)

Thread (*seed*)

Tears of Zeus (*rain*)

Fates clothed in white (*phases of the moon*)

Little flower (*spring*)

Workless (*epithet of night*)

Gorgonian (*epithet of the moon, because of the face in it*.)

Aphrodite (*time for seed-sowing*)

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

23\. (*Papyrus, third century* B.C.)

. . . in order that he may find

. . on account of the rite they paid the penalty of their fathers. Save
me, Brimô, Demeter Rhea, and armed Curêtês! . . .

So that we may perform beautiful sacrifices . . .

Goat and bull, limitless gifts . . .

And by the law of the river. . .

Of the goat, and let him eat the rest of the flesh. Let no uninitiated
look on!

. . . dedicating to the . . .

. . prayer . . .

I call on . . . and Eubouleus, and call the (*Maenads*) who cry Euoi . .
.

You having parched with thirst the friends of (the *feast*). . .

. . . of Demeter and Pallas for us . . .

King Irekepaigos, save me, (*Phanes*)!

(*The end is mutilated, but there is a reference to the toys of
Dionysus*): top, rattle, dice-bones, or mirror.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](app03.htm#fr_0) For list and discussion,
see *Companion*, pp. 5-8.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:1](app03.htm#fr_1) The Orphics are not named
here, but are obviously meant.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3:1](app03.htm#fr_2) Τιτῆνες from τίνεσθαι.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3:2](app03.htm#fr_3) 'Orpheus, Oiagros’ and
Calliope’s (*son*)' is supplied in the blank space here.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5:1](app03.htm#fr_4) See Harrison,
*Prolegomena*, Appendix by Gilbert Murray; Guthrie, *Orpheus and Greek
Religion*, pp. 172-31 Freeman, *Companion to the Pre-Socratic
Philosophers* pp. 16-7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Musaeus](app04)
