[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app05)  [Next](app07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

### 4. HÊSIOD OF ASCRA

<span class="smallcaps">Hêsiod</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Ascra</span> flourished probably in the eighth century
B.C.

Apart from his *Theogony* and *Works and Days*, another poem called
*Astrologia* or *Astronomia* was sometimes attributed to him by ancient
authors. This poem was probably written in the sixth century B.C.

1\. Mortals call them the Pleiads.

2\. The stormy Pleiads are setting.

3\. Then vanish the Pleiads.

4\. (*The morning setting of the Pleiads coincides with the autumnal
equinox, according to Epimenides*).

5\. *The Hyades:* They are Nymphs like the Graces: Phaesylê and Corônis
and fair-garlanded Cleeia, lovely Phaeô and Eudôrê of the long robe,
whom the tribes of men on earth call Hyades.

6\. (*The Great Bear: a daughter of Lycaon in Arcadia chose the life of
a huntress with Artemis on the mountains. Being seduced by Zeus, she
continued, undetected by the goddess, until the latter discovered her
pregnancy on seeing her bathing, and changed her into a bear. She bore
the so-called Areas. When on the mountain she was hunted by goatherds
and handed over to Lycaon with her baby. Later she was believed to have
set foot in the sacred precinct of Zeus in ignorance of the law; being
pursued by her own son and about to be killed, she was saved by Zeus and
placed among the stars*.

(*Boôtês: he is said to be Areas son of Zeus and Callistô. When Zeus had
seduced her, Lycaon served him with a dish of the infant's flesh*.

(*Callistô was one of the Nymphs*).

7\. (*Ôrion: son of Minô and Poseidon, was granted by his father the
power of walking on the waves. While in Chios he seduced Meropê, and was
blinded and expelled by her father Oenopiôn. He went to Lemnos, where
Hephaestus in pity gave him a guide, Cêdalion; carrying him on his
shoulders, Orion went eastwards until his blindness was cured by the
sun. He then returned to seek vengeance on Oenopiôn, but the latter was
hidden underground by his people. Baulked in his search, Orion went to
Crete and gave himself up to hunting, with Artemis and Leto. He
threatened to* 

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

*kill all the animals on earth, but Gê in anger sent a huge serpent
whose sting killed him. Zeus at the request of Artemis and Leto placed
him among the stars for his valour*).

8\. (*Straits of Messina: Orion, after the sea had opened up, piled up
the headland of Pelôris on the Sicilian side and made the precinct of
Poseidon, which was particularly revered by the inhabitants. Orion then
crossed to Euboea and settled there*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Phôcus of Samos](app07)
