[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app08)  [Next](app10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7. PHERECŶDES OF SYROS

<span class="smallcaps">Pherecŷdes</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Syros</span>: date uncertain; he may have lived in the
seventh century, or middle of the sixth century B.C.

He was said to have been the first to write in prose. His book, extant
in antiquity, was called *Heptamychos* (Seven-Chambered Cosmos) or
*Theocrasia* (Divine Mingling) or *Theogonia*.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

1\. <span class="smallcaps">Zas</span> (*Zeus*) and Time existed always,
and Chthoniê; but Chthoniê acquired the name Gê, since Zas gives earth
to her as a gift of honour.

1a. (*Pherecydes, like Thales, gives water as the first cause; he calls
it Chaos, probably borrowing the term from Hesiod*).

2\. For him (*Zas*) they make the houses many and great. And when they
had finished providing all this, and also furnishings and men-servants
and maid-servants and all else required, when all is ready, they carry
out the wedding. On the third day of the wedding, Zas makes a robe,
large and fair, and on it he embroiders Earth and Ôgenos (*Ocean*) and
his dwelling . . . 'For wishing your marriage to take place, I honour
you with this. Therefore receive my greeting and be my wife.' This they
say was the first unveiling ceremony, and hence arose the custom among
gods and men. And she answers him, receiving the robe from him . . .

3\. (*Zeus when about to create changed into Eros, because by combining
the Cosmos out of opposites he brought it into harmony and love, and
sowed likeness in all, and unity extending through all things*).

4\. (*Story of the war between the two armies under Cronos* (*Saturn*)
*and Ophioneus: after challenges and combats, a pact was made, that
whichever side fell into Ocean should have lost, and the other side
should be victors and rule the heavens. To this can be traced the
Mysteries concerning Titans and Giants who are said to have made war on
the gods, and also the Egyptian stories of Typho, Horus and Osiris*).

S. (*Comment by Pherecydes on* Homer, *Iliad*, I. 590 *and* xv. 18):

Below this part of the world is the Tartarean part; its guardians are
the daughters of Boreas, the Harpies and the Storm-wind. Thither does
Zeus banish any god who commits an act of lawlessness.

6\. Hollows, ditches, caves and gates.

7\. Outflow.

8\. (*Aethalides had from Hermes the gift of transmigration of his soul
from Hades and earth and vice versa*).

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

9\. Rhê (*Rhea*).

10\. (*Forms for possessive pronoun 'mine'*).

11\. (*Forms for personal pronouns 'we, you, they'*).

12\. (*Word used by the gods for 'table'*).

13\. (*Pherecydes does not agree that Zeus and Hera are the father and
mother of the gods*).

13a. (*Ambrosia the food of the gods*).

*Spurious*

14\. (*The pupils of Pherecydes called the Dyad Boldness and Impulse and
Opinion, because the true and false are in Opinion*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Theagenes of Rhêgium](app10)
