[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app23)  [Next](app25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### 29. ZÊNÔ OF ELEA

<span class="smallcaps">Zênô</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Elea</span> was in his prime about 450 B.C.

He wrote a book of *Epicheirêmata* (Attacks) in defence of Parmenides’
theory of Being as One and Indivisible; his method was to take the
opposite proposition that Things are Many, and derive two contradictory
conclusions therefrom.

1\. (*Second half of the Epicheirêma showing that if Things are Many,
they must be* (a) *infinitely small*, (b) *infinitely great*).

If Being had no size, it could not Be either.

If anything Is, it follows that each (*part*) must have a certain size
and bulk, and distance one from the other. And the same reasoning
applies also to the part preceding it; for that too will have size and
there will be another part preceding it. The same reasoning, in fact,
applies always: no part of the Whole will be such as to be outermost,
nor will any part be unrelated to another part. Therefore, if Things are
Many, they must be both small and great: so small as to have no size, so
large as to be infinite.

2\. (*First half of the Epicheirêma showing that if Things are Many they
must be* (a) *infinitely small*, (b) *infinitely great*).

If it (*a unit without magnitude*) be added to another existing thing,
it would not make the latter at all larger. For if a thing without
magnitude is added (*to another thing*) the latter cannot gain anything
in magnitude. And thus (*it follows*) at once that the thing added is
nothing. And if when a unit is subtracted the other will not become at
all less, and will not, on the other hand, increase when (*this unit*)
is added, it is clear that the unit added or subtracted was nothing.

3\. (*Epicheirêma showing that if Things are Many, they must be* (a)
*finite*, (b) *infinite in number*).

If Things are Many, they must be as many as they are and neither more
nor less than this. But if they are as many as they are, they must be
finite (*in number*).

If Things are Many, they are infinite in number. For there are always
other things between those that are, and again others between those. And
thus things are infinite (*in number*).

4\. (*From an Epicheirêma showing the impossibility of motion*).

That which moves, moves neither in the place in which it is, nor in that
in which it is not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. Melissus of Samos](app25)
