[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app38)  [Next](app40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 44. PHILOLÂUS OF TARENTUM

<span class="smallcaps">Philolâus</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Tarentum</span> was active in the latter half of the
fifth century B.C.

He was said to have written one book, which was the first published
account of Pythagoreanism. The fragments attributed to him are in Doric
dialect. Their genuineness has been disputed by modern scholars,
probably without justification. <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_61) This
work was usually given the title *On the Universe*. Another work
entitled *Bacchae* was sometimes attributed to him.

1\. Nature in the universe was fitted together from the Non-Limited and
the Limiting, both the universe as a whole and everything in it.

2\. All existing things must necessarily be either Limiting, or
Non-Limited, or both Limiting and Non-Limited. But they could not be
merely Non-Limited (nor merely Limited). Since however it is plain that
they are neither wholly from the Limiting nor wholly from the
Non-Limited, clearly then the universe and its contents were fitted
together from both the Limiting and the Non-Limited. This is proved also
by actual existing things; for those of them which are made of Limiting
(*elements*) impose Limit, whereas those made of both Limiting and
Non-Limited (*elements*) both do and do not impose Limit, and those made
of Non-Limited (*elements*) will appear Non-Limited.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

3\. For there could not even be an object set before knowledge to begin
with, if all things were Non-Limited.

4\. Actually, everything that can be known has a Number; for it is
impossible to grasp anything with the mind or to recognise it without
this (*Number*).

S. Actually, Number has two distinct forms, odd and even, and a third
compounded of both, the even-odd; each of these two forms has many
aspects, which each separate object demonstrates in itself.

6\. This is how it is with Nature and Harmony: the Being of things is
eternal, and Nature itself requires divine and not human intelligence;
moreover, it would be impossible for any existing thing to be even
recognised by us if there did not exist the basic Being of the things
from which the universe was composed, (*namely*) both the Limiting and
the Non-Limited. But since these Elements exist as unlike and unrelated,
it would clearly be impossible for a universe to be created with them
unless a harmony was added, in which way this (*harmony*) did come into
being. Now the things which were like and related needed no harmony; but
the things which were unlike and unrelated and unequally arranged are
necessarily fastened together by such a harmony, through which they are
destined to endure in the universe. . . .

The content of the Harmony (*Octave*) is the major fourth and the major
fifth; the fifth is greater than the fourth by a whole tone; for from
the highest string (*lowest note*) to the middle is a fourth, and from
the middle to the lowest string (*highest note*) is a fifth. From the
lowest to the third string is a fourth, from the third to the highest
string is a fifth. Between the middle and third strings is a tone. The
major fourth has the ratio 3:4, the fifth 2:3, and the octave 1:2. Thus
the Harmony (*Octave*) consists of five whole tones and two semitones,
the fifth consists of three tones and a semitone, and the fourth
consists of two tones and a semitone.

7\. The first composite (*entity*), the One, which is in the centre of
the Sphere, is called Hearth.

8\. The One is the beginning of everything.

9\. By nature, not by convention.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

10\. Harmony is a Unity of many mixed (*elements*), and an agreement
between disagreeing (*elements*).

11\. One must study the activities and the essence of Number in
accordance with the power existing in the Decad (*Ten-ness*); for it
(*the Decad*) is great, complete, all-achieving, and the origin of
divine and human life and its Leader; it shares . . . The power also of
the Decad. Without this, all things are unlimited, obscure and
indiscernible.

For the nature of Number is the cause of recognition, able to give
guidance and teaching to every man in what is puzzling and unknown. For
none of existing things would be clear to anyone, either in themselves
or in their relationship to one another, unless there existed Number and
its essence. But in fact Number, fitting all things into the soul
through sense-perception, makes them recognisable and comparable with
one another as is provided by the nature of the Gnômôn, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_62) in that Number gives them body and divides
the different relationships of things, whether they be Non-Limited or
Limiting, into their separate groups.

And you may see the nature of Number and its power at work not only in
supernatural and divine existences but also in all human activities and
words everywhere, both throughout all technical production and also in
music.

The nature of Number and Harmony admits of no Falsehood; for this is
unrelated to them. Falsehood and Envy belong to the nature of the
Non-Limited and the Unintelligent and the Irrational.

Falsehood can in no way breathe on Number; for Falsehood is inimical and
hostile to its nature, whereas Truth is related to and in close natural
union with the race of Number.

12\. The bodies (*physical Elements)* of the Sphere are five: the Fire
in the Sphere, and the Water, and Earth, and Air, and, fifth, the
vehicle(?) <span id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_63) of the Sphere.

13\. (The Four Elements of the rational animal are: Brain, Heart, Navel,
Genital Organ). The Head is the seat of the Mind, the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Heart of the Soul
and of feeling, the Navel of the Rooting and Growth of the original
(*embryo*), the Genital Organ of the emission of Seed and of Creation.
The Brain (indicates) the ruling factor of Man, the Heart that of the
animal, the Navel that of the plant, and the Genital Organ of them all;
for they all derive their life and growth from a seed.

14\. The ancient theologians and seers also bear witness that because of
certain punishments the soul is yoked to the body and buried in it as in
a tomb.

15\. (*Socrates to Cebes in the 'Phaedo': The theory that we are in a
sort of watch-tower which we must not desert is difficult; but I agree
that we are one of the possessions of the gods*). <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_64)

16\. There are certain thoughts which are stronger than ourselves.

*Attributed to a prose work called 'Bacchae'*

17\. (<span class="smallcaps">Stobaeus</span>: *paraphrase*). The
universe is one, and it began to come into being from the centre, and
from the centre upwards at the same intervals (of distance) as those
below. For the parts above from the centre are in inverse relationship
to those below; for the centre is to what is below as it is to what is
above, and so with all the rest; for both stand in the same relationship
to the centre, except in so far as their positions are reversed.

18\. (<span class="smallcaps">Stobaeus</span>: *quotation on the Sun has
fallen out*).

19\. (<span class="smallcaps">Proclus</span>: *Plato, Pythagorean
doctrine and Philolaus in the 'Bacchae' teach theology through
mathematical figures*).

*Doubtful fragments*

20\. (*The Number Seven is like*) Nikê (*i.e.* *Athena*), the Motherless
and Virgin . . . for it is ruler and teacher of all things; it is God,
One ever-existing, stable, unmoving, itself like to itself, different
from the rest.

20a. The Dyad (*Two-ness*) is the Bride of Cronos.

*Spurious fragments*

21\. (*Quoted by Stobaeus from a work attributed to Philolaus entitled
'On the Soul'*).

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

Therefore it (the universe) endures both indestructible and indomitable
for endless time. For neither within it will there be found any cause
more powerful than itself, nor outside it any cause able to destroy it.
But this universe was from eternity and will endure till eternity, One,
steered by One, akin to it and most powerful and unsurpassable. The
universe, being one and continuous and inspired by the breath of Nature
and carried round, has also the beginning of motion and change from its
first beginning. And part of it is unchanging and part changing. And the
unchanging part has its bounds from the Soul which encloses the Whole as
far as the moon; and the changing part from the moon to the earth. But
since the moving part circles from everlasting to everlasting, and the
part that is moved is disposed in whatever way the moving part carries
it, it follows necessarily that one is ever in motion and the other ever
passive. And the one is wholly the dwelling (?) of Mind and Soul, and
the other of Becoming and Change; and the one is first in power and
superior, and the other is second and inferior. But that which is made
of both these, namely the ever-running (*circling*) Divine and the
ever-changing Mortal, is the universe.

It is well that the universe should be an everlasting activity of God
and Becoming, according to the attendance (on God) of changeable Nature.
And he remains One for ever in the same position and condition, but
particular existences are coming into being and perishing in vast
numbers. And they, when given over to destruction, yet keep their
natures and forms, and in birth they reproduce the same form as their
father and creator who gave them birth . . .

22\. (<span class="smallcaps">Claudianus Mamertus</span> (*5th century
A.D.*) *purporting to quote from the third volume of a treatise of
Philolaus 'On Rhythm and Metre'*).

The soul is joined to the body through Number and the immortal and
likewise incorporeal Harmony . . . The body is loved by the soul,
because without it it cannot use the senses. When the soul has been
separated from the body by death, it lives an incorporeal existence in
the world.

23\. (<span class="smallcaps">Iamblichus</span>) Number is the ruling
and self-created bond which maintains the everlasting stability of the
contents of the universe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[73:1](app39.htm#fr_66) See *Companion*, pp.
228-9.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[75:1](app39.htm#fr_67) Gnômôn: here, a figure
used in solving geometrical problems. Heath, *Greek Mathematics*, I. p.
78; and Newbold, *Philolaus, in Arch. für Gesch. der Phil.* (1906) P.
176 *sqq*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[75:2](app39.htm#fr_68) ὁλκάς, 'hull of a ship';
some emend to ὁλκός, 'roll' or 'envelope', an unlikely meaning.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[76:1](app39.htm#fr_69) Plato does not name
Philolaus here; but his name is applied by Athenagoras (second century
A.D.) to a similar statement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 45. Eurytus of Southern Italy](app40)
