[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](app74)  [Next](app76) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0674035011/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers*, by Kathleen Freeman,
\[1948\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 80. PRÔTAGORAS OF ABDÊRA

<span class="smallcaps">Prôtagoras</span> of <span
class="smallcaps">Abdêra</span>: latter half of fifth century B.C.

He wrote a book called *Truth* or *Refutatory Arguments* or *On Being*;
and one *On the Gods*. Various other titles are mentioned.

1\. (*From 'Truth' or Refutatory Arguments'*). Of all things the measure
is Man, of the things that are, that they are, and of the things that
are not, that they are not.

2\. (*From 'On Being'*).

(<span class="smallcaps">Porphyry</span>: '*Few of the writings of
Plato's predecessors have survived, otherwise Plato perhaps would have
been detected in further plagiarisms. fit any rate, in the place where I
happened to have been reading in Protagoras’ book "On Being" the
argument he uses against those who make Being One, I find that he uses
the same refutatory terms. For I took the trouble to memorise the
passage word for word*').

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

3\. (*From a treatise entitled 'Great Logos'*). Teaching needs endowment
and practice. Learning must begin in youth.

4\. (*From 'On the Gods'*). About the gods, I am not able to know
whether they exist or do not exist, nor what they are like in form; for
the factors preventing knowledge are many: the obscurity of the subject,
and the shortness of human life.

5\. (*Title: 'Contradictory Arguments'. Plato plagiarised from this in
the 'Republic'*).

*Doubtful titles* (*taken from Diogenes Laertius*)

6\. (*'Art of the Eristics': disputations on famous subjects. Protagoras
and the other Sophists were the first to compose these set pieces known
as 'common places'*).

6a. (*Protagoras was the first to say that there were two contradictory
arguments about everything*).

6b. To make the weaker cause the stronger.

'*On Mathematics*'

7\. (*Protagoras, arguing against the definition of the mathematicians
and appealing to perception, used to say that the tangent touched the
circle not at a point but along a line*).

'*On Wrestling and the Other Arts*'

8\. (<span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>, *Sophist* 232D, E: *'Those
views regarding all the arts and each art separately, what one must say
against the craftsman practising each: views which stand published in
writing for all to learn if they wish.—I think you must mean the views
of Protagoras on wrestling and the other arts'*).

(*Titles*)

8a. '*On Constitution*.'

8b. '*On the Original Social Structure*.'

8c. '*On Ambition*.'

8d. '*On Virtues*.'

8e. '*On Human Errors*.'

8f. '*Exhortation*.'

8g. '*Trial concerning a Fee*.'

8h. '*On the Underworld*.'

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

*From unspecified writings*

9\. When his sons, who were fine young men, died within eight days, he
(Pericles) bore it without mourning. For he held on to his serenity,
from which every day he derived great benefit in happiness, freedom from
suffering, and honour in the people's eyes—for all who saw him bearing
his griefs valiantly thought him great-souled and brave and superior to
themselves, well knowing their own helplessness in such a calamity.

10\. Art without practice, and practice without art, are nothing.

11\. Education does not take root in the soul unless one goes deep.

12\. (*Graeco-Syrian Maxims: Protagoras said*): Toil and work and
instruction and education and wisdom are the garland of fame which is
woven from the flowers of an eloquent tongue and set on the head of
those who love it. Eloquence however is difficult, yet its flowers are
rich and ever new, and the audience and those who applaud and the
teachers rejoice, and the scholars make progress and fools are vexed—or
perhaps they are not even vexed, because they have not sufficient
insight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 81. Xeniades of Corinth](app76)
