[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl21)  [Next](wsl23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XX.--The Imperial City.

We were now traversing a wide causeway of black marble, on either side
of which were deep, dark chasms of which it was impossible to see the
bottom from the great clouds of heavy vapor that hung over them. Passing
and repassing us upon this highway were a great many dark spirits, some
bearing great heavy loads upon their backs, others almost crawling along
on all fours like beasts. Great gangs of slaves passed us, wearing heavy
iron collars on their necks and linked together by a heavy chain. They
were coming from the second or inner gate of what was evidently a large
fortified city whose dark buildings loomed through the dense masses of
dark fog in front of us. The causeway, the style of buildings, and the
appearance of many of the spirits made me feel as though we were
entering some ancient fortified city of the old Roman Empire, only here
everything gave one the sense of being foul and horrible, in spite of
the fine architecture and the magnificent buildings whose outlines we
could dimly trace. The second gateway was finer in appearance than the
first, and the gates being open we passed in with the stream of spirits
hurrying through it, and as before we seemed to pass unseen.

"You will perceive," said Faithful Friend, "that here there is a life in
no way different from the earthly life of such a city at the time when
the one of which this is the spiritual reflection, was in the full
zenith of its power, and when the particles of which this is formed were
thrown off from its material life and drawn down by the force of
attraction to form this city and these buildings, fit dwellings for its
spiritual inhabitants; and you will see in the more modern appearance of
many of the buildings and inhabitants how it has been added to from time
to time by the same process which is going on continuously. You will
notice that most of the spirits here fancy themselves still in the
earthly counterpart and wonder why all looks so dark and foul and dingy.
In like manner this same city has its spiritual prototype in the higher
spheres to which all that was fair and good and noble in its life has
been attracted, and where those spirits who were good and true have gone
to dwell; for in the lives of cities as of men the spiritual emanations
are attracted upwards or downwards according as there is good or evil in
the deeds done in them. And as the deeds done in this city have in evil
far exceeded those which were good, so this city is far larger, far more
thickly peopled in this sphere than in those above. In the ages to come
when the spirits who are here now shall have progressed, that heavenly
counterpart will be fully finished and fully peopled, and then will this
place we gaze at now have crumbled into dust--faded from this sphere."

We were now in a narrow street, such as it must have been in the earthly
city, and a short distance farther brought us into a large square
surrounded with magnificent palaces, while before us towered one more
splendid in design than all the others. A great wide flight of marble
steps led up to its massive portico, and looming through the dark cloudy
atmosphere we could trace its many wings and buildings. All was truly on
a magnificent scale, yet all to my eyes appeared dark, stained with
great splashes of blood, and covered with slimy fungus growth which
disfigured the magnificence and hung in great repulsive-looking
festoons, like twisted snakes, from all the pillars and cope-stones of
the buildings. Black slimy mud oozed up through the crevices of the
marble pavement, as though the city floated upon a foul swamp, and
noisome vapors curled up from the ground and floated above and around us
in fantastic and horrible smoke wreaths like the huge phantoms of past
crimes. Everywhere were dark spirits crawling across the great square
and in and out of the palace doors, driven onward by other stronger dark
spirits with lash or spear. Such cries of execration as broke forth from
time to time, such fearful oaths, such curses and imprecations, it was
truly the pandemonium of the lost souls in the Infernal regions! And
over all hung those black night clouds of sorrow and suffering and
wrong.

Far away to the earth my thoughts traveled, back to the days of the
Roman Empire, and I saw reflected as in a glass this city in all the
splendor of her power, in all the iniquities of her tyranny and her
crimes, weaving down below, from the loom of fate, this other place of
retribution for all those men and women who disgraced her beauties by
their sins; I saw this great city of Hell building atom by atom till it
should become a great prison for all the evil spirits of that wicked
time.

We went up the wide flight of steps through the lofty doorway and found
ourselves in the outer court of the Emperor's Palace. No one spoke to us
or seemed aware of our presence, and we passed on through several
smaller halls till we reached the door of the Presence Chamber. Her my
companion stopped and said:

"I cannot enter with you, friend, because I have already visited the
dark spirit who reigns here, and therefore my presence would at once
excite his suspicions and defeat the object of your visit, which is that
you may rescue an unhappy spirit whose repentant prayers have reached
the higher spheres, and will be answered by the help you are sent to
give him. You will find the person you seek without any difficulty. His
desire for help has already drawn us thus near to him and will draw you
still closer. I must now for a time part from you because I have my own
path of work to follow, but we shall meet again ere long, and if you but
keep a stout heart and a strong will and do not forget the warnings
given you, no harm can befall you. Adieu, my friend, and know that I
also shall need all my powers."

Thus, then, I parted from Faithful Friend and passed out alone into the
Council Chamber, which I found thronged with spirits, both men and
women, and furnished with all the barbaric splendor of the days of the
Emperors; yet to my sight there was over everything the same stamp of
foul loathsomeness which had struck me in the exterior of the palace.
The men and women, haughty patricians in their lives, no doubt, appeared
to be eaten up with a loathsome disease like lepers, only they were even
more horrible to look upon. The walls and floors seemed stained with
dark pools of blood and hung with evil thoughts for drapery. Worm-eaten
and corrupting were the stately robes these haughty spirits wore, and
saturated with the disease germs from their corrupted bodies.

On a great throne sat the Emperor himself, the most foul and awful
example of degraded intellect and manhood in all that vast crowd of
degraded spirits, while stamped upon his features was such a look of
cruelty and vice that beside him the others sank into insignificance by
comparison. I could not but admire, even while it revolted me, the
majestic power of this man's intellect and will. The kingly sense of
power over even such a motley crew as these, the feeling that even in
Hell he reigned as by a right, seemed to minister to his pride and love
of dominion even in the midst of his awful surroundings.

Looking at him I beheld him for one brief moment, not as I saw him and
as he saw these disgusting creatures round him, but as he still appeared
in his own eyes, which even after all these centuries were not opened to
his true state, his real self. I saw him as a haughty handsome man, with
cruel clear-cut features, hard expression, and eyes like a wild vulture,
yet withal possessing a certain beauty of form, a certain power to
charm. All that was repulsive and vile was hidden by the earthly
envelope, not revealed as now in all the nakedness of the spirit.

I saw his court and his companions change back to the likeness of their
earthly lives, and I knew that to each and all they appeared just the
same in their own eyes, all were alike unconscious of the horrible
change in themselves, yet perfectly conscious of the change in each of
their companions.

Were all unconscious? No! not quite all. There was one man crouching in
a corner, his mantle drawn over his disfigured face, whom I perceived to
be fully conscious of his own vileness as well as the vileness of all
who surrounded him.

And in this man's heart there had sprung up a desire, hopeless, as it
seemed to himself, for better things, for a path to open before him
which, however hard and thorny, might lead him from this night of Hell
and give him even at this eleventh hour the hope of a life removed from
the horrors of this place and these associates; and as I looked I knew
it was to this man that I was sent, though how I was to help him I knew
not, I could not guess. I only felt that the power which had led me so
far would open up my path and show me the way.

While I had stood thus gazing around me the dark spirits and their Ruler
became conscious of my presence, and a look of anger and ferocity passed
over his face, while in a voice thick and hoarse with passion he
demanded who I was and how I dared to enter his presence.

I answered: "I am a stranger only lately come to this dark sphere and I
am still lost in wonder at finding such a place in the spirit world."

A wild ferocious laugh broke from the spirit, and he cried out that they
would soon enlighten me as to many things in the spirit world. "But
since you are a stranger," he continued, "and because we always receive
strangers right royally here, I pray you to be seated and partake with
us of our feast."

He pointed to a vacant seat at the long table in front of him at which
many of the spirits were seated, and which was spread with what bore the
semblance of a great feast, such as might have been given in the days of
his earthly grandeur. Everything looked real enough, but I had been
warned that it was all more or less illusionary, that the food never
satisfied the awful cravings of hunger which these former gluttons felt,
and that the wine was a fiery liquid which scorched the throat and
rendered a thousand times worse the thirst which consumed these
drunkards. I had been told to neither eat nor drink anything offered me
in these regions, nor to accept any invitation to rest myself given by
these beings; for to do so would mean the subjugation of my higher
powers to the senses once more, and would at once put me more on a level
with these dark beings and into their power. I answered: "While I fully
appreciate the motives which prompt you to offer me the hospitality of
your place, I must still decline it, as I have no desire to either eat
or drink anything."

At this rebuff his eyes shot gleams of living fire at me and a deeper
shade of anger crossed his brow, but he still maintained a pretense of
graciousness and signed to me to approach yet nearer to him. Meanwhile
the man whom I had come to help, aroused from his bitter meditations by
my arrival and the Emperor's speech with me, had drawn near in wonder at
my boldness and alarmed for my safety, for he knew no more of me than
that I seemed some unlucky new arrival who had not yet learned the
dangers of this horrible place. His anxiety for me and a certain sense
of pity created a link between us, which, unknown to either, was to be
the means whereby I would be able to draw him away with me.

When I advanced a few steps towards the Emperor's throne, this repentant
spirit followed me, and, coming close, whispered:

"Do not be beguiled by him. Turn and fly from this place while there is
yet time, and I will draw their attention from you for the moment."

I thanked the spirit but said: "I shall not fly from any man, be he whom
he may, and will take care not to fall into any trap."

Our hurried speech had not been unnoticed by the Emperor, for he became
most impatient, and striking his sword upon the ground he cried out to
me:

"Approach, stranger! Have you no manners that you keep an Emperor
waiting? Behold my chair of state, my throne, seat yourself in it and
try for a moment how it feels to be in an Emperor's place."

I looked at the throne as he pointed, and saw it was like a great chair
with a canopy over it. Two immense winged figures in bronze stood at the
back of the seat, each with six long arms extended to form the back and
sides, while upon the heads of these figures the canopy rested as upon
pillars. I had no thought to sit in such a place; its late occupant was
too repulsive to me to desire to go any nearer to him, but had even
curiosity made me wish to examine the chair the sight I saw would have
effectually prevented me. The chair seemed suddenly to become endowed
with life, and before my eyes I beheld a vision of an unhappy spirit
struggling in the embraces of those awful arms which encircled it and
crushed its body into a mangled writhing mass. And I knew that such was
the fate of all those whom the Emperor induced to try the comforts of
his chair. Only for one brief instant the vision lasted and then I
turned to the Emperor and, bowing, said to him:

"I have no desire to place myself upon your level, and must again
decline the honor you would do me."

Then he broke into a tempest of rage, and cried out to his guards to
seize me and thrust me into that chair and pour the food and the wine
down my throat till they choked me.

Immediately there was a rush made towards me, the man I had come to save
throwing himself before me to protect me, and in a moment we were
surrounded by a seething, fighting mass of spirits, and for that moment,
I confess my heart sank within me and my courage began to fail. They
looked so horrible, so fiendish, so like a pack of wild beasts let loose
and all setting upon me at once. Only for a moment, however, for the
conflict aroused all my combative qualities of which I have been thought
to possess my fair share. And I threw out all my will to repel them,
calling upon all good powers to aid me while I grasped firm hold of the
poor spirit who had sought to help me. Thus I retreated to the door,
step by step, the whole crowd of dark spirits following us with wild
cries and menacing gestures, yet unable to touch us while I kept firm my
determination to keep them off. At last we reached the door and passed
through it, whereupon it seemed to close fast and keep in our pursuers.
Then strong arms seemed to lift us both up and bear us away into a place
of safety on the dark plain.

My rescued companion was by this time in a state of unconsciousness, and
as I stood by him I saw four majestic spirits from the higher spheres
making magnetic passes over his prostrate form; and then I beheld the
most wonderful sight I had ever seen. From the dark disfigured body
which lay as in a sleep of death there arose a mist-like vapor which
grew more and more dense till it took shape in the form of the spirit
himself; the purified soul of that poor spirit released from its dark
envelope; and I saw those four angelic spirits lift the still
unconscious risen soul in their arms as one would bear a child, and then
they all floated away from me up, up, till they vanished from my sight.
At my side stood another bright angel who said to me: "Be of good cheer,
oh! Son of the Land of Hope, for many shalt thou help in this dark land,
and great is the joy of the angels in Heaven over these sinners that
have repented."

As he finished speaking he vanished, and I was alone once more on the
bleak plains of Hell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI.--The Fires of Hell--A Vengeful Spirit--Pirates--The
Sea of Foul Mud--The Mountains of Selfish Oppression--The Forest of
Desolation--Messages of Love](wsl23)
