[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl20)  [Next](wsl22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PART III.

# The Kingdom of Hell.

### CHAPTER XIX.

The companion who was assigned to me in this expedition was a spirit who
had been in this sphere before, and who was, therefore, well fitted to
act as my guide on entering this Land of Horrors. After a short time we
were to separate, he told me, and each to follow his own path--but at
any time either of us could, if needful, summon the other to his aid in
case of extremity.

As we drew near the great bank of smoke and flame I remarked to my
companion upon the strangely material appearance they presented. I was
accustomed in the spirit world to the realism and solidity of all our
surroundings which mortals are apt to imagine must be of some ethereal
and intangible nature, since they are not visible to ordinary
eyesight,--still these thick clouds of smoke, these leaping tongues of
flame, were contrary to what I had pictured Hell as being like. I had
seen dark and dreary countries and unhappy spirits in my wanderings, but
I had seen no flames, no fire of any sort, and I had totally disbelieved
in material flames in a palpable form, and had deemed the fires of Hell
to be merely a figure of speech to express a mental state. Many have
taught that it is so, and that the torments of Hell are mental and
subjective, not objective at all. I said something of this to my
companion, and he replied:

"Both ideas are in a sense right. These flames and this smoke are
created by the spiritual emanations of the unhappy beings who dwell
within that fiery wall, and material as they seem to your eyes, opened
to the sight of spiritual things, they would be invisible to a mortal's
sight, could one still in the body of flesh by any miracle visit this
spot. They have, in fact, no earthly material in them, yet they are none
the less material in the sense that all things earthly or spiritual are
clothed in matter of some kind. The number and variety of degrees of
solidity in matter are infinite, as without a certain covering of
etherealized matter even spiritual buildings and spiritual bodies would
be invisible to you, and these flames being the coarse emanations of
these degraded spirits, possess for your eyes an appearance even more
dense and solid than for the inhabitants themselves."

My companion's spirit name was "Faithful Friend," a name given him in
memory of his devotion to a friend who abused his friendship and finally
betrayed him, and whom he had even then forgiven and helped in the hour
when shame and humiliation overtook the betrayer, and when reproach and
contempt or even revenge might have seemed amply justifiable to many
minds. This truly noble spirit had been a man of by no means perfectly
noble character in his earthly life, and had therefore passed at death
into the lower spheres near the earth plane, but he had risen rapidly,
and at the time I met him he was one of the Brotherhood in the second
sphere, to which I had so recently been admitted, and had been once
before through the Kingdoms of Hell.

We now drew near what appeared like the crater of a vast volcano--ten
thousand Vesuviuses in one! Above us the sky was black as night, and but
for the lurid glare of the flames we should have been in total darkness.
Now that we have reached the mass of fire I saw that it was like a fiery
wall surrounding the country, through which all who sought to enter or
leave it must pass.

"See now, Franchezzo," said Faithful Friend, "we are about to pass
through this wall of fire, but do not let that alarm you, for so long as
your courage and your will do not fail, and you exert all your
will-power to repel these fiery particles, they cannot come in actual
contact with your body. Like the waters of the Red Sea they will fall
apart on either side and we shall pass through unscathed.

"Were any one of weak will and timid soul to attempt this they would
fail, and be driven back by the force of these flames which are
propelled outwards by a current of strong will-force set in motion by
the fierce and powerful beings who reign here, and who thus, as they
imagine, protect themselves from intrusions from the higher spheres. To
us, however, with our more spiritualized bodies, these flames and the
walls and rocks you will find in this land, are no more impenetrable
than is the solid material of earthly doors and walls, and as we can
pass at will through them, so can we pass through these, which are none
the less sufficiently solid to imprison the spirits who dwell in this
country. The more ethereal a spirit is the less can it be bound by
matter, and at the same time the less direct power can it have in the
moving of matter, without the aid of the physical material supplied by
the aura of certain mediums. Here, as on earth, we would, in order to
move material substances, require to use the aura of some of the
mediumistic spirits of this sphere. At the same time we shall find that
our higher spiritual powers have become muffled, so to say, because in
order to enter this sphere and make ourselves visible to its
inhabitants, we have had to clothe ourselves in its conditions, and thus
we are more liable to be affected by its temptations. Our lower natures
will be appealed to in every form, and we shall have to direct our
efforts to prevent them from again dominating us.

My friend now took my hand firmly in his and we "willed" ourselves to
pass through the wall of fire. I confess that a momentary sense of fear
passed over me as we began to enter it, but I felt we were "in for it,"
so exerting all my powers and concentrating my thoughts I soon found
that we were floating through--the flames forming a fiery arch below and
above us through which as through a tunnel we passed. Thinking of it now
I should say it must have been about a quarter to half a mile thick,
judging as one would by earthly measurements, but at the time I did not
take sufficient note to be very exact, all my energies being directed to
the repelling of the fiery particles from myself.

As we emerged we found ourselves in a land of night. It might have
seemed like the bottomless pit of desolation had we not stood upon solid
enough ground, while above us was this canopy of black smoke. How far
this country extended it was impossible to form any idea, since the
heavy atmosphere like a black fog shut in our vision on every side. I
was told that it extended through the whole of this vast and dreadful
sphere. In some parts there were great tumbled jagged mountains of black
rocks, in others long and dreary wastes of desert plains, while yet
others were mighty swamps of black oozing mud, full of the most noisome
crawling creatures, slimy monsters, and huge bats. Again there were
dense black forests of gigantic, repulsive-looking trees, almost human
in their power and tenacity, encircling and imprisoning those who
ventured amongst them. Ere I left this awful land I had seen these and
other dreadful regions, but truly neither I nor anyone else could ever
really describe them in all their loathsomeness and foulness.

As we stood looking at this country my sight, gradually becoming used to
the darkness, enabled me to perceive the surrounding objects dimly, and
I saw that before us there was a highway marked by the passage of many
spirit feet across the black plain on which we stood. A plain covered
with dust and ashes, as though all the blighted hopes, the dead ashes of
misused earthly lives had been scattered there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.--The Imperial City](wsl22)
