[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl32)  [Next](wsl34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXI.--Why the Spheres Are Invisible--Spirit Photographs.

"And now, Hassein, there is another point I wish to ask you about. I
have frequently heard men on earth say they want to know, if the spheres
exist around the earth and between them and the sun, why is it that all
men cannot see them, and why they cannot even see those spirits who are
said to be actually in the room with them. Naturally, men are not all
satisfied to be told simply that it is because they are not
clairvoyants, and have not the soul-sight. They want a still clearer
explanation. I am a spirit myself and I know that I exist, and so does
my dwelling-place, but I am unable to give an answer to the question.
Can you do so?"

Hassein laughed. "I could give a dozen elaborate explanations, but
neither you nor these mortals who are unable to see the spirits would be
much wiser after I had done so. I must, therefore, endeavor to make my
answer as free from technicalities as I can. First, though, let me ask
if you have seen the photographs of unmaterialized spirits which have
been obtained by certain mediums in the flesh. You will have noticed
that to mortal sight they present a semi-transparent appearance. The
material doors and windows, furniture, etc. show through the figures of
the spirits.

"Now that gives you a very good idea of the amount of materiality
possessed by an astral body (the first degree of spiritualized matter).
The material particles are spread so thinly that they are like a fine
net-work united by invisible atoms of a more etherealized nature--so
sublimated in fact that they cannot be impressed upon the most sensitive
plates now used by photographers. Spirits after they leave the earth
plane cannot be photographed by the plates now in use--they do not
possess gross enough atoms in the composition of their bodies, and have
therefore to either materialize a body like an earthly one, or they may
use another method which has been found successful and which is the one
commonly used in the case of spirit photographs, where the spirits are
visible to clairvoyant sight though invisible to material eyes. This is
simply described by saying these spirits make use of some of those
astral envelopes or bodies that I have already described to you as
forming from cloud masses of semi-material human atoms--astral shells
which never served as the covering of any soul, and which are so plastic
in their nature that spirits can mold them into their own likeness as a
sculptor molds the clay. These replicas can be and are photographed,
bearing a greater or less resemblance to the spirit, according as his
will power and his knowledge enable him to stamp his likeness upon them,
and though they are not strictly speaking the photos of the spirits
themselves, yet they are none the less evidence of spirit power and of
the existence of the spirit who has made use of them, because each
spirit must himself stamp his own identity upon the plastic astral form,
while more advanced scientific spirits prepare that form to receive the
impression.

"In the case of materialized spirits' photographs, the spirits really
make a body from the more material atoms and clothe themselves in it.

"A clairvoyant seeing one of these astral forms about to be photographed
would probably not be able to distinguish between it and a true spirit
man or woman, because the power of distinguishing between them is not
yet developed in mediums, neither, as a rule, do they know why a spirit
that looks solid enough to them comes out on a photographic plate with a
semi-transparent appearance. The see the more spiritualized matter as
well as the grosser astral atoms, therefore it appears to them as a
solid body with well-rounded, well proportioned limbs, not as a
transparent shadow of a spirit whose appearance may well give rise to
the idea that returning spirits are mere shades, almost, in fact, empty
shells--the real reason of the empty appearance being that, as I have
said, the photographic appliances at present in use are not capable of
transferring the whole spirit's form but only these grosser particles.
In the case of a fully materialized spirit being photographed, this
transparent appearance does not exist. The form is so perfect, so
life-like and solid, that men turn round and say it, therefore, cannot
be a spirit photograph at all--it must be nothing but the medium. Blind
seekers, who in trying to grasp a subject so vast, so full of the most
subtle difficulties, bring to bear upon it only the knowledge suitable
for mundane things, and then conclude that they are able to decide
finally so momentous, so scientific a question!

"But to return to your question. Having shown you how a photograph may
give a spirit whose appearance is like that of the traditional ghost, I
will now show you how mortals may also see them as such, but to
illustrate my meaning I will first ask you to imagine yourself back in
your earthly body with no more powers of spirit sight than you possessed
then. Let us liken the material and spiritual sight to two eyes. The one
we will call the left, the other the right eye, and let the left stand
for the material sight, the right the spiritual. Suppose you stand with
your back to the light and hold your forefinger in front of the right
eye where it can be seen by that eye only, the left seeing only the wall
before you--shut the right eye and the finger is invisible, yet it is
there, only not in the line of vision for the left, or material, sight.
Now open both eyes at once and look at your finger and you will now see
it certainly, but owing to a curious optical illusion it will appear
transparent, a mere shadow of a finger, the wall being seen through it,
and it may be likened to a ghost of a finger although you know it to be
a solid reality.

"Thus you can imagine how a person whose material sight is alone open
cannot see that which requires spiritual sight to discern, and how, when
both the material and spiritual sight are open at the same mement a
spirit may be visible but with the same transparent appearance as your
finger had just now. Hence has arisen the popular idea of a ghost. A
clairvoyant, looking at any spiritual object with the spiritual sight,
does so with the material sight closed through the power of the
controlling intelligence who directs that person's mediumship. Therefore
to him or to her the spiritual object does present the appearance of a
solid reality such as a material finger appears when seen by the
material sight alone.

"Few men know and still fewer consider that even their material sight is
dependent upon the material atoms which fill the earth's atmosphere, and
without which atoms there would be no light to see anything by.

At night mortals can see the stars--even those which are not themselves
suns--distant as they are, because they are material objects from which
the light of the sun is reflected. During the day the stars are still
there, but the immense mass of material particles in the earth's
atmosphere being illuminated by the reflecting of the sun's rays from
them, causes so dense an atmosphere of light that the stars are veiled
and no longer visible to material eyes. Ascend, however, above this
material atmosphere of illuminated atoms, and, behold, the stars are
again visible at mid-day and the surrounding ether of space, being free
from such material particles, is quite dark. There is nothing to reflect
the sun's rays.

Thus, although the mortal would be nearer to the sun, yet its light is
no longer visible to his material eyes, which can only see when there is
some material object, however small, to reflect the light of the sun for
him. How, then, does man know that the light of the sun is traveling
through the ether space to earth? Only by reason and analogy, not by
sight, for beyond the earth's atmosphere the sun's light is invisible to
him. Men know the light of the moon to be only the light of the sun
reflected from the moon's surface. Experience and experiment have proved
this, and it is now universally admitted. In like manner each little
atom of material matter floating in the earth's atmosphere is an
infinitesimal moon to reflect the sun's light for man and brighten earth
with the splendor of these reflections. So again those minute particles
that are continually being thrown off into the atmosphere by the earth
itself, are but the larger and grosser atoms enclosing or rather
revolving round, minute spiritual germs that form a spiritual atmosphere
around the earth and reflect for clairvoyants the spiritual elements of
the light of the sun. This spiritual atmosphere forms what is known as
the astral plane, and bears the same proportion of density to astral
bodies that the material atmosphere does to mortal bodies, and the light
from the spiritual elements of the sun striking upon these spiritual
particles is the light of the astral plane by which spirits see; the
material atmosphere of earth being visible to the material sight of
mortals. Is it not, then, easy to imagine that the spirit spheres may
exist around the earth, and between man and the material envelope of the
sun without his being able to see them, by reason of the fact that his
spiritual sight is closed and he can only see what is material? The
spiritual spheres and their inhabitants are certainly more transparent
and intangible to mortal sight than his finger appeared just now. Yet
they exist and are as solid a reality as his finger, and are only
invisible by reason of his imperfect sight, which is limited to material
things of comparatively great density."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII.--Through the Gates of Gold--My Mother--My Home in
the Land of Bright Day--I Am Joined by Benedetto](wsl34)
