[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl29)  [Next](wsl31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVIII.--My Home and Work in the Morning Land.

I was not, however, destined to remain in the Land of Dawn. My home was
now to be in the circle of the Morning Land, and I was therefore
escorted thither by my friends.

It lay beyond the peaceful lake and those hills behind which I used to
watch the light of that dawning day which never seemed to grow brighter
or advance in the Land of Dawn, but whose beauties belonged to this
Morning Land. This land lay in an opposite direction from that range of
hills beyond which lay the Plain of Remorse.

Here in the Morning Land I found that I was to have a little house of my
own, a something earned by myself. I have always loved a place of my
own, and this little cottage, simple as it was, was very dear to me. It
was indeed a peaceful place. The green hills shut it in on every side
save in front, where they opened out and the ground stretched away in
undulating slopes of green and golden meadow land. There were no trees,
no shrubs, around my new home, no flowers to gladden my eyes, because my
efforts had not yet blossomed into flower. But there was one sweet
trailing honeysuckle that clustered around the little porch and shed the
fragrance of its love into my rooms. This was the gift of my beloved to
me, the spiritual growth of her sweet pure loving thoughts which twined
around my dwelling to whisper to me ever of her constant love and truth.

There were only two little rooms, the one for me to receive my friends
and to study in, and the other my chamber of repose, where I could rest
when weary with my work on the earth plane. And in this room there was
my picture framed in roses, and all my little treasures. The blue sky
outside shed down on me so pure a light, my eyes, long wearied to see
it, gazed on it again and yet again. The soft green grass and the
fragrant honeysuckle were all so sweet, so delicious to me, wearied as I
was with my long dark wanderings, that I was overcome with the emotions
of my gratitude. I was aroused by a kindly hand, a loving voice, and
looking up, beheld my father. Ah! what a joy, what a happiness I felt,
and still more when he bade me come to earth with him and show this home
in a vision to her who was its guiding star!

What happy hours I can recall when I look back to that, my first home in
the spirit land. I was so proud to think I had won it. My present home
is far finer, my present sphere far more beautiful in every way, but I
have never felt a greater happiness than I felt when that first home of
my own was given to me.

I should but weary my readers were I to attempt to describe all the work
on the earth plane I did at this time, all the sad ones I helped to
cheer and direct upon the better way. There is a sameness in such work
that makes one example serve for many.

Time passes on for spirits as well as mortals and brings ever new
changes--fresh progression. And thus while I was working to help others
I was gradually myself learning the lesson which had proved most hard
for me to learn. The lesson of that entire forgiveness of our enemies
which will enable us to feel that we not only desire them no harm but
that we even wish to do them good--to return good for evil cordially. It
had been a hard struggle to overcome my desire for revenge, or wish that
at all events some punishment should overtake the one who had so deeply
wronged me, and it was as hard, or harder even, to desire now to benefit
that person. Time and again while I was working on the earth plane I
went and stood beside that one, unseen and unfelt save for the thoughts
of me that would be awakened, and each time I perceived that my enemy's
thoughts were to the full as bitter as my own. There was no love lost
between us. Standing there I beheld time after time the events of our
lives blended together in one picture, the dark shadows of our
passionate hate dimming and blurring these pictures as storm clouds
sweep over a summer sky. And in the clearer light of my spiritual
knowledge I beheld where my faults had lain, as strongly or more so than
I beheld those of my enemy. And from such visits I would return to my
little cottage in the spirit land overwhelmed with the bitterest
regrets, the keenest anguish, yet always unable to feel aught but
bitterness and anger towards the one whose life seemed only to have been
linked by sorrow and wrong to my own.

At last one day while standing beside this mortal I became conscious of
a new feeling, almost of pity, for this person was also oppressed in
soul--also conscious of regret in thinking of our past. A wish had
arisen that a different course towards me had been followed. Thus was
there created between us a kinder thought, which though faint and feeble
was yet the first fruits of my efforts to overcome my own anger--the
first softening and melting of the hard wall of hatred between us. Then
was there given to me a chance to assist and benefit this person even as
the chance had before come to me of doing harm, and now I was able to
overcome my bitterness and to take advantage of this opportunity, so
that it was my hand--the hand which had been raised to curse and
blight--which was now the one to help instead.

My enemy was not conscious of my presence nor of my interference for
good, but felt in a dim fashion that somehow the hatred between us was
dead, and that, as I was dead, it were perhaps better to let our
quarrels die also. Thus came at last a mutual pardon which severed the
links which had so long bound our earthly lives together. I know that
during the earthly life of that one we shall never cross each other's
path again, but even as I had seen in the case of my friend Benedetto,
when death shall sever the thread of that earthly life, our spirits will
meet once again, in order that each may ask pardon from the other. Not
until then will all links be finally severed between us and each pass on
to our appointed sphere. Great and lasting are the effects upon the soul
of our loves and our hates; long, long after the life of earth is past
do they cling to us, and many are the spirits whom I have seen tied to
each other, not by mutual love but mutual hate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX.--The Formation of Planets](wsl31)
