[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wsl33)  [Next](wsl35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NJRA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands*, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), \[1896\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXII.--Through the Gates of Gold--My Mother--My Home in the Land of Bright Day--I Am Joined by Benedetto.

I was always fond of watching the clouds float over the sky and shape
themselves into pictures suggested by my thoughts. Since I reached the
second sphere of the spirit land my skies have always had clouds
floating over them, lovely light fleecy clouds which shape themselves
into a thousand forms and take on the most lovely shades of color,
sometimes becoming rainbow hued and at others of the most dazzling
white, and then again vanishing away altogether. I have been told by
some spirits that in their skies they never see a cloud, all is serene
clear beauty; and no doubt it is so in their lands, for in the spirit
world our thoughts and wishes form our surroundings. Thus, because I
love to see clouds they are to be seen in my sky, at times veiling and
softening its beauties and making cloud-castles for me to enjoy.

Now, some time after I obtained my little home in the Morning Land I
began to see between myself and my cloud-pictures a vision which, like
the mirage seen in the desert, hovered on the horizon, distinct and
lifelike, only to melt away as I gazed. This was a most lovely ethereal
gate of wrought gold, such as might be the entrance to some fairy land.
A clear stream of water flowed between myself and this gate, while trees
so fresh, so green, so aerial, they seemed like fairy trees, arched
their branches over it and clustered at the sides. Again and again did I
see this vision, and one day while I was gazing at it my father came
unnoticed by me and stood by my side. He touched my shoulder and said:

"Franchezzo, that gate is inviting you to go nearer and see it for
yourself. It is the entrance to the highest circle of this second
sphere, and it is within those gates that your new home is waiting for
you. You might have gone some time ago into those circles which lie
between you and it, had not your affection for this little cottage made
you content to remain in it. Now, however, it would be as well for you
to go forth and see if the wonders of that new land will not still more
delight you. I am, as you know, in the third sphere, which will,
therefore, be still above you, but the nearer you approach to me the
more easily can I visit you, and in your new home we shall be much
oftener together."

I was so surprised I could not answer for a little time. It seemed
incredible that I should be able so soon to pass those gates. Then,
taking my father's advice, I bade a regretful adieu to my little home
(for I grow much attached to places which I live long in) and set forth
to journey to this new country, the gate shining before me all the time,
not fading away as it had done before.

In the spirit land where the surface is not that of a round globe as
with the planets, you do not see the objects on the horizon vanishing in
the same way, and earth and sky meeting at last as one. Instead you see
the sky as a vast canopy overhead, and the circles which are above you
seem like plateaux resting upon mountain tops on your horizon, and when
you reach those mountains and see the new country spread out before you,
there are always on its horizon again more mountains and fresh lands
lying higher than those you have reached. Thus also you can look down on
those you have passed as upon a succession of terraces, each leading to
a lower, less beautiful one, till at last you see the earth plane
surrounding the earth itself, and then beyond that again (for those
spirits whose sight is well developed) lie another succession of
terrace-like lands leading down to Hell. Thus circle melts into circle
and sphere into sphere, only that between each sphere there exists a
barrier of magnetic waves which repels those from a lower sphere who
seek to pass it until their condition has become in harmony with the
higher sphere.

In my journey to the golden gates I passed through several circles of
this second sphere, whose cities and dwelling-places would have tempted
me to linger and admire them had I not been so eager to view the fair
land which was now the goal of my hopes. I knew, moreover, that I could
at any time on my way to earth stop and explore those intermediate
lands, because a spirit can always retrace his steps if he desires and
visit those below him.

At last I reached the top of the last range of mountains between me and
the golden gates, and saw stretched out before my eyes a most lovely
country. Trees waved their branches as in welcome to me and flowers
blossomed everywhere, while at my feet was the shining river and across
it the golden gates. With a great sense of joy in my heart I plunged
into that beautiful river to swim across, its refreshing waters closing
over my head as I dived and swam. I had taken no heed to my clothing and
as I landed on the farther side I looked to see myself dripping with
water, but in a moment I found my clothing as dry as could be, and what
was still stranger, my grey robe with its triple bordering of white had
changed into one of the most dazzling snowy lustre with a golden girdle
and golden borderings. At the neck and wrists it was clasped with little
plain gold clasps, and seemed to be like the finest muslin in texture. I
could scarce believe my senses. I looked and looked again, and then,
with a trembling, beating heart I approached those lovely gates. As my
hand touched them they glided apart and I passed into a wide road
bordered by trees and flowering shrubs and plants of most lovely
hues--like flowers of earth, indeed, but ah! how much more lovely, how
much more fragrant no words of mine can convey to you.

The waving branches of the trees bent over me in loving welcome as I
passed, the flowers seemed to turn to me as greeting one who loved them
well, at my feet there was the soft green sward, and overhead a sky so
clear, so pure, so beautiful, the light shimmering through the trees as
never did the light of earthly sun. Before me were lovely blue and
purple hills and the gleam of a fair lake, upon whose bosom tiny islets
nestled crowned with the green foliage of groups of trees. Here and
there a little boat skimmed over the surface of the lake filled with
happy spirits clad in shining robes of many different colors--so like to
earth, so like my beloved Southern Land, and yet so changed, so
glorified, so free from all taint of wrong and sin!

As I passed up the broad flower-girt road a band of spirits came to meet
and welcome me, amongst whom I recognized my father, my mother, my
brother and a sister, besides many beloved friends of my youth. They
carried gossamer scarfs of red, white and green colors, which they were
waving to me, while they strewed my path with masses of the fairest
flowers as I approached, and all the time they sang the beautiful songs
of our own land in welcome, their voices floating on the soft breeze in
the perfection of unison and harmony. I felt almost overcome with
emotion; it seemed far too much happiness for one like me.

And then my thoughts even in that bright scene turned to earth, to her
who was of all the most dear to me, where all were so dear, and I
thought, "Alas that she is not here to share with me the triumphs of
this hour; she to whose love more than to any other thing I owe it." As
the thought came to me I suddenly beheld her spirit beside me, half
asleep, half conscious, freed for a brief moment from the earthly body
and borne in the arms of her chief guardian spirit. Her dress was of the
spirit world, white as a bride's and shimmering with sparkling gems like
dew drops. I turned and clasped her to my heart, and at my touch her
soul awoke and she looked smilingly at me. Then I presented her to my
friends as my betrothed bride, and while she was still smiling at us
all, her guide again drew near and threw over her a large white mantle.
He lifted her in his arms once more, and like a tired child she seemed
to sink into slumber as he bore her away to her earthly body, which she
had left for a time to share and crown this supreme moment of my joy.
Ah, me! even in my joy I felt it hard to let her go, to think I could
not keep her with me; but the thread of her earthly life was not yet
fully spun, and I knew that she like others must travel the path of her
earthly pilgrimage to its end.

When my beloved was gone, my friends all clustered round me with tender
embraces, my mother whom I had never seen since I was a little
child--caressing my hair and covering my face with kisses as though I
had been still the little son whom she had left on earth so many, many
years ago that his memory of her had been but dim, and that the father
had supplied the image of both parents in his thoughts.

Then they led me to a lovely villa almost buried in the roses and
jasmine which clustered over its walls and twined around the slender
white pillars of the piazza, forming a curtain of flowers upon one side.
What a beautiful home it seemed! How much beyond what I deserved! Its
rooms were spacious, and there were seven of them, each typical of a
phase in my own character or some taste I had cultivated.

My villa was upon the top of a hill overlooking the lake which lay many
hundreds of feet below, its calm waters rippled by magnetic currents and
the surrounding hills mirrored in its quiet bosom, and beyond the lake
there was a wide valley. As one looks down from a mountain top to the
low hills and the dark valley and level plains below, so did I now look
down from my new dwelling upon a panorama of the lower spheres and
circles through which I had passed, to the earth plane and again to the
earth itself, which lay like a star far below me. I thought as I looked
at it that there dwelt still my beloved, and there yet lay the field of
my labors. I have sat many times since gazing out on that lone star, the
pictures of my past life floating in a long wave of memory across my
day-dream, and with all my thoughts was interwoven the image of her who
is my guiding star.

The room from which I could see this view of the distant earth was my
music-room, and in it were musical instruments of various kinds. Flowers
festooned the walls and soft draperies the windows, which required no
glass in their frames to keep out the soft zephyrs of that fair land. A
honeysuckle, that was surely the same sweet plant which had so rejoiced
my heart in my little cottage in the Morning Land, trailed its fragrant
tendrils around the window, and on one of the walls hung my picture of
my darling, framed with its pure white roses which always seemed to me
an emblem of herself. Here, too, I again found all my little treasures
which I had collected in my dark days when hope seemed so far and the
shadow of night was ever over me. The room was full of soft masses of
lovely spirit flowers, and the furniture was like that of earth only
more light in appearance, more graceful and beautiful in every way.
There was a couch which I much admired. It was supported by four
half-kneeling figures of wood-nymphs, carved as it would seem from a
marble of the purest white and even more transparent than alabaster.
Their extended arms and clasped hands formed the back and the upper and
lower ends; their heads were crowned with leaves and their floating
draperies fell around their forms in so graceful, so natural a manner,
it was difficult to believe they were not living spirit-maidens. The
covering of this couch was of a texture like swan's down, only it was
pale gold in color; so soft was it, it seemed to invite one to repose,
and often have I lain upon it and looked out at the lovely scene and
away to the dim star of earth with its weary pilgrims--its toiling
souls.

The next apartment was filled with beautiful pictures, lovely statues,
and tropical flowers. It was almost more like a conservatory than a
room, the pictures being collected at one end of it and the statues and
flowers forming a foreground of beauty that was like another and larger
picture. There was a little grotto with a fountain playing, the water
sparkling like diamonds and rippling over the sides of the smaller basin
into one larger still, with a murmuring sound which suggested a melody
to me. Near this grotto was one picture which attracted me at once, for
I recognized it as a scene from my earthly life. It was a picture of one
calm and peaceful evening in early summer when my beloved and I had
floated on the quiet waters of an earthly river. The setting sun glowing
in the west was sinking behind a bank of trees, while the grey twilight
crept over the hollows through the shade of the trees; and in our hearts
there was a sense of peace and rest which raised our souls to Heaven. I
looked around and recognized many familiar scenes, which had likewise
been full of happiness for me and in whose memories there was no sting.

There were also many pictures of my friends, and of scenes in the spirit
world. From the windows I could behold another view than from my
music-room. This view showed those lands which were yet far above me,
and whose towers and minarets and mountains shone through a dim haze of
bright mist, now rainbow hued, now golden, or blue, or white. I loved to
change from the one view to the other, from the past which was so clear,
to the future that was still dim, still veiled for me.

In this picture salon there was all which could delight the eye or rest
the body, for our bodies require repose as well as do yours on earth,
and we can enjoy to rest upon a couch of down earned by our labors as
much as you can enjoy the possession of fine furniture bought with gold
earned by your work on earth.

Another saloon was set apart for the entertainment of my friends, and
here again, as in the lower sphere, there were tables set out with a
feast of simple but delicious fruits, cakes, and other agreeable foods
like earthly foods, only less material, and there was also the delicious
sparkling wine of the spirit world which I have before mentioned.
Another room again was full of books recording my life and the lives of
those whom I admired or loved. There were also books upon many subjects,
the peculiarity in them being that instead of being printed they seemed
full of pictures, which when one studied them appeared to reflect the
thoughts of those who had written the books more eloquently than any
words. Here, too, one could sit and receive the inspired thoughts of the
great poets and literary men who inhabit the sphere above, and here have
I sat, and inscribed upon the blank pages of some book laid open before
me, poems to her who filled the larger half of all my thoughts.

From this room we passed out to the garden, my father saying he would
show me my chamber of repose, after our friends were gone. Here, as in
the house, flowers were everywhere, for I always loved flowers, they
spoke to me of so many things and seemed to whisper such bright fancies,
such pure thoughts. There was a terrace around the house, and the garden
seemed almost to overhang the lake, especially at one secluded corner
which was fenced in with a bank of ferns and flowering shrubs and backed
by a screen of trees. This nook was a little to the side of the house
and soon became my favorite resort; the ground was carpeted with soft
green moss as you have not on earth--and flowers grew all around. Here
there was a seat whereon I loved to sit and look away to the earth, and
fancy where my beloved one's home would be. Across all those millions of
miles of space my thoughts could reach her as hers could now reach me,
for the magnetic cord of our love stretched between us and no power
could ever shut us out from each other again.

When I had seen and admired all, my friends led me back to the house and
we all sat down to enjoy the feast of welcome which their love had
prepared for me. Ah! what a happy feast that was. How we proposed the
progression and happiness of each one, and then drank our toast in wine
which left no intoxication behind, no after reckoning of shame to mar
its refreshing qualities! How delicious seemed this fruit, these
numerous little delicacies which were all the creations of someone's
love for me. It seemed too much happiness, I felt as in a delightful
dream from which I must surely wake. At last all my friends left except
my father and mother, and by them I was conducted to the upper chambers
of the house. They were three in number. Two were for such friends as
might come to stay with me, and both were most prettily furnished, most
peaceful looking; the third room was for myself, my own room, where I
would retire when I desired to rest and to have no companion but my own
thoughts. As we entered, the thing which attracted me most and filled me
with more astonishment that anything I had yet seen, was the couch. It
was of snowy white gossamer, bordered with pale lilac and gold, while at
the foot were two angels, carved, like the wood-nymphs, out of the
dazzlilng white alabaster I have vainly tried to describe. They were
much larger than myself or any spirits whom I had seen, and their heads
and extended wings seemed almost to touch the roof of my room, and the
pose of these two most lovely figures was perfect in its grace. Their
feet scarce touched the floor and with their bending forms and
half-outstretched wings they appeared to hover over the bed as though
they had but just arrived from their celestial sphere.

They were male and female forms, the man wearing on his head a helmet
and bearing in his hand a sword, while the other hand held aloft a
crown. His figure was the perfection of manly beauty and grace, and his
face with its perfect features so firmly moulded, expressing at once
strength and gentleness, had to my eyes a look of calm regal majesty
that was divine.

The female figure at his side was smaller--more delicate in every way.
Her face was full of gentle, tender, womanly purity and beauty. The eyes
large and soft even though carved in marble, the long tresses of her
hair half-veiling her head and shoulders. One hand held a harp with
seven strings, the other rested upon the shoulder of the male angel as
though she supported herself with his strength, while the lovely head
was half bent forward and rested upon her arm, and on her head she wore
a crown of pure white lilies.

The look upon her face was one of such exquisite sweetness, such
maternal tenderness, it might well have served for that of the Virgin
Mother herself. The attitudes, the expressions of both were the most
perfect realization of angelic beauty I have seen, and for some moments
I could but gaze at them expecting them to melt away before my eyes.

At last I turned to my father and asked how such lovely figures came to
be in my room, and why they were represented with wings, since I had
been told that angels had not really wings growing from their bodies at
all.

"My son," he answered, "these lovely figures are the gift of your mother
and myself to you, and we would fain think of you as reposing under the
shadow of their wings, which represent in a material form the protection
we would ever give you. They are shown with wings because that is the
symbol of the angelic spheres, but if you will look closely at them you
will find that these wings are like a part of the drapery of the forms,
and are not attached to the bodies at all as though they grew from the
shoulder in the fashion earthly artists represent them. The wings,
moreover, express the power of angelic beings to soar upon these
outstretched pinions into Heaven itself. The shining helmet and the
sword represent war, the helmet the war of the Intellect against Error,
Darkness and Oppression. The sword, the war man must ever wage against
the passions of his lower nature. The crown symbolizes the glory of
virtue and self-conquest.

"The harp in the woman's hand shows that she is an angel of the musical
sphere, and the crown of lilies expresses purity and love. Her hand
resting on the man's shoulder is to show that she derives her strength
and power from him and from his stronger nature, while her attitude and
looks as she bends over your couch express the tender love and
protection of woman's maternal nature. She is smaller than the man,
because in you the masculine elements are stronger than the feminine. In
some representations of the angels of men's souls they are made of equal
size and stature, because in those characters the masculine and feminine
elements are both equal, both evenly balanced, but with you it is not
so, therefore are they represented with the woman dependent upon the
stronger one.

"The male angel typifies power and protection. The female angel purity
and love. Together they show the eternal dual nature of the soul and
that one-half is not complete without the other. They also are the
symbolical representation of the twin guardian angels of your soul whose
wings may be said in a spiritual sense to be ever outstretched in
protection over you."

Shall I confess that even in that beautiful home there were times when I
felt lonely? I had this home, earned by myself, but as yet I had no one
to share it with me, and I have always felt a pleasure to be doubly
sweet when there was some one whom I could feel enjoyed it also. The one
companion of all others for whom I sighed was still on earth, and alas!
I knew that not for many years could she join me. Then Faithful Friend
was in a circle of the sphere above me in a home of his own, and as for
Hassein, he was far above us both, so that though I saw them at times as
well as my dear father and mother, there was no one to share my life
with me *en bon camarade,* no one to watch for my home-coming, and no
one for whom in my turn I could watch. I was often on earth--often with
my darling--but I found that with my advanced position in the spirit
world I could not remain for so long at a time as I had been wont to do.
It had upon my spirit much the effect of trying to live in a foggy
atmosphere or down a coal mine, and I had to return more frequently to
the spirit land to recover myself.

I used to sit in my lovely rooms and sigh to myself, "Ah, if I had but
some one to speak with, some congenial soul to whom I might express all
the thoughts which crowd my mind." It was therefore with the greatest
pleasure that I received a visit from Faithful Friend, and heard the
suggestion he had to make to me.

"I have come," said he, "on behalf of a friend who has just come to this
circle of the sphere, but who has not yet earned for himself a home of
his own and therefore desires to find one with some friend more richly
endowed than himself. He has no relatives here and I thought that you
might be glad of his companionship."

"Most truly, I would be delighted to share my home with your friend."

Faithful Friend laughed. "He may be called your friend also, for you
know him. It is Benedetto."

"Benedetto!" I cried in astonishment and delight. "Ah! then he will
indeed be doubly welcome. Bring him here as soon as possible."

"He is here now--he awaits at your door; he would not come with me till
he was sure you would really be glad to welcome him."

"No one could be more so," I said. "Let us go at once and bring him in."

So we went to the door and there he stood, looking very different from
when I had last seen him in that awful city of the lower sphere--then so
sad, weighed down, so oppressed--now so bright, his robes, like mine, of
purest white, and though his face was still sad in expression yet there
was peace, and there was hope in the eyes he raised to mine as I clasped
his hand and embraced him as we of my Southern Land embrace those we
love and honor. It was with much pleasure that we met--we who had both
so sinned and so suffered--and we were henceforth to be as brothers.

Thus it was that my home became no more solitary, for, when one of us
returns from our labors, the other is there to greet him, to share the
joy and the care, and to talk over the success or the failure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII.--My Vision of the Spheres](wsl35)
