[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sdr06)  [Next](sdr08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662308/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians*, by Magus Incognito, \[1918\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### PART VI

### THE UNIVERSAL FLAME OF LIFE

In the Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians, we find the following Fifth
Aphorism:

#### The Fifth Aphorism

**V. The One is the Flame of Life. The Many are the Sparks in the Flame.
The Flame once lighted kindles everything within its sphere. The Fire is
in everything and everywhere; there is nothing dark or cold within its
sphere**.

In this Fifth Aphorism of Creation, the Rosicrucian is directed to apply
his attention to the concept of the Universal Life—the Life of the World
Soul, permeating everything everywhere within its sphere of existence.
This concept of the World Soul as a Flaming Fire of Life, abiding in the
entire Universe in all of its parts, is represented by the Rosicrucians
by the symbol of a circle filled with flaming fire.

The symbol of Life has always been the Flaming Fire, in all occult
teachings. The Eternal, Universal Fire, or Flame, which kindles ever all
that presents itself to its influence, yet ever remains unchanged and
undiminished in its Essence, has ever been the favorite symbol of the
occultists for the Universal Life in Manifestation. When the term
"Spirit" is used to indicate "Life," then the Flame or Fire has always
been the symbol for Spirit.

And, indeed, the Flame is the most appropriate

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

symbol for Life that can be thought of. For the Flame while ever
remaining the same, yet is never composed of the same particles or
sparks for even two consecutive seconds. The Flame, itself, in its
Essence, ever remains the same and unchanged, yet its Manifestation is
always accompanied and correlated to the appearance and disappearance of
innumerable

<span id="img_fig09"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Figure 9. Symbol
of the Universal Flame of Life](tn/fig09.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig09.jpg)  
Figure 9. Symbol of the Universal Flame of Life  
</span>

tiny particles of material substance which it kindles into sparks, then
destroys by the process of combustion, and then replaces by others of
similar nature.

And so it is with the Universal Life. It ever persists unchanged and
unaltered in its Essence, yet constantly manifesting itself through and
in countless material forms which come and go and are in turn replaced
by other forms. The form appears, is consumed, and perishes—yet the
Flame abides and

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

survives all change. Those who have plunged deep into the esoteric
teachings are aware that there are many other very good reasons why the
Flame or Fire is the best possible symbol for Life, but it is not
thought expedient to go into these further reasons at this time and in
this place.

It was formerly the teachings of science that the Universe was composed
of two great classes of Things, as follows: (1) Living Things, and (2)
Lifeless Things. In the first class were placed all human and animal
life, at least during their term of vital existence; plants were
afterward added, though somewhat grudgingly, by science. In the second
class, all Things below the plane of animal or plant life were placed;
it being taught that minerals, chemical elements, etc., were utterly
lifeless. Any who ventured to question this accepted classification were
deemed of unsound mind, and unworthy of serious consideration.

But the esoteric schools of thought, and the occultists, were always
insistent upon the principle that there was nothing lifeless in the
universe—that everything was instinct with life in some form, degree, or
phase. And, lo! modern science has at last reached the point where it is
practically looking Occultism squarely in the face, in full agreement
upon this important point. The old idea of a half-lifeless universe is
fast passing away, and men of advanced science are beginning to whisper
to each other that "The Universe is Alive, as a Whole and in all of its
parts." Surely this is a remarkable change in scientific opinion.

This changed conception of science is picturesquely expressed by Luther
Burbank, the " wizard of plant life," as follows: "All my investigations
have led me

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

away from the idea of a dead material universe tossed about by various
forces, to that of a universe which is absolutely all force, life, soul,
thought, or whatever name we may choose to call it. Every atom,
molecule, plant, animal, or planet, is only an aggregation of organized
unit forces, held in place by stronger forces, thus holding them for a
time latent, though teeming with inconceivable power. All life on our
planet is, so to speak, just on the outer fringe of this infinite ocean
of force. The universe is not half-dead, but all alive."

Prof. Dolbear goes back even to the Ether of Space in his assumption of
Omnipresent Life, when he says: The Ether has besides the function of
energy and motion, other inherent qualities, out of which could emerge
under proper circumstances, other phenomena, such as life, mind, or
whatever may be in that substratum." Prof. Cope has intimated that "the
basis of Life lies back of the atoms and may be found in the Universal
Ether."

Saleeby, in his well-known work of Evolution, in which he carries to its
logical conclusions the work of Herbert Spencer, says: "Life is
potential in matter; life-energy is not a thing unique and created at a
particular time in the past. If evolution be true, living matter has
been evolved by natural processes from matter which is, apparently,
dead. But if life is potential in matter, it is a thousand times more
evident that mind is potential in life. The evolutionist is impelled to
believe that mind is potential in matter. (I adopt that form of words
for the moment, but not without future criticism.) The microscopic cell,
a minute speck of matter that is to become man, has in it the promise
and germ of mind. May we not draw the inference that the elements of
mind are

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

present in those chemical elements—carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen,
sulphur, phosphorus, sodium, potassium, chlorine—that are found in the
cell. Not only must we do so, but we must go further, since we know that
each of these elements, and every other, is built up out of one
invariable unit, the electron, and we must therefore assert that mind is
potential in the unit of matter—the electron itself. It is to assert the
sublime truth first perceived by Spinoza, that mind and matter are the
warp and woof of what Goethe called 'the living garment of God.' Both
are complementary expressions of the Unknowable Reality which underlies
both."

Flammarion has said: 'The universe is a dynamism. Life itself,
[from](errata.htm#7) the most rudimentary cell up to the most
complicated organism, is a special kind of movement, a movement
determined and organized by a directing force. Visible matter, which
stands for us at the present moment for the universe, and which certain
classic doctrines consider as the origin of all things—movement, life,
thought—is only a word void of meaning. The universe is a great
organism, controlled by a dynamism of the psychical order. Mind gleams
through its every atom. There is mind in everything, not only in human
and animal life, but in plants, in minerals, in space." \[The student
must always remember that where there is "mind," there must be "life;"
and where "life," there must be "mind." Hence the importance of these
admissions of modern science.\]

Haeckel in his "Riddle of the Universe," sometimes called "The Bible of
Materialism," makes the following statement, remarkable coming from such
a source: "I cannot imagine the simplest chemical and physical process,
without attributing the movements

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

of the material particles to unconscious sensation." Again, he says:
"The idea of chemical affinity consists in the fact that the various
chemical elements perceive the qualitative differences in other
elements—experience 'pleasure' or 'revulsion' at contact with them, and
execute specific movements on this ground." He adds, at another point:
"The sensations and responses in plant and animal life are connected by
a long series of evolutionary stages with the simpler forms of sensation
that we find in the inorganic elements, and that reveal themselves in
chemical affinity." He quotes with approval the statement of Nageli
that: "If the molecules possess something that is related, however
distantly, to sensation, it must be uncomfortable to be able to follow
their attractions and repulsions; uncomfortable when they are forced to
do otherwise."

But not only is modern science giving approval to the oldest conceptions
of the occultists concerning Universal Life in the manner mentioned
above, i.e. by general statements; it is also quoting with approval the
experiments and discoveries of leading scientists along the same
line—experiments which go to prove the general statements above quoted.
Let us consider a few of these experiments and discoveries in the
laboratories of modern science.

Science has practically created counterparts of the diatoms or "living
crystals"—created artificially, in the laboratories, creatures similar
to these links between the mineral and the animal forms. The diatoms are
tiny geometrical forms, composed of a tiny shell of siliceous material
enclosing a minute drop of plasm, resembling glue. These creatures are
visible through the microscope, and are so small that thousands of them
might be gathered together

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

on the head of a pin. They so closely resemble crystals that a very
careful examination is required to distinguish them from true crystals;
and yet they are alive, and perform all the functions of life.

Crystals, as you know, are born, grow, live, and may be killed by
chemicals or electricity. Some investigators have discovered indications
of elementary sex functions in certain crystals. A scientific writer has
said: "Crystallization, as we are to learn now, is not a mere mechanical
grouping of dead atoms—it is a birth." The crystal forms from the mother
liquor, and its body is built up systematically, regularly, and
according to a well-defined pattern, plan, or design—as true to the
pattern as are the bodies of plants and animals. The certainty is
present in the crystal creative life activity. And, not only does the
crystal grow in this way, like a plant or an animal, but it also
reproduces itself by separation and division, just as do the individuals
of the lower forms of plant-life and animal-life. The distinguishing
point between the growth and reproduction of crystal forms and that of
the higher forms of life has, heretofore, been held to be as follows:
the crystal takes its nourishment from the outside and builds up its
bodily structure on its outer surface, while the lowly forms of
plant-life and animal-life takes its nourishment from the outside but
builds up its bodily structure from within. If the crystal had a
soft-centre and took its nourishment in the way of the low form of
plant-life or animal-life (building from within) it would be almost
identical with the diatom; or if the diatom grew from the outside, and
had a hard centre, it would be considered a true crystal; so, as you see
there is very little real difference between

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

them. And, now, lo! even this distinction is apparently to be wiped out
by the discovery of artificial living crystals, evolved in the
laboratory.

Careful scientific tests have determined that there is what is known as
"the fatigue of elasticity" in metals, which is relieved by a rest or
"vacation." This has also been found true of razors, the edges of which
are restored by a little rest, thus corroborating the ancient
"superstition" of users of razors. Tuning forks have been found to lose
their power of vibration by over-use, a short rest restoring the same.
Machinery in mills and factories have been found to be benefited by an
occasional "day off." Metals have been discovered to be subject to
disease and infection, and in some cases have been found to have been
actually poisoned and afterward restored by antidotes. Window glass,
especially the fine stained glass of cathedral windows, is found to be
subject to an infectious disease, spreading from pane to pane, and
resulting in the disintegration of the substance of the glass. Workmen's
tools have been found to experience fatigue, and to be the better for an
occasional holiday or longer vacation. Every observing machinist has
observed certain idiosyncrasies in particular machines which need
"humoring."

The most conclusive [scientific](errata.htm#8) report upon this
interesting subject, so far as known to the present writer, is that
which recites the celebrated series of experiments conducted upon
so-called "non-living matter, several years ago, and which are recorded
in the book entitled "Response in the Living and Non-Living," by the
scientists who conducted the experiments, Professor J. Chunder Bose, of
the Calcutta University, who occupies a high position in the scientific

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

world. Professor Bose's experiments have aroused the greatest interest
in prominent scientific circles, and have aided greatly in corroborating
the conclusions of other scientists who hold that "there is no such
thing as dead matter."

Proceeding from the fundamental postulate that the best and only true
test of the presence of life is the response of matter to external
stimulus, Professor Bose has demonstrated that in many instances
so-called inorganic matter, such as metals, minerals, etc., give a
response to such stimulus which is similar, if not indeed identical, to
the response of the matter composing the bodies of "living" animals,
plants, and men. He devised certain very delicate apparatus for
registering and measuring such responses, the same being traced as
curves on a revolving cylinder. He employed that most delicate
scientific instrument called, the Galvanometer in these experiments. The
Galvanometer will register the faintest irritation of nerve-matter, or
living muscle; and the experiments proved that it would also register
the variations of minerals, metals, etc., subjected to the stimulus of
outside force; the curves or tracings being practically identical in
either case.

Professor Bose reports that when he attached the Galvanometer to bars of
various metals they gave a similar response when struck or twisted; the
greater the degree of irritation caused in the metal the greater the
degree of response. It should be noted that the living nerve or muscle
reacts and registers in precisely the same way, and so far as the
instrument indicated the response of muscle, nerve, metal, and mineral
was identical. Just as the nerve or registered "fatigue" after
frequently repeated stimulus, so did the metal or mineral so register.
And,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

just as the nerve or muscle registered the renewal of vigor after a
rest, so did the metal or mineral. To all intents and purposes the
"living" and "non-living" matter gave the same response and evidence of
"life." Moreover, the instrument showed something like "tetanus" in
metals, caused by repeated shocks; recovery after the rest being also
recorded. Moreover, several metals recorded fatigue from other causes;
and in some cases the metals showed the effect of poisoning, recovery by
the application of antidotes, and also the signs of excitement or
intoxication from other forms of stimulus.

The experiments also showed that metals manifest a condition akin to
sleep; that they can be killed; that they exhibit torpor and
sluggishness; that they wake up, and can be roused into activity; that
they may be stimulated, strengthened, weakened, drugged or intoxicated;
that they suffer from extreme cold or heat; that they respond to the
presence of certain drugs just as do living plant and animal. A piece of
steel subjected to the effect of poison recorded on the delicate
instrument a gradual fluttering and weakening, resulting in final death,
just as does a portion of animal matter, or an organ of the body of an
animal, or a piece of the living substance of a plant. When revived
before it was too late, the response of the metal was gradual in the
case of both muscle and metal. A most interesting fact is the statement
of the [experimenter](errata.htm#9) that even the poisons which served
to "kill" the metals showed a like susceptibility to the actions of
other poisons, and were found to be, themselves, capable of being
"killed" by poisons. In the case of these metal "killings," however, the
molecular structure was apparently not affected, just as the similar
structure

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

in the animal tissue is not affected—in both cases there was apparently
a causing of a "something within" to cease to function in the substance,
a "something" which may as well be called a "soul" as any other term.

Other scientific laboratory experiments have revealed most interesting
facts concerning the production of living things from "non-living
matter." Dr. Charles Bastian, of London, England, has prepared and
exhibited more than five thousand microphotographs showing the evolution
of organic living forms from the inorganic "non-living" (so-called). He
claims to have produced certain microscopic black spots from a
previously perfectly clear liquor, which spots gradually enlarge and are
transformed into certain forms of lowly bacteria. Professor Burke, of
Cambridge, England, claims to have produced from sterilized bouillon, by
the action of sterilized radium chloride, certain minute living bodies
which manifest subsequent growth and reproduction by subdivision.

The ordinary student of chemistry and physics is familiar with what is
called "metallic vegetation," notably in the case of the "lead tree," in
which there is manifested the appearance of plant forms on the part of
the acidulated solution of certain metallic substances. In the case of
the "lead tree" an acidulated solution of acetate of lead is placed in a
wide-necked bottle, from the cork of which bottle a piece of copper wire
is suspended, at the end of which dangles a piece of zinc which hangs at
the centre of the lead solution. When the bottle is corked the copper
wire begins at once to be surrounded with a growth of metallic lead
closely resembling a very fine moss, which moss gradually

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

develops branches and limbs and finally foliage, in the end a miniature
bush or tree being formed. Other metallic solutions produce similar
phenomena. Saltpeter, subjected to the effect of polarized light,
assumes forms closely resembling the orchid. Crystals of frost form on
window panes the shapes of leaves, branches, foliage, blossoms, flowers,
etc. Many metals tend to crystallize in the forms of vegetable growth;
and this is particularly significant when it is remembered that crystals
are beginning to be regarded as "almost alive" by modern science, as
noted in a preceding paragraph of the present chapter.

The scientific magazines, a few years ago, contained references to an
interesting experiment performed by a German scientist using certain
metallic salts. The scientist subjected the salts to the action of a
galvanic current, and was astounded to discover that around the negative
or cathode (female) pole of the battery the particles of the metallic
salt began to group themselves in the form of a tiny mushroom, with stem
and umbrella-like top. These metallic mushrooms at first displayed a
transparent appearance, but gradually developed color, and finally
assumed a pale straw color on the stems, with a bright red color on the
top of the umbrella and a faint rose tint on the under surface. But the
most startling feature of the [phenomenon](errata.htm#10) was that the
metallic mushroom had fine veins or tiny tubes running along the
interior of the steins, through which the nourishment, or additional
material for growth, was transported—the mushroom **being fed from the
inside**, as in the case of the true fungus mushroom. It seemed that, to
all intents and purposes, these metallic

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

mushrooms were practically the connecting link between mineral and
vegetable life.

As has been stated elsewhere in this chapter, modern science now stands
on the threshold of the discovery (by actual laboratory proof) that
there is no such thing as "lifeless" matter—and that Everything is
Alive. This has been the contention of the occultists for thousands of
years. As a writer has said, it would seem that as in the case of the
great Tunnel of the Alps, the two bands of workers, each on its own side
of the mountain, were fast approaching the place where only a thin
partition separated them one from another; and that already they can
faintly hear the sounds of each others' picks penetrating the thin
dividing wall between the two camps. The occultist may now safely await
the day when modern science will actually "prove for him the old
teaching of the esoteric schools."

Moreover, science is coming very near to the place when it will perceive
the truth of the old occult axiom that "All Power is Will-Power," and
that the movements of electrons, atoms, molecules, and masses of matter
are in response to an inward "feeling" resulting from the attraction or
repulsion to or from other forms of matter, and the "will" action in
response thereto, as Haeckel and Nageli (materialistic scientists though
they may be called) have claimed for half a generation past. The
contention of the Materialists that Life and Mind are but qualities of
Matter, and are to be found in all forms of material objects, needs but
to be **inverted** in order to show the Truth, long since uttered by the
ancient occultists, namely that Matter is but the Outer Garment of
**Soul** (Life-Mind), and that all material forms are ensouled by Life
and Mind. The conception

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

of the Materialists is but the Inverted Pyramid of Error, while the
conception of the Occultists is the firmly placed, and soundly resting,
true Pyramid of Truth—that Rock of Ages which can never be overturned,
for it rests squarely and firmly on the Eternal Base of Being.

Remember, O student, the Rosicrucian aphorism that **"The Fire is in
everything and everywhere: there is nothing dark or cold within its
sphere."** 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VII. The Planes of Consciousness](sdr08)
