[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sdr02)  [Next](sdr04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662308/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians*, by Magus Incognito, \[1918\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### PART II

### THE ETERNAL PARENT

In the Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians we find the following
Aphorism of Creation:

#### The First Aphorism

**I. The Eternal Parent was wrapped in the Sleep of the Cosmic Night.
Light there was not: for the Flame of Spirit was not yet rekindled. Time
there was not: for Change had not re-begun. Things there were not: for
Form had not re-presented itself. Action there was not: for there were
no Things to act. The Pairs of Opposites there were not: for there were
no Things to manifest Polarity. The Eternal Parent, causeless,
indivisible, changeless, infinite, rested in unconscious, dreamless
sleep. Other than the Eternal Parent there was Naught, either Real or
Apparent**.

In this First Aphorism of Creation the Rosicrucian student is directed
to apply his attention to the concept of the Infinite Source of All
Things—the Eternal Parent "from which all things proceed." This Eternal
Parent—the Infinite Unmanifest, is represented by the Rosicrucians by
the symbol of a circle, having nothing outside of itself and nothing
within itself.

The circle, however, must not be interpreted as conveying the idea of
limitation; rather is it intended to convey the idea of limitlessness.
The symbol, although the best possible for the purpose,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

is inadequate—this by reason of the impossibility of representing the
Infinite by a finite symbol. The only adequate symbol of the Eternal
Parent would be that of Infinite Space, and this, of course, cannot be
represented by a sign, for no matter how wide the circle might be drawn
there would always be Space beyond it. But, recognizing the
impossibility of an

<span id="img_fig03"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Figure 3. Symbol
of the Infinite Unmanifest](tn/fig03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig03.jpg)  
Figure 3. Symbol of the Infinite Unmanifest  
</span>

adequate symbol, the ancient Rosicrucians have adopted the empty circle
as the best possible finite symbol of the Infinite Unmanifest.

The concept of Infinite Space has always been regarded by the
Rosicrucians as the best possible concept with which to "think of" the
Infinite Unmanifest, since the latter cannot be actually "thought" in
consciousness as a Thing, and consciousness is capable of thinking only
of Things. Strictly speaking, the Infinite Unmanifest is a "Nothing"
rather than

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

a "Thing"; and yet not such a "Nothing" as implies "not-ness" or
"naught," but rather such a "Nothing" as implies "The Possibility of
Everything, yet without the limitations of Thingness."

Infinite Space cannot be considered a "Thing," for it has none of the
characteristics of a "Thing." And yet it cannot be denied actual
existence and presence. Roughly speaking, it may be defined as "A
No-Thing, containing within itself the possibility of infinite
Thingness, or the infinite possibility of Things." Infinite Space must
be thought of as the Absolute Container of Everything, whether Manifest
or Unmanifest—for outside of Infinite Space there is only Nothingness,
or, more strictly speaking, there is no outside of Infinite Space.

Infinite Space, therefore, has always been the accepted occult and
esoteric symbol by means of which men are able to "think of" the
Infinite Unmanifest—the Eternal Parent, wrapped in the Sleep of the
Cosmic Night. In one of the ancient occult catechisms, the question was
asked: **"What is that which ever has been, is now, and ever shall be,
whether there be a Universe or not, and whether there be gods or not?"**
And the answer is: **"Space!"**

The strength of this symbol of Infinite Space, as indicating the
Infinite Unmanifest, is perceived when the mind tries to think, or even
imagine, the absence of Infinite Space—either as absent before its
creation, or else as absent after its destruction. It will, of course,
be discovered that the human mind, and the human imagination, finds it
impossible to think of Space being absent in either event. The mind is
compelled to think of Space as being Infinite, and as being Eternal,
without regard to whatever else is held to be either present or absent
at any time,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

past, present, or future. And at the same time, the mind finds that it
is unable to define Space as a Thing—yet it dare not regard it as a
Nothing or Naught. It is found that Infinite Space must be always
thought of as necessarily eternally present, and yet ever free from the
limitations of Things.

Moreover, as Infinite Space is invisible and beyond the other senses, it
cannot be "known" or cognized as a Thing. Thought regarding it must
always report "not this; not that" regarding it; and it answers to the
ancient sage's statement of Reality that: "The Essence of Being is
without attributes, formless, devoid of distinctions, and unconditioned.
It is different from that which we know, and from that which we do not
know. Words and thought turn from it without finding it. The wise answer
only by silence all questions concerning its nature. To all suggestions
concerning its qualities, properties, and attributes, the wise simply
answer: 'neti, neti'—'not this, not that!' Of THAT the wise assert
simply 'It IS.'" And as other ancient sages have said: "The imagination,
the understanding, and abstract thinking will always strive in vain to
represent the Infinite; for no form of finiteness (to which thought and
speech also belong) can express the Infinite; nor can that which was
timed express the Timeless and Eternal; nor can thought resultant from
the chain of causation grasp the Causeless or Self-Existent." So, in
every way, and from every angle of view, we discover that the concept of
Infinite Space is a noble and worthy symbol of THAT which we mean when
we try to think of the Infinite Unmanifest—of the Essence of Being
before Manifestation into Activity and Form.

The First Aphorism states that **"The Eternal** 

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **Parent was
wrapped in the Sleep of the Cosmic Night."**

In this sentence there is a reference to that teaching concerning the
Cosmic Days and Nights, which under some of many names is found lying at
the base of all esoteric teachings and occult philosophies. The highest
human and superhuman intelligences have testified to the fact that
Rhythm is abiding in, and manifest through, the Cosmos—from the tiniest
point of Manifested Being to the Totality of Being, there is found to
ever exist the presence and manifestation of Rhythm.

There is reported to us from the highest occult sources of information
the fact that the ALL presents Itself alternately in great periods of
Manifestation (called the Cosmic Days), followed by a like great period
of Unmanifestation (called the Cosmic Nights). During the Cosmic Night
the Eternal Parent exists as if wrapped in an unconscious and dreamless
sleep, from which with the Dawn of the new Cosmic Day it awakens
gradually into Manifestation. The Cosmic Day, in turn, gradually finds
itself changing into a Twilight, which slowly but surely darkens into
the Cosmic Night when all again is stilled and quiet. And so on, and on,
and on, in infinite sequence and repetition—in infinite rhythm—the
Cosmos presents this succession of Days and Nights: of Manifestation and
Unmanifestation. And, so it has been forever and ever, and will continue
forever and ever, without end, ceasing, or interruption. Such is the
report of the wise and the illumined teachers of the race.

A great occult teacher has written of this teaching, as follows: "The
Esoteric Doctrine teaches, like Buddhism and Brahmanism, and even the
Kabala,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

that the one infinite and unknown Essence exists from all eternity, and
in regular and harmonious successions is either passive or active. In
the poetical phraseology of Manu these conditions are called the 'Days'
and the 'Nights' of Brahma. The latter is either 'awake' or 'asleep' \*
\* \* Upon inaugurating an active period, says the Secret Doctrine, an
expansion of this Divine Essence from without inwardly, and from within
outwardly, occurs in obedience to eternal and immutable law, and the
phenomenal or visible universe is the ultimate result of the long chain
of cosmical forces thus progressively set in motion. In like manner,
when the passive condition is resumed, a contraction of the Divine
Essence takes place, and the previous work of creation is gradually and
progressively undone. The visible universe becomes disintegrated, its
material dispersed, and 'darkness' solitary and alone, broods once more
over the face of the 'deep.' To use a metaphor from the Secret Books,
which will convey the idea more clearly, an out-breathing of the
'unknown essence' produces the world; and an inhalation causes it to
disappear. This process has been going on from all eternity, and our
present universe is but one of an infinite series, which had no
beginning and will have no end."

In this connection, the student of Herbert Spencer will find in the
ancient occult doctrines and teachings an unsuspected firm basis for the
teaching of his modern master. Spencer in his teaching of the universal
presence and activity of Rhythm but echoes the old occult teachings on
the subject. Note the following from the pen of the modern prophet of
Evolution: "Apparently, the universally coexistent forces of attraction
and repulsion which, as

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

we have seen, necessitate rhythm in all minor changes throughout the
universe, also necessitate rhythm in the totality of its changes—produce
now an immeasurable period during which the attracting forces
predominating, cause universal concentration, and then an immeasurable
period, during which the repulsive forces predominating, cause universal
diffusion—alternate eras of Evolution and Dissolution."

The First Aphorism further states: **"Light there was not: for the Flame
of Spirit was not yet rekindled."**

This is apt to prove a "hard saying" to those who, having the half-truth
only, and not realizing the existence of the other half, have thought of
Infinite Reality as being Spirit, of which the Flame is of course the
occult and esoteric symbol. But the best ancient wisdom, as voiced by
the most careful teachers, have ever taught those qualified to know the
whole truth that not only back of Matter, but also back of Spirit, there
abides an Eternal and Infinite Essence, which is neither Spirit nor
Matter, but which is the unconditioned root and source of both Spirit
and Matter. Light and Flame—the two universally recognized esoteric and
occult symbols of Spirit—have back of them the "lightless and heatless"
Essence of Light and Heat. The Infinite Reality is the Essence of the
Spirit Light and Flame—not the Light and Flame itself. The student will
be aided in. grasping this truth, if he will contemplate the flame of a
lamp, a candle, a gas-flame, or any other kind of physical flame; he
will perceive to be present, under and at the centre of the flame, a
dark, transparent, "something" which is the "essence" from which the
Flame itself proceeds, and upon which it draws for support and
sustenance. In occult

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

terminology the counterpart of this on the higher planes of Being is
called "the Dark Flame"—it is the Essence of the Flame and Light, and
not Flame or Light itself. As an ancient writer has said: "The Essence
is the 'spirit of the fire,' and not Fire itself; therefore, the
attributes of Fire, i.e., heat, flame, and light, are not the attributes
of the Essence, but rather of the Fire of which the Essence is the
Cause."

Therefore, the Infinite Unmanifest—the sleeping Eternal Parent—must not
be thought of by the student as being Spirit, in the sense of the latter
term as commonly employed in our thought. Rather is it akin to Pure
Space from which the Flame emerges, and in which it is contained. There
is close reasoning and distinction here, which will become clear to the
student as he proceeds, but which must be noted even now in passing.

The First Aphorism further states: **"Time there was not: for Change had
not begun."**

Here, again, is expressed another "hard saying" for the student who has
not grasped the true meaning of "Time." Time, in the strict
philosophical meaning of the term, does not mean **pure duration of
existence**—instead, it means "the measure of changing existence." An
enduring existence in which there is no change of form, activity, or
degree, mental or physical, is Timeless. Time, in fact, is but the
"measure of Change." Without Change there can be no Time, in the true
sense of the latter term. Pure Being manifests not Time. Time is the
result of Becoming, or Change, and is always measured by change or
becoming in something.

The following statement from a modern text book may serve to point to
the difference between the conception of Pure Duration, and Time: "Pure
Duration

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

is conceived without regard to the motions of changes in things. Time on
the contrary is the sensible measure of any portion of duration, often
marked by particular phenomena, as the apparent revolution of the
celestial bodies, the rotation of the earth on its axis, etc. Our
conception of Time originates in that of motions; and particularly in
those regular and equable motions carried on in the heavens, the parts
of which, from their perfect similarity to each other, are correct
measures of the continuous and successive quantity called Time, with
which they are conceived to co-exist. Time, therefore, may be defined
as, The perceived number of successive movements. Time, based upon the
movements of the celestial bodies, or the earth, is frequently measured
by instruments based upon such movements, such as watches, clocks,
sun-dials, etc."

We are also conscious of the passage of Time by changes in our mental
states, our thoughts, our mental images, etc., both in the waking state
or the state of dreams. Without changes in the outside world,
represented to our consciousness by perceptions of such changes, or
without changes in our mental states, Time would not exist for us. It
thus follows that given an Eternal Changeless Reality, for whom and by
whom no "outside world" has been or is manifested; and which is wrapped
in an unconscious and dreamless sleep, such as is pictured in the First
Aphorism; for such a Reality there could exist no Time—no Time would
present itself—Timelessness would abide, until Change began once more.

Therefore, the student will perceive the necessary truth of the
statement of the First Aphorism that for the Eternal Parent, wrapped in
the Sleep of the Cosmic Night, "Time there was not: for Change had

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

not begun." It is impossible to hold otherwise, considering the nature
of Time, and the absence of Change during the Cosmic Night of the
Eternal Parent. The student will perceive that given Infinite Existence,
and the absence of Change, then we must necessarily postulate Pure
Duration, and the absence of Time. There is no logical escape from this
conclusion.

The First Aphorism further states: **"Things there were not: for Form
had not re-presented itself."**

Here, again, we are presented with an unescapable conviction. A "Thing"
is "Whatever exists, or is conceived to exist, as a separate entity, and
as a separable or distinguishable object of thought." Every "Thing" must
manifest "form." "Form" is (1) the shape or structure of anything, as
distinguished from the material of which it is composed, hence, the
configuration or figure of anything; (2) the mode of acting or
manifestation of anything to the senses, or to the intellect; (3) the
assemblage of qualities constituting a conception, or the internal
constitution making an existing thing what it is."

Strictly speaking a "Thing" must be capable of being thought of or
pictured as composed of qualities, attributes, or properties
distinguishing it from other things; hence every "Thing" must manifest
form in order to be so distinguished and perceived by the senses or by
the intellect as a Thing. The Eternal Parent—the Infinite
Unmanifest—cannot be held to manifest Form, or to display or present any
particular quality, property, or attribute of Manifestation, when in its
state of Unmanifestation. When the Eternal Parent takes upon itself the
robes of Manifestation it proceeds to manifest the appearance of
Things—these Things each displaying Form,

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

and certain qualities, properties, or attributes which distinguish them
from other manifested Things. It it axiomatic in metaphysics and
philosophy that the Unmanifest cannot be thought of as possessing or
manifesting (in its essential nature) any one set of qualities,
properties, or attributes which appear later in its Manifestation of
Things, as distinguished from the opposite set of qualities, properties,
or attributes. And it cannot be thought of as possessing (in its
essential nature) of both of the opposing sets of qualities, attributes,
or properties, for "opposites cancel each other," and "antinomies
condition not."

Instead of possessing qualities, properties, or attributes—or Form, in
any of the meaning of that term—the Unmanifest must be regarded as
possessing the "possibility of infinite manifestation of Form,
qualities, properties, and attributes in its manifestations," or "the
infinite possibility of the manifestation of Form, qualities,
properties, or attributes in its manifested Things." The Infinite
Un-manifest cannot be thought of as a Thing, either in itself, or by
means of its symbol of Infinite Space. Rather, as an illumined occult
master has expressed it, it must be regarded as "An Omnipresent,
Eternal, Boundless, and Immutable **Principle**, regarding which all
speculation is impossible, since it transcends the power of human
conception and could only be dwarfed by any human expression or
similitude. It is beyond the range and reach of thought—it is
unthinkable and unspeakable."

In the period of the Cosmic Night, there being nothing present except
the Infinite Unmanifest, therefore it is seen that, necessarily, "Things
there were not: for Form had not re-presented itself." There is no
logical escape from this conclusion.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

The First Aphorism further states: **"Action there was not: for there
were no Things to act."**

This statement requires little or no explanation. There being no Things
present, there were no Things to act. And all action of the Infinite
must be through, by, or in Things. All action requires Change, and where
there is no Change there can be no action. And yet, it must not be
thought that the Infinite Unmanifest is powerless, for it possesses all
Power; it must not be thought that it is motionless, for in itself it is
Abstract Motion. Speaking in finite terms, it may be said that in its
state of the Infinite Unmanifest the Eternal Parent dwells in a state of
such infinite Motion that as compared with relative Motion it is in a
state of Absolute Rest.

The First Aphorism further states: **"The Pairs of Opposites there were
not: for there were no Things to manifest Polarity."**

As every student of philosophy knows, or should know, every Thing
manifests a combination of qualities, properties, or attributes. Each
quality, property, or attribute, is one of a Pair of Opposites—one Pole
of the Two Poles of Qualities which are ever found present. Given one
quality, property, or attribute of Thingness, it necessarily follows
that there is in existence in other Things an Opposite, or "Other
Pole"—its antithesis. There is no exception to this rule, and though the
Opposite may at first appear to be absent, diligent search will surely
reveal it, and its necessary existence must be logically predicated.

Thus we have the following familiar Opposites: Hard and Soft, Hot and
Cold, Large and Small, Far and Near, Up and Down, Day and Night, Light
and Darkness, Long and Short, etc. Even where our language fails to
supply a definite term for the Opposite

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

of a discovered quality, property, or attribute, the Opposite may be
expressed by prefixing the term "Not" to the observed quality, property,
or attribute.

Some thinkers have sought to imply that the term "Infinite" implies a
quality, property, or attribute which was the opposite of Finite, but
this is merely a play upon words. The word "Infinite" implies simply
**an absence of limitations, bounds, or form**, and does not indicate
any limit, bound, or form no matter how extended. It is impossible to
form a mental image of The Infinite Unmanifest, or to attach Thingness
or Form, or quality, property, or attribute of any kind to it—hence the
term "Infinity" is not a true Opposite. It is only when Manifestation
begins that the Pairs of Opposites or Polarity put in an appearance.

The Infinite Unmanifest possesses the possibility of an infinity of
manifestations, all objects of which manifestation must exhibit one or
the other of any given set of qualities, properties, or attributes. But
to the Infinite Unmanifest itself—the Eternal Parent, in its
essence—there can be no Polarity or presence of any one set of Pairs of
Opposites.

Here, as elsewhere, the student is directed to think of the Infinite
Unmanifest by means of its symbol of Infinite Space, whenever he wishes
to test any of the statements of the First Aphorism.

The First Aphorism finally states: **"The Eternal Parent, causeless,
indivisible, changeless, infinite, rested in unconscious, dreamless,
sleep. Other than the Eternal Parent there was Naught, either Real or
Apparent."**

That the Eternal Parent is Causeless is a self-evident fact, for there
is nothing which could have

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

caused the Eternal and Original Being, from which all Manifestation
proceeds. That which is Eternal must, of necessity, be Causeless. That
which is Infinite, can have no Other which could have caused it. And it
could not have been caused from or by Nothing, for "from Nothing,
nothing comes."

That the Eternal Parent is Indivisible is likewise self-evident, for
anything that can be divided or separated into parts or particles, must
in the first place be originally composed of parts or particles. And
anything that is composed of parts or particles must be merely a
Composition, an Aggregate, a Collection, or Crowd of such parts and
particles, and, therefore, not a Real Entity or Unity at all. Moreover,
that which is Infinite cannot become divided or separated into parts or
particles without losing its essential Infinity—a divided Infinite is no
Infinite at all, but merely a Collection or Crowd of Finite Things.
Absolute Indivisibility must be predicated of True Unity and Infinite
Being. There is no logical escape from this conclusion.

That the Eternal Parent is incapable of Essential Change is likewise
self-evident, for though It may **manifest** an infinity of change,
nevertheless it must always remain essentially Itself, and never
anything else but Itself. Moreover, not being composed essentially of
qualities, properties, or attributes, it cannot undergo the change which
comes from the shifting of the poles of the Opposites. And not having
Form, it cannot experience the change which arises from Change of Form.
Absolute Immutability must be predicated of the Eternal Parent. There is
no logical escape from this conclusion.

That the Eternal Parent is Infinite is likewise self-evident. It must be
Infinite, for there is nothing

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

else by which it may be limited, defined, bounded, caused, influenced,
or affected. That which is Absolute and Original, Ultimate and
Elementary, can have no binding or limiting conditions or Things.
Absolute Infiniteness must be predicated of the Eternal Parent. There is
no logical escape from this conclusion.

That the Eternal Parent rested in "Unconscious, dreamless sleep" is held
by all advanced metaphysicians and philosophers to be a logical
necessity, if we are to postulate the existence of a period or state of
Unmanifestation. For, as all psychologists and philosophers know,
consciousness (even in the form of dreams) is impossible without Change.
A changeless state of consciousness can only be expressed as
Unconsciousness. And yet, the student must not fall into the error of
believing that this Infinite Unconsciousness implies "inferiority to
consciousness"; for rather does it imply a state of "rising above"
ordinary consciousness—a state of Infinite Super-Consciousness—a state
of transcending consciousness, in which there is ever present the
"possibility of consciousness" without the exercise thereof. Ordinary
consciousness is a **descent** from this state of Unconsciousness, not
an **ascent**. This distinction is important, and must not be lost sight
of by the student.

As we shall presently discover, when Manifestation begins to dawn into
appearance, then, and then only, the Eternal Parent may be said to begin
to "dream"—to dream of an infinity of universes, succeeding each other
in rhythmic sequence. And only when the Eternal Parent shall awaken
fully from the dream, into the bright noon-tide of infinite
self-consciousness, may It be thought of as being fully

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "awake" and
conscious. These facts will unfold themselves as we proceed with the
consideration of the Aphorisms.

**"Other than the Eternal Parent there was Naught, either Real or
Apparent."** Here, again, we have a self-evident truth. There can have
been no other Real being—no "other" to the Infinite and Absolute
Reality—for the predicate of Infinity and Absoluteness carries with it
the implicit predicate of Aloneness, Oneness, and Uniqueness. There can
be no "other" Real being to Infinite Reality. And, in the absence of
Manifestation, there can have been no Apparent (i.e., manifested or
"created" Thing or Things) Thing in existence in the period of the
Infinite Unmanifestation. There is no logical escape from this
conclusion.

Finally, the student is once more bidden to fall back upon the symbol of
Infinite Space, in this consideration of the Infinite Unmanifest,
whenever he finds it difficult, or almost impossible, to conceive of the
truth of the statements contained in the First Aphorism as concerned
with the Eternal Parent in the state of the Infinite Unmanifest, in the
Cosmic Night. The symbol will be found perfectly adequate in order to
permit one to "think of the Infinite Un-manifest," although, of course,
it is impossible to paint a mental picture of either symbol or the
reality which it represents.

Edgar Allen Poe has well said of the thought and concept of "The
Infinite," and similar efforts of the human mind to think of the
unthinkable: "This merest of words, and some other expressions of which
the equivalents exist in nearly all languages, is by no means the
expression of an idea, but of an effort of one. It stands for the
possible attempt at

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

an impossible conception. Man needed a term by which to point out the
**direction** of this effort—the cloud behind which lay, forever
invisible, the **object** of this attempt. A word, in fine, was demanded
by means of which one human being might put himself in relation at once
with another human being and with a certain **tendency** of the human
intellect. Out of this arose this term, which is thus the representative
but of **the thought of a thought**. \* \* The fact is that, upon the
enunciation of any one of that class of terms to which this belongs,—the
class representing **thoughts of thought**, he who has a right to say
that he thinks **at all** feels himself called upon **not** to entertain
a conception, but simply to direct his mental vision toward some given
point in the intellectual firmament where lies a nebula never to be
solved. To solve it, indeed, he makes no effort, for with a rapid
instinct he comprehends, not only the impossibility, but as regards all
human purposes, the inessentiality of its solution. He sees at once how
it lies **out** of the brain of man, and even **how**, if not **exactly
why**, it lies out of it."

In the Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians, therefore, there is no
attempt made to **define** the Essence of the Eternal Parent—in fact, it
is held, in the spirit of Spinoza's celebrated aphorism, that "To
**define** The Infinite is to **deny** The Infinite." In refusing to
ascribe the finite qualities, properties, and attributes of Personality
to the Eternal Parent, the Rosicrucians do not mean to imply that The
Infinite Reality is **below** the plane of Personality, but rather that
it is so immeasurably **above** that plane, and so infinitely transcends
all Personality, that it is childish to think or speak of it in the
terms of Personality.

It has been held by eminent thinkers that even the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

finite intelligence of man is capable of conceiving of a state of
intelligence as much higher than that of the most intelligent man as the
latter is higher than that of the black beetle. This being so, it can
readily be seen that such a Power, to which the manifestation of such a
superlative degree of intelligence being is but a bagatelle effort of
power, is, and must be, in its essential nature so infinitely above the
plane of human personality that it is practically an insult to think of
it in the terms of Personality.

As has been frequently stated in this consideration of the First
Aphorism, the state of Being of the Infinite and Absolute Reality—the
Eternal Parent—during this state of the Infinite Unmanifest cannot be
expressed in words, for it is beyond words. It can be thought of only
symbolically—by means of Its only possible symbol, i.e., that of
Infinite Space. Even symbolized, it can be thought of only in terms of
negation; for being in the state of Absolute Being (which as Hegel says
is practically identical with Non-Being, when the term "Being" is used
in the sense of finite, conditioned, and qualified Being), it cannot be
thought of as possessing any of the qualities, attributes, or properties
of Thingness. Therefore, its state of Being can be suggested only by
using the terms implying the negation of all those qualities,
properties, and attributes which men ascribe to Things—even to those
Things which they feel rather than conceive, and which represent even
the remotest limits of their mentative efforts.

Edwin Arnold, in his beautiful poem "The Light of Asia," has well
expressed the Buddhistic conception of this "beyond-thoughtness" of the
Essence of the Infinite Reality, in the following words:

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Om Amataya! Measure not with words the Immeasurable;  
 Nor sink the string of thought into the Fathomless.  
 Who asks does err; who answers, errs; say naught!  
 Shall any gazer see with mortal eyes?  
 Or any searcher know with mortal mind?  
 Veil after veil will lift—but there must be  
 Veil upon veil behind!"

</div>

And, so, the Rosicrucians regard the fact of the Infinite Ummanifest—the
Absolute Essence—only under the symbol of the Infinite Sea of Pure
Space, resting in a state of Absolute Calm and Absolute Transparency
through which the mortal eye gazes and seems to see but NOTHING: but
which the Illumined Intuition knowness to be Allness instead of
Nothingness—Absolute and Infinite Being instead of Nothingness—Infinite
Life, instead of Death!

Though it cannot be perceived by mortal sense, and though it transcends
the highest effort of both intellect and imagination to conceive or
picture, yet the highest reports of Pure Reason inform us that it must
be present, and the highest reports of Intuitive Faith render it
impossible to doubt its all-presence and reality. To the ignorant and
the half-wise, this symbol may seem to indicate Nothing: but to the
illumined and truly wise, it is seen to represent Absolute ALLNESS of
Reality. Gaze ye, then, upon this symbol of Infinite Space with awe, for
it represents our highest (though feeble) efforts at expressing the
nature of the Infinite Essence of Being!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III. The Soul of the World](sdr04)
