[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](crt12)  [Next](crt14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span id="img_08600"></span>

[![Sir Launcelot takes the armor of Sir Kay](tn/08600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08600.jpg.md)  
Sir Launcelot takes the armor of Sir Kay  

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span id="img_headp00"></span> ![](img/headp00.jpg)

### Chapter Eighth

How Sir Launcelot Rescued Sir Kay From a Perilous Pass. Also, How He
Changed Armor with Sir Kay and what Befell.

ONE day Sir Launcelot came at early nightfall to a goodly manor-house
and there he besought lodging for the night, and lodging was granted to
him very willingly.

Now there was no lord of that manor, but only an old gentlewoman of very
good breeding and address. She made Sir Launcelot right welcome and gave
such cheer as she could, setting before him a very

|                                                    |
|----------------------------------------------------|
| *The old gentlewoman makes Sir Launcelot welcome*. |

good supper, hot and savory, and a great beaker of humming mead
wherewith to wash it down. Whilst Sir Launcelot ate, the gentlewoman
inquired of him his name and he told her it was Sir Launcelot of the
Lake. "Ha!" quoth she, "I never heard that name before, but it is a very
good name."

At this Sir Launcelot laughed: "I am glad," said he, "that my name
belikes thee. As for thy not having heard of it--well, I am a young
knight as yet, having had but three years of service. Yet I have hopes
that by and by it may be better known than it is at this present."

"Thou sayest well," quoth she, "for thou art very young yet, wherefore
thou mayst not know what thou canst do till thou hast tried." And
therewith Sir Launcelot laughed again, and said: "Yea, that is very
true."

Now after Sir Launcelot had supped, his hostess showed him to the
lodging she had provided for him wherein to sleep, and the lodging was
in a fair garret over the gateway of the court. So Sir Launcelot went to
his bed and, being weary with journeying, he presently fell into a deep
and gentle sleep.

Now about the middle of the night there fell of a sudden the noise of
someone beating upon the gate and calling in a loud voice and demanding

|                                        |
|----------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot is aroused from sleep*. |

immediate admittance thereat. This noise awoke Sir Launcelot, and he
arose from his couch and went to the window and looked out to see who it
was that shouted so loudly and made such uproar.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

The moon was shining at that time, very bright and still, and by the
light thereof Sir Launcelot beheld that there was a knight in full armor
seated upon horseback without the gate, and that the knight beat upon
the gate with the pommel of his sword, and shouted that they should let
him in.

But ere anyone could run to answer his call there came a great noise of
horses upon the highroad, and immediately after there appeared three
knights riding very fiercely that way, and these three knights were
plainly pursuing that one knight. For, when they perceived him, they
rode very violently to where he was, and fell upon him fiercely, all
three at one time; wherefore, though that one knight defended himself as
well as he could, yet was he in a very sorry way, and altogether likely
to be overborne. For those three surrounded him so close to the gate
that he could do little to shift himself away from their assaults.

Now when Sir Launcelot beheld how those three knights attacked that one
knight, he said to himself: "Of a surety, yonder knight is in a very
sorry way. I will do what I can to help him; for it is a shame to behold
three knights attack one knight in that way. And if he be slain in this
assault, meseems I shall be a party to his death."

Therewith he ran and put his armor upon him, and made ready for battle.
Then he drew the sheet from his bed, and he tied the sheet to the

|                                                              |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot goeth to the rescue of the knight assaulted*. |

bar of the window and by it he let himself quickly down to the ground
not far from where those knights were doing battle. So being safely
arrived in that way he cried out in a very loud voice: "Messires, leave
that knight whom ye assail, and turn to me, for I have a mind to do
battle with you myself."

Then one of those knights, speaking very fiercely, said: "Who are you,
and what business have you here?"

"It matters not who I am," said Sir Launcelot, "but I will not have it
that you three shall attack that one without first having had to do with
me."

"Very well," said that knight who had spoken, "you shall presently have
your will of that."

Therewith he and his fellows immediately descended from their horses,
and drew their swords and came at Sir Launcelot upon three sides at
once. Then Sir Launcelot set his back against the gate and prepared to
defend himself.

Therewith that knight whom he would defend immediately got down from his
horse with intent to come to the aid of Sir Launcelot, but Sir Launcelot
forbade him very fiercely, saying: "Let be, Sir Knight, this is my
quarrel, and you shall not meddle in it."

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Upon this, those three knights rushed upon him very furiously, and they
struck at him all at once, smiting at him wherever they could and with
all their might and main. So Sir Launcelot had much ado to defend
himself from their assault. But he made shift that they should not

|                                                 |
|-------------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot does battle with three knights*. |

all rush in upon him at once, and by and by he found his chance with one
of them. Whereupon he turned suddenly upon that one, and suddenly he
lashed so terrible a buffet at him that the knight fell down and lay as
though he had been struck dead with the force thereof.

Then, ere those other two had recovered themselves, he ran at a second
and struck him so fierce a blow that his wits left him, and he staggered
like a drunken man and ran around and around in a circle, not knowing
whither he went. Then he rushed upon the third and thrust him back with
great violence, and as he went back Sir Launcelot struck him, too, as he
had struck his companions and therewith that knight dropped his sword
and fell down upon his knees and had not power to raise himself up.

Then Sir Launcelot ran to him and snatched off his helmet, and catched
him by the hair with intent to cut off his head. But at that the fallen
knight embraced Sir Launcelot about the knees, crying out: "Spare my
life!"

"Why should I spare you?" said Sir Launcelot. "Sir," cried the knight,
"I beseech you of your knighthood to spare me."

"What claim have you upon knighthood," said Sir Launcelot, "who would
attack a single knight, three men against one man?"

Then the other of those knights who had been staggered by Sir
Launcelot's blow, but who had by now somewhat recovered himself, came
and kneeled to Sir Launcelot, and said: "Sir, spare his life, for we all
yield ourselves unto you, for certes, you are the greatest champion in
all the world."

Then Sir Launcelot was appeased, but he said: "Nay, I will not take your
yielding unto me. For as you three assaulted this single knight, so
shall you all three yield to him."

"Messire," said the knight who kneeled: "I am very loth to yield us to
that knight, for we chased him hither, and he fled from us, and we would
have overcome him had you not come to his aid."

"Well," said Sir Launcelot, "I care nothing for all that, but only that
you do as I will. And if ye do not do it, then I must perforce slay your
companions and you two. Wherefore you may take your choice."

Then said that knight who kneeled: "Messire, I see no other

|                                                   |
|---------------------------------------------------|
| *The three knights must yield to the one knight*. |

thing to do than to yield us as you would have, wherefore we submit
ourselves unto this knight whom you have rescued from us."

Then Sir Launcelot turned to that knight to whom he had brought aid in

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

that matter, and he said: "Sir Knight, these knights yield themselves
unto you to do as you command them. Now I pray you of your courtesy to
tell me your name and who you are."

"Sir," said that knight, "I am Sir Kay the Seneschal, and am King
Arthur's foster-brother, and a knight of the Round Table. I have been
errant now for some time in search of Sir Launcelot of the Lake. Now, I
deem either that you are Sir Launcelot, or else that you are the peer of
Sir Launcelot,"

"Thou art right, Sir Kay," said Sir Launcelot, "and I am Sir Launcelot
of the Lake." So thereat they two made great joy over one another, and
embraced one another as brothers-in-arms should do.

Then Sir Kay told Sir Launcelot how it was with those three knights who
had assailed him; that they were three brethren, and that he had
overthrown the fourth brother in an adventure at arms and had hurt him
very sorely thereby. So those three had been pursuing him for three days
with intent to do him a harm.

Now Sir Kay was very loath to take submission of those three knights,
but Sir Launcelot would have it so and no other way. So Sir Kay
consented

|                                                   |
|---------------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Kay taketh submission of the three knights*. |

to let it be as Sir Launcelot willed. Thereupon those three knights came
and submitted themselves to Sir Kay, and Sir Kay ordained that they
should go to Camelot and lay their case before King Arthur, and that
King Arthur should adjudge their case according to what he considered to
be right and fitting.

Then those three knights mounted upon their horses and rode away, and
when they had done so the gates of the manor were opened, and Sir
Launcelot and Sir Kay entered in. But when the old lady who was his
hostess beheld Sir Launcelot come in, she was very greatly astonished,
for she wist he was still asleep in his bed-chamber. Wherefore she said:
"Sir, methought you were in bed and asleep." "So indeed I was," said Sir
Launcelot, "but when I saw this knight in peril of his life against
three knights, I leaped out of my window and went to his aid." "Well,"
said his hostess, "meseems that you will sometime be a very good knight,
if you have so much courage whilst you are so young." And at that both
Sir Launcelot and Sir Kay laughed a great deal.

Then the chatelaine set bread and wine before Sir Kay, and he ate and
refreshed himself, and thereafter he and Sir Launcelot went to that
garret above the gate, and there fell asleep with great ease of body.

 

Now before the sun arose Sir Launcelot awoke but Sir Kay still slept
very soundly. Then Sir Launcelot beheld how Sir Kay slept, and he had

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

a mind for a jest. So he clad himself in Sir Kay's armor altogether from
head to foot, and he took Sir Kay's shield and spear, and he

|                                        |
|----------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot takes Sir Kay's armor*. |

left his armor and shield and spear for Sir Kay to use. Then he went
very softly from that room, and left Sir Kay still sleeping. And he took
Sir Kay's horse and mounted upon it and rode away; and all that while
Sir. Kay knew not what had befallen, but slept very deeply.

Now after a while Sir Kay awoke, and he found that Sir Launcelot was
gone, and when he looked he found that his own armor was gone and that
Sir Launcelot's armor was left. Then he wist what Sir Launcelot had
done, and he said: "Ha! what a noble, courteous knight is the gentleman.
For he hath left me his armor for my protection, and whilst I wear it
and carry his shield and ride his horse, it is not likely that anyone
will assail me upon my way. As for those who assail him, I do not
believe that they will be likely to find great pleasure in their
battle."

Therewith he arose and clad himself in Sir Launcelot's armor, and after
he had broken his fast he thanked his hostess for what she had given
him, and rode upon his way with great content of spirit.

(And it was as Sir Kay had said, for when he met other knights upon the
road, and when they beheld the figure upon his shield, they all said:
"It is not well to meddle with that knight, for that is Sir Launcelot."
And so he came to Camelot without having to do battle with any man.)

 

As for Sir Launcelot, he rode upon his way with great cheerfulness of
spirit, taking no heed at all of any trouble in the world, but chanting
to himself as he rode in the pleasant weather. But ever he made

|                                             |
|---------------------------------------------|
| *How Sir Launcelot travels toward Camelot*. |

his way toward Camelot, for he said: "I will return to Camelot for a
little, and see how it fares with my friends at the court of the King."

So by and by he entered into the country around about Camelot, which is
a very smooth and fertile country, full of fair rivers and meadows with
many cots and hamlets, and with fair hedge-bordered highways,
wonderfully pleasant to journey in. So travelling he came to a very
large meadow where were several groves of trees standing here and there
along by a river. And as he went through this meadow he saw before him a
long bridge, and at the farther side of the bridge were three pavilions
of silk of divers colors,

|                                                   |
|---------------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot perceives three knights at least*. |

which pavilions had been cast in the shade of a grove of beech-trees. In
front of each pavilion stood a great spear thrust in the earth, and from
the spear hung the shield of the knight to whom the pavilion belonged.
These shields Sir Launcelot read very easily, and so knew the knights
who were there. To wit: that they were Sir

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Gunther, Sir Gylmere, and Sir Raynold, who were
three brothers of the Court of King Arthur. As Sir Launcelot passed
their pavilions, he saw that the three knights sat at feast in the
midmost pavilion of the three, and that a number of esquires and pages
waited upon them and served them, for those knights were of very high
estate, and so they were established as high lords should be.

Now when those knights perceived Sir Launcelot they thought it was Sir
Kay because of the armor he wore, and Sir Gunther, who was the eldest of
the three brothers, cried out: "Come hither, Sir Kay, and eat with us!"

|                                                                |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| *The three knights bid Sir Launcelot come to least with them*. |

But to this Sir Launcelot made no reply, but rode on his way. Then said
Sir Gunther: "Meseems Sir Kay hath grown very proud this morning. Now I
will go and bring him back with me, or else I will bring down his pride
to earth." So he made haste and donned his helmet and ran and took his
shield and his spear, and mounted his horse and rode after Sir Launcelot
at a hard gallop. As he drew nigh to Sir Launcelot he cried out: "Stay,
Sir Knight! Turn again, and go with me!" "Why should I go with you?"
said Sir Launcelot. Quoth Sir Gunther: Because you must either return
with me or do battle with me." "Well, said Sir Launcelot, "I would
rather do battle than return against my will." And at that Sir Gunther
was astonished, for Sir Kay was not wont to be so ready for a battle. So
Sir Launcelot set his shield and spear and took his stand, and Sir
Gunther took his stand. Then, when they were in all ways prepared, each
set spur to his horse and

|                                         |
|-----------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot overthrows Sir Gunther*. |

rushed together with terrible speed. So each knight struck the other in
the midst of his shield, but the onset of Sir Launcelot was so terrible
that it was not to be withstood, wherefore both Sir Gunther and his
horse were overthrown in such a cloud of dust that nothing at all was to
be seen of them until that cloud lifted.

At this both Sir Raynold and Sir Gylmere were astonished beyond measure,
for Sir Gunther was reckoned to be a much better knight than Sir Kay,
wherefore they wist not how it was that Sir Kay should have overthrown
him in that fashion.

So straightway Sir Gylmere, who was the second of those brothers, called
out to Sir Launcelot to tarry and do battle. "Very well," said Sir
Launcelot, "if I cannot escape thee I must needs do battle. Only make
haste, for I would fain be going upon my way."

So Sir Gylmere donned his helm in haste and ran and took his shield and
spear and mounted upon his horse. So when he had made himself ready in
all ways he rushed upon Sir Launcelot with all his might and Sir
Launcelot rushed against him.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

In that encounter each knight struck the other in the midst of his
shield, and the spear of Sir Gylmere burst into pieces, but Sir
Launcelot's

|                                         |
|-----------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot overthrows Sir Gylmere*. |

spear held, so the breast-strap of Sir Gylmere's saddle bursting, both
saddle and knight were swept entirely off the horse and to the earth,
where Sir Gylmere lay altogether stunned.

Then Sir Raynold came against Sir Launcelot in like manner as the others
had done, and in that encounter Sir Launcelot overthrew

|                                        |
|----------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot wins from Sir Raynold*. |

both horse and man so that, had not Sir Raynold voided his horse, he
would likely have been very sadly hurt.

Then Sir Raynold drew his sword and cried out in a loud voice: "Come,
Sir Knight, and do me battle afoot!" But Sir Launcelot said: "Why will
you have it so, Sir Knight? I have no such quarrel with you as to do
battle with swords." "Ha!" said Sir Raynold, "you shall fight with me.
For though you wear Sir Kay's armor, I wot very well that you are not
Sir Kay, but a great deal bigger man than ever Sir Kay is like to be."

"Nay," said Sir Launcelot, "I will not do any more battle with you." And
therewith he drew rein and rode away, leaving Sir Raynold standing very
angry in the middle of the highway.

After that Sir Launcelot rode very easily at a quiet gait, with no great
thought whither he rode, until after a while he came to a place where a
road went across a level field with two rows of tall poplar trees, one
upon either side of the highway. Then Sir Launcelot perceived where,
beneath the shade of these poplar trees, were four knights standing

|                                           |
|-------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot meets lour noble knights*. |

each by his horse. And these four knights were conversing very
pleasantly together. Now as Sir Launcelot drew nigh he perceived that
those were four very famous noble knights of the Round Table; to wit:
one of those knights was his own brother, Sir Ector de Maris, another
was Sir Gawain, another was Sir Ewain, and the fourth was Sir Sagramore
le Desirous.

Now as Sir Launcelot drew nigh Sir Gawain said: "Look, yonder cometh Sir
Kay the Seneschal." Unto this Sir Sagramore le Desirous said: "Yea, this
is he; now bide you here for a little while, and I will go and take a
fall of him."

So straightway he mounted upon his horse, and he rode toward Sir
Launcelot, and he cried out: Stay, Sir Knight, you cannot go farther
until you have had to do with me. "What would you have of me?" quoth Sir
Launcelot. "Sir," said Sir Sagramore, "I will have a fall of you."
"Well," said Sir Launcelot, "I suppose I must pleasure you, since it
cannot be otherwise."

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

Therewith he dressed his shield and his spear and Sir Sagramore dressed

|                                           |
|-------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot overthrows Sir Sagramore*. |

his shield and his spear, and when they were in all ways prepared they
ran together at full tilt. In that encounter Sir Sagramore's spear
broke, but Sir Launcelot struck so powerful a blow that he overthrew
both horse and man into a ditch of water that was near-by.

Then Sir Ector de Maris said: "Ha, surely some very ill chance has
befallen Sir Sagramore for to be overthrown by Sir Kay. Now I will go
and have ado with him, for if the matter rests here there will be no
living at court with the jests which will be made upon us."

So he took horse and rode to where Sir Launcelot was, and he went at a
very fast gallop. When he had come near to Sir Launcelot he cried out:
"Have at thee, Sir Kay, for it is my turn next!" "Why should I have at
thee?" said Sir Launcelot, "I have done thee no harm." "No matter," said
Sir Ector, "you can go no farther until you have had to do with me."
"Well," said Sir Launcelot, "if that is so, the sooner I have to do with
thee, the sooner shall I be able to go upon my way."

Therewith each knight made himself ready and when they were in all

|                                       |
|---------------------------------------|
| *Sir Launcelot overthrows Sir Ector*. |

ways prepared they came together with such force that Sir Launcelot's
spear went through Sir Ector's shield and smote him upon the shoulder,
and Sir Ector was thrown down upon the ground with such violence that he
lay where he had fallen, without power to move.

Then said Sir Ewain to Sir Gawain where they stood together: "That is,
the most wonderful thing that ever I beheld, for never did I think to
behold Sir Kay bear himself in battle in such a fashion as that. Now
bide thee here and let me have a try at him." Therewith Sir Ewain
mounted his horse and rode at Sir Launcelot, and there were no words
spoken this time, but each knight immediately took his stand to do
battle. Then they ran their horses together, and Sir Launcelot gave Sir
Ewain such a buffet that he was astonished, and for a little he knew not
where he was, for his spear fell down out of his hand, and he bore his
shield so low that Sir Launcelot might have slain him where he stood if
he had been minded to do so.

Then Sir Launcelot said: "Sir Knight, I bid thee yield to me." And Sir
Ewain said: "I yield me. For I do not believe that thou art Sir Kay

|                                      |
|--------------------------------------|
| *Sir Ewain yields to Sir Launcelo*t. |

but a bigger man than he shall ever be. Wherefore I yield me." "Then
that is well," said Sir Launcelot. "Now stand thou a little aside where
thou mayst bring succor unto these other two knights, for I see that Sir
Gawain has a mind to tilt with me."

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

And it was as Sir Launcelot said, for Sir Gawain also had mounted his
horse and had made himself ready for that encounter. So Sir Gawain and
Sir Launcelot took stand at such place as suited them. Then each knight
set spurs to his horse and rushed together like thunder, and each knight
smote the other knight in the midst of his shield; and in

|                                        |
|----------------------------------------|
| *Sir Gawain fails with Sir Launcelot*. |

that encounter the spear of Sir Gawain brake in twain but the spear of
Sir Launcelot held, and therewith he gave Sir Gawain such a buffet that
Sir Gawain's horse reared up into the air, and it was with much ado that
he was able to void his saddle ere his horse fell over backward. For if
he had not leaped to earth the horse would have fallen upon him.

Then Sir Gawain drew his sword and cried very fiercely: "Come down and
fight me, Sir Knight! For thou art not Sir Kay!"

"Nay, I will not fight thee that way," said Sir Launcelot, and therewith
he passed on his way without tarrying further.

But he laughed to himself behind his helmet as he rode, and he said:
"God give Sir Kay joy of such a spear as this, for I believe there came
never so good a spear as this into my hand. For with it I have
overthrown seven famous knights in this hour.

As for those four knights of the Round Table, they comforted one another
as best they could, for they knew not what to think of that which had
befallen them. Only Sir Ector said: "That was never Sir Kay who served
us in this wise, but such a man as is better than ten Sir Kays, or twice
ten Sir Kays, for the matter of that."

Now Sir Launcelot came to Camelot about eventide, what time King Arthur
and his court were assembled at their supper. Then there was great joy
when news was brought of his coming and they brought him in to the court
and set him beside the King and the Lady Guinevere all

|                                          |
|------------------------------------------|
| *How Sir Launcelot returned to Camelot*. |

armed as he was. Then King Arthur said: "Sir Launcelot, how is it with
thee?" and Sir Launcelot said: "It is well." Then King Arthur said:
"Tell us what hath befallen thee." And Sir Launcelot told all that had
happened in that month since he had left court. And all they who were
there listened, and were much astonished.

But when Sir Launcelot told how he had encountered those seven knights,
in the armor of Sir Kay, all laughed beyond measure excepting those of
the seven who were there, for they took no very good grace to be laughed
at in that wise.

 

So now I hope I have made you acquainted with Sir Launcelot of the Lake,
who was the greatest knight in the world. For not only have I told

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

you how he was created a knight at the hands of King Arthur, but I have
also led you errant along with him, so that you might see for yourself
how he adventured his life for other folk and what a noble and generous
gentleman he was; and how pitiful to the weak and suffering, and how
terrible to the evil-doer. But now I shall have to leave him for a while
(but after a while in another book that shall follow this, I shall
return to him to tell you a great many things concerning other
adventures of his), for meantime it is necessary that I should recount
the history of another knight, who was held by many to be nearly as
excellent a knight as Sir Launcelot was himself.

<span id="img_09600"></span> ![](img/09600.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](crt14.md)
