[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](crt18)  [Next](crt20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span id="img_13200"></span>

[![The Queen of Ireland seeks to slay Sir Tristram](tn/13200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13200.jpg.md)  
The Queen of Ireland seeks to slay Sir Tristram  

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span id="img_headp02"></span> ![](img/headp02.jpg)

### Chapter Fourth

How Sir Tristram encountered Sir Palamydes at the tournament and of what
befell Also how Sir Tristram was forced to leave the Kingdom of Ireland.

SO came the time for the tournament that King Angus of Ireland had
ordained; and that was a very famous affair at arms indeed. For it hath
very rarely happened that so noble a gathering of knights hath ever come
together as that company which there presented itself for that occasion
at the court of the King of Ireland.

For you may know how excellent was the court of chivalry that
foregathered thereat when you shall hear that there came to that
tournament, the King of an Hundred Knights and the King of the Scots,

|                                        |
|----------------------------------------|
| *Of the court of chivalry at Ireland*. |

and that there came several knights of the Round Table, to wit: Sir
Gawaine, Sir Gaheris and Sir Agravaine; and Sir Bagdemagus and Sir Kay
and Sir Dodinas, and Sir Sagramore le Desirous, and Sir Gumret the Less,
and Sir Griflet; and that there came besides these many other knights of
great renown.

These and many others gathered at the court of King Angus of Ireland, so
that all those meadows and fields coadjacent to the place of battle were
gay as beds of flowers with the multitude of tents and pavilions of
divers colors that were there emplanted.

And on the day of the tournament there came great crowds of people into
the lists, so that all that place was alive with movement. For it was as
though a sea of people had arisen to overflow the seats and stalls
thereof.

Now that tournament was to last for three days, and upon the third day
there was to be a grand mêlée in which all these knights contestant were
to take stand upon this side or upon that.

But upon the first two of those three days Sir Tristram sat in the stall
of the King and looked down upon the jousting, for, because of the
illness from which he had recovered, he was minded to save his body
until the right time should come, what time he should be called upon to
do his uttermost.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

And in those two days, Sir Tristram beheld that Sir Palamydes did more
wonderfully in battle than he would have believed it possible for any
knight

|                                     |
|-------------------------------------|
| *Sir Palamydes performeth wonders*. |

to do. For Sir Palamydes was aware that the eyes of the Lady Belle
Isoult were gazing upon him, wherefore he felt himself uplifted to
battle as with the strength of ten. Wherefore he raged about that field
like a lion of battle, seeking whom he might overthrow and destroy. And
upon the first day he challenged Sir Gawaine to joust with him, and then
he challenged Sir Gaheris, and the King of an Hundred Knights, and Sir
Griflet, and Sir Sagramore le Desirous and fourteen other knights, and
all of these he met and many he overcame, and that without any mishap to
himself. And upon the second day he met with great success Sir Agravaine
and Sir Griflet and Sir Kay and Sir Dodinas and twelve other knights.
Wherefore those who beheld how he did gave great shouts and outcries of
applause and acclaim, saying: "Certes, there was never knight in all of
the world so great as this knight. Yea; even Sir Launcelot himself could
not do more than that knight doeth."

Then Belle Isoult was troubled in her mind, and she said: "Tramtris,
yonder in very truth is a most fierce and terrible knight. Now
somewhiles I have fear that you may not be able to overcome him."

Thereat Sir Tristram smiled very grimly, and said: "Lady, already I have
overcome in battle a bigger knight than ever Sir Palamydes has been or
is like to be." But the Lady Belle Isoult wist not that that knight of
whom Sir Tristram spake was Sir Marhaus of Ireland.

Now upon the evening of the second day of that tournament, Sir Palamydes
came to where the Lady Belle Isoult was, and he said: "Lady, all

|                                                 |
|-------------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Palamydes bespeaks the Lady Belle Isoult*. |

these things I have done for your sake. For had it not been for my love
for you, I would not have been able to do a third part of that which I
did. Now I think you should have pity and regard for one who loves you
so strongly as that; wherefore I beseech you to bestow some part of your
good-will upon me."

"Sir," said the Lady Belle Isoult, "you are not to forget that there is
still another day of this battle, and in it you may not happen to have
the same fortune that favored you to-day; so I will wait until you have
won that battle also before I answer you."

"Well," said Sir Palamydes, "you shall see that I shall do even more
worthily to-morrow for your sake than I have done to-day."

But the Lady Belle Isoult was not very well pleased with that saying,
for she began again to fear that maybe the will of Sir Palamydes was so
strong that Sir Tristram would not have any success against him.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

So came the third day of that very famous contest at arms, and when the
morning was come there began to gather together in the two parties those
who were to contest the one against the other. Of one of these parties,
Sir Palamydes was the chiefest knight, and upon that side was also Sir
Gawaine and several of the knights who were with him. For these said,
"There shall certes be greater credit to be had with Sir Palamydes than
against him," and so they joined them with his party. Of the other party
the chiefest knights were the King of an Hundred Knights and the King of
Scots, and both of these were very famous and well-approved champions,
of high courage and remarkable achievements.

Now when the time was nigh ready for that tournament, Sir Tristram went
to put on the armor that the Lady Belle Isoult had provided him, and
when he was armed he mounted very lightly upon the horse

|                                   |
|-----------------------------------|
| *Belle Isoult arms Sir Tristram*. |

which she had given him. And the armor of Sir Tristram was white,
shining like to silver, and the horse was altogether white, and the
furniture and trappings thereof were all white, so that Sir Tristram
glistened with extraordinary splendor.

Now when he was armed and prepared in all ways, the Lady Belle Isoult
came to where he was and she said, "Tramtris, are you ready?" And he
answered "Yea." Therewith she took the horse of Sir Tristram by the
bridle and she led him to the postern gate of the castle, and put him
out that way into a fair field that lay beyond; and Sir Tristram abided
in the fields for some while until the tournament should have begun.

But the Lady Belle Isoult went to the tournament with her father, the
King, and her mother, the Queen, and took her station at that place
assigned to her whence she might overlook the field.

So in a little while that friendly battle began. And again Sir Palamydes
was filled with the vehement fury of contest, wherefore he raged about
the field, spreading terror whithersoever he came. For first

|                                               |
|-----------------------------------------------|
| *How Sir Palamydes fought in the tournament*. |

he made at the King of an Hundred Knights, and he struck that knight so
direful a blow that both horse and man fell to the ground with the force
thereof. Then in the same manner he struck the King of Scots with his
sword, and smote him straightway out of the saddle also. Then he struck
down one after another, seven other knights, all of well-proved strength
and prowess, so that all those who looked thereon cried out, "Is he a
man or is he a demon?" So, because of the terror of Sir Palamydes, all
those in that contest bore away from him as they might do from a lion in
anger.

At this time came Sir Tristram, riding at a free pace, shining like to a
figure of silver. Then many saw him and observed him and said to one

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

another: "Who is this knight, and what party will he join with to do
battle?

These had not long to wait to know what side he would join, for
immediately Sir Tristram took stand with that party which was the party
of the King of an Hundred Knights and the King of Scots, and at that the
one party was very glad, and the other party was sorry; for they deemed
that Sir Tristram was certes some great champion.

Then straightway there came against Sir Tristram four knights of the
other party, and one of these was Sir Gaheris, and another was Sir
Griflet

|                                       |
|---------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram enters the tournament*. |

and another was Sir Bagdemagus and another was Sir Kay. But Sir Tristram
was possessed with a great joy of battle, so that in a very short time
he had struck down or overthrown all those knights, beginning with Sir
Gaheris, and ending with Sir Kay the seneschal.

This Sir Gawaine beheld, and said to Sir Sagramore: "Yonder is certes a
knight of terrible strength; now let us go and see of what mettle he
be."

Therewith Sir Gawaine pushed against Sir Tristram from the one side, and
Sir Sagramore came against him on the other side, and so they met him
both at once. Then first Sir Gawaine struck Sir Tristram such a buffet
that the horse of Sir Tristram turned twice about with the force of that
stroke; and therewith Sir Sagramore smote him a buffet upon the other
side so that Sir Tristram wist not upon which side to defend himself.

Then, at those blows Sir Tristram waxed so exceedingly fierce that it
was as though a fire of rage flamed up into his brains and set them into
a blaze of rage. So with that he rose up in his stirrups and launched so
dreadful a blow upon Sir Gawaine that I believe nothing could have
withstood the force of that blow. For it clave through the shield of Sir
Gawaine and it descended upon the crown of his helmet and it clave away
a part of his helmet and a part of the épaulière of his shoulder; and
with the force of that dreadful, terrible blow, Sir Gawaine fell down
upon the ground and lay there as though he were dead.

Then Sir Tristram wheeled upon Sir Sagramore (who sat wonder-struck at
that blow he had beheld) and thereafter he smote him too, so that he
fell down and lay upon the ground in a swoon from which he did not
recover for more than two hours.

Now Sir Palamydes also had beheld those two strokes that Sir Tristram
had given, wherefore he said: "Hah! Yonder is a very wonderful knight.
Now if I do not presently meet him, and that to my credit, he will have
more honor in this battle than I."

So therewith Sir Palamydes pushed straight against Sir Tristram, and

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

when Sir Tristram beheld that he was very glad, for he said: "Now it
will either be Sir Palamydes his day, or else it will be mine." So

|                                             |
|---------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Palamydes rides against Sir Tristram*. |

he upon his part pushed against Sir Palamydes with good intent to engage
him in battle, and then they two met in the midst of the field.

Then immediately Sir Palamydes smote Sir Tristram such a buffet that Sir
Tristram thought a bolt of lightning had burst upon him, and for a
little while he was altogether bemazed and wist not where he was. But
when he came to himself he was so filled with fury that his heart was
like to break therewith.

Thereupon he rushed upon Sir Palamydes and smote him again and again and
again with such fury and strength that Sir Palamydes was altogether
stunned at the blows he received and bare back

|                                      |
|--------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram smites Sir Palamydes*. |

before them. Then Sir Tristram perceived how that Sir Palamydes bare his
shield low because of the fierceness of that assault, and thereupon he
rose up in his stirrups and struck Sir Palamydes upon the crown of the
helmet so dreadful a buffet that the brains of Sir Palamydes swam like
water, and he must needs catch the pommel of his saddle to save himself
from falling. Then Sir Tristram smote him another buffet, and therewith
darkness came upon the sight of Sir Palamydes and he rolled off from his
horse into the dust beneath its feet.

Then all who beheld the encounter shouted very loud and with great
vehemence, for it was the very best and most notable assault at arms
that had been performed in all that battle. But most of those who beheld
that assault cried out "The Silver Knight!" For at that time no one but
the Lady Belle Isoult wist who that silver knight was. But she wist very
well who he was, and was so filled with the glory of his prowess that
she wept for joy thereof.

Then the King of Ireland said: "Who is yonder knight who hath so
wonderfully overthrown Sir Palamydes? I had not thought there was any
knight in the world so great as he; but this must be some

|                                       |
|---------------------------------------|
| *Belle Isoult declares Sir Tristram*. |

great champion whom none of us know." Upon that the Lady Belle Isoult,
still weeping for joy, could contain herself no longer, but cried out:
"Sir, that is Tramtris, who came to us so nigh to death and who hath now
done us so great honor being of our household! For I knew very well that
he was no common knight but some mighty champion when I first beheld
him."

At that the King of Ireland was very much astonished and overjoyed, and
he said: "If that is indeed so, then it is a very great honor for us
all."

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

Now after that assault Sir Tristram took no more part in that battle but
withdrew to one side. But he perceived where the esquires attendant upon
Sir Palamydes came to him and lifted him up and took him away. Then by
and by he perceived that Sir Palamydes had mounted his horse again with
intent to leave that meadow of battle, and in a little he saw Sir
Palamydes ride away with his head bowed down like to one whose heart was
broken.

All this Sir Tristram beheld and did not try to stay Sir Palamydes in
his departure. But some while after Sir Palamydes had quitted that
place, Sir Tristram also took his departure, going in that same
direction that Sir Palamydes had gone. Then after he had come well away
from the meadow of battle, Sir Tristram set spurs to his horse and rode
at a hard gallop along that way that Sir Palamydes had taken.

So he rode at such a gait for a considerable pass until, by and by, he
perceived Sir Palamydes upon the road before him; and Sir Palamydes was
at that time come to the edge of a woods where there were several stone
windmills with great sails swinging very slowly around before a strong
wind that was blowing.

Now this was a lonely place, and one very fit to do battle in, wherefore
Sir Tristram cried out to Sir Palamydes in a loud voice: "Sir Palamydes!
Sir

|                                            |
|--------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram overthrows Palamydes again*. |

Palamydes! Turn you about! For here is the chance for you to recover the
honor that you have lost to me." Thereupon Sir Palamydes, hearing that
loud voice, turned him about. But when he beheld that the knight who
called was he who had just now wrought such shame upon him, he ground
his teeth together with rage, and therewith drave his horse at Sir
Tristram, drawing his sword so that it flashed like lightning in the
bright sunlight. And when he came nigh to Sir Tristram, he stood up in
his stirrups and lashed a blow at him with all his might and main; for
he said to himself: "Maybe I shall now recover mine honor with one blow
which I lost to this knight awhile since." But Sir Tristram put aside
that blow of Sir Palamydes with his shield with very great skill and
dexterity, and thereupon, recovering himself, he lashed at Sir Palamydes
upon his part. And at that first stroke Sir Tristram smote down the
shield of Sir Palamydes, and gave him such a blow upon the head that Sir
Palamydes fell down off his horse upon the earth. Then Sir Tristram
voided his own horse very quickly, and running to Sir Palamydes where he
lay he plucked off his helmet with great violence. Therewith he cried
out very fiercely: "Sir Knight, yield thee to me, or I will slay thee."
And therewithal he lifted up his sword as though to strike off the head
of Sir Palamydes.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

Then when Sir Palamydes saw Sir Tristram standing above him in that
wise, he dreaded his buffets so that he said: "Sir Knight, I yield me to
thee to do thy commands, if so be thou wilt spare my life."

Thereupon Sir Tristram said, "Arise," and at that Sir Palamydes got him
up to his knees with some ado, and so remained kneeling before Sir
Tristram.

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "I believe you have saved your life by thus
yielding yourself to me. Now this shall be my commandment upon you.
First of all, my commandment is that you forsake the Lady Belle Isoult,
and that you do not come near her for the space of an entire year. And
this is my second commandment; that from this day you do not assume the
arms of knighthood for an entire year and a day."

"Alas!" said Sir Palamydes, "why do you not slay me instead of bringing
me to such shame as this! Would that I had died instead of yielding
myself to you as I did." And therewith he wept for shame and despite.

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "let that pass which was not done. For now
you have yielded yourself to me and these are my commands." So with that
Sir Tristram set his sword back again into its sheath, and he mounted
his horse and rode away, leaving Sir Palamydes where he was.

But after Sir Tristram had gone, Sir Palamydes arose, weeping aloud. And
he said: "This is such shame to me that I think there can be no greater
shame." Thereupon he drew his misericordia, and

|                                  |
|----------------------------------|
| *Sir Palamydes disarms himself*. |

he cut the thongs of his harness and he tore the pieces of armor from
off his body and flung them away very furiously, upon the right hand and
upon the left. And when he had thus stripped himself of all of his
armor, he mounted his horse and rode away into the forest, weeping like
one altogether brokenhearted.

So Sir Tristram drave Sir Palamydes away from the Lady Belle Isoult as
he had promised to do.

 

Now when Tristram came back to the castle of the King of Ireland once
more, he thought to enter privily in by the postern-gate as he had gone
out. But lo! instead of that he found a great party waiting for him
before the castle and these gave him loud acclaim, crying, "Welcome, Sir
Tramtris! Welcome, Sir Tramtris!" And King Angus came forward and took
the hand of Sir Tristram, and he also said: "Welcome, Sir Tramtris, for
you have brought us great honor this day!"

But Sir Tristram looked at the Lady the Belle Isoult with great reproach
and by and by when they were together he said: "Lady, why did you

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

betray me who I was when you had promised me not to do so?" "Sir," she
said, "I meant not to betray you, but in the joy of your victory I

|                                     |
|-------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram chides Belle Isoult*. |

know not very well what I said." "Well," said Sir Tristram, "God grant
that no harm come of it." She said, "What harm can come of it, Messire?"
Sir Tristram said: "I may not tell you, Lady, but I fear that harm will
come of it."

Anon the Queen of Ireland came and said: "Tramtris, one so nigh to death
as you have been should not so soon have done battle as you have done.
Now I will have a bain prepared and you shall bathe therein, for you are
not yet hale and strong."

"Lady," said Tristram, "I do not need any bain, for I believe I am now
strong and well in all wise."

"Nay," said the Queen, "you must have that bain so that no ill may come
to you hereafter from this battle which you have fought."

So she had that bain prepared of tepid water, and it was very strong and
potent with spices and powerful herbs of divers sorts. And when that
bain was prepared, Sir Tristram undressed and entered the bath, and the
Queen and the Lady Belle Isoult were in the adjoining chamber which was
his bed-chamber.

Now whilst Sir Tristram was in that bath, the Queen and Belle Isoult
looked all about his chamber. And they beheld the sword of Sir Tristram

|                                                      |
|------------------------------------------------------|
| *The Queen of Ireland beholds Sir Tristram's sword*. |

where it lay, for he had laid it upon the bed when he had unlatched the
belt to make himself ready for that bath. Then the Queen said to the
Lady Belle Isoult, "See what a great huge sword this is," and thereupon
she lifted it and drew the blade out of its sheath, and she beheld what
a fair, bright, glistering sword it was. Then in a little she saw where,
within about a foot and a half from the point, there was a great piece
in the shape of a half-moon broken out of the edge of the sword; and she
looked at that place for a long while. Then of a sudden she felt a great
terror, for she remembered how even such a piece of sword as that which
had been broken off from that blade, she had found in the wound of Sir
Marhaus of which he had died. So she stood for a while holding that
sword of Sir Tristram in her hand and looking as she had been turned
into stone. At this the Lady Belle Isoult was filled with a sort of
fear, wherefore she said, "Lady, what ails you?" The Queen said,
"Nothing that matters," and therewith she laid aside the sword of Sir
Tristram and went very quickly to her own chamber. There she opened her
cabinet and took thence the piece of sword-blade which she had drawn
from the wound of Sir Marhaus, and which she had kept ever since. With
this she hurried back to the chamber of Sir Tristram, and

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

fitted that piece of the blade to the blade; and lo! it fitted exactly,
and without flaw.

Upon that the Queen was seized as with a sudden madness; for she
shrieked out in a very loud voice, "Traitor! Traitor! Traitor!" saying
that word three times. Therewith she snatched up the sword

|                                   |
|-----------------------------------|
| *The Queen assails Sir Tristram*. |

of Sir Tristram and she ran with great fury into the room where he lay
in his bath. And she beheld him where he was there all naked in his
bath, and therewith she rushed at him and lashed at him with his sword.
But Sir Tristram threw himself to one side and so that blow failed of
its purpose. Then the Queen would have lashed at him again or have
thrust him through with the weapon; but at that Gouvernail and Sir
Helles ran to her and catched her and held her back, struggling and
screaming very violently. So they took the sword away from her out of
her hands, and all the while she shrieked like one gone entirely
distracted.

Then as soon as Gouvernail and Sir Helles loosed her, she ran very
violently out of that room with great outcry of screaming, and so to
King Angus and flung herself upon her knees before him, crying out:
"Justice! Justice! I have found that man who slew my brother! I beseech
of you that you will deal justice upon him."

Then King Angus rose from where he sat, and he said: "Where is that man?
Bring me to him." And the Queen said: "It is Tramtris, who hath come
hither unknown unto this place."

King Angus said: "Lady, what is this you tell me? I cannot believe that
what you say is true." Upon this the Queen cried out: "Go yourself,
Lord, and inquire, and find out how true it is."

Then King Angus rose, and went forth from that place, and he went to the
chamber of Sir Tristram. And there he found that Sir Tristram had very
hastily dressed himself and had armed himself in such wise as he was
able. Then King Angus came to Tristram, and he said: "How is this, that
I find thee armed? Art thou an enemy to my house?" And Tristram wept,
and said: "Nay, Lord, I am not your enemy, but your friend, for I have
great love for you and for all that is yours, so that I would be very
willing to do battle for you even unto death if so be I were called upon
to do so."

Then King Angus said: "If that is so, how is it that I find thee here
armed as if for battle, with thy sword in thy hand?" "Lord," said Sir
Tristram, "although I be friends with you and yours, yet I know not
whether you be friends or enemies unto me; wherefore I have prepared
myself so that I may see what is your will with me, for I will not have
you slay me without defence upon my part." Then King Angus said: "Thou
speakest in a very foolish way, for how could a single knight hope to
defend himself against

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

my whole household? Now I bid thee tell me who thou art, and what is thy
name, and why thou camest hither knowing that thou hadst slain my
brother?"

Then Sir Tristram said, "Lord, I will tell thee all the truth." And
therewith he confessed everything to King Angus, to wit: who was his

|                                         |
|-----------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram confesses to King Angus*. |

father and his mother, and how he was born and reared; how he fought Sir
Marhaus, and for what reason; and of how he came hither to be healed of
his wound, from which else he must die in very grievous pain. And he
said: "All this is truth, Lord, and it is truth that I had no ill-will
against Sir Marhaus; for I only stood to do battle with him for the sake
of mine uncle, King Mark of Cornwall, and to enhance mine own honor; and
I took my fortune with him as he took his with me. Moreover, I fought
with Sir Marhaus upon the same day that I was made knight, and that was
the first battle which I fought, and in that battle I was wounded so
sorely that I was like to die as you very well know. As for him, he was
a knight well-tried and seasoned with many battles, and he suffered by
no treachery but only with the fortune of war."

So King Angus listened to all that Sir Tristram said, and when he had
ended, quoth he: "As God sees me, Tristram, I cannot deny that you did
with Sir Marhaus as a true knight should. For it was certes your part to
take the cause of your uncle upon you if you had the heart to do so, and
it was truly a real knightly thing for you who were so young to seek
honor at the hands of so famous a knight as Sir Marhaus. For I do not
believe that until you came his way there was any knight in the world
who was greater than he, unless it were Sir Launcelot of the Lake.
Wherefore, from that, and from what I saw you do at the tournament, some
time ago, I believe that you are one of the strongest knights in the
world, and the peer of Sir Launcelot, or of anybody else.

"But though all this is true, nevertheless it will not be possible for
me to maintain you in this country, for if I keep you here I shall
greatly displease not only the Queen and her kin, but many of those
lords and knights who were kin to Sir Marhaus or who were -united to him
in pledges of friendship. So you must even save yourself as you can and
leave here straightway, for I may not help or aid you in any way."

Then Sir Tristram said: "Lord, I thank you for your great kindness unto
me, and I know not how I shall repay the great goodness that my Lady
Belle Isoult hath showed to me. For I swear to you upon the pommel of my
sword which I now hold up before me that I would lay down my life for
her sake. Yea, and my honor too! for she hath the entire love of my
heart, so that I would willingly die for her, or give up for her all
that

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I have in the world. Now as for my knighthood, I
do believe that I shall in time become a knight of no small worship, for
I feel within my heart that this shall be so. So if my life be spared,
it may be that you will gain more having me for your friend and your
true servant than you will by taking my life in this outland place. For
whithersoever I go I give you my knightly word that I shall be your
daughter's servant, and that I shall ever be her true knight in right or
in wrong, and that I shall never fail her if I shall be called upon to
do her service."

Then King Angus meditated upon this for a while, and he said: "Tristram,
what thou sayest is very well said, but how shall I get you away from
this place in safety?"

Sir Tristram said: "Lord, there is but one way to get me away with
credit unto yourself. Now I beseech you of your grace that I may take
leave of my lady your daughter, and that I may then take leave of all
your knights and kinsmen as a right knight should. And if there be any
among them who chooses to stop me or to challenge my going, then I must
face that one at my peril, however great it may be."

"Well," said King Angus, "that is a very knightly way to behave, and so
it shall be as you will have it."

So Sir Tristram went down stairs to a certain chamber where Belle Isoult
was. And he went straight to her and took her by the hand; and he said:
"Lady, I am to go away from this place, if I may do so with credit to my
honor; but before I go I must tell you that I shall ever be your own
true knight in all ways that a knight may serve a lady. For no other
lady shall have my heart but you, so I shall ever be your true knight.
Even though I shall haply never see your face again, yet I shall ever
carry your face with me in my heart, and the thought of you shall always
abide with me withersoever I go."

At this the Lady Belle Isoult fell to weeping in great measure, and
thereat the countenance of Sir Tristram also was all writhed with
passion, and he said, "Lady, do not weep so!" She said, "Alas I cannot
help it!" Then he said: "Lady, you gave me my life when I thought I was
to lose it, and you brought me back from pain unto ease, and from sorrow
unto joy. Would God I were suffering all those pangs as aforetime, so
that there might be no more tears upon your face."

Then, King Angus being by, he took her face into his hands

|                                         |
|-----------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram parts from Belle Isoult*. |

and kissed her upon the forehead, and the eyes, and the lips. Therewith
he turned and went away, all bedazed with his sorrow, and feeling for
the latch of the door ere he was able to find it and go out from that
place.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

After that Sir Tristram went straight unto the hall of the castle, and
there he found a great many of the lords of the castle and knights
attendant upon the King. For the news of these things had flown fast,
and many of them were angry and some were doubtful. But Tristram came in
very boldly, clad all in full armor, and when he stood in the midst of
them he spoke loud and with great courage, saying: "If there be any man
here whom I have offended in any way, let him speak, and I will give him
entire satisfaction whoever he may be. But let such speech be now or
never, for here is my body to make good my knighthood against the body
of any man, whomsoever he may be."

At this all those knights who were there stood still and held their
peace, and no man said anything against Sir Tristram (although there
were several knights and lords who were kin to the Queen), for the
boldness of Tristram overawed them, and no one had the heart to answer
him.

So after a little while Sir Tristram left that place, without turning
his head to see if any man followed him.

So he left that castle and Gouvernail went with him, and no one stopped

|                                      |
|--------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram departs from Ireland.* |

him in his going. After that, he and Gouvernail came to the, shore and
took a boat and they came to the ship of Sir Tristram, and so they
sailed away from Ireland. But the heart of Sir Tristram was so full of
sorrow that he wished a great many times that he was dead.

So Sir Tristram, though as to his body he was very whole and sound, was,
as to his spirit, very ill at ease; for though he was so well and
suffered no pain, yet it appeared to him that all the joy of his life
had been left behind him, so that he could nevermore have any more
pleasure in this world which lieth outside of the walls of Paradise.

<span id="img_tailp00"></span> ![](img/tailp00.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Fifth](crt20.md)
