[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](crt17)  [Next](crt19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span id="img_12400"></span> ![The Lady Belle Isoult](img/12400.jpg.md)  
The Lady Belle Isoult

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span id="img_headp01"></span> ![](img/headp01.jpg)

### Chapter Third

How Sir Tristram went to Ireland to be healed of his wound by the Kin 's
daughter of Ireland, and of how he came to love the Lady Belle Isoult.
Also concerning Sir Palamydes and the Lady Belle Isoult.

NOW that grievous hurt which Sir Tristram had received at the hands of
Sir Marhaus did not heal, but instead grew even more rankled and sore,
so that there were many who thought that there had been treachery
practised and that the spearhead had been poisoned to cause such a
malignant disease as that with which the wounded man suffered. So by and
by Sir Tristram grew so grievously sick of his hurt that all those who
were near him thought that he must certainly die.

Then King Mark sent everywhere and into all parts for the most wise and
learned leeches and chirurgeons to come to Cornwall and search the
wounds of Sir Tristram, but of all these no one could bring him any
ease.

Now one day there came to the court of King Mark a very wise lady, who
had travelled much in the world and had great knowledge of wounds of all
sorts. At the bidding of the King, she went to where

|                                            |
|--------------------------------------------|
| *How Sir Tristram lieth sick in Cornwall*. |

Sir Tristram lay, and searched the wound as so many had already done.
And when she had done that she came out of Sir Tristram's chamber and
unto King Mark, where he was waiting for her. Then King Mark said to
her: "Well, how will it be with yonder knight?" "Lord," quoth she, "it
is thus; I can do nothing to save his life, nor do I know of any one who
may save it unless it be the King's daughter of Ireland, who is known as
the Belle Isoult because of her wonderful beauty. She is the most
skilful leech in all of the world, and she alone may hope to bring Sir
Tristram back to life and health again, for I believe that if she fail
no one else can save him."

Then after the aforesaid lady had gone, King Mark went to where Sir
Tristram lay, and he told him all that she had said concerning his
condition; and King Mark said: "Tristram, wilt thou go to the King's
daughter of Ireland and let her search thy wound?"

Then Sir Tristram groaned at the thought of the weariness and pain of
moving, and he said: "Lord, this is a great undertaking for one who is
so sick.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Moreover, it is a great risk for me, for, if I
go to Ireland, and if it be found that I am he who slew Sir Marhaus,
then it is hardly likely that I shall ever escape from that country
again with my life. Ne'theless, I am so sorely sick of this wound that I
would rather die than live as I am living; wherefore I will go to
Ireland for the sake of being healed, if such a thing is possible."

Accordingly, a little while after that, King Mark provided a ship to
carry Sir Tristram to Ireland. This ship he furnished with sails of silk
of divers colors, and he had it hung within with fine embroidered cloth,
and fabrics woven with threads of silver and gold, so that in its
appearance it was a worthy vessel even for a great king to sail in.
Then, when all was ready, King Mark had a number of attendants carry Sir
Tristram down to the ship in a litter, and he had them lay Sir Tristram
upon a soft couch of crimson satin, which was set upon the deck beneath
a canopy of crimson silk, embroidered with threads of silver and
garnished with fringe of silver, and Sir Tristram lay there at ease
where the breezes of the ocean came pleasantly to him, and breathed upon
his face and his temples and his hair and his hands with coolness; and
Gouvernail was with Sir Tristram all the while in attendance upon him.

So they set sail for Ireland, the weather being very fair and pleasant,

|                                                             |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram sails to Ireland to have his wound searched*. |

and on the third day, at about the time of sunset, they came to a part
of the coast of Ireland where there was a castle built upon the rocks
that rose out of the sea.

Now there were several fishermen fishing in boats near that castle, and
of these the pilot of Sir Tristram's boat made inquiry what castle that
was. To him the fisherman replied: "That castle is the castle of King
Angus of Ireland." And the fisherman said: "It so happens that the King
and Queen and their daughter, hight the Lady Belle Isoult, and all of
their court are there at this very while."

This Sir Tristram heard and said: "This is good news, for indeed I am
very sick and am right glad that my voyaging is ended." So he gave
orders that the pilot should bring the ship close under the walls of
that castle, and that he should there let go anchor; and the pilot did
as Sir Tristram had commanded him.

Now, as aforesaid, that ship was of a very wonderful appearance, like to
the ship of a king or a high prince, wherefore many people came down

|                                     |
|-------------------------------------|
| *How Sir Tristram came to Ireland*. |

to the walls of the castle and stood there and gazed at the vessel as it
sailed into the harbor. And by that time the sun had set and all the air
was illuminated with a marvellous golden light; and in this sky of gold
the moon hung like a shield of silver, very bright and steady above the
roofs and towers of the castle. And there came from

<span id="page_1127">p. 1127</span>

the land a pleasing perfume of blossoms; for it was then in the fulness
of the spring-time, and all the fruit-bearing trees were luxuriant with
bloom so that the soft air of evening was full of fragrance thereby.

Then there came a great content into the heart of Sir Tristram,
wherefore he said to Gouvernail: "Gouvernail, either I shall soon be
healed of this wound, or else I shall presently die and enter into
Paradise free of pain, for I am become very full of content and of peace
toward all men." And then he said: "Bring me hither my harp, that I may
play upon it a little, for I have a desire to chant in this pleasant
evening-time."

So Gouvernail brought to Sir Tristram his shining harp, and when Sir
Tristram had taken it into his hands he tuned it, and when he had tuned
it he struck it and sang; and, because of the stillness of the

|                       |
|-----------------------|
| *Sir Tristram Sings*. |

evening, his voice sounded marvellously clear and sweet across the level
water, so that those who stood upon the castle walls and heard it
thought that maybe an angel was singing on board of that ship.

That time the Lady Belle Isoult sat at the window of her bower enjoying
the pleasantness of the evening. She also heard Sir Tristram singing,
and she said to those damsels who were with her, "Ha, what is that I
hear?"

Therewith she listened for a little while, and then she said: "Meseems
that must be the voice of some angel that is singing." They say: "Nay,
Lady, it is a wounded knight singing, and he came to this harbor in a
wonderful ship some while ago." Then the Lady Belle Isoult said to a
page who was in attendance: "Bid the King and Queen come hither, that
they may hear this singing also, for never did I think to hear such
singing beyond the walls of Paradise."

So the page ran with all speed, and in a little the King and Queen came
to the bower of the Lady Belle Isoult; and she and they leaned upon the
window-ledge and listened to Sir Tristram whilst he sang in the soft
twilight. Then by and by King Angus said: "Now I will have yonder
minstrel brought hither to this castle to do us pleasure, for I believe
that he must be the greatest minstrel in all the world to sing in that
wise." And the Lady Belle Isoult said: "I pray you, sir, do so, for it
would be great joy to everybody to have such singing as that in this
place."

So King Angus sent a barge to that ship, and besought that he who sang
should be brought to the castle. At that Sir Tristram was very glad, for
he said: "Now I shall be brought to the Lady the Belle Isoult and maybe
she will heal me." So he had them bare him to the barge of the King of
Ireland, and so they brought him to the castle of King Angus, where they
laid him upon a bed in a fair room of the castle.

Then King Angus came to Sir Tristram where he lay, and he said: "Messire

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

what can I do for you to put you more at your ease than you are?"
"Lord," said Sir Tristram, "I pray you to permit the Lady Belle Isoult
to search a

|                                  |
|----------------------------------|
| *King Angus cometh to Tristram*. |

great wound in my side that I received in battle. For I hear that she is
the most skilful leech in all the world, and so I have come hither from
a great distance, being in such pain and dole from my grievous hurt that
I shall die in a little while unless it be healed."

"Messire," said King Angus, "I perceive that you are no ordinary knight,
but somebody of high nobility and estate, so it shall be as you desire."
And then King Angus said: "I pray you, tell me your name and whence you
come."

Upon this, Sir Tristram communed within his own mind, saying: "An I say
my name is Tristram, haply there may be someone here will know me and
that I was the cause why the brother of the Queen of this place hath
died." So he said: "Lord, my name is Sir Tramtris, and I am come from a
country called Lyonesse, which is a great distance from this."

Quoth King Angus, "Well, Sir Tramtris, I am glad that you have come to
this place. Now it shall be done to you as you desire, for to-morrow the
Lady Belle Isoult shall search your wound to heal it if possible."

And so it was as King Angus said, for the next day the Lady Belle Isoult
came with her attendants to where Sir Tristram lay, and one of the

|                                            |
|--------------------------------------------|
| *My Lady Belle Isoult searches the wound*. |

attendants bare a silver basin and another bare a silver ewer, and
others bare napkins of fine linen. So the Lady Belle Isoult came close
to Sir Tristram and kneeled beside the couch whereon he lay and said,
"Let me see the wound." Therewith Sir Tristram laid bare his bosom and
his side and she beheld it. Then she felt great pity for Sir Tristram
because of that dolorous wound, and she said: "Alas, that so young and
so fair and so noble a knight should suffer so sore a wound as this!"
Therewith still kneeling beside Sir Tristram she searched the wound with
very gentle, tender touch (for her fingers were like to rose leaves for
softness) and lo! she found a part of the blade of a spear-head embedded
very deep in the wound of Sir Tristram.

This she drew forth very deftly (albeit Sir Tristram groaned with a
great passion of pain) and therewithafter came forth an issue of blood
like a crimson fountain, whereupon Sir Tristram swooned away like one
who had gone dead. But he did not die, for they quickly staunched the
flow, set aromatic spices to his nostrils, so that in a little he
revived in spirit to find himself at great ease and peace in his body
(albeit it was for a while like to the peace of death).

|                           |
|---------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram is healed*. |

Thus it was that the Lady Belle Isoult saved the life of Sir Tristram,
for in a little while he was able to be about again, and presently waxed
almost entirely hale and strong in limb and body.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

And now it is to be told how Sir Tristram loved the Lady Belle Isoult
and how she loved Sir Tristram. Also how a famous knight, hight Sir
Palamydes the Saracen, loved Belle Isoult and of how she loved not him.

For, as was said, it came about that in a little while Sir Tristram was
healed of that grievous wound aforetold of so that he was able to come
and go whithersoever he chose. But always he would be

|                                             |
|---------------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram loves the Lady Belle Isoult*. |

with the Lady Belle Isoult, for Sir Tristram loved her with a
wonderfully passionate regard. And so likewise the lady loved Sir
Tristram. For if he loved her because she had saved his life, then she
also loved him for the same reason. For she did not ever forget how she
had drawn out the head of that spear from the wound at his side, and of
how he had groaned when she brought it forth, and of how the blood had
gushed out of that wound. Wherefore she loved him very aboundingly for
the agony of pain she had one time caused him to suffer.

So they two fair and noble creatures were always together in bower or in
hall, and no one in all that while wist that Sir Tramtris was Sir
Tristram, and that it was his hand that had slain Sir Marhaus of
Ireland.

So Sir Tristram was there in Ireland for a year, and in that time he
grew to be altogether well and sturdy again.

Now it was in those days that there came Sir Palamydes the Saracen
knight to that place, who was held to be one of the very foremost
knights in the world. So great rejoicing was made over him because

|                                    |
|------------------------------------|
| *Sir Palamydes cometh to Ireland*. |

he had come thither, and great honor was shown to him by everyone.

But when Sir Palamydes beheld the Lady Belle Isoult and when he saw how
fair she was, he came in a short while to love her with almost as
passionate a regard as that with which Sir Tristram loved her, so that
he also sought ever to be with her whenever the chance offered.

But Belle Isoult felt no regard for Sir Palamydes, but only fear of him,
for all of her love was given to Sir Tristram. Nevertheless, because Sir
Palamydes was so fierce and powerful a knight, she did not dare to
offend him; wherefore she smiled upon him and treated him with all
courtesy and kindness although she loved him not, dissembling her regard
for him.

All this Sir Tristram beheld from aside and it displeased him a very
great deal to see how Sir Palamydes was always beside the lady. But
Belle Isoult beheld how Sir Tristram was displeased, wherefore she

|                               |
|-------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram is displeased*. |

took occasion to say to him: "Tramtris, be not displeased, for what am I
to do? You know very well that I do not love this knight, but I am
afraid of him because he is so fierce and so strong."

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

To this Sir Tristram said: "Lady, it would be a great shame to me if I,
being by, should suffer any knight to come betwixt you and me and win
your regard through fear of him."

She said: "Tramtris, what would you do? Would you give challenge to this
knight? Lo, you are not yet entirely healed of your hurt, and Sir
Palamydes is in perfect strength of body. For indeed it is for you I am
most of all afraid lest you and Sir Palamydes should come to battle and
lest he should do you a harm before you are entirely healed."

"Lady," quoth Sir Tristram, "I thank God that I am not at all afraid of
this knight, or of any other knight, and I have to thank you that I am
now

|                                       |
|---------------------------------------|
| *Sir Tristram de sires to do battle*. |

entirely recovered and am as strong as ever I was. Wherefore I have now
a mind to deal with this knight in your behalf. So if you will provide
me with armor I will deal with him so that maybe he will not trouble you
again. Now I will devise it in this way:--tell your father, King Angus,
to proclaim a great jousting. In that jousting I will seek out Sir
Palamydes and will encounter him, and I hope with God's aid that I shall
overcome him, so that you shall be free from him."

Belle Isoult said, "Tramtris, are you able for this?" He said, "Yea, I
am as ready as ever I shall be in all of my life." Whereat Belle Isoult
said, "It shall be as you will have it."

Then Sir Tristram charged Belle Isoult that she should keep secret all
this that had been said betwixt them. And more especially she was to
keep it secret that he was to take part in such a tournament as that
which they had devised. And he said to her: "Lady, I lie here under a
great peril to my life, though I cannot tell you what that peril is. But
I may tell you that if my enemies should discover me at this place, it
would go hard with me to preserve my life from them. Wherefore, if I
take part in any such affair as this, it must be altogether a secret
betwixt us."

So therewith they parted and Lady Belle Isoult went to her father and
besought him to proclaim a great day of jousting in honor of Sir
Palamydes, and the King said that he would do so. So the King sent forth
proclamation to all the courts of that nation that a great tournament
was to be held and that great rewards and great honors were to be given
to the best knight thereat. And that tournament was talked about in all
the courts of chivalry where there were knights who desired to win glory
in such affairs at arms.

And now it shall be told concerning that tournament and how it befell
with Sir Tristram thereat, and with Sir Palamydes thereat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Fourth](crt19.md)
