[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr03) 
[Next](idr05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WELSH OR BRITISH DRUIDISM.

Druidism has been of late years so persistently appropriated by the
Welsh, that English, Scotch, and Irish have seemed to have no part in
the property. Even Stonehenge has been claimed by the Welsh, on the very
doubtful story of the Britons, Cæsar's Teutonic *Belgæ*, being driven by
Romans to Wales. The true Welsh--the Silures, or Iberians--were in the
land before the Romans appeared. Gaels from Ireland, Cymry from Scotland
and England, Belgæ from Germany, Bretons, Britons, Saxons, Normans,

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

English, Irish, and Flemings go to make up the rest. We know nothing of
Welsh prehistoric races.

Even allowing cromlechs, circles, and pillar-stones to be called
Druidical, there are fewer of these stone remains in Wales than in
Scotland, Ireland, England, or France. As to other antiquities, Ireland
is richer than Wales in all but Roman ruins.

It is hard upon Ireland that her Druids should have been so long
neglected, and the honours of mystic wisdom become the sole possession
of Wales. It is true, however, that the Irish have been less eager about
their ancestral glory in that aspect, and have not put forward, as the
Welsh have done, a Neo-Druidism to revive the reputation of the ancient
Order. But Ireland had its *Druids*, and traditionary lore testifies
that country in the acknowledgment of those magi or philosophers.

The Welsh have a great advantage over the Irish in the reputed
possession of a literature termed Druidical. They assume to know who the
Druids were, and what they taught, by certain writings conveying the
secret information. The Irish do not even pretend to any such knowledge
of their Druids. The Welsh, therefore, look down with pity upon their
insular neighbours, and plume themselves on being the sole successors of
a people who were under true Druidical teaching, and whose transmitted
records reveal those mysteries.

The revival of the ancient faith, in the organization called *Druids of
Pontypridd*,--having members in other parts of Wales, but claiming a far
larger number of adherents in America,--has given more prominence to
Druidical lore. The fact of the late simple-minded but learned
Archdruid, Myfyr Morganwg, a poet and a scholar, after thirty years'
preaching of Christianity, publicly proclaiming the creed of his heathen
forefathers, has naturally startled many

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

thoughtful minds. The writer can affirm, from personal knowledge of
Myfyr, that he was no pretender, but an absolute believer in the tenets
he taught; it is not therefore surprising that students of anthropology
should inquire into this revival.

Such teaching is quite different from the *Neo-Druidism* which arose a
few years ago, and whose imaginative interpretation of writings in
Welsh, under the names of Taliesin, &c., were endorsed by several
distinguished ministers of the Christian religion. Neo-Druidism was
brought forward at Eisteddfods, and works were written to show that
Welsh Druidism was simply the truth as recorded in the biblical account
of the Hebrew Patriarchs.

The Pontypridd Archdruid held quite another doctrine. He embraced within
his fold not only Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but the promulgators of
Hindooism, Buddhism, and all the ancient systems of so-called idolatry.
He recognized his principles in them all, as they simply represented the
forces of Nature, under the guise of personalities.

The mantle of the octogenarian leader has fallen upon Mr. Owen Morgan,
better known as *Morien*, long an able and voluminous writer for the
Press. His version of Welsh Druidism can be studied in the recently
published *Light of Britannia*. He assumes for his Druids the priority
of learning. From the mountains of Britain proceeded the light which
produced the wisdom of Egypt, Babylon, Persia, India, Phœnicia, Judea,
and Greece.

They who deem this too large a draft upon faith for acceptance, will
assuredly discover in that unique work a mass of curious facts bearing
upon ancient science, and be constrained to admit that the *Light of
Britannia* is not the product of unreasoning Welsh enthusiasm, but is
among the most candidly expressed books ever printed.

It was Dr. Lanigan who asserted, "The Christian missionaries

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

early opened schools in opposition to Druids." It was the opinion of
Arthur Clive that much Druidism "blended with the Christian learning of
the seventh and subsequent centuries." The same might be affirmed of
Welsh Druidism. Alluding to an astronomical MS. of the fourteenth
century, Clive says, "I believe that it, or rather the knowledge which
it contains, is a Druidic survival, a spark transmitted through the dark
ages." Gomme tells us, "that Druidism continued to exist long after it
was officially dead can be proved."

Dr. Moran, Bishop of Ossory, in his *Irish Saints*, associates the Welsh
Saint David with an Irish Druid. St. David was the son of an Irish
Christian lady. He came to Menevia, on the Welsh promontory, made a fire
on the shore, and its smoke filled the land. The Bishop then goes on to
say:--

"The owner of the district was an Irishman, named Baya, a pagan and a
Druid. He was one of those successful rovers who years before had carved
out territories for themselves on the Welsh coast, and continued to hold
them by the sword. He was filled with horror when he saw the smoke that
arose from St. David's fire, and cried out to those that were with him,
'The enemy that has lit that fire shall possess this territory as far as
the smoke has spread.' They resolved to slay the intruders, but .their
attempt was frustrated by a miracle. Seeing this, Baya made a grant of
the desired site, and of the surrounding Country, to St. David, whose
monastery quickly arose."

Welsh patriotic zeal would receive a shock from Professor O'Curry's
statement. "It appears then that it was from Erinn that the Isle of Mona
(Anglesey) received its earliest Colony; and that that colony was of a
Druidical people." This view has been supported by other testimony. The
Welsh Cerrig Edris (Cader Idris) has been identified

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

with the Irish Carrick. Carrick Brauda of Dundalk, like Carig Bradyn of
Mona, was renowned for astronomical observations.

Owen Morgan, in the *Light of Britannia*, has brought forward
authorities to support his theory that the Welsh, at any rate, could
claim for ancestors the Druids of classical writers. But Leflocq
declares the language of the so-called Welsh Druids of the early
Christian centuries is modern; and that even Sharon Turner--"for the
mythological poems dare not assign them to the sixth century, nor
attribute them to Taliesin." He considers the mystery of the Bards of
Britain consists of a number of Christian sentences, interpreted
according to the arbitrary system of modern mysticism; and concludes,
"Such are the narrow bases of the vast pre-conceived system of our days
as to the true religion of the Gauls."

But Rhys in *Celtic Britain* asserts that "the Goidelic Celts appear to
have accepted Druidism, but there is no evidence that it ever was the
religion of any Brythonic people." Again, "The north-west of Wales, and
a great portion of the south of it, had always been in the possession of
a Goidelic people, whose nearest kinsmen were the Goidels of
Ireland."--"The Brythonic Celts, who were polytheists of the Aryan type;
the non-Celtic natives were under the sway of Druidism; and the Goidelic
Celts, devotees of a religion which combined polytheism with Druidism."
He says the word *Cymry* "merely meant fellow-countrymen"; though, as he
adds, "The Cymry people developed a literature of their own, differing
from that of the other Brythonic communities." He makes Carlisle the
centre of their influence before coming down into Wales.

The assumptions of Welsh advocates may not be very satisfactory to
scholars, and all we know of Irish Druids

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

furnishes little evidence for romantic conclusions; but why should
tradition hold so tenaciously to the theory? Making all allowance for
extravagance of views, and their variety, it is not easy to explain
these early and particular accounts.

Although Welsh Druidism is represented by Welsh writers as being so
different from the Gaulish, as pictured by French authors, or the Irish
of Irish scholars, a few words may be allowed from the publication of
the enthusiastic Morien of Wales.

"It is evident," says he, "that the Druid believed in the eternity of
matter in an atomic condition, and also in the eternity of water; and
that the passive, that is, the feminine principle of the Divine nature,
pervaded both from eternity."--"He imagined a period before creation
began, when darkness and silence pervaded illimitable space."--"The Sun
is the son of the Creator, who is referred to by the Druids as the
higher sun of the circle of Infinitudes above the Zodiacal
Sun."--"Wherever the solar rites relating to the ancient worship had
been performed, those places were still regarded by the masses as
sacred."

The *Annwn* of Morien is Hades or Erebus, and that "of northern ideas is
cold." Of the Archdruid he says, "The Divine Word incarnate, such was
our Druidic High Priest;" especially when standing on the Logan stone.
The Holy Greal was the cauldron of Ceridwen, or Venus. The Druids'
ecclesiastical year commenced at midnight, March 20-21.

God was regarded through the symbol of three letters / \| or rods,
representing the light, or descent of rays, the true Logos, Hu, the
divine Sun, was the *Menw* incarnate. The grave is the matrix of *Ced*,
who bears the same relation to Venus as the Creator does to Apollo the
Sun. The twelve battles of Arthur, or the Sun, relate to the signs of
the Zodiac, Morien observes two sects in Druidism--the

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

party of the Linga, and that of the Logos. His Druidism is simply solar
worship,--or, in another sense, pure Phallicism. According to him, "The
Christian religion is scientifically arranged on the most ancient
framework of British Druidism."

A perusal of Morien's *Light of Britannia* will give the reader an
explicit account of the mystery of Welsh Druidism, but fail to prove its
identity with Irish Druidism; although the connection of Ireland with
Wales was most intimate before the Danish invasion, traditional Irish
saints having converted to Christianity their wilder neighbours of North
and South Wales, as they did of those in Cornwall and other places.

The Druid, according to Morien, and his distinguished master, the
Archdruid Myfyr Morganwg, was a more picturesque individual than the
person figured by Irish writers, and he is strictly associated with
so-called Druidical circles, cromlechs, &c. Stonehenge and **Avebury**,
not less than Mona and Pontypridd, are claimed as the scenes of their
performances. All that tradition has represented them, or poets have
imagined them, the Druids were in the estimation of modern Welsh
authorities.

"Theirs were the hands free from violence,  
Theirs were the mouths free from calumny,  
Theirs the learning without pride,  
And theirs the love without venery."

They were more than what Madame Blavatsky said--"only the heirs of the
Cyclopean lore left to them by generations of mighty hunters and
magicians." They were, as Diodorus declared, "Philosophers and divines
whom they (Gauls) call Saronidæ, and are held in great veneration."
Myfyr left it on record, "That the Druids of Britain were Brahmins is
beyond the least shadow of a doubt."

Much has been written about Druids' dress, their

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

ornaments, and the mysteries of their craft,--as the glass boat, the
cup, the cross, &c. Archdruid Myfyr, at Pontypridd (not Dr. Price),
explained to the present writer, his processional cross, with movable
arms; his wonderful egg, bequeathed from past ages; his *Penthynen*,
writing rods, or staff book; his rosary,--used by ancient priests, not
less than by modern Mahometans and Christians; his glass beads; his
*torque* for the neck; his breastplate of judgment; his crescent
adornments; his staff of office, &c.

The staff or *Lituus* was of magical import. Wands of tamarisk were in
the hands of Magian priests. The top of such augur rods were slightly
hooked. One, found in Etruria, had budded in the hand. The *barsom*, or
bundle of twigs, is held by Parsee priests. Strabo noted twigs in hand
at prayer. The *Thyrsus* had several knots. Prometheus hid the fire from
heaven in his rod.

Glass was known in Egypt some three or four thousand years before
Christ. Amber beads--Hesiod's tears of the sisters of Phœbus--were in
use by Phœnicians, brought probably from the Baltic. Torques have been
found in many lands. As Bacon remarked, "Religion delights in such
shadows and disguises."

Nash, in his remarks upon the writings of Taliesin, writes:--"The only
place in Britain in which there is any distinct evidence, from the Roman
authorities, of the existence of Druids, should be the Isle of Anglesey,
the *seat of the Irish population* before the migration (from Scotland)
of the Cambrian tribes, the ancestors of the modern Welsh." He thus
fixes the Irish Druids in Wales.

While history and philology are tracing the great migration of Cambrians
into North Wales from *Scotland*, where their language prevailed before
the Gaelic, why is North Britain so little affected with the mysticism
associated with Welsh Druidism? A natural reply would be, that this

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

peculiar manifestation came *into* Wales subsequent to the Cambrian
migration from the Western Highlands through Cumberland to the southern
side of the Mersey, and did not originate with the Cambrian Druids. It
must not be forgotten that two distinct races inhabit Wales; the one,
Celtic, of the north; the other, Iberian, dark and broad-shouldered, of
the south. Some Iberians, as of Spain and North Africa, retain the more
ancient language; others adopted another tongue. Many of the so-called
Arabs, in the Soudan, are of Iberian parentage.

No one can read Morien's most interesting and suggestive *Light of
Britannia*, without being struck with the remarkable parallel drawn
between the most ancient creeds of Asia and the assumed Druidism of
Wales. The supposition of that industrious author is, that the British
Druids were the originators of the theologies or mythologies of the Old
World.

Ireland, in his calculation, is quite left out in the cold. Yet it is in
Ireland, *not in Wales*, that Oriental religions had their strongest
influence. That country, and not Wales, would appear to have been
visited by Mediterranean traders, though tradition, not well
substantiated, makes Cornwall one of their calling-places.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Irish Druidism](idr05)
