[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr06.md) 
[Next](idr08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OPINIONS ON IRISH DRUIDS.

Leflocq wrote his *Études de Mythologie Celtique* in 1869, observing,
"Some represented the Druids as the successors of the Hebrew patriarchs,
the masters of Greek philosophy, the forerunners of Christian teaching.
They have credited them with the honours of a religious system founded
upon primitive monotheism, and crowned by a spiritualism more elevated
than that of Plato and St. Augustine." One might perceive little of this
in Irish tales, like the preceding. Leflocq is justified in adding, "One
will be at first confounded by the extreme disproportion which exists
between the rare documents left by the past, and the large developments
presented by modern historians."

Pliny speaks thus of the Druids, "A man would think the Persians learned
all their magic from them;" and Pomponius Mela affirmed, "They profess
to have great knowledge of the motions of the heavens and the stars."
Others write in the same strain. Who, then, were the Druids of Greeks
and Romans? Why did Cæsar recognize such as living in Gaul? Why did
Jamblichus make Pythagoras a disciple of Gaulish priests? Why did St.
Clement say the Druids

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

had a religion of philosophy; and St. Cyril, that they held but one God?
Why should Origen, like the foe of early Christianity, Celsus, believe
that the Druids of Gaul had the same doctrines as the Jews?

Himerius speaks of Abaris, the sage, from Scythia, but well acquainted
with Greek, with this description:--"Abaris came to Athens, holding a
bow, having a quiver hanging from his shoulders, his body wrapt up in a
plaid, and wearing trousers reaching from the soles of his feet to his
waist." Cicero knew Divitiacus, who professed the knowledge of Nature's
secrets, though regarded as a Hyperborean.

Could these have been the Scythians from Tartary, the descendants of the
wise men who gave their religion and the arrow-headed letters to
Assyrian-Semitic conquerors, who had come down as Turanian roamers to
the Plains of Babylon, and whose Chaldæan faith spread even to Egypt and
Europe?

It would seem more probable--with respectful consideration of the
learned Morien, who makes Wales the teacher of the world--that wisdom
should emanate from a people cultured long before Abrahamic days, though
subsequently regarded as rude shepherd Scythians, than proceed from a
western land preserving no monuments of learning.

Then, the dress, the staff, the egg, and other things associated with
Druids, had their counterpart In the East, from, perhaps, five thousand
years before our Christian era.

As to so-called Druidical monuments, no argument can be drawn thence, as
to the primary seat of this mysticism, since they are to be seen nearly
all over the world. An instance of the absurd ideas prevalent among the
ancients respecting Druids is given in Dion Chrysostom:--"For, without
the Druids, the Kings may neither do nor consult anything; so that in
reality they are the Druids who reign, while the Kings, though they sit
on

golden

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

thrones, dwell in spacious palaces, and feed on costly dishes, are only
their ministers." Fancy this relating to either rude Irish or Welsh.
Toland makes out that Lucan spoke to one; but Lucan said it not. The
*Edinburgh Review* of 1863 may well come to the conclusion that "the
place they really fill in history is indefinite and obscure."

Madame Blavatsky has her way of looking at them. They were "the
descendants of the last Atlanteans, and what is known of them is
sufficient to allow the inference that they were Eastern priests akin to
the Chaldæans and Indians." She takes, therefore, an opposite view to
that held by Morien. She beheld their god in the Great Serpent, and
their faith in a succession of worlds. Their likeness to the Persian
creed is noticed thus:--"The Druids understood the morning of the Sun in
Taurus; therefore, while all the fires were extinguished on the first of
November, their sacred and inextinguishable fires alone remained to
illumine the horizon, like those of the Magi and the modern
Zoroastrians."

Poppo, a Dutchman of the eighth century, wrote *De officiis Druidum*;
and Occo, styled the last of the Frisian Druids, was the author of a
similar work. Worth, in 1620, and Frickius of 1744 were engaged on the
same subject. It is curious to notice St. Columba addressing God as "My
Druid," and elsewhere saying, "My Druid is Christ the Son of God." The
Vates were an order known in Irish as *Faidh*. Some derive *Druid* from
*Druthin*, the old German for God. The word *Druith* is applied to a
Druidess.

While many treat the Druids as religious, O'Curry asserts, "There is no
ground whatever for believing the Druids to have been the priests of any
special positive worship." Then Vallencey declares that "Druidism was
not the established religion of the Pagan Irish, but Buddhism." Yet Lake
Killarney was formerly *Lock Lene*, the Lake of Learning.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

The mystical, but accomplished, Massey tell us, "An Irish name for
Druidism is *Maithis*, and that includes the Egyptian dual Thoth called
Mati, which, applied to time, is the Terin or two Times at the base of
all reckoning"--"likely that the Druidic name is a modified form of
Tru-Hut."--"In Egypt *Terut* signifies the two times and before,. so the
Druidic science included the knowledge of the times beforehand, the
coming times."

Toland, one of the earliest and most philosophical Irish writers on this
subject, thus spoke of them in his *History of the Druids*--"who were so
prevalent in Ireland, that to this hour their ordinary word for magician
is *Druid* (Drai), the art magic is called *Druidity* (Druidheacht), and
the wand, which was one of the badges of the profession, the rod of
Druidism (Slatnan Druidheacht)."

Windele, in Kilkenny records, expressed this view:--"Druidism was an
artfully contrived system of elaborate fraud and imposture. To them was
entrusted the charge of religion, jurisprudence, and medicine. They
certainly well studied the book of Nature, were acquainted with the
marvels of natural magic, the proportions of plants and herbs, and what
of astronomy was then known; they may even have been skilled in
mesmerism and biology." He thought that to the Druid "exclusively were
known all the occult virtues of the whole *materia medica*, and to him
belonged the carefully elaborated machinery of oracles, omens, auguries,
aëromancy, fascinations, exorcisms, dream interpretations and visions,
astrology, palmistry, &c"

As this may demand too much from our faith, we may remember, as Canon
Bourke says, that "the youth of these countries have been taught to
regard the Pagan Druids as educated savages, whereas they had the same
opportunity of acquiring knowledge, and had really possessed as much as
the Pagans of the Peloponnesus." We should further

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

bear in mind the assurance of the Irish historian, O'Curry, that "there
are vast numbers of allusions to the Druids, and of specific instances
of the exercise of their vocation-be it magical, religious,
philosophical, or educational--to be found in our old MSS."

Has not much misapprehension been caused, by authors concluding that all
varieties of religion in Ireland proceeded from a class of men who,
while popularly called Druids, may not have been connected with them? We
know very far more about these varieties of faith in Ireland, before
Christianity, than we do about any description of religion in Wales; and
yet the Druidism of one country is reported as so different from that in
the other immediately contiguous. Such are the difficulties meeting the
student of History.

The Irish Druidical religion, like that of Britain and Gaul, has given
rise to much discussion, whether it began, as some say, when Suetonius
drove Druids from Wales, or began in Ireland before known in either
Britain or Gaul, direct from the East.

"The Druidical religion," says Kenealy in the *Book of God*, "prevailed
not only in Britain, but likewise all over the East." Pictet writes,
"There existed very anciently in Ireland a particular worship which, by
the nature of its doctrines, by the character of its symbols, by the
names even of its gods, lies near to that religion of the Cabirs of
Samothrace, emanated probably from Phœnicia." Mrs. Sophie Bryant thinks
that "to understand the Irish non Christian tradition and worship, we
should understand the Corresponding tradition and worship, and their
history, for all the peoples that issued from the same Aryan home."
Ledwich is content with saying, that "the Druids possessed no internal
or external doctrine, either veiled by Symbols, or clouded in enigmas,
or any religious tenets

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

but the charlatanerie of barbarian priests and the grossest Gentile
superstition."

While Professor O'Curry had "no ground whatever for believing the Druids
to have been the priests of any special positive worship,"--and
Vallencey could say," From all I could collect from Irish documents,
relative to the religion of the heathen Irish, it appears that the
Druidical religion never made a part of it,"--popular opinion has always
been in the other direction. Yet Vallencey would credit Druids with some
religion, when he mentions the Druidical oracular stone,--in Irish
*Logh-oun*, in Cornish Logan,--"into which the Druids pretend that the
*Logh*, or divine affluence, descended when they consulted it."

Dr. Richey depreciates the Druid, when writing of the early Irish
missionaries: "They did not encounter any Archdruid as the
representative or head of a national religion,--they found no priesthood
occupying a definite political position which the ministers of the new
religion could appropriate." The Welsh Archdruid Myfyr took higher
ground, when saying, "This Gorsedd has survived the bardic chairs of
Greece and Rome--it has survived the institutions of Egypt, Chaldæa, and
Palestine." He declared, "Druidism is a religious system of positive
philosophy, teaching truth and reason, peace and justice." He believed
of Druids what Burnouf thought of the Hindoo Rishis, that their
metaphysics and religion "were founded on a thorough grasp of physical
facts."

Morien, his favourite disciple, boldly avows that Druidism, like
Freemasonry, was a philosophy, founded on natural law, and not religion
in the ordinary sense of that term. So L. Maclean regarded Ossian's
heroes "for the greater part cabalistic, and indicative of the solar
worship. Phion (Fingal) bespeaks the Phœnician; Cual, the Syrian or
Dog-star worshipper, of which Conchulain with his

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

*crios* or belt is but a variation." In Smith's *Dictionary of the
Bible*, the religion of the Phœnicians is described in the way Morien
has done that of the Druids;--"a personification of the forces of
nature, which, in its more philosophical shadowing forth of the Supreme
powers, may be said to have represented the male and female principles
of production."

The Sabbath--a Babylonian word--was, it is said, kept on the 1st, 8th,
15th, 22nd, 29th of months, as with the Magi of the East. Philo says all
nations of antiquity kept the seventh day holy. Porphyry mentions the
same thing of the heathen. Professor Sayce finds it was a day of rest
with ancient Assyrians, as Dr. Schmidt of temple pagan worship. Eusebius
asserted that almost all philosophers acknowledged it. The Roman
Pontiffs regulated the Sabbath, and Roman school-boys had then a
holiday. The Persian word *Shabet* is clearly of Assyrian origin. The
authoress of *Mazzaroth* says, "The Assyrians, Babylonians, Egyptians,
Chinese, and the natives of India were acquainted with the seven days
division of time, as were the Druids." The sun, moon, and five planets
were the guardians of the days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Irish Bards](idr08.md)
