[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr08) 
[Next](idr10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ISLE OF MAN DRUIDISM.

The Isle of Man lies just between Ireland and Wales. Let us examine what
can be shown about these matters therein.

Boetius, translated by Alfred the Great, had a particularly doubtful
story to tell; too similar, alas! to the narratives of early Christian
writers. "Cratilinth, the Scottish King, A.D. 277," said he, "was very
earnest in the overthrow of Druidism in the Isle of Mon and elsewhere;
and upon the occasion of Dioclesian's persecution, when many Christians
fled to him for refuge, he gave them the Isle of Man for their
residence." He relates that Mannanan Beg "was the establisher and
cultivator of religion after the manner of the Egyptians.--He caused
great stones to be placed in the form of a circle."

Train, in his *History of Man*, refers to Mannanan Beg, Mac-y-Leirr, of
the first century, having kept the Island

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

under mist by his necromancy. "If he dreaded an enemy, he would cause
one man to seem a hundred, and that by Art Magic." King Finnan, 134
B.C., is said to have first established Druids there. The Archdruid was
known as *Kion-druaight*, or *Ard-druaight*. Plowden thought the Druids
emigrated thither after the slaughter at Mona; others declare Mona to
have been an Irish Druidical settlement. Sacheverell refers to Druidical
cairns on the tops of hills, which were dedicated to the Sun, and speaks
of hymns having what were called cairn tunes. Train says, "So highly
were the Manx Druids distinguished for their knowledge of astronomy,
astrology, and natural philosophy, that the Kings of Scotland sent their
sons to be educated there." He thought that until 1417, "in imitation of
the practice of the Druids, the laws of the Island were locked up in the
breasts of the Deemsters." The old rude edifices of stone are still
called *Tinan Druinich*, or Druids' houses. McAlpine says that *Druid*
in Manx is *Magician*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: French Druidism](idr10)
