[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr07.md) 
[Next](idr09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IRISH BARDS.

The BARDS proper occupied a high position in Ireland. The Ollamhs had
colleges at Clogher, Armagh, Lismore, and Tamar. On this, Walker's
*Historical Memoirs*, 1786, observes that "all the eminent schools,
delectably situated, which were established by the Christian clergy in
the fifth century, were erected on the ruins of those colleges." They
studied for twelve years to gain the barred cap and title of Ollamh or
teacher. They were *Ollamhain Re-dan*, or *Filidhe*, poets. They acted
as heralds, knowing the genealogy

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of their chiefs. With white robe, harp in hand, they encouraged warriors
in battle Their power of satire was dreaded; and their praise, desired.

There is a story of the Ard Ollamh, or Archdruid, sending to Italy after
a book Of skins, containing various chosen compositions, as the
*Cuilmeun*, &c. As heralds they were called *Seanachies*. As Bards they
sang in a hundred different kinds of verse. One Ollamh Fodhla was the
Solon of Ireland; Amergin, the singer, lived 500 B.C.; Torna Egeas, was
last of the paean bards. Long after, they were patriots of the tribes--

"With uncouth harps, in many-colour'd vest,  
Their matted hair With boughs fantastic crown'd"

The *Statutes of Kilkenny* (Edward III.) made it penal to entertain any
Irish Bard; but Munster Bards continued to hold their annual Sessions to
the early part of last century. Carolan, the old blind harper, called
last of the Bards, died in 1738.

Bards sang in the Hall of Shells: shells being then the cups. There were
hereditary bards, as the O'Shiels, the O'Canvans, &c., paid to sing the
deeds of family heroes. A lament for Dallan ran--

"A fine host and brave was he, master of and Governor,  
                                 Ulla! Ullalu  
We, thrice fifty Bards, we confessed him chief in song and war--  
                                 Ulla! Ullalu!"

In the far-famed Trinity College Library is The *Dialogue of the Two
Sages*, in the Irish Fenian dialect, giving the qualifications of a true
Ollamh. Among the famous bards were, Lughar, "acute poet, Druid of
Meidhbh"; Olioll, King of Munster; Oisin, son of Cormac, King of Tara,
now nearly unintelligible to Irish readers; Fergus finbel of the *Dinn
Senchus*; Oisin, the Fenian singer; Larghaire, whose

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

poem to the sun was famous; Lughaidh, whose poem of the death of his
wife Fail is of great antiquity; Adhna, once chief poet of Ireland;
Corothruadh, Fingin, &c. Fergus Finbheoil, *fair lips*, was a Fenian
Bard.

Ireland's Mirror, 1804, speaks of Henessey, a living seer, as the
Orpheus of his country. Amergin, brother of Heber, was the earliest of
Milesian poets. Sir Philip Sydney praised the Irish Bards three
centuries ago. One, in Munster, stopped by his power the corn's growth;
and the satire of another caused a shortness of life. Such rhymes were
not to be patronized by the Anglo-Normans, in the Statute of 1367. One
Bard directed his harp, a shell of wine, and his ancestor's shield to be
buried with him. In rhapsody, some would see the images of coming events
pass before them, and so declare them in song. He was surely useful who
rhymed susceptible rats to death.

The Irish war odes were called *Rosg-catha*, the Eye of Battle. Was it
for such songs that Irish-Danes were cruel to Bards? O'Reilly had a
chronological account of 400 Irish writers. As Froude truly remarks,
"Each celebrated minstrel sang his stories in his own way, adding to
them, shaping them, colouring them, as suited his peculiar genius." It
was Heeren who said of the early Greek bards, "The gift of song came to
them from the gods." Villemarque held that Irish Bards were "really the
historians of the race."

Walker's *Irish Bards* affirms that the "Order of the Bards continued
for many succeeding ages invariably the same." Even Buchanan found "many
of their ancient customs yet remain; yea, there is almost nothing
changed of them in Ireland, but only ceremonies and rites of religion."
Borlase wrote, "The last place we read of them in the British dominions
is Ireland." Blair added, "Long after the Order of the Druids was
extinct, and the national

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

religion changed, the Bards continued to flourish, exercising the same
functions as of old in Ireland." But Walker claimed the *Fingalians* as
originally Irish. Sir I. Ferguson, in his *Lays of the Western Gael*,
says, "The exactions of the Bards were so intolerable that the early
Irish more than once endeavoured to rid themselves of the Order." Their
arrogance had procured their occasional banishment. Higgins, in *Celtic
Druids*, had no exalted opinion of them, saying, "The Irish histories
have been most of them filled with lies and nonsense by their bards."
Assuredly a great proportion of their works were destroyed by the
priests, as they had been in England, Germany, France, &c.

The harp, according to Bede, was common in the seventh century. St.
Columba played upon the harp. Meagor says of the first James of
Scotland, "On the harp he excelled the Irish or the Highland Scots, who
are esteemed the best performers on that instrument." Ireland was the
school of music for Welsh and Scotch. Irish harpers were the most
celebrated up to the last century. Ledwich thought the harp came in from
Saxons and Danes. The Britons, some say, had it from the Romans. The old
German harp had eighteen strings; the old Irish, twenty-eight; the
modern Irish, thirty-three. Henry VIII. gave Ireland the harp for an
armorial bearing, being a great admirer of Irish music; but James I.
quartered it with the arms of France and England. St. Bernard gives
Archbishop Malachy, 1134, the credit of introducing music into the
Church service of Ireland.

The Irish *cruit* was the Welsh *crwdd* or *crwth*. Hugh Rose relates,
that "a certain string was selected as the most suitable for each song."
Diodorus Siculus recorded that "the bards of Gaul sang to instruments
like lyres." The cymbals were not Bardic, but bell cymbals of the
Church. They were hollow spheres, holding loose bits of metal for

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

rattling, and connected by a flexible shank. The corn was a metallic
horn; the drum, or *tiompan*, was a tabor; the *piob-mela*, or bagpipes,
were borrowed from the far East; the bellows to the bag thereof were not
seen till the sixteenth century. The Irish used *foghair*, or whole
tones, and *foghair-beg*, or semi-tones. The *cor*, or harmony, was
*chruisich*, treble, and *cronan*, base. The names of clefs were from
the Latin. In most ancient languages the same word is used for Bard and
Sage. Lönnrot found not a parish among the Karelians without several
Bards. Quatrefages speaks of Bardic contests thus: "The two bards start
strophe after strophe, each repeating at first that which the other had
said. The song only stops with the learning of one of the two."

Walker ungallantly wrote, "We cannot find that the Irish had female
Bards," while admitting that females cried the *Caoine* over the dead.
Yet in *Cathluina* we read, "The daughter of Moran seized the harp, and
her voice of music praised the strangers. Their souls melted at the
song, like the wreath of snow before the eye of the sun."

The Court Bards were required, says Dr. O'Donovan, to have ready seven
times fifty chief stories, and twice fifty sub-stories, to repeat before
the Irish King and his chiefs. Conor Mac Neasa, King of Ulster, had
three thousand Bards, gathered from persecuting neighbouring chiefs.

"Musician, herald, bard, thrice may'st thou be renowned,  
And with three several wreaths immortally be crowned."

Brehons.--*Breitheamhain* - were legislative Bards; and, said Walker, in
1786, they "promulgated the laws in a kind of recitative, or monotonous
chant, seated on an eminence in the open air." According to McCurtin,
the Irish Bards of the sixth century wore long, flowing garments,
fringed and Ornamented with needlework. in a *Life of Columba*, 1827,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

it is written, "The Bards and Sennachees retained their office, and some
degree of their former estimation among the nobility of Caledonia and
Ireland, till the accession of the House of Hanover."

"Nothing can prove," says O'Beirne Crowe, "the late introduction of
Druidism into our country more satisfactorily than the utter contempt in
which the name *bard* is held in all our records.--After the
introduction of our irregular system of Druidism, which must have been
about the second century of the Christian era, the *Filis* (bard) had to
fall into something like the position of the British Bards-- hence we
see them, down to a late period--practising incantations like the Magi
of the continent, and in religious matters holding extensive sway."

Ossianic literature had a higher opinion of the Bards; as, "Such were
the words of the Bards in the days of the Song; when the King heard the
music of harps and the tales of other times. The chiefs gathered from
all their hills, and heard the lovely sound.. They praised the voice of
Cona, the first among a thousand bards." Again, "Sit thou on the heath,
O Bard! and let us hear thy voice. It is pleasant as the gale of the
spring, that sighs on the hunter's ear, when he wakens from dreams of
joy, and has heard the music of the spirits of the hill.--The music of
Cardil was like the memory of joys that are past, pleasant, and mournful
to the soul. The ghosts of departed Bards heard it." "My life,"
exclaimed Fingal, "shall be one stream of light to Bards of other
times." Cathmor cried, "Loose the Bards. Their voice shall be heard in
other ages, when the Kings of Temora have failed."

Keating, amusingly credulous as an *Irish historian* records with
gravity the story of an ancient militia numbering nine thousand in time
of peace, who had both sergeants and colonels. Into the ranks of these

Fine Eirion

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

no one was admitted unless proved to be a poetical genius, well
acquainted with the twelve books of poetry.

The *Dinn Seanchas* has poems by the Irish Bard of the second century,
Finin Mac Luchna; and it asserts that "the people deemed each other's
voices sweeter than the warblings of the melodious harp." On Toland's
authority we learn that, for a long time after the English Conquest, the
judges, Bards, physicians, and harpers held land tenures in Ireland. The
O'Duvegans were hereditary Bards of the O'Kellies; the O'Shiels were
hereditary doctors; the O'Brodins, hereditary antiquaries; the
Maglanchys, hereditary judges. The Bards were Strabo's hymn-makers.

Mrs. Bryant felt that "The Isle of Song was soon to become the Isle of
Saints;" and considered "Ireland of the Bards knew its Druids simply as
men skilled in all magical arts, having no marked relation either to a
system of theology, or to a scheme of ceremonial practice."

The *Brehon Law* gives little information respecting Druids, though the
Brehons were assumed to have been Originally Druid judges. St. Patrick
has the credit of compiling this record.

These Brehons had a high reputation for justice; and yet it is confessed
that when one was tempted to pass a false sentence, his chain of office
would immediately tighten round his neck most uncomfortably as a
warning. Of the Brehons, it is said by the editors--O'Mahony and Richey
--"The learning of the Brehons became as useless to the public as the
most fantastic discussions of the Schoolmen, and the whole system
crystallized into a form which rendered social progress impossible."
Though those old Irish laws were so oppressive to the common people, and
so favourable to the hereditary chiefs, it was hard indeed to get the
people to relinquish them for English laws.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

In 1522, English law existed in only four of the Irish counties; and
Brehons and Ollamhs (teachers) were known to the end of the
**seventeenth** century. The founding of the book of Brehon Law is thus
explained:--"And when the men of Erin heard--all the power of Patrick
since his arrival in Erin--they bowed themselves down in obedience to
the will of God and Patrick. It was then that all the professors of the
sciences (Druids) in Erin were assembled, and each of them exhibited his
art before Patrick, in the presence of every chief in Erin.--What did
not clash with the Word of God in the written law, and in the New
Testament, and with the consciences of the believers, was confirmed in
the laws of the Brehons by Patrick, and by the ecclesiastics and the
chieftains of Erin."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isle Of Man Druidism](idr09.md)
