[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr16) 
[Next](idr18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IRISH SUPERSTITIONS.

THE peculiar superstitions of a people will often throw a light upon
their ancient faiths. Baring-Gould has remarked, "Much of the religion
of the lower orders, which we regard as essentially divine, is ancient
heathenism, refined with Christian symbols." Whatever doubt may be felt
as to this, all must admit the underlying paganism of some customs,
credences, or sayings. Gomme tells us that "the local fetishism to be
found in Aryan countries simply represents the undying faith of the
older race."

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Dr. Todd, in his work on *Irish Religion*, ventured on more tender
ground, when he wrote concerning the "Guardsman's Cry" of St.
Patrick--"The prayer which it contains against women, smiths, and
Druids, together with the invocation of the powers of the sky, the sun,
fire, lightning, &c., proves that, notwithstanding the undoubted piety
and fervent Christian faith of the author, he had not yet fully shaken
off the pagan prejudices." Giraldus Cambrensis declared that the Irish,
at the conquest by Henry II., justified their condemnation by the Pope,"
being more ignorant than all other nations of the first principles of
the faith."

The legends of the English and French might be shown to contain a vast
amount of questionable common sense and faith; but our present inquiry
is to trace the underlying opinions of the ancient Irish.

Leaving outside the so-called Druidical megalithic monuments, about the
origin of which, in circles, pillars, &c., we know little or nothing
beyond speculation, and which are scattered almost all over the globe,
we notice in the Irish certain notions and practices connected with
stones that reflect the manners of former times.

The stone of Cuamchoill, near Tipperary, produced blindness on those who
gazed on it. Stones of Speculation, *Liath Meisieth*, used to draw fire,
were much revered. One object in the Irish Museum, of brass cased in
silver, six inches by four, has the precious crystal in the centre, set
round with coloured stones. The footprints of the angel Victor were to
be seen on a stone in Down County, as the celestial being alighted to
deliver-his message from on high to St. Patrick.

In the *Glimpses of Erin*, by S. and Alice Milligan, an interesting
notice occurs of the *Brash* or *Bullan* stones, in Cork Co, though
there is a specimen at the Seven

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Churches of Glendalough. "The upper surface of this monument," say they,
"is indented with four deep basin-shaped hollows. Two of them, the
smallest, are quite close to each other at one edge; the other two, of
larger size, are at the opposite edge. The devotee placed his or her
knees in the smaller hollows; and, repeating a certain number of
prayers, dropped an offering of some minute article into the larger.
This operation, with certain rounds and washings at the Well, was deemed
a specific for rheumatic pains and other ailments."

It is added, of the *Brash* superstition, "This is a pagan cultus, which
all the power of Christianity, the personal influence of the cleric, and
national education, have not been able to obliterate." A respectable
farmer declared that he was not above saying a prayer at the "blessed
stone" when he came that way. The water found in hollows of Bullan
stones was held good for bad eyes.

Upright *Standing Stones*, or *Dallans*, the same authorities assure us,
are reverenced as in idolatrous India. Mr. Milligan says, "The
Inismurray women kneel before these stones, and pray that they may be
delivered from the perils of childbirth." St. Bridget's stone at the
Faughard, Louth, has a raised work round it, with St. Bridget's pillar
near it upon steps, round which the devotees walk.

The *Clocha breca*, or speckled stones of Inismurray, Sligo, are thus
described by Dr. O'Donovan--

"They are round stones, of various sizes, and arranged in such order
that they cannot be easily reckoned; and, if you believe the natives,
they cannot be reckoned at all. These stones are turned, and, if I
understand them rightly, their order changed by the inhabitants on
certain occasions, when they visit the shrine to wish good or evil
against their neighbours." An *aeir*, or *long-curse*, has been often
thus hurled against a private enemy.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

There is no account of the people, as recorded of some Celts,
worshipping a bloody spear, or one placed in a vase upon the altar, as
With the Scythians; but Spenser, in Queen Elizabeth's time, observed the
Irish drink blood in a certain ceremony, and swear by the right hand of
their chiefs.

Solinus, in the early Christian centuries, must have heard strange tales
of Eric, when he left this record--"It is a surly, savage race. 'the
soldier in the moment of victory takes a draught of his enemy's blood,
and smears his face with the gore. The mother puts her boy's first food,
for luck, on the end of her husband's sword, and lightly pushes it into
the infant's mouth, with a prayer to the gods of her tribe that her son
may have a soldier's death."

The *Evil Eye* was an object of dread, and penalties concerning it are
conspicuous in the old Brehon laws. The *Suil Bhaloirs*, or *Balor eye*,
relates to one Balor, who was able by an eye to strike a foe dead. Love
potions, on the contrary, are referred to in many ancient songs.

Persons were put under vows to do or not to do a thing. They were said
to be under *Gesa*. This was often imposed with certain spells or
charms.

Raising the wind--so valuable a power in sailing days--was the privilege
of a few, and had its votaries down to the last century. Windbound
fishermen of the Hebrides, too, used to walk, sunwise, round the chapel
of Fladda, in Fladdahuan Isle, and pour water upon a round,
bluish-looking stone. This effectually raised a wind. The gods then kept
the wind in bags. Not so long ago, old women in the Shetlands would sell
wind to sailors.

Dreams have played a great part in Ireland. In St. Patrick's
*Confession* they are referred to. Professor O'Curry explains the
meaning attached to them by the peasantry. Auguries were taken from the
flight of birds, from beasts,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and the appearance of clouds. Prodigies were not always perceived but by
favoured parties. Thus we read in one poem, "The King alone beheld the
terrible sight; and he foresaw the death of his people." Showers of
blood were thus beheld. Bards at times recognized the sounds of
approaching death on the strings of their harps.

Miracles were of ordinary occurrence, and of varied character. Tales
were told of early saints crossing the Irish Sea by standing upon their
garments laid upon the water. They are similar to what is noted in
Hucher's *Le Saint Graal*, where a number of Christians came to Britain
upon Joseph of Arimathea's shirt, which grew in size with the number
mounting upon it.

Transformations, especially into animal forms, have been implicitly
believed in by the peasantry. Some perceive in this the system of
Totemism. Prof. Rhys was led to recognize a Dog-totem in Ireland from
the number of dog-names. Conaire, son-of-bird, must not eat bird; and
Cuchulainn, the hero, named after a dog, was told not to eat of dog; he
was ruined by breaking the order. "The descendants of the wolf in
Ossory," we are told in Wonders of Erin, "could then transform
themselves into wolves." The wolf was the totem of Ossory.

Druids, as tradition relates, could change men into animals or trees.
Dalyell's *Darker Superstitions of Scotland* gives a number of such
transforming stories. Thus Minerva changed Ulysses, for fear of his
enemies

"She spake, then touched him with her powerful wand;  
The skin shrunk up, and withered at her hand:  
A swift old age o'er all his members spread,  
A sudden frost was sprinkled on his head."

An Indian changed himself to a mouse to catch a fairy dancer. So many
Irish tales relate to transformations, though more for war stratagem
than love beguilements.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

Andrew Lang, referring to Cupid and Psyche, equally applicable to other
superstitions, observes, "We explain the separation of the lovers as the
result of breaking a taboo, or one of etiquette, binding among men and
women as well as between men and fairies."

Witchcraft--the conscious or unconscious exercise of a power peculiar to
some persons, in greater or lesser degree, of controlling little-heeded
or understood laws of nature--was ever common in Ireland. Witches were
*Pitags, Buitseachs*, or *Taut-ags*. These had the *mark*, or "Seal of
the Devil," in reddening skin, which would retain for hours an
indentation upon it. Recently, it has been ascertained by a philosopher,
that a sensitiveness in certain individuals exists even beyond their
bodies, so that they suffer without being actually touched.

In a tradition respecting Conn of the Hundred Battles, the hero Eogan
was told by three women that he should be slain in the coming fight.
Upon his asking their names, they replied, "Our names are *Ah, Lann*:,
and *Leana*; we are daughters of Trodan the Magician." A witch, who
sought to rescue a hero surrounded by foes, induced the tribesmen to
leave him and attack some rocks, which they were hypnotized to believe
were armed soldiery. The witches tied knots in a string, and breathed on
them with a curse upon the object of their hateful incantation. Some
persons, however, were clever enough, when finding such a charmed
string, to undo the knots, and so prevent the calamity. The Koran
contains a prayer for delivery "from the mischief of women blowing on
knots."

Incantations were common in Ireland. A story in Erse--*Pandyeen
O'Kelly*--has a man riding aloft on a besom. A giant blew a young man to
a distant Rath, and sent him into a heavy sleep A giant got from a
little green man a black cap--like Jack-the-Giant-Killer's Cap of

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

Darkness, and gave it to the King of Ireland's son, that he might be
invisible at his leisure.

Other superstitious traditions, more or less hypnotic, may be mentioned.
A thimble was given by a fairy to a young man to serve as a boat. A
large white cat declared herself a woman three hundred years old. Riding
on fairy horses, carrying off princesses through the air, using swords
that gave light, sending weasels to bring money, turning into flying
beetles, forcing into magic sleep, and even restoring youth, were some
of the wonders, A black dog was said to be a hag's father. Adepts could
turn into vultures, swans, wolves, &c. But, according to Hyde's *Folk
Lore*, witches could be released by masses. A hag or witch was a
*gwrack* in Celtic Welsh.

Sir George Grey, in his New Zealand narratives, has several instances of
enchantment, like those of Irish times. One old woman, by her spells,
held a boat so that it could not be launched. Again, "Early in the
morning Kua performed incantations, by which he kept all the people in
the cave in a profound sleep." A sorcerer baked food in an enchanted
oven to kill a party. Of another, "He smote his hands on the threshold
of the house, and every soul in it was dead."

This was an Irish charm for the toothache:--

"May the thumb of chosen Thomas  
in the side of guileless Christ  
heal my teeth without lamentation  
from worms and from pangs."

Charms of a peculiar kind were employed to ward off evil. Of these--more
potent than the feminine sign of the horseshoe over the threshold--was
the celebrated *Shelah-na-Gig*. The writer, many years ago, was shown
one of these strange figures in the reserved depositaries of the British
Museum. It was the squatting figure of an

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

exposed naked female, rudely sculptured, not unlike, except in size, the
singular colossi under the Museum porch brought from Easter Isle. This
figure was taken down from over the doorway of an ancient church in
Ireland, and was, without doubt, a relic of pagan days, used during many
Christian centuries to ward off evil from the incoming congregation.
Another stood by the moat of Howth.

In the *Stone Chips* of E. T. Steven we have the following--"The
horse-shoe is still the conventional figure for the Yoni in Hindoo
temples, and although its original import was lost, until lately the
horse-shoe was held to be a charm against witchcraft and the evil eye
amongst ourselves, precisely as was the case with the more unmistakable
*Shelah-na-Gig* at certain churches in Ireland."

The Dublin Museum contains an extraordinary bone-pin representing the
*Shelah-na-Gig* and evidently a charm to shield the wearer. It was found
alongside a skull in a field. Wilde declared that a Roscommon child was
taken from the grave to obtain its arms for charm purposes.

Popular holidays are still associated with the ideas of former heathen
festivals.

May-day in some parts of Ireland has its female mummers, who dance and
hurl, wearing a holly-bush. A masked blown carries a pail of water with
a mop for spreading its contents abroad. Boys then sing carols, as in
France. In the south-east of Ireland a girl is chosen as May Queen,
presiding at all May-makings till she is married. May Eve, having its
dangers from fairies, &c., is spent in making cattle safe from the
milk-thieving *little people*, by causing the cows to leap over fires.
Dairymaids prudently drive their cows along with the mystical rowan
stick.

Of the phallic May-pole, set up for St. John's Eve or Midsummer-day, N.
O'Kearney remarks, "The pole was

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

evidently used in the Druidical ceremonies." Yule cakes were *Nur*
cakes. Hogmanay was observed, as in Scotland. Hog was a Chaldaen
festival. Irish pagan feasts were announced by the blowing of long
horns, two or three yards in length, some of which are to be seen in
Dublin Museum. The Christmas Candle of south-west Ireland was burnt till
midnight on Christmas Eve, and the remnant kept as a preservative
against evil spirits till the next year's candle was set up. Magic
ointment revealed the invisible.

All Saints' Day perpetuated the pagan *Samhain* of November Eve. Holy
cakes, known sometimes as triangular bannocks, were then eaten as
Soul-Mass cakes.

"November Eve," says Mrs. Bryant's *Celtic Ireland*, "is sacred to the
Spirits of the Dead. In the western islands the old superstition is
dying very hard, and tradition is still well alive. It is *dangerous* to
be out on November Eve, because it is the one night in the year when the
dead come out of their graves to dance with the fairies on the hills,
and as it is their night, they do not like to be disturbed."--"Funeral
games are held in their houses." In olden times it was thought their
dead heroes could help in distress.

"Twice during the Treena of Tailten,  
Each day at sunrise I invoked Mac Eve  
To remove from me the pestilence."

The Keens, or lamentations for the dead, are connected with ancient and
heathenish practices. Professional howlers had charge of the corpse.
Rich, who wrote in 1610 of a Keen, remarked, "A stranger at the first
encounter would beleeve that a quantity of hags or hellish fiendes were
carrying a dead body to some infernell mansion." But some of the Death
Songs have great beauty of composition. Shelah Lea's *Lament* is a fine
example. It is thus translated from the Erse:--

"Sing the wild Keen of my country, ye whose heads

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

bend in sorrow, in the house of the dead! Lay aside the wheel and flax,
and sing not in joy, for there's a spare loft in my cabin! Oweneen, the
pride of my heart, is not here! Did you not hear the cry of the Banshee
crossing the lovely Kilcrumper? Or, was there a voice from the tomb, far
sweeter than song, that whistled in the mountain wind, and told you that
the young oak was fallen? Yes, he is gone! He has gone off in the spring
of life, like the blossom of the prickly hawthorn, scattered by the
merciless wind, on the cold clammy earth.--Raise the Keen, ye whose
notes are well known, tell your beads, ye young women who grieve; lie
down on his narrow house in mourning, and his spirit will sleep and be
at rest! Plant the shamrock and wild firs near his head, that strangers
may know who is fallen! Soon again will your Keen be heard on the
mountain, for before the cold sod is sodded over the breast of my
Oweneen, Shelah, the mother of Keeners, will be there. The voice, which
before was loud and plaintive, will be still and silent, like the
ancient harp of her country," &c.

Another exclaimed:--"My sunshine you were. I loved you better than the
sun itself; and when I see the sun going down in the west, I think of my
boy, and my black night of sorrow. Like the rising sun, he had a red
glow on his cheek. He was as bright as the sun at mid-day; but a dark
storm came on, and my sunshine was lost to me for ever."

No one would claim for the Keens a Christian origin. The Rev. John
Wesley saw a funeral in 1750, and wrote:--"I was exceedingly shocked at
the Irish howl which followed. It was not a song, but a dismal,
inarticulate yell, set up at the grave by four shrill-voiced women who
were hired for the purpose; but I saw not one that shed a tear, for that
it seems was not in the bargain."

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Mrs. Harrington, in 1818, had this account of a professional Keener, a
descendant of pagan performers:--"Before she began to repeat, she
usually mumbled for a short time, with her eyes closed, rocking her body
backward and forward, as if keeping time to the measure of the verse.
She then commenced in a kind of whining recitative; but, as she
proceeded, and as the composition required it, her voice assumed a
variety of deep and fine tones." Her eyes continued shut while
repeating, with some variations, it may be, the ancient poem.

It is said of Curran, that he derived his earliest ideas of eloquence
from the hired mourners' lamentations over the dead. Dryden refers to
the ancient practice:--

"The women mix their cries, and clamour fills the fields.  
The warlike wakes continued all the night,  
And funeral games were played at new returning light."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

With so imaginative and ignorant a people, a supposed spiritual set of
creatures played a great part in daily life, and those ancient ideas are
not entirely driven off by the march of the school-master. Scotland,
with its centuries of parish schools, retained many superstitions to a
very late date, as the clergyman of Kirkmichael, Perthshire, declared he
found there in 1795.

Some spirits answered to those described by Plato, as--"Between God and
man are the *daimones*, or spirits, who are always near us, though
commonly invisible to us, and know our thoughts." The Rev. R. Kirk left
on record, in 1691, that "the very devils, conjured in any country, do
answer to the language of the place;" and yet he ascertained that when
the Celt left his northern home, they lost power over him, as they were
*Demones Loci*. In some cases they were ghouls, feeding on human flesh,
causing the

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

man or woman gradually to waste away, unless exorcism were practised in
time.

Would that men had found as much comfort in the belief of good spirits,
as they have suffered fears from the belief in evil ones! There is
still, alas! in this world, more thought of a jealous and an avenging
Deity than of one benevolent and paternal.

Subterranean spirits might dwell in burning mountains, or occupy
themselves in mining, and the storing of treasure. Many Irish legends
relate to such. They may appear as *Daome-Shi*, dressed in green, with
mischievous intent. Others presented themselves restlessly moving over
water. Not a few sought amusement by destroying at night what parts of a
church had been constructed in the day. Hence the need, in certain
cases, to bury alive a man, woman, or child under the foundations.
Tradition says that St. Columba, thus tormented, buried St. Oran, at his
own request, under the monastery of Iona.

The *Phookas*, or *Pookas*, have left some marks in Ireland. There is
*Castle Pookah*:, or *Carrig-a-Phooka*, Cork co., and a Phook cavern in
Wicklow co. Pope calls it--

      "A dusky, melancholy sprite  
As ever sullied the fair face of night."

Phookas have been seen running from hill to hill. Their shapes vary,
like the *Boduchs* of the Hebrides.

The *Cluricaune*, or *Leprechaune*, is a mischievous old fellow,
dressing in a green coat, but without brogues

           "That sottish elf,  
Who quaffs with swollen lips the ruby wine,  
 Draining the cellar with as free a hand  
As if it were his purse which ne'er lack'd coin."

In the *Religious Beliefs of the Pagan Irish*, by O'Beirne Crowe, is a
reference to the *Morrigan*, which once appeared in the shape of a bird
"addressing the famous bull

Dond

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

in dark mysterious language."--"On another occasion she appears to Cu,
in the form of a beautiful lady, and tells him she is in love with him,
and has brought him her gems and her cattle. Cu said he had something
else than love to attend to at that time. She said when he would next
engage in single combat, she would, in the shape of a serpent, coil
herself around his feet, and hold him fast for his adversary."

Of the mysterious *Banshee* much has been said and sung. She is often
attached to certain families, or even septs, and gives notice of coming
calamities. She is the *Ben-sidhe* of Irish; and *Cyveraeth*, or
*Tyloethod*, of Welsh, whom it is fatal to meet, or to listen to her
shrieks. As an old woman, she is the White or House fairy. In this sense
she is said to "draw nigh at the time of death, and bear the soul to its
fairy home." The White Lady of Avenel was a Banshee.

There is a curious old Irish legend about a lady whose father shut her
up in a tower on Tory Isle, with twelve matrons in charge, who were to
keep her from the sight of a man. All went well till McKineely consulted
the Banshee of the mountain. Telling him to dress in women's garments,
she ferried him to the island, asking shelter for a noble lady chased by
an enemy. Landing the young man, she threw the dozen guardians into a
Druidic sleep, and left the couple together awhile, afterwards rowing
the man ashore. Serious results ensued.

Fairies are more pronounced in Irish than in English traditions. They
are fairly represented in the west of Scotland, in Wales, Lancashire,
and Cornwall, parts frequented by Irish friends and foes.

They are *Sides, Sighe, Sith, Duine Matha*, or *Good People. Fear-sig*
of the supernatural world are Irish forms of the Welsh *Tylwyth teg*,
the fair family; Swedish, *Nissen*;

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

Danish, *Damhest*; Polish, *Rotri*; the Russian, *Domavoi*; English,
*Puck*, Elf, Fay, or *Robin Goodfellow*; Cornish *Pixie*; Burmese,
*Nats*; Breton, *Korigan*, or *Koril*; Scotch *Brownie*; Norwegian,
*Trolls*, or *Nyss*; Oriental, *Jin*; Jewish, *Schedim*; Italian,
*Fata*; Greek, *Parcæ*, or *Eumenides*.

"That which is neither ill nor well,  
That which belongs not to heaven or hell."

Because many are represented as little men, writers have fancied the
idea was but a tradition of pre-existing races, small in stature, who
were improved off by visitors or marauders of larger growth. Dwarfs or
*Duzes* are thought in Brittany to haunt the dolmens, or ancient graves,
though in some manner they are known as the ghosts of Druids. Certainly
Africa bears evidence of a wide-spread pigmy race. There are *Dokos* of
South Abyssina, *Obongo* of West Africa, *Akka* of Central Africa,
*Batua* living in trees like monkeys, and others in Congo, &c.

The Fairies are associated with mankind at present, though they may
carry off their children, replacing them by changelings. The mannikins
may be white, brown, grey, or yellow. Some are small enough to sit in
ears of corn, while others fly about on magic horses. It is sad to know
that these little people indulge in faction fights, and pinch those who
dance with them. Giants figure less often. The *Book of Leinster* tells
of giant Luter, with fourteen heads, wooing Gobal, whose charms extended
over fifty cubits.

Occasionally these little people are not content with stealing babies,
but would run off with men; as Nea, of the golden hair, did the Irish
Fenian warrior. The busy *Maakiset*, who worked underground, were more
worthy of offerings than the *Kapeet*, who caused eclipses by catching
hold of the moon. It is discreet always to speak well of

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

fairies, as they listen without being seen. Their females look after
men, as their males look after women.

They have kings and queens. Oberon or Elberich was a king, and Titania a
queen. The Irish say that Don, the Milesian leader, drowned in a storm
raised by the Tuaths, became a King of the Fays. Inis Mananain, now Isle
of Man, was so called from Mananan, an ancient chief transformed to a
royal Sidhe. Mab, daughter of King Eochaidh Faidhleach, became Queen of
the Fairies, being more than immortalized in Spenser's *Fairy Queen*.
Another King of the Fairies was the Tuath Fionnbharr. The Welsh Fairy
King was Gwyh ab Nudd.

As these spirits of air, earth, and water are numerous, it is a comfort
to learn from the Talmud that, while the bad ones are exactly 7,405,926,
the good ones number, in the rougher estimate, I,064,340,000,000,000.

.Black fairies are not conspicuous, unless in the mines. The Maories of
New Zealand assure us that their merry little fays are not of their dark
colour, but fair like Englishmen. They love the hills of Waikato. A
chief, frightened of them, took off his ornaments, and gave them away.
As soon as they finished their song, as he told the tale, they took the
shadows of the Maori's earrings, and handed them about from one to the
other.

As all know, the Fairies, or Peris, are suffering from some misconduct
in happier climes. Christian tradition holds to their final redemption.

Irish fairies are thus mourned for by D. F. McCarthy:--

"Ah! the pleasant time hath vanished ere our wretched doubtings
banished  
All the graceful spirit people, children of the earth and sea--  
Whom in days now dim and olden, when the world was fresh and golden,  
Every mortal could behold in haunted rath and tower and tree--  
They have vanished, they are banished. Ah I how sad the loss for thee."

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

Some were not so pleasant:--

"While the Phooka horse holds his frantic course  
O'er wood and mountain fall,  
And the Banshee's croon, a rhythmic rime  
From the crumbling, ivied wall."

As elsewhere noted, the Irish fairies are intimately associated with the
Druidical, ghostly, or magical Tuaths. When these were conquered by the
Milesians, they betook themselves to the hills, and survived as fairies.
*The Good People* have been also thought to be Druidesses. The English
*Lubberfiend* of Milton is doubtless the Irish *Lurigadan*.

The *Sighe, Shee*, or *Sith* were of many varieties. As the *Farr-shee*
was the man of the Sidhs, so was the *Bann-shee* the woman of the Sidhs.
They were magical deceivers; they built fine balls, and interfered in
battles.

"Behold the Sidh before your eyes,  
It is manifest to you that it is a king's mansion,  
Which was built by the firm Daghda;  
It was a wonder, a court, an admirable hill."

They might have been deified mortals. Lug Mac Ethlend had been a
thousand years a Sidh. He would sometimes sojourn awhile on earth. Once
he had a son by the fair Decture, and thus Cuchulainn became a hero.
Carolan, the Irish bard, celebrates the fairy hills of Sith Beag and
Sith More in Leitrim. Troops of them on horses followed their King Donn
and Queen Cliodhna, or Cleena.

The *Daoine Shee*, or men of peace, referred to in the *Book of Armagh*,
were peevish rather than malevolent. Dressing in green, they resented
the appearance of human beings in green. They who wanted to see them
must select Hallow-eve, walk round their hill nine times, when a door
would open revealing the dancing throng. It is dangerous to accept their
invitation to come in for a dance, as the tripper never returns again to
his home.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

Fairy-inspired bards were liable to be spirited away by their muse, the
*Leannan Sighe*. If she helped them in composition, they were bound to
follow her throughout eternity.

"Were it not better thou shouldst dwell awhile with a young maiden of
golden locks,  
Than that the country should be laughing at thy doggrel rhyme?"

The Mermaids, or sea-fairies, were *Moruodh*, or *Moruogh*. Their hair
and teeth were green. We have no record of their pugnacious qualities,
as of the denizens of land. Ailne, whose lay is in old Irish, lamenting
the death of her husband and two sons, knew--"by the mighty fairy host,
That were in conflict over the Dun, Fighting each other"--that evil
would befall her three beloved. They did not then play *Ceol-sidh*, or
fairy music.

The word *Sidh* is said to be the Celtic root for a blast of wind. The
whirlwind was certainly called a fairy wind. There is a *Sidh Thuim* on
the Boyne, *Sidh Neanta* of Roscommon, *Sidh Meadha* near Tuam, *Sidh
Aodha Ruaidh* a hill of Donegal. There are seventy Irish townships
beginning with *Shee*.

Ireland abounds with localities having fairy associations. Joyce gives
many. Finn and his Fenians are in *Sliabh-na-mban-fionn*, the mountain
of the fair-haired women; *Rath Sithe*, the Fenian fortress, is in
Antrim; the Fairy's wood is in Sligo. Then there are the *Sheegys*,
fairy hills, in Donegal; the *Sheeauns*, fairy mounds; the haunted
hills, *Shean, Sheena, Shane*; and *Knockna looricaim*, the hills of the
Cluricane. In Lough Corrib the *Leprechauns* were said to have been
provided with ground meal for supper by hospitable neighbours.

There was a Banshee's palace in South Munster, and another in a rock
near Mallow. The Banshee *Aeibhell* had a fine palace in a rock by
Killaloe; it was she who threw

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

her cloak round the hero O'Hartigan at the battle of Clontarf, so
rendering him invisible. In fact, Joyce is led to exclaim, "Some parts
of Connaught must have been more thickly populated with fairies than
with men."

Were the fairies in Ireland of great antiquity?

One has written of the fancy, "that the tales of mortals abiding with
the Fays in their Sighe palaces are founded on the tender preferences
shown by the Druidic priestesses of old to favourite worshippers of the
Celtic divinities." N. O'Kearney is of opinion that "our fairy
traditions are relics of paganism." Kennedy says, "In borrowing these
fictions from their heathen predecessors, the Christian story-tellers
did not take much trouble to correct their laxity on the subject of
moral obligations." Andrew Lang sees that "the lower mythology--the
elemental beliefs of a people--do service beneath a thin covering of
Christian uniformity."

At least, we may admit, with Prof. Stokes, that "much of the narrative
element in the classic epics is to be found in a popular or childish
form in primitive Fairy tales."

Among the early and latter superstitions, *Ghosts* are very prominent.

As so many ghost stories rest upon tradition, it is well to bear in mind
what the author of *The Golden Bough says* --

"The superstitious beliefs and practices which have been handed down by
word of mouth are generally of a far more archaic type than the
religions depicted in the most ancient literature of the Aryan race."

It is not easy to laugh at Irish peasants for ghost yarns when all
nations, from the remotest antiquity, accepted them, and philosophers
like Dr. Johnson, preachers like John Wesley, reformers like Luther,
poets like Dante and Tasso, recognized such spirits. Some, like an
author in 1729, may doubt souls returning from heaven--"Nor do

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

I know," said he, "whether it would be worth their shifting Hell, and
coming back to this world in the wandering condition those things called
Ghosts are understood to be." Others may exclaim with Dr. Johnson, "All
argument is against it, but all belief is for it."

Thyræus, the Jesuit, thinks that they are but souls from purgatory,
seeking rest. Earberg considered, "It is against no Scripture that souls
should come from Hades." Henri Martin, the French Celtic scholar, said,
"The intercourse between earth and heaven is a belief strongly
accredited among the Bards." Gladstone recognizes that the recent Greek
dead "are wanderers in the Shades, without fixed doom or occupation."
Homer's *Odyssey* has this reference--

"But swarms of spectres rose from deepest hell,  
With bloodless visage and with hideous yell.  
They scream, they shriek, and groans and dismal sounds  
Stun my scared ears and pierce hell's utmost bounds."

Virgil shows to Æneas his father Anchises--

"Then thrice around his neck his arms he threw;  
And thrice the flitting shadow slipp'd away,  
Like wind or empty dreams that fly the day."

Suetonius tells us that the ghost of Caligula walked in Lavinia's
garden, where his body was buried, until the house was burnt down.
Ecclesiasticus (chap. xlvi.) speaks of Samuel thus: "And after his death
he prophesied, and showed the king his end." In the archives of the
Royal Society is a MS. paper, read November 16, 1698, on some
"Apparitions in y<sup>e</sup> N. of Scotland," in which we are informed
that Mr. Mackeney, A.M., Oxford, "said that they saw apparitions almost
every week; and upon his knowledge they did very frequently foretell the
death of Persons, w<sup>ch</sup> always succeeded accordingly."

Were all these mistaken? Were they under the influence of Herbert
Spencer's *Organ of Reviviscence*, or Wonder-Organ,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

which "affords a tangible explanation of mental illusions"?

The Irish, like the ancient Jews, held that bad men, especially, could
walk this earth after death; and the English law, almost to our day,
allowed a stake to be driven through the body of suicides and murderers,
to prevent their spirit troubling the living.

The Church has had its say in the matter. The Council of Elvira, A.D.
300, forbade the lighting of tapers in cemeteries, as that was apt to
disturb the souls of Saints; so said the Council of Iliberit. St. Basil
was told by a ghost that he had killed Julian. Both Ignatius and Ambrose
were said to have appeared to their disciples. No Church has ever denied
the existence and appearance of ghosts, and none opposed exorcism in
some form or other.

"Irish pagans," observes Nicolas O'Kearney, "never dreamed of spirits
after death having assumed such forms (misty ghosts). The spirits from
Elysium always appeared in their proper shape, and spoke and acted as if
they were still in the enjoyment of mortal life."

In this respect he differs from Macpherson's *Ossian*. The opinion is,
also, opposed to other descriptions in recognized Irish poems of
antiquity. In the poem *Cathluina*, as translated in *Ireland's Mirror*,
is this:--"Ferarma, bring me my shield and spear; bring me my sword,
that stream of light. What mean these two angry ghosts that fight in
air? The thin blood runs down their robes of mist; and their half-formed
swords, like faint meteors, fall on sky-blue shields. Now they embrace
like friends. The sweeping blast pipes through their airy limbs. They
vanish. I do not like the sight, but I do not fear it."

The Inverness *Gaelic Society* had a paper by Donald Ross on this
subject, saying, "Spectres hovered gloomily over the reedy marsh or the
moor, or arrayed themselves

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

on the blasts of the wind; and pale ghosts, messengers of the unseen
world, brought back the secrets of the grave." A Gaelic song has the
following--"In a blast comes cloudy death, and lays his grey head low.
His ghost is rolled on the vapours of the fenny field." Henri Martin
speaks of "harps of bards, untouched, sound mournful over the hill."

Some ghosts were material enough. That of St. Kieran, of Clonmacnoise,
managed to strike King Felim, the plunderer of his church, so
effectually, with his ghostly crozier, as to give an internal wound, of
which the chief died. When Finn or Fionn appeared to Osgar, on the
battle-field of Gabhra, it is affirmed that "his words were not murmurs
of distant streams," but loud and clear.

But the *Fetch*, as recognized in the scattered poems collected, or
revised, in Macpherson's *Ossian*, is more a spirit of the air. Some of
the descriptions, relating to the ghosts of Erin and Argyle, are
striking:--

"She was like the new moon seen through the gathering mist--like a
watery beam of feeble light, when the moon rushes sudden from between
two clouds, and the midnight shower is on the heath.--Clouds, the robe
of ghosts,--rolled their gathered forms on the wind--with robes of
light.--Soon shall our cold pale ghosts meet in a cloud, on Cona's
eddying winds.--Tell her that in a cloud I may meet the lovely maid of
Toscar."

Again--"Faint light gleams over the heath. The ghosts of Arden pass
through, and show their dim and distant forms.--The misty Loda, the
house of the spirits of men.--Ghosts vanish, like mists on the sunny
hill.--His soul came forth to his fathers, to their stormy isle. There
they pursued boars of mist along the skirts of winds.--I move like the
shadow of mist--The ghost of Crugal came from his cave. The stars
dim--twinkled through his form. His voice was like the sound of a
distant stream."

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

Of one it is said," His eyes are like two decaying flames. Dark is the
wound of his breast."--Caugal, who appeared in dress and form as living,
but pale, is made by the poet to say, "My ghost is on my native hills,
but my corse is on the sands of Ullin. Thou shalt never talk with
Caugal, nor find his lone steps on the heath.--Like the darkened moon,
he retired in the midst of the whistling blast."

Of another--"A cloud, like the steed of the stranger, supported his airy
limbs. His robe is of the mist of Lano, that brings death to the people.
His sword is the green meteor, half-extinguished, his face is without
form and void." Some "show their dark forms from the chinky rocks."
Others "fled on every side, and rolled their gathered forms on the
wind." One comforts himself, dying, with, "My fathers shall meet me at
the gates of their airy halls, tall, with robes of light, with mildly
kindled eyes."

A hero cried out, "I never feared the ghosts of night. Small is their
knowledge, weak their hands." A poet murmurs," I hear at times the
ghosts of bards, and learn their pleasant song." Of a great warrior, it
is said, "A thousand ghosts are on the beams of his steel, the *ghosts
of those who are to fall* by the King of resounding Morven." Or, "Let
Carril (a bard) pour his songs, that the chiefs may rejoice in their
mist." Of a beautiful woman, it is written--"She is fair as the ghost of
the hill, when it moves in a sunbeam at noon over the silence of
Morven."

A ghost may warn of danger, foretell disaster, foresee death,
communicate intelligence. Whatever may be thought of Macpherson's
*Ossian*, there can be no doubt that all the poetical representations of
Irish ghosts bear pagan, and not Christian, characteristics. The
traditions, coming through Christian centuries, have a distinct pagan
colouring. The ghosts of Christian times would seem to

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

have left their Christianity in this life, becoming heathen on the other
side.

Other illustrations of Irish superstitions occur in the course of this
work, though noted under various heads. The Irish were not more
superstitious by nature than their neighbours; but, in changing less
their abodes, and retaining faith in the religion of their fathers, they
have clung to old traditions more than those who were subject to greater
transitions of place and ideas.

After all, as some of these Irish superstitions are the heritage from
the past in all lands, can the scientific mind afford to treat them as
irrational and absurd? Is experience of all times and all nations
utterly worthless? If the photographer's sensitive plate can *see* more
than the human eye, and exhibit stars which no telescope can show, are
we so sure that nothing exists but what is revealed by our senses? May
we not hinder our own mental vision by a studied resolution to reject
what we cannot explain?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Irish Magic, and Tuatha De Danaans](idr18)
