[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr17.md) 
[Next](idr19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IRISH MAGIC, AND TUATHA DE DANAANS

BY far the most interesting of the peoples that formerly inhabited
Ireland were the *Tuaths*, or *Tuatha de Danaans*, or *Dananns*. There
is much mystery about them in Irish traditions. They were men, gods, or
fairies. They came, of course, from the East, calling in at Greece on
the way, so as to increase their stock of magic and wisdom. Some trace
them to the tribes of Dan, and note Dedan in Ezek. xxv. 13. Mrs. Wilkins
identifies them with the Dedanim of Isa. xxl. 13, "a nomad, yet
semi-civilized, people." Isaiah calls them "travelling companies of
Dedanim."

The credulous *Four Masters* have wonderful tales of Tuath doings. In
their invasion of Ireland, Tuaths had to

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

deal with the dark aborigines, known as the Firbolgs, and are said to
have slain 100,000 at the battle of Magh-Tuireadh Conga. Driven off the
island by their foes, they travelled in the East, returning from their
exile as finished magicians and genuine Druids. Mr. Gladstone, in
*Juventus Mundi*, contends that *Danaan* is of Phœnician extraction,
that a district near Tripoli, of Syria, is known as Dannié. He adds,
"Pausanias says that at the landing-place of Danaos, on the Argive
coast, was a temple of Poseidon Genesios, of Phœnician origin."

After reigning in Ireland two hundred years, the Tuatha were, it is
narrated, invaded by the children of Gail Glas, who had come from Egypt
to Spain, and sailed thence to Erin under Milesius, the leader of the
Milesians. When their fleet was observed, the Danaans caused a Druidic
fog to arise, so that the land assumed the shape of a black pig, whence
arose another name for Ireland--"*Inis na illuic*, or Isle of the Pig."
The Milesians, however, employed their enchantments in return, and
defeated the Tuatha at Tailteine, now Teltown, on the Blackwater, and at
Druim-Lighean, now Drumleene, Donegal.

The Tuatha have been improperly confounded with the Danes. Others give
them a German origin, or a Nemedian one. Wilde describes them as large
and fair-complexioned, carrying long, bronze, leaf-shaped swords, of a
Grecian style, and he thinks them the builders of the so-called Danish
forts, duns, or cashels, but not of the stone circles. McFirbis, 200
years ago, wrote--"Every one who is fair-haired, revengeful, large, and
every plunderer, professors of musical and entertaining performances,
who are adepts of druidical and magical arts, they are the descendants
of the Tuatha-de-Danaans."

"The Danans," O'Flanagan wrote in 1808, "are said to have been well
acquainted with Athens; and the memory

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

of their kings, poets, and poetesses, or female philosophers, of highest
repute for wisdom and learning, is still preserved with reverential
regret in some of our old manuscripts of the best authority." Referring
to these persons, as Kings Dagad, Agamon and Dalboeth, to Brig, daughter
of Dagad, to Edina and Danana, he exclaimed, "Such are the lights that
burst through the gloom of ages?' The Tuatha, G. W. Atkinson supposes,
"must be the highly intellectual race that imported into Ireland our
Oghams, round towers, architecture, metal work, and, above all, the
exquisite art which has come down to us in our wonderful illuminated
Irish MSS." The polished Tuatha were certainly contrasted with the rude
Celts. Arthur Clive declares that civilization came in with an earlier
race than the Celts, and retired with their conquest by the latter.

"The bards and Seanachies," remarks R. J. Duffy, "fancifully attributed
to each of the Tuath-de-Danaan chiefs some particular art or department
over which they held him to preside;" as, Abhortach, to music. The
author of *Old Celtic Romances* writes--"By the Milesians and their
descendants they were regarded as gods, and ultimately, in the
imagination of the people, they became what are now in Ireland called
'Fairies." They conquered the Firbolgs, an Iberian or a Belgic people,
at the battle of Moytura.

There is a strong suspicion of their connection with the old idolatry.
Their last King was *Mac*-*grene*, which bears a verbal relation to the
Sun. The Rev. R. Smiddy assumes them descendants of *Dia-tene-ion*, the
Fire-god or Sun. In the *Chronicles of Columba* we read of a priest who
built in Tyrconnel a temple of great beauty, with an altar of fine
glass, adorned with the representation of the sun and moon. Under their
King Dagda the Great, the Sun-god, and his wife, the goddess *Boann*,
the Tuaths were once

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

pursued by the river Boyne. This Dagda became King of the Fairies, when
his people were defeated by the warlike Milesians; and the Tuatha, as
Professor Rhys says, "formed an invisible world of their own," in hills
and mounds.

In the *Book of Ballimote*, Fintan, who lived before the Flood,
describing his adventures, said--

"After them the Tuatha De arrived  
Concealed in their dark clouds--  
I ate my food with them,  
Though at such a remote period."

Mrs. Bryant, in Celtic Ireland, observes:--"Tradition assigns to the
Tuatha generally an immortal life in the midst of the hills, and beneath
the seas. Thence they issue to mingle freely with the mortal sons of
men, practising those individual arts in which they were great of yore,
when they won Erin from the Firbolgs by 'science,' and when the
Milesians won Erin from them by valour. That there really was a people
whom the legends of the Tuatha shadow forth is probable, but it is
almost certain that all the tales about them are poetical myths."

Elsewhere we note the Tuath Crosses, with illustrations; as that Cross
at Monasterboice, of processions, doves, gods, snakes, &c. One Irish
author, Vallencey, has said, "The Church Festivals themselves, in our
Christian Calendar, are but the direct transfers from the Tuath de
Danaan ritual. Their very names in Irish are identically the same as
those by which they were distinguished by that earlier race." That
writer assuredly did not regard the Tuatha as myths. Fiech, St.
Patrick's disciple, sang--

"That Tuaths of Erin prophesied  
That new times of peace would come."

Magic--*Draoideachta*--was attributed to the Irish Tuatha, and gave them
the traditional reputation for wisdom.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

"Wise as the Tuatha de Danaans," observes A. G. Geogbegan, "is a saying
that still can be heard in the highlands of Donegal, in the glens of
Connaught, and on the seaboard of the south-west of Ireland." In *Celtic
Ireland* we read--"The Irish worshipped the Sidhe, and the bards
identify the Sidhe with the Tuath de Danaan.--The identity of the Tuath
de Danaan with the degenerate fairy of Christian times appears plainly
in the fact, that while Sidhes are the halls of Tuatha, the fairies are
the people of the Sidhe, and sometimes called the Sidhe simply."

The old Irish literature abounds with magic. Druidic spells were
sometimes in this form--"I impose upon thee that thou mayst wander to
and fro along a river," &c.

In the chase, a hero found the lost golden ring of a maiden --

"But scarce to the shore the prize could bring,  
   When by some blasting ban--  
Ah! piteous tale--the Fenian King  
   Grew a withered, grey old man.

Of Cumhal's son then Cavolte sought  
   What wizard Danaan foe had wrought  
Such piteous change, and Finn replied--  
   'Twas Guillin's daughter--me she bound  
By a sacred spell to search the tide  
   Till the ring she lost was found.

Search and find her, She gave him a cup--  
   Feeble he drinks--the potion speeds  
Through every joint and pore;  
   To palsied age fresh youth succeeds--  
Finn, of the swift and slender steeds,  
   Becomes himself once more."

Druidic sleeps are frequently mentioned, as--

"Or that small dwarf whose power could steep  
The Fenian host in death-like sleep."

Kennedy's *Fictions of the Irish Celts* relates a number of magical
tales. The *Lianan* might well be feared when

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

we are told of the revenge one took upon a woman--"Being safe from the
eyes of the household, she muttered some words, and, drawing a Druidic
wand from under her mantle, she struck her with it, and changed her into
a most beautiful wolf-hound." The Lianan reminds one of the classical
Incubi and Succubi. Yet Kennedy admits that "in the stories found among
the native Irish, there is always evident more of the Christian element
than among the Norse or German collections."

The story about Fintan's adventures, from the days of the Flood to the
coming of St. Patrick, "has been regarded as a Pagan myth," says one,
"in keeping with the doctrine of Transmigration."

In the *Annals of Clonmacnoise* we hear of seven magicians working
against the breaker of an agreement. Bruga of the Boyne was a great De
Danaan magician. Jocelin assures us that one prophesied the coming of
St. Patrick a year before his arrival. Angus the Tuath had a mystic
palace on the Boyne. The healing stone of St. Conall has been supposed
to be a remnant of Tuath magic; it is shaped like a dumb-bell, and is
still believed in by many.

In spite of the Lectures of the learned O'Curry, declaring the story to
be "nothing but the most vague and general assertions," Irish tradition
supports the opinion of Pliny that, as to magic, there were those in the
British Isles "capable of instructing even the Persians themselves in
these arts." But O'Curry admits that "the European Druidical system was
but the offspring of the eastern augurs"; and the Tuaths came from the
East. They wrote or repeated charms, as the *Hawasjilars* of Turkey
still write *Nushas*. Adder-stones were used to repel evil spirits, not
less than to cure diseases. One, writing in 1699, speaks of seeing a
stone suspended from the neck of a child as remedy for whooping-cough.
Monuments ascribed to the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

Tuatha are to be seen near the Boyne, and at Drogheda, Dowth, Knowth,
&c.

According to tradition, this people brought into Ireland the magic
glaive from Gorias, the magic cauldron from Murias, the magic spear from
Finias, and the magic *Lia Fail* or talking coronation stone from
Falias; though the last is, also, said to have been introduced by the
Milesians when they came with Pharaoh's daughter.

Enthusiastic Freemasons believe the Tuatha were members of the mystic
body, their supposed magic being but the superior learning they imported
from the East. If not spiritualists in the modern sense of that term,
they may have been skilled in Hypnotism, inducing others to see or hear
what their masters wished them to see or hear.

When the Tuatha were contending with the Firbolgs, the Druids on both
sides prepared to exercise their enchantments. Being a fair match in
magical powers, the warriors concluded not to employ them at all, but
have a fair fight between themselves. This is, however, but one of the
tales of poetic chronicles; of whom Kennedy's *Irish Fiction*
reports--"The minstrels were plain, pious, and very ignorant Christians,
who believed in nothing worse than a little magic and witchcraft."

It was surely a comfort to Christians that magic-working Druids were
often checkmated by the Saints. When St. Columba, in answer to an
inquiry by Brochan the magician, said he should be sailing away in three
days, the other replied that he would not be able to do so, as a
contrary wind and a dark mist should be raised to prevent the departure.
Yet the Culdee ventured forth in the teeth of the opposing breeze,
sailing against it and the mist. In like manner Druid often counteracted
Druid. Thus, three Tuatha Druidessess,--Bodhbh, Macha, and Mor
Kegan,--brought down darkness and showers of blood and fire upon

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

Firbolgs at Tara for three days, until the spell was broken by the
Firbolg magic bearers--Cesara, Gnathach, and Ingnathach. Spells or
charms were always uttered in verse or song. Another mode of bringing a
curse was through the chewing of thumbs by enchantresses. Fal the Tuath
made use of the *Wheel of Light*, which, somehow, got connected with
Simon Magus by the Bards, and which enabled the professor to ride
through the air, and perform other wonders. We hear, also, of a *Sword
of Light*. The magic cauldron was known as the *Brudins*.

Some of the Tuath Druids had special powers,--as the gift of knowledge
in Fionn; a drink, too, given from his hands would heal any wound, or
cure any disease. Angus had the power of travelling on the wings of the
cool east wind. Credne, the Tuath smith, made a silver hand for Nuadhat,
which was properly fitted on his wrist by Dianceht, the Irish
Æsculapius. To complete the operation, Miach, son of Dianceht, took the
hand and infused feeling and motion in every joint and vein, as if it
were a natural hand. It is right to observe, however, that, according to
Cormac's *Glossary*, Dianceht meant "The god of curing."

Finn as elsewhere said, acquired his special privilege by accidentally
sucking his thumb after it had rested upon the mysterious *Salmon of
Knowledge*. He thus acquired the power of Divination. Whenever he
desired to know any particular thing, he had only to suck his thumb, and
the whole chain of circumstances would be present to his mind. The
*Magic Rod* is well known to have been the means of transforming objects
or persons. The children of Lir were changed by a magic wand into four
swans, that flew to Loch Derg for 300 years, and subsequently removed to
the sea of Moyle between Erin and Alba.

Transformation stories are numerous in the ancient legends of Ireland. A
specimen is given in the

Genealogy of Corea

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

*Laidhe*. A hag, "ugly and bald, uncouth and loathesome to behold," the
subject of some previous transformation, seeks deliverance from her
enchanted condition by some one marrying her; when "she suddenly passed
into another form, she assumed a form of wondrous beauty."

Some enchanters assumed the appearance of giants. The Fenians of old
dared not hunt in a certain quarter from fear of one of these monsters.
Cam has been thus described in the story of *Diarmuid*--"whom neither
weapon wounds, nor water drowns, so great is his magic. He has but one
eye only, in the fair middle of his black forehead, and there is a thick
collar of iron round that giant's body, and he is fated not to die until
there be struck upon him three strokes of the iron club that he has. He
sleeps in the top of that Quicken tree by night, and he remains at its
foot by day to watch it." The berries of that tree had the exhilarating
quality of wine, and he who tasted them, though he were one hundred
years old, would renew the strength of thirty years.

The *Fate of the Children of Tuireann*, in an Irish MS., gave a curious
narrative of Tuath days and magic. It was published by the "Society for
the Preservation of the Irish Language." The sons had to pay heavy
*eric*, or damages, on account of a murder. One failed, and died of his
wounds. Lugh got helped by Brian the Druid against the Fomorians, who
were then cruelly oppressing the Tuaths, exacting an ounce of gold from
each, under penalty of cutting their noses off. Druidical spells were
freely used by Lugh, the hero of the story.

The *eric* in question required the three sons to procure the three
apples from the garden of the Hesperides,--the skin of the pig,
belonging to the King of Greece, which could cure diseases and
wounds,--two magic horses from the King of Sicily,--seven pigs from the
King of the Golden Pillars, &c.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

Once on their adventures, Brian changed them with his wand into three
hawks, that they might seize the apples; but the King's daughters, by
magic, changed themselves into griffins, and chased them away, though
the Druid, by superior power, then turned them into harmless swans. One
son gained the pig's skin as a reward for reciting a poem. A search for
the Island of Fianchaire beneath the sea was a difficulty. But we are
told, "Brian put on his water-dress." Securing a head-dress of glass, he
plunged into the water. He was a fortnight walking in the salt sea
seeking for the land.

Lugh came in contact with a fairy cavalcade, from the *Land of Promise*.
His adventure with Cian illustrated ideas of transformation. Cian, when
pursued, "saw a great herd of swine near him, and he struck himself with
a Druidical wand into the shape of one of the swine." Lugh was puzzled
to know which was the Druidical pig. But striking his two brothers with
a wand, he turned them into two slender, fleet hounds, that "gave tongue
ravenously" upon the trail of the Druidical pig, into which a spear was
thrust. The pig cried out that he was Clan, and wanted to return to his
human shape, but the brothers completed their deed of blood.

Not only the pig, but brown bulls and red cows figure in stories of
Irish magic. We read of straw thrown into a man's face, with the
utterance of a charm, and the poor fellow suddenly going mad. Prince
Comgan was struck with a wand, and boils and ulcers came over him, until
he gradually sunk into a state of idiocy. A blind Druid carried about
him the secret of power in a straw placed in his shoe, which another
sharp fellow managed to steal.

Illumination, by the palms of the hands on the cheek of one thrown into
a magical sleep, was another mode of

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

procuring answers to questions. Ciothruadh, Druid to Cormac, of Cashel,
sought information concerning a foe after making a Druidical fire of the
mystical mountain ash. But he was beaten in his enchantments by Mogh
Ruith, the King of Munster's Druid, who even transformed, by a breath,
the three wise men of Cashel into stones, which may be seen to this day.
That he accomplished with charms and a fire of the rowan tree. The
virtues of rowan wood are appreciated to this day in Munster, where
provident wives secure better butter by putting a hoop of it round their
churns.

Tuaths had a reputation for their ability in the interpretation of
dreams and omens, and their skill in auguries. Some Druids, like Mogh
Ruith, could fly by the aid of magical wings. It was, however, no
Irishman, but Math, the divine Druid, who brought his magic to Gwydron
ab Dom, and was clever enough to form a woman out of flowers, deemed by
poetic natures a more romantic origin than from the rib of a man.
Manannan, son of a Tuath chieftain, he who gave name to the Isle of Man,
rolled on three legs, as a wheel, through a Druidic mist. He
subsequently became King of the Fairies.

Professor Rhys speaks of the Tuatha as Tribes of the goddess Danu;
though the term, he says, "is somewhat vague, as are also others of the
same import, such as *Tuath Dea*, the Tribes of the goddess--and Fir
Dea, the men of the goddess." He further remarks--"The Tuatha de Danann
contain among them light and dark divinities, and those standing
sometimes in the relation of parents and offspring to one another."

Massey has the following philological argument for the Tuatha,
saying:--"The *Tuaut* (Egy.), founded on the underworld, denotes the
gate of worship, adoration; the worshippers, *Tuaut ta tauan*, would
signify the place of

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

worship within the mound of earth, the underground sanctuary. The
Babylonian temple of Bit-Saggdhu was in the gate of the deep. The
*Tuaut* or portal of Ptah's temple faced the north wind, and the Irish
Tievetory is the hill-side north. The Tuaut entrance is also glossed by
the English *Twat*. The Egyptian *Tuantii* are the people of the lower
hemisphere, the north, which was the type of the earth-temple. The
Tuatha are still known in Ireland by the name of the Divine Folk; an
equivalent to Tuantii for the worshippers."

The Rev. R. Smiddy fancies the people, as *Denan* or Dene-ion, were
descendants of *Dene*, the fire-god. An old MS. calls them the people of
the god Dana. Clive, therefore, asks, if they were simply the old gods
of the country. Joyce, in *Irish Names* says, 'This mysterious race,
having undergone a gradual deification, became confounded and identified
with the original local gods, and ultimately superseded them
altogether." He recalls the Kerry mountain's name of Da-chich-Danainne.
He considers the Tuatha "a people of superior intelligence and artistic
skill, and that they were conquered, and driven into remote districts,
by the less intelligent but more warlike Milesian tribes who succeeded
them."

Lady Ferguson, in her *Story of the Irish before the Conquest*, has the
idea of the Danaans being kinsmen to the Firbolgs, that they came from
the region of the Don and Vistula, under Nuad of the Silver Hand,
defeating Eochaid, King of the Firbolgs, at Moytura, and ruling Ireland
two hundred years.

They were certainly workers in metal, and have therefore been confounded
by monkish writers with smiths. St. Patrick's prayer against smiths, and
the traditional connection between smiths and magic, can thus be
understood. They--according to the *Book of Invasions*--

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

"By the force of potent spells and wicked magic  
And conjurations horrible to hear,  
Could set the ministry of hell at work,  
And raise a slaughtered army from the earth,  
And make them live, and breathe, and fight again.  
Few could their arts withstand, or charms unbind."

They were notorious in Sligo, a county so full of so-called Druidical
remains. In Carrowmore, with its sixty-four stone circles, there must
once have been a large population. "Why," asks Wood-Martin, "is that
narrow strip of country so thickly strewn with monuments of the Dead?"
But he learned that the Fomorian pirates, possibly from the Baltic,
swarmed on that wild coast. He especially notes the tales of Indech, a
mighty Fomorian Druid, grandfather of the dreaded Balor, of the Evil
Eye.

The mythic *Grey Cow* belonged to Lon mac Liomhtha, the first smith
among the Tuaths who succeeded in making an iron sword. At the battle of
Moytura, Uaithne was the Druid harper of the Tuatha. Of Torna, last of
Pagan Bards, it was declared he was

"Sprung of the Tualtha de Danans, far renown'd  
For dire enchanting arts and magic power."

But, as Miss Brooke tells us, "most of the Irish romances are filled
with Dananian enchantments, as wild as the wildest of Ariosto's
fictions, and not at all behind them in beauty." It was Dr. Barnard,
Bishop of Killaloe, who traced the race to visitors from South Britain;
saying, "The Belgæ and Danmonii, whose posterity in Ireland were called
Firbolghs and Tuatha de Danan."

In the destructive battle between the "manly, bloody, robust Fenians of
Fionn," and "the white-toothed, handsome Tuatha Dedaans," when the
latter saw a fresh corps of Fenians advancing, it is recorded that
"having enveloped themselves in the Feigh Fiadh, they made a precipitate
retreat."

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

Jubainville's *Cours de la littérature Celtique* does not omit mention
of these wonder-workers. He calls to mind the fact that, like the Greeks
of the Golden Age, they became invisible, but continued their relations
with men; that the Christian writers changed them into mortal kings in
chronicles; that their migrations and deities resemble those of Hesiod;
that they continue to appear in animal or human forms, though more
commonly as birds; that ancient legends record their descent to earth
from the blue heavens.

He brings forward a number of the old Irish stories about the Tuaths.
When defeated by the Sons of Milé, they sought refuge in subterranean
palaces. One Dagan, a word variant of the god Dagdé, exercised such
influence, that the sons of Milé were forced, for peace' sake, to make a
treaty with him. His palace retreat below was at Brug na Boinné, the
castle of the Boyne. The burial-place of Crimtham Nia Nair, at Brug na
Boinné, was chosen because his wife was a fairy of the race of Tuatha.
In the *Tain bô Cuailnge* there is much about the *Sid*, or enchanted
palace. Dagdé had his harp stolen by the Fomorians, though it was
recovered later on.

The son of Dagdé was Oengus. When the distribution of subterranean
palaces took place, somehow or other, this young fellow was forgotten.
Asking to be allowed to spend the night at one, he was unwilling to
change his quarters, and stayed the next day. He then absolutely refused
to depart, since time was only night and day; thus retaining possession.
The same Tuath hero fell in love with a fair harper, who appeared to him
in a dream. The search, aided by the fairies, was successful in finding
the lady, after a year and a day.

It was in his second battle that Ogmé carried off the sword of Tethra,
King of the Fomorians. This sword

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

had the gift of speech; or, rather, said Jubainville, it seemed to
speak, for the voice which was heard was, according to a Christian
historian, only that of a demon hidden in the blade. Still, the writer
of this Irish epic remarked, that in that ancient time men adored
weapons of war, and considered them as supernatural protectors.

The *Book of Conquests* allows that the Tuatha were descended from
Japhet, though in some way *demons*; or, in Christian language, heathen
deities. One Irish word was often applied to them, viz. *Liabra*, or
phantoms. It is believed that at least one Tuath warrior, named Breas,
could speak in native Irish to the aboriginal Firbolgs.

A writer in *Anecdota Oxon* is of opinion that very different notions
and accounts exist at the different periods of Irish epic literature
concerning them. He declares that, excepting their names, no very
particular traces of them have come down to us. The most distinct of the
utterances about the race points to the existence of war-goddesses.

Wilde gives a definite reason why we know so little about the Tuatha de
Danaans. It was because "those who took down the legends from the mouths
of the bards and annalists, or those who subsequently transcribed them,
were Christian missionaries, whose object was to obliterate every
vestige of the ancient forms of faith." The distortion of truth about
these singular, foreign people makes it so difficult to understand who
or what they were; to us they seem always enveloped in a sort of Druidic
fog, so that we may class them with men, heroic demi-gods, or gods
themselves, according to our fancy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Irish Gods](idr19.md)
