[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr12.md) 
[Next](idr14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NEO-DRUIDISM.

Edward Davies, author of *Mythology and Rites of British Druids*, was
one of those who, with Job Morganwg, regarded the Arkite theory as
having its foundation in Genesis. But,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

as Professor Rhys says, "when one turns to Davies's authorities for his
unhesitating statements of the kind, no doubt one is a little dismayed
at first, and not a little inclined to doubt him altogether, and, in
disposing of his Helio-Arkite absurdity, dispose of the Druids with
them."

The *Modern Druidism*, or *Bardism*, about which a few years ago there
was considerable excitement in Wales, must not be confounded with the
Druidism of Myfyr and Morien, who sought the revival of what was
declared by others to be a mystical paganism. The Bardism of this
century, brought forward by Welsh clergymen, like *Ab Ithel*, &c., was
founded upon the so-called Welsh *Triads* of the Middle Ages, which were
interpreted in a quasi Christian light, and presumed to have been the
relics of the Scriptural Patriarchal system.

The Rev. John Williams was, perhaps, the best exponent of Bardism,
though all its advocates recognized in it the Church of England ideas of
this century, and yet hardly of the High Church order. The *Patriarchal
Religion of Britain*, by the Rev. Dr. James, made many converts to the
system. But the ceremonies associated with it have something of the
Masonic character. This is the Summary of the Bardo-Druidic creed:--

There was one God. There were five elements--earth, water, fire, air,
and heavens. The soul--refined, vital, and imperishable--is a lapsed
intelligence, regaining happiness by transmigration. Creation improved
as man improved, and animals gradually became men. Man develops by
experience in different states of being. Celestial beings aid man in
development. Ultimately all will be happy, and evil finally
extinguished. All these views were gathered from the said Triads, though
regarded by many pious Welshmen as teaching opposed to Christianity.

Morien's reading of the Triads is something very different;

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

for *The Light of Britanni*a has no Bardo-Druidic creed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Druidical Belief](idr14.md)
