[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr28) 
[Next](idr30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IRISH CROSSES.

WHO could write the history of the Cross? It is the most ancient, and
the most deeply reverenced of all religious symbols. To the men dwelling
beside the Nile or the Euphrates, to the inhabitants of India to the
East and of Mexico to the West, to those sojourners in Egypt before the
Great Pyramid was built, not less than to modern Christians, the
*Cross*, whatever may have been the meaning attached to it, in the
ever-changing systems of faith, has been a source of wonder, of mystery,
and of comfort.

When the Christians assaulted the Osirian temple at Alexandria, and with
destructive force entered its sacred precincts, they saw a huge cross
occupying the marble pavement. Great, too, was the surprise of the
Spaniards to find the same emblem in the temples of aboriginal America.
The *Tau* or Cross meets one's view in the ornamental relics of many
lands.

Ancient Ireland was no exception in the display of cruciform objects.

The *Edinburgh Review* of 1870 truly said, "It appears to have been the
possession of every people in antiquity; the elastic girdle, so to
speak, which embraced the most widely-separated heathen communities; the
most significant token of a universal brotherhood." It can, it adds, be
traced "to the remotest antiquity, and is still recognized as a military
and national badge of distinction."

The Rev. A. Hisrop, in his *Two Babylons*, boldly asserts

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

that "the cross was known to Adam." It is strange that the chosen people
should have preserved no tradition of it, and that the only mention of
it in the Old Testament (Ezek. ix.) should be a mark or *tau* on the
forehead of idolaters, as may be seen to this day in the bazaars of
India. Baring-Gould thinks "it is more than a coincidence that Osiris,
by the Cross, should give life eternal to the spirits of the just." Is
he not here confounding the archetypical emblem with the antitypical?

Oliver, the authority on Freemasonry, ventures this connection between
Pagan and Christian crosses--"The system of salvation through the
atonement of a crucified Mediator was the main pillar of Freemasonry
ever since the Fall." (!) Were this true, Popes need not have
excommunicated the Brotherhood.

The Spaniards saw the Indians bowing to the cross in worship. It has
been found on the breasts of statuettes from the Indian cemetery of
Jingalpa, Nicaragua, of unknown antiquity. Tablets of gypsum, in Mexico,
bore it in the form of that cross adopted by the Knights in Malta. The
Peruvians and Babylonians had the Maltese cross. The Druids were said to
have made their cross of the stem and two branches of the oak.

The Buddhist *tau* or Swastika is a cross--having sometimes a Calvary,
with buds and leaves. The Tree of Immortality in the palace of Assyrian
Khorsabad forms a cross. Etruria and Pompeii exhibit the same symbol.
*The Reviewer* of 1870 says, "Our commonplace book contains nearly two
hundred distinct representations of. the Pre-Christian Cross."

Only in recent days have British Protestants cared to use the cross. Now
it may be seen on and in Methodist and Nonconformist chapels. It was
once thought distinctly Papal in origin. But Tertullian, Jerome, and
Origen, notify

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

its use in their day. Processions in its honour were known in the fifth
century. Cyprian records its use on the brow in baptism. The first
Protestant Prayer-book (Edward VI.) ordered its mark on the infant's
breast and forehead. The whole Christian world has either bowed to it,
or raised but a feeble voice against its use.

Ireland has been, and is, the very land of crosses. Long before St.
Patrick came to its shores, wise men from the East had brought it in
Mediterranean galleys.

What did the Irish think of the Cross? What elevating ideas did it
convey to them? Was the Pre-Christian emblem anything to the mass of the
natives, or pertaining only to the foreign settlers encamped upon their
coast? Did Irish Druids, mixing more with the people, adore the Cross,
as was the custom with British Druids?

To the Christianized Irish, whether Culdees or not, it was the symbol of
the once suffering but now exalted One. In bowing to it they beheld the
image of their Saviour, and indulged the hope of a happier Home Beyond.
If the heathen cross came to them from the East, it was from the East it
afterwards approached them with a higher and nobler faith.

The pagan crosses being just the same in appearance as those
subsequently introduced by Christian missionaries, we may reasonably be
puzzled to distinguish one class from the other. Dr. Graves, Bishop of
Limerick, compared Irish and Coptic crosses. "These," said he," were
brought into both Egypt and Ireland from Palestine, Syria, Asia Minor,
Byzantium." He found oriental crosses with or without circles on Ogham
Irish monuments.

Wakeman, in his *Irish Inscribed Crosses*, believes they "were used by
the people of Erin as a symbol of some significance, at a period long
antecedent to the mission of St. Patrick." Rubbings from the stones on
the Island of

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

Inismurray, of Sligo, overlooking the Atlantic, led him to: say--"We
have the elements of all, or nearly all, spirals, chevrons, lozenges,
cups and dots, crosslets, foliage, cable, wavy and other mouldings, upon
cinerary urns, golden or bronze ornaments and implements, and most
notably upon megalithic structures, associated with the practice of
cremation, all of which are beyond the range of Western history."

Pre-Christian crosses he identifies at Dowth and New Grange upon the
Boyne, Knockmany of Tyrone, Deer Park of Fermanagh, Cloverhill of Sligo,
Slieve-ha-Calliagh near Lough Crew of Meath. These are like the heathen
inscriptions in Scotia Minor or Lesser Ireland, which we know now as
Scotland

Tuath-de-Danaan crosses are associated with Snakes and are not likely to
be Christian ones. The Tuath on resemble those of Buddhist countries.
That at Killcullen county Kildare, bears the figures of nine Buddhist
priests in oriental garb, and even with a sort of Egyptian beard. Keane,
of Round Tower story, writes--"Gobban-Saer means the sacred past, or the
Freemason sage, one of the Guabhres or Cabiri, such as you have seen him
represent on the Tuatha-de-Danaan Cross of Clonmacnoise." The latter was
adorned with birds and other animals.

Clonmacnoise was a sacred spot before Christianity came. It is ten miles
from Athlone, in King's Co. The North Cross, thirteen feet high, bears
carvings of priests Brehons. The South Cross, twelve feet, has some
splendid, figures of birds, deer, &c. There are staves, with bunches of
leaves. A dog appears among the animals. This would have no meaning with
a Christian cross, but sacredness of that friend of man in Zend books
classes that cross among those of oriental origin.

The human figure has an eastern look, fully clothed

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

and crowned. It holds two sceptres crossed in the arms, with crosses at
the top. That Clonmacnoise was a sacred spot is evidenced by the two
remaining Round Towers there. Its sanctity was continued, though in a
Christian channel. Besides the cathedral, there are remains of nine
churches. The author of the *Round Towers of Ireland* is led to exclaim,
"Within the narrow limits of two Irish acres, we have condensed more
religious ruins of antiquarian value, than are to be found, perhaps, in
a similar space in any other quarter of the habitable world."

That writer is disposed to see proofs of some connection between the
ancient Irish faith and that of the Zendavesta of Cyrus. Referring to
the dog on those crosses, he says--"The personation of a dog--their
invariable accompaniment, as it is also found among the sculptures of
Persepolis, and in other places in the East--would in itself be
sufficient to fix the heathen appropriation of these crosses, as that
animal can have no possible relation to Christianity; whereas, by the
Tuath de Danaans it was accounted sacred, and its maintenance enjoined
by the ordinances of the State."

Buddhist crosses are well known throughout the East. The Rev. Ernest
Eitel, of Hongkong, describing one on Amitabha Buddha, writes, "It is
exactly the same diagram which you may have seen engraved on ancient
church bells in England, and which learned antiquarians invariably
declare to be the hammer of Thor (the Scandinavian god of Thunder).
Perhaps, also, you remember to have heard that among the German
peasantry, and in Ireland, this same figure is used as a magical charm
to dispel thunder. Well, you turn to your friend (*Chinese*). 'What is
the meaning of this?' He informs you that it is the mystic Shibboleth of
the believers in the Western Paradise, an accumulation of lucky signs."
Anyhow it had a different significance to that we now recognize in the
cross.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

One need not be alarmed at the discovery, that not only the Cross, but
the Crucifixion, was a sacred symbol many hundreds of years before the
birth of Jesus. Yet, in Christianity, a different and more moral and
elevated idea became associated with the figure of a crucifix. Mithras,
as the Sun, is represented as crucified at the winter solstice. Vishnu,
Buddha, and Indra were, also, said to have been crucified on the cross.
The Scandinavians had a crucifixion of the sun ceremony on the shortest
day.

Ireland, like other lands, had Pre-Christian crucifixions. The most
remarkable one seen by us was that at Glendalough. The Persian
head-dress, and the ancient kilt, were observed with the oriental crown.
That character was afterwards imitated in Christian times, as some
suppose, down to the twelfth century.

Clonmacnoise has the figure fully clothed and crowned. The figures of
Knockmoy, Galway, and Cashel wear the kilt of the East As has been
remarked, "The Hindoo Puranas corroborate to an iota this our Knockmoy
crucifixion." That of India refers to the death of Sulioahana upon the
tree. The Knockmoy figure has the same sort philibeg, or kilt, as that
worn by the arms-extended Deity in Nubia.

Another peculiarity noticed in some of the Irish Pre-Christian
illustrations of the Crucifixion is the absence of nails; the legs being
bound with cords at the ankles. Cords, also, pass round the chest, and
under the arms. The arms are not fully outstretched, but rather hang
downward. At Monasterboice the figure is bound by cords. As Keane
observed--"Such a mode of representing the crucifixion never could have
occurred to the early Irish Christian missionaries and bishops, who are
universally allowed to have made the Scriptures their chief study." The
crown

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

resembles that worn by the goddess Diana. Keane is pleased to say of the
whole--"It represents the Cuthite crucifixions of primeval tradition."

The Irish shrine of St. Manchin led that same writer to add--"The
crucified figure in the sculptures from a Persian Rock Temple may assist
in explaining the mummy-like figures on the Irish shrine. The similarity
of the design would seem to confirm the idea that the figures were
intended to signify the inmates of the Ark, undergoing the process of
mysterious death, which was supposed to be exhibited in Arkite
ceremonies."

O'Brien's *Round Towers*, which, with the exception of some
extravagances, has been largely approved by the learned, alludes to a
bronze crucifix, with arms extended, and with an oriental crown and
kilt, in these words--"could not have been intended for our Saviour,
wanting besides the INRI, and wearing the Iranian royal crown, instead
of the Jewish crown of thorns. Therefore we are justified in ascribing
it to its owner Buddha, whom again we find imprinted in the same
crucified form." The supposed Virgin and John figures on one of the
Round Towers, he declares to be Rama and Buddha's mother.

It is singular that the dress of one crucified figure, as worn about the
loins, corresponds with that of the fabled crucified Christna. That
Christian artists, who, as seen in the beautiful works of ancient Irish
art, borrowed so much from the East, should imitate oriental
Pre-Christian crucifixions, ought not to surprise us. Christian
symbolism is generally borrowed, with new adaptation, from heathen
mythology.

Myfyr, the late Welsh Archdruid, has this explanation of the mystery,
viz.--"Hu, of light, died on the cross at the equinox, descending to the
southern hemisphere, and was

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

re-born at Christmas, when rising toward the northern summer lands."

Scotland, peopled by the same race, on its western side, as Ireland, had
the like veneration for stone crosses. Donald Clark, a Gaelic scholar,
derives Inverary from the river *Aray* and *Aoradh* (worshipped). "This
place," says he, "is still called *Crois-an-Sleuchdte* (kneeling cross),
because the pilgrims on arriving there were wont to kneel in prayer
Before, however, they arrived here, they had to ford the river Aray at a
point where the cross came in sight, and in sight of the cross they
*aoradh* (worshipped), and the stream was from this association called
*uisgge aoradh* (water of worship), not simply *aoradh* (worship)"

One cross of Kintyre is made of four round bosses, with a fifth in the
centre At Keills, of Kintyre, the cross is highly sculptured. A winged
figure appears in the top compartment, and the centre is circular, with
three bosses inside, surrounded by four dogs Captain White finds "the
conical or pyramidal weather-cope on so many the Irish crosses is
conspicuously absent in the Scottish examples." He observed, however,
that "the primitive kind of four-holed cross, met with in Knapdale
(Kintyre) is common to Wales, Cornwall, Cumberland, and other western
districts."

His remarks on serpent crosses are as follows--"The representations of
serpents, so prevalent in the one set sculptures (*Irish*), are almost
unknown to the other, though on the eastern pillar-shafts they so
frequently appear. I cannot recall a single instance of a serpent
delineated a West Highland ecclesiastical carving in the mainland
districts I have traversed; it appears, however, on a cross in Islay,
and on one in Iona." The open wheel, so prevalent in Ireland, occurs,
according to Captain White, but thrice in Scotland.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

Eugene Hucher, in *L'Art Gaulois*, has some remarkable illustrations of
the cross among a kindred people to the Irish across the Channel. It is
there associated with the pig, lion, serpent, eagle, winged horse, bird,
chariot, pig under a horse, fleur-de-lis, &c. The Gaulish coins have the
cross frequently impressed on them.

Some Irish crosses are distinguished by the Buddhist symbol in all sorts
of positions. The *Triple Tau* of India is equally manifest. The
Thor's-hammer cross is very common among other Pre-Christian crosses.
Fosbroke affirms that there are twenty-two instances of the cross on
Ogham stones, but none on the fifty-three inscribed stones in Rath
chambers. It is his opinion that "stone crosses owe their origin to
marking Druid stones with crosses, in order to change the worship
without breaking the prejudice."

The Irish cross within a circle has been seen not only in the far East,
but in the Indian Mounds of Ohio. The Druid's Cross is fully
acknowledged in the *Two Babylons* of the Rev. A. Hislop. The form of
the Philistine Dagon is detected in the sculptured mermaid on Meath's
cross, and at Clontarf cathedral; where the fish-woman has a forked
tail. The *Tau*, mentioned in Ezek. ix. 4, is declared by St. Jerome to
have been a cross.

The base of the cross at Kells, Co. Meath, has the figure of a centaur
with the trident, another centaur behind armed with a bow and arrows,
birds, fishes, and a sacred hare. The sandstone cross of Arboe, by Lough
Neagh, 20 feet high, is covered with men and horses, trees and serpents.
That of Monasterboice, 23 feet in height, has figures on the panels.
Brash has interesting records of the sculptured crosses of Ireland. He
describes those of Kilkenny and Clonmel, of sandstone, having in the
centre of One, coiled around the boss, four serpents. On the panel of

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

the left arm is a hunting scene; on the right are chariots, horsemen,
and dogs. A human head had a forked, oriental-looking beard.

Lucan mentions that the Druids wrote over the cross, *Pan Daran, Lord of
Thunder*, bearing *Hesus* or *Hu* on the right arm, and *Beli* on the
left.

Mrs. Wilkes, in her *Ireland the Ur of the Chaldees*, has thus declared
her views--"The cross as a symbol is traceable to the crossed rods of
the Chaldæan Shepherd Kings,--as ancient as the fish and the serpent
signs, and as the, ring and cup cuttings to be seen on the stones of
Scotland and Ireland." Again, "The inhabitants of Erin, previous to the
arrival of St. Patrick, were well acquainted with the cross as a symbol"
Further she writes, "As we find the Christian emblem was general among
the Druids, no one need fear assigning to many of the crosses of Ireland
and Scotland a period far anterior to the introduction of Christianity."

The *crann tau-ré*, or *crois-tau-ré*, the Fiery Cross, which was
carried through the Highlands thirty miles in three hours, in the year
1745, at the Stuart Rebellion, was known in very remote times among the
western Celts, as it still is in India. When dipped in the blood of
goats, and bearing a flame, it was the message of alarm among the wild
tribes. A serpentine figure was often twisted round the cross in heathen
times.

It is curious to find that the pagan crosses of Central India resemble
many still existing in Cornwall and Ireland. A St Andrew's cross marked
the ancient Holy Cakes Egypt. A Buddhist god bore the cross and trident
in his hand. The Emperor Decius had the cross on coins. Some of the
early Fathers were led to call the old heathen cross an invention of the
devil.

The cross of Finglas has a romantic history. It was

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

exhumed in 1816, after having been buried for ages. Its cross was
represented in a sun figure, as in Egypt. There were the marks of the
snake about it, though much defaced.

The so-called Druidical temple of New Grange, one of the most wonderful
monuments of old Ireland, is in the form of a Latin cross. There are
four angled crosses or *fylfots* within a circle. The emblem, seen also
on cromlechs, may be a reminiscence of Baal, or of the Scandinavian
Thor, both being associated with crosses. The pyramidal cross, observed
at New Grange, was known in countries as far apart as India and the
Tonga Isles. Every one knows that the several deities of ancient Egypt
are recognized by the cross they hold in their hands.

They who would study the subject further may consult O'Neal's *Irish
Crosses*, and Rolt Brash's *Sculptured Crosses of Ireland*. By comparing
the information therein with accounts of Egyptian, Persian, Phœnician,
Babylonian, Hindoo, and other ancient crosses, the conviction will be
strengthened that, from whatever sources derived, Ireland was acquainted
with the Cross, as a religious emblem of some sort, long before the
Christian era.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sacred Tara Hill](idr30)
