[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr22) 
[Next](idr24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIRE-WORSHIP.

FROM the earliest time, the sun has been the object of human adoration.
But the common flame itself, being destructive, yet beneficial, while
ever mounting upward as if disdaining earth contact, became with most
races of mankind a religious emblem, if not a Deity.

Pyrolatreia, or fire-worship, was once nearly universal. The Moloch of
the Canaanites, Phœnicians, and Carthaginians, was the divinity of
various nations under different names Moloch was not the only deity
tormenting simple maids and tender babes with fire The blazing or fiery
cross, in use among Khonds of India, was well known in both Ireland and
Scotland The Egyptians, with more modern Africans, have reverenced
flame.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

The Irish assuredly were not behind the most cultured peoples in this
respect. The sanctity of their places for fire was notorious. The
ancient lighting of fires was attended with solemn ceremonies. Even now,
the trampling upon cinders in a household is regarded, in some way, as
an indignity to the head of the establishment.

According to the old records of the *Four Masters* of Ireland, a curious
spectacle was witnessed one St. George's day, having reference to this
curious superstition. At Ross Dela, now Ross-dalla, of Westmeath, a
tower of fire blazed up from a belfry for hours, while a great black
bird, accompanied by a flock of smaller birds, kept flying in and out of
the fire, the smaller taking shelter under the wings of the leader. When
the great bird had finished its fiery purifications, it took up an oak
tree by the roots, and flew off with it.

Persia was once the high seat of fire-worship. The Parsees of India were
refugees from Persia at the time of the Mahometan conquest of that
country, and these still retain the old fire religion. The natural
flames that issued from the earth, and were regarded as divine, have
pointed out to the practical moderns the mineral oil deposits of Baku.
At the *Sheb-Seze*, or Fire-feast of Persia, says Richardson, birds and
beasts were let loose with inflammable material about them.

American Indians, in some cases, retain this custom of their ancestors.
Squier notes the supreme, holy, Spirit of Fire, *Loak Ishte-hoola-aba*,
and the ignition of new fires at the solar festival. The priests got
fire by friction. The Pawnees had a sacrifice of human beings in the
fire at the vernal equinox. The Aztecs had a god of fire in Xiuhteuctli.
The image of Hercules, the sun-god, was solemnly burnt once a year at
Tarsus.

The Scriptures have many references to this worship.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

A story is told in Maccabees of a priest who took sacred fire from the
altar, and hid it in a cave. Upon Nehemiah sending for it, water only
was found; yet, when the liquid was poured over an altar of wood, the
whole burst into flame. Phené remarks--"The British spire now fills the
place, in the plains, of the once aspiring flame which ascended from the
hill-altars."

The *Perpetual Lamps* of the ancients sanctioned the same idea. No less
than one hundred and seventy Roman, Arab, and Medieval writers record
the finding of such lamps. In 1540 a lamp was reported still burning in
the tomb of Cicero's daughter. Lights were buried in urns. Herodotus
speaks of lamps in the tombs of Egypt. Augustine wrote of lights
inextinguishable by either rain or wind. Asbestos wicks of lamps were
known in Greek temples. Madame Blavatski says that Buddhist priests made
use of asbestos wicks. Dr. Westcott, who records instances of Perpetual
Lamps, adds, "There formerly existed an art that has been lost."

Ireland was not without her perpetual fire. St. Bridget and her nuns, in
maintaining a constant flame in Kildare, were but continuing a very
ancient heathen custom. Tradition says that Druidesses did the same,
also, in sacred Kildare. As there was an Irish goddess Bridgit, Higgins
remarked that the deity had become a saint, when the disciple of St
Patrick founded her nunnery at Kildare. The Welsh ecclesiastic, who
wrote of the Norman) Conquest of Ireland, says of this fire, that though
ever recruited with fuel, "yet the ashes have never increased" It was
fed with the wood of the hawthorn. The place of the fire is described as
being twenty feet square, with a stone roof.

The virgin Daughters of the Fire were

Inghean au

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

*dagha*; but, as fire-keepers, were *Breochwidh*. The Brudins, a place
of magical cauldron and perpetual fires, disappeared with Christianity.
Those flames were devoted by the Celts, &c. to Hestia, who stood in the
place of Vesta. Being in the *Brudins* now means in *the fairies*. The
Greek *Pyrtaneium* was, like the Brudins, a public feeding-house, where
the fire never went out. The baptism of fire was an Indian institution.
The Mexicans, Virginian Indians, and Peruvians, had their perpetual fire
of a religious character. A curious sect arose once in Spain, that burnt
a cross on the forehead of the child in baptism.

Lucius Florus said of Numa Pompilius, "He appointed a fire to be kept up
by the Vestal Virgins, that a flame in imitation of the stars might
perpetually watch as Guardian of the Empire."

The Archbishop of Dublin, in 1220, shocked at this revival of
fire-worship, under the mask of Christianity, ordered the Kildare fire
to be extinguished. It was, however, relighted, and duly maintained,
until the suppression of the nunnery in the reign of Henry VIII. As an
old poet sang:--

"The bright lamp that shone in Kildare's holy fane,  
And burned through long ages of darkness and stain."

The Parsees of India have such a fire that has burned for twelve hundred
years. This is at Oodwada, near Bulsar, which is much frequented by
Parsee pilgrims during certain periods of the year. The writer once
questioned a Parsee in Bombay on this matter. The gentleman repudiated
the idea of Fire or Sun-worship, declaring that he saw the Deity better
by that symbol than by any other.

As the Egyptian priests were said to acknowledge the same, it is
possible that the Irish priests recognized in sun and flame but symbols
of the invisible God.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

Mrs. Bryant, however, asserts that "there is more trace of sun and
fire-worship in the peasantry lingering among us to-day, than in the
Bardic literature of the remote Iris past." Dr. Waddell, in *Ossian and
the Clyde*, has no doubt of fire-worship being extant in Ossian's days.
Dr. O'Brennan thinks that the Gadelians or Gaels everywhere they went
established fire-worship. The *Gabha-Bheil* was an ordeal by fire.

Two sects were said to be in the island--the Baalites, or fire adorers,
and the Lirites, or devotees of water. O'Kearny tells us--"It is
probable that very violent contentions we once carried on in Ireland by
the partizans of the rival religions, who were accustomed to meet and
decide the quarrels at the place set apart for battle." The *Samhaisgs*,
were devoted to fire-worship, and the *Swans* to Lir worship.

May-day in Ireland was very strictly observed, as it has been in Babylon
ages before. "Even now," says Mrs. Bryant, "in remote places, if the
fire goes out in a peasants house before the morning of the first of
May, a lighted sod from the priest's house to kindle it is highly
esteemed." On that day they once burnt hares, from a fancy that they
stole the butter.

The eve of May-day was a trying time, as fairies we then extra
frolicsome in stealing the milk. For preventative, the cows were driven
through fires, as in distant pagan days. According to Hone (1825), in
Dublin, folks would cast horses' heads into the bonfire; horses were sun
animals. May-eve rejoicings were known by the name *Nech-na-Bealtaine*.
According to the *Book of Rights*, Ultonian kings were not to bathe on
May-day. O'Conor remarks that the May fire ceremonies were transferred
by St. Patrick to the 24th of June. John Baptist's day. Leaping through
fire symbolized human sacrifice.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

Beltaine, or Baaltinne, was the Roman *Compitalia*, or glad times, for
their beginning of the year. The *Tailtean* games of the Irish were said
to have originated from Tailte, wife of Mac Erc, the last Firbolg king,
killed in the Battle of Moy-tuir. May-eve was, with some, *Neen na
Bealtina*, Baal's fire eve.

Keating, writing on the *Fair at Uisneach*, of Meath, says, "This fair,
or assembly, was held on the first day of the month of May; and they
were wont to exchange or barter their cattle and other property there.
They were also accustomed to make offerings to the chief god which they
worshipped, named Bel; and it was a custom with them to make two fires
in honour of this Bel in every cantred of Ireland, and to drive a couple
of every kind of cattle in the cantred between the two fires as a
preservative."

Easter-time was duly celebrated in pagan as it is now in Christian
times. The joyful season of awakening summer was being celebrated on
Tara hill, at the very moment when St. Patrick was lighting his Easter
fire on Slane hill, within sight of the King and his Court.

The *Book of Rights* informs us that "Patrick goes afterwards to Fearta
Fear Feic. A fire is kindled by him at that place on Easter Eve.
Laegaire is enraged as he sees the fire, for that was the *geis* of
Teamhair among the Gaedhil." The King had, according to custom, ordered
all fires out, as no fresh blaze could be kindled but directly or
indirectly from his own fire.

This incident in the life of the Saint is the most interesting of his
career, but can only be briefly referred to here. It was when standing
on the site of the royal palace at Tara hill, and looking across the
beautiful country to the distant hill of Slane, that we seemed to
realize the legend. Druids had forewarned the King of the coming of
strangers, but were as much astonished as he was at the

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

sight of a blaze afar, when no light could be raised but by the
Sovereign's command.

Orders were issued for the arrest of the bold intruders. St. Patrick and
his shaven companions were brought into the presence of the Master of
Fire. Then he told his tale and lighted a flame in Erin never to be
quenched. The story, as given us there by a bent old woman of seventy
years, will not be soon forgotten. Leaning on her stick with one hand,
and pointing over the almost deserted region to the hill of the Saint's
fire with the other, heaving a sigh over the departed glories of Tara,
she might have been taken for a Druidess herself.

That Paschal fire was the victor over pagan fires, with their abominable
Moloch associations.

Midsummer fires served as sun charms to keep up the heat. Midsummer Eve,
however, afterwards nominated as John the Baptist's Eve, was a great
fire-day far and wide. Von Buch, the traveller, speaks of seeing custom
observed within the Arctic Circle.

An old writer about Ireland remarked--"A stranger would imagine the
whole country was on fire." Brand writes of the Vigil of St. John--"They
make bonfires, run along the streets and fields with wisps of straw
blazing on long poles, to purify the air which they think infectious by
believing all the devils, spirits, ghosts, and hobgoblins abroad this
night to hurt mankind." One, writing in 1867 said--"The old pagan
fire-worship still survives in Ireland though nominally in honour of St.
John. On Sunday night bonfires were observed throughout nearly every
county the province of Leinster."

As Easter Day was of old devoted to Astarte, the East goddess, so was
St. John's Day to Baal. But the eve of the first of November was the
Hallow Eve or *Samhain*, when the fires were a thanksgiving to the sun
at the end of

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

harvest. Keating, who notes the sacred fire lighted by the Archdruid on
Usnagh Hill, Kildare, tells of the fires on the hill of Ward, Meath
County, on the last day of October. Some old writers identify this
period, rather than Easter, as that of the meeting of St. Patrick and
the King. The *Samhain* feast received a Christian baptism as the feast
of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary.

The festival known as the *Lucaid-lamh-fada*, or festival of Love, had
no connection with the fires. It was held from the first to the
sixteenth of August, in honour of the sun and moon, when games, more or
less accompanied by greetings of the two sexes, were duly celebrated.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Baal or Bel is associated with the fires. *Beltane* was the Lucky Fire
through which cattle were passed for purification. Spenser declared that
in his day the Irish never put out a fire without a prayer. The
*Gabha-Bheil*, or trial by Beil, subjected the person with bare feet to
pass three times through a fire. A festival is mentioned, when birds and
other creatures, previously caught, were set free with lights attached
to them. There was an old Irish prayer, *Bealaine*, corrupted to
*Bliadhain*. Then we have *Bealtinne*, or Baal's fire; the cromlech,
near Cork, of *Bealach magdadhair*; *aiche Beltinne*, the night of
Baal's fire; *Baaltinglas*; *Beilaine*, circle of Baal, &c.

Mrs. Anna Wilkes, in *Ireland, the Ur of the Chaldees*, sees in the
Irish and Hebrew word *ur*, the sacred fire. A fire-priest was *Ur-bad*,
or *Hyr-bad*. The perpetual fire in the monastery of Seighir, says the
Tripartite Life, was at the place where St. Patrick first met St.
Kieran. The *Rinceadh-fada* was a sacred dance of the Irish at
Beil-tinne, like dances recorded of Phœnicia and Assyria. At Uisneach,
the *Navel of Ireland*, where the Druids lighted

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

the first fire of the season, courts were regularly held till long after
Christian times.

The Venerable Bede records that even in his lifetime many of the Irish
were given to fire-worship. Fraser assures his readers that "in the
south of Ireland, the wayside beggar whose appeals for charity have met
with a liberal response, can think of no benediction so comprehensive as
'May the blessing of Bel rest upon you! "'

Culdees, the recognized successors of the Druids in Ireland and
Scotland, are said to owe their name--*cal, gal, or ceill*--to the word
meaning *preserver of fire* "It is still lucky," writes one, "for the
young people to jump over the flames, or for cattle to pass between two
fires" Another says," Our forefathers sent their sons and daughters
through the fire to Moloch" In Toland's day firebrands were cast about
the fields of corn at Midsummer Eve, the survival prayers to the
fire-god to give heat for the harvest perfection he calls the November
fire, *Tine-tlached-gha*, or fire-ground. And yet, Arthur Clive
considered fire-worship oppose alike to Druidism and the faith preceding
it.

In the *Book of Rights*, so ably reproduced by J. O'Donovan, there are
four seasons described--Earrach, Samhradh, Foghmhar, and Geimeridh which
he finds to be "undoubtedly Irish words not derived from the Latin
through Christianity" Fires were lighted at Bealtaine the beginning of
Samhradh The summer end fires, Samhain, were known by the name of
*Tlachtgha*. The new fire was produced by the wheel and spindle, with
tow. The wheel, a solar symbol, must be turned by the spokes in
direction of the sun's daily course.

As Scotland, especially the western part, was largely peopled from
Ireland, it would not be surprising to recognise Baal or fire-worship
there.

All Hallow Eve ceremonies are well known, and especially

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

the passing through the fire, although the Council of Constantinople,
680, expressly prohibited the heathen practice of leaping through the
fire. The Rev. Alan Stewart, referring to such fires in his parish of
Kirkmichael, famous for its Druidical circle, said, "The practice of
lighting bonfires prevails in this and the neighbouring Highland
parishes." These were the *Tinegin* or *Needfires*.

Regular Baal-fires continued in Ayrshire till 1780, and milkmaids still
like to drive their cows through the flames with a rowan stick. The
proper way to light the fire is by friction. S. Laing writes of "the
Bel-fires which, when I was young, were lighted on Midsummer night on
the hills of Orkney and Shetland. As a boy, I have rushed, with my
playmates, through the smoke of these bonfires, without a suspicion that
we were repeating the homage paid to Baal in the Valley of Hinnom."

One cannot help remembering the passage in Isa. l. 11--"All ye that
kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks, walk in the
light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled." Virgil
records a prayer to Apollo at Soracte:--

"Whom first we serve, whole woods of unctuous pine  
Burn on thy Heap, and to thy glory shine;  
By thee protected, with our naked soles,  
Thro' flame unsinged we pass, and tread the kindled coals."

The poet did not add that such devotees first applied a special ointment
to their feet.

The Scotch Beltane, till lately, was observed in the Hebrides with
something more heathen than the fire. The people lighted the fire by the
old fashion of friction with two pieces of wood, and then ate the
consecrated cake indulged in by pagan Syrians. The Scotch had the
mixture of eggs, milk, and oatcake. This was broken up, and distributed
among the assembly. Whoever got the

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

black bit, hidden in the cake, was considered worthy of sacrifice to
Baal, as the *cailteach bealtine*. He was pushed into the fire, though
soon rescued, and afterwards had to leap three times through the flames.
The term *Beltane carline* was ever a name of reproach.

In other places, at the Bealtine, a trench was cut round the fire, the
young men assembled in the circle, and cast lots who should be the
threefold leaper. Before eating the consecrated oatcake, a libation, in
heathen style, was poured upon the ground. The Scotch generally are not
now so given to sacramentarianism. Dr. Donald Clark conceives that the
Beltane is not derived from Baal.

The Isle of Man, coming more under the influence of Ireland than any
neighbouring land, has survivals of the old worship. Waldron asserts,
"Not a family in the old Island, of natives, but keeps a fire constantly
burning--or the most terrible devastations and mischief would
immediately ensue" Train, in his account of the people, writes--"Almost
down to the present time, no native of the Isle of Man will lend
anything on either of the great Druidical festivals."

The *Deas-iul* dance, anciently in honour of the sun, is, still
practised there, going, like the sun, from east to south, in its course,
not *ear-tuia-iul*, or going round by east to north. Fires were kept up
on the first of November, as at Hallowe'en.

Plowden, another historian of the place, remarks that--"The Scotch,
Irish, and Manx call the first day of May *Beiltein*, or the day of
Baal's fire." A newspaper of I837 has this paragraph--"On May-day the
people of the Isle of Man have, from time immemorial, burned all the
whin bushes in the Island, conceiving that they thereby burn all the
witches and fairies, which they believe take refuge there."

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

In like manner, in the Isle of Lewis, they had the custom of *Dessil*
(right hand), or *Dess*, from carrying fire in the right hand about
houses and the stock. When a murrain occurred among the cattle there,
all fires were formerly put out, and a fresh flame obtained by the
rubbing of two planks together.

The Gaelic Councils tried in vain to arrest this fire devotion. James I.
of Scotland has left a poem on the custom--

"At Beltane, quhen ilk bodie bownis  
To Peblis to the play--"

that is, at Beltane all went to the play or games at Peebles.

In Cornwall, another part under Irish influence, Midsummer Eve was kept
up with fire rejoicings. At Penzance, until a few years ago, on that eve
men carried two barrels on poles. Others had torches and rockets, and
girls held flowers. All at once all joined hands, and ran through the
streets, crying out, "An eye! an eye!"--when an eye was opened by a
pair, and all passed through. The old country dance was one in the same
style.

No one needs reminding how far Wales, long under Irish rule, had similar
fire customs. At Newton Nottage, till very recently, people leaped
through the Midsummer fires. Of this custom, Theodoret, in condemnation
of it, admitted that it was held as an expiation of sin. Great fires
were kept up formerly on the noonside rock of Brimham, a Yorkshire
Druidical locality.

France, especially in Brittany, has survivals of fire-worship. Such
fires were useful to bless the apple-trees, and forward the harvest. A
Breton priest was once called *Belec*, which means a servant of Baal.
Outside Paris, Baal fires were lighted on St. John's Eve. Flammarion, in
1867, wrote--"In the evening the bonfires in honour of

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

the feast of St. John were lighted all around Angoulême, and men and
women were dancing before them, and jumping over them almost all night."

Russia and India have their leaping through the flames. In the first, a
straw figure of Kupalo, a sort of representative of vegetation, was
thrown in the fire. Germans had a straw image of the god Thor. In
Mexico, babes on their, fourth day were passed through fire.

Sonnerat had this account of the *Darma*, a Feast of Fire in India--"It
lasts eighteen days, during which time those who make a vow to keep it
must fast, abstain from women, lie on the bare ground, and walk on a
brisk fire. On the eighteenth day, they assemble on the sound of
instruments their heads covered with flowers, the body daubed with
saffron, and follow in cadence the figures of Darma Rajah and Dobrede
his wife, who are carried there in procession. When they come to the
fire, they stir it to animate its activity, and take a little of the
ashes, with which they their foreheads, and when the gods have been
three times round it, they walk, either fast or slow, according to their
zeal, over a very hot fire, extended to about forty feet length"

Fire-worship may be the purest form of idolatry; flame, so nearly
immaterial, ever moving, always aspiring is a type of the spiritual,--is
useful, although dangerous. But no form of idolatry could be more cruel
than fiery adoration of the grim Moloch Symbols are agreeable to fancy,
and often helpful; but they may, and repeat do, lead men to crass
idolatry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Stone-Worship](idr24)
