[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr20) 
[Next](idr22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SERPENT FAITH.

No country in Europe is so associated with the Serpent as Ireland, and
none has so many myths and legends connected with the same. As that
creature has furnished so, many religious stories in the East, and as
the ancient faiths of Asia and Egypt abound in references to it, we may
reasonably look for some remote similarity in the ideas of worship
between Orientals and the sons of Erin.

That one of the ancient military symbols of Ireland should be a serpent,
need not occasion surprise in us. The Druidical serpent of Ireland is
perceived in the Tara brooch, popularized to the present day. Irish
crosses, so to speak, were alive with serpents.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

Although tradition declares that all the serpent tribe have ceased to
exist in Ireland, "yet," as Mrs. Anna Wilkes writes, "it is curious to
observe how the remains of the serpent *form* lingered in the minds of
the cloistered monks, who have given us such unparalleled specimens of
ornamental initial letters as are preserved in the *Books of Kells,
Ballymote*, &c." A singular charm did the reptile possess over the
imagination of the older inhabitants. Keating assures his readers that
"the Milesians, from the time they first conquered Ireland, down to the
reign of Ollamh Fodhla, made use of no other arms of distinction in
their banners than a serpent twisted round a rod, after the example of
their Gadelian ancestors."

And, still, we recognize the impression that Ireland never had any
snakes. Solinus was informed that the island had neither snakes nor
bees, and that dust from that country would drive them off from any
other land. But the same authority avers that no snakes could be found
in the Kentish Isle of Thanet, nor in Crete. Moryson, in 1617, went
further, in declaring, "Ireland had neither singing nightingall, nor
chattering *pye*, nor undermining *moule*."

Bishop Donat of Tuscany, an Irishman by birth, said--

"No poison there infects, nor scaly snake  
Creeps thro' the grass, nor frog annoys the lake."

As to frogs, they were known there after the Irish visit of William
III., being called *Dutch Nightingales*. Even Bede sanctioned the legend
about the virtues of wood from the forests of Ireland resisting poison;
and some affirm that, for that reason, the roof of Westminster Hall was
made of Irish oak. Sir James Ware said, two centuries ago, that no snake
would live in Ireland, even when brought there. Camden wrote, "Nullus
hic anguis, nec venematum quicquarn." Though adders might creep about,
no one dreamed they were venomous.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

While it was popularly believed that the serpent tribe once abounded
there, some naturalists contend that Ireland was cut off from the
continent of Europe before the troublers could travel so far to the
north-west An old tradition is held that Niul, the fortunate husband of
Pharaoh's daughter Scota, had a son, Gaoidhial, who was bitten by a
serpent in the wilderness. Brought before Moses, he was not only healed,
but was graciously informed that no serpent should have power wherever
he or his descendants should dwell. As this hero, of noble descent,
subsequently removed to Erin, that would be sufficient reason for the
absence of the venomous plague from the Isle of Saints.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

But, granting that the reptiles once roamed at large there, how came
they extirpated thence?

Universal tradition in Ireland declares that St. Patrick drove them all
into the sea; and various, as well as often humorous, are the tales
concerning that event. The Welsh monk, Jocelin, in 1185, told how this
occurred at Cruachan Aickle, the mountain of West Connaught; for the
Saint "gathered together the several tribes of serpents and venomous
creatures, and drove them headlong into the Western Ocean." Others
indicate the spot as the sacred isle near Sligo--Innis Mura. St.
Patrick's mountain, Croagh Phadrig, shares this honour.

Giraldus Cambrensis, who went over the Irish Sea with Henry II. in the
twelfth century, having some doubt of the story, mildly records that
"St. Patrick, according to common report, expelled the venomous reptiles
from it by the *Baculum Jesu*"--the historical staff or rod. The Saint
is said to have fasted forty days on a mount previous to the miracle,
and so gained miraculous power. Elsewhere, Giraldus says, "Some indeed
conjecture, with what seems

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

a *flattering fiction*, that St. Patrick and the other Saints of that
country cleared the island of all pestiferous animals."

As, however, there was the notion that there never were any but
symbolical snakes, it was held sufficient to assert, that the Apostle
absolutely prohibited any such vermin coming near his converts. An Irish
historian of 1743 gives the following differences of belief about the
affair:--"But the earlier writers of St. Patrick's Life have not
mentioned it Solinus, who wrote some hundreds of years before St.
Patrick's arrival in Ireland, takes notice of this exemption; and St.
Isidore, Bishop of Seville, in the seventh century, copies after him.
The Venerable Bede, in the eighth century, mentions this quality, but is
silent as to the cause."

The non-residence of snakes in the Isle of Thanet was accounted for by
the special blessing of St Augustine, who landed there on his mission to
the Saxons. So also tradition ascribed the Irish deliverance to the
blessing of St Patrick. Yet, while Giraldus evidently treats the story
as a fable, St. Colgan felt compelled to "give it up." Ancient
naturalists relate that Crete was preserved from snakes by the herb
Dittany driving them away.

In a work by Den is, Paris, 1843--*Le Monde Enchante Cosmographie et
Histoire Naturelle Fantastiques du Moyan Age*--the following remarks
occur--"Erin the green, the emerald of the sea, the country of the
Tuatha Dedan, counts for little at that time, nor arrests the attention
of the rapid historian. Yet there happened a wonder which ought not to
be ignored by the rest of Europe, and Messire Brunetto relates it with a
simple faith, which forbids any brevity in the narration. Now, you must
know, that the land of magical traditions, this Ireland, is a region
fatal to serpents; should some evil spirit carry them thither, all the
reptiles of the world would perish on its shores. Even

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

the stones of Ireland become a happy talisman which one can employ
against these animal nuisances, and the soil upon which they are thrown
will not be able to nourish the serpents."

But there are competitors for the glory of reptile expulsion. St. Kevin,
the hero of the *Seven Churches* of Wicklow, is stated to have caused
the death of the last Irish serpent, by setting his dog Lupus to kill
it. This event was commemorated by a carved stone placed under the east
window of Glendalough Cathedral, delineating the struggle between Lupus
and the snake. This stone was stolen by a visitor on the 28th of August,
1839.

Again, the gallant conqueror of, or conquered by, the Irish Danes, King
Brian Boroimhe, we are assured by an ancient MS., had a famous son,
Murchadh, who destroyed all serpents to be found in Ireland. This is
mentioned in the Erse story of the *Battle of Clontarf*.

St. Cado, of Brittany, was an expeller of serpents from Gaul; and Doué
de Gozon expelled them from Malta. Even Colomba did the same good
service for Iona, as others of his disciples did for Donegal. On the
tombstone of the Grand Master of Malta, 1342, are the words, *Draconis
Extinctor*. Among the heroes of serpent-destroyers were also St.
Clement, the vanquisher of the Dragon of Metz; St. Marcel, the deliverer
of Paris from the monster; and St. Romain, whose exploits were
immortalized over the gargouille of Paris, not to speak of German,
Spanish, Russian, and other Saints--Michael. The serpent is the Divine
Wisdom of several lands.

One meaning, however, for these revelations of a miracle, has been
found. Keating, the Irish historian, fancies the whole must be taken in
a figurative sense, referring to the expelling from the converts of the
old Serpent, the Devil. O'Neill, also, observes--"The conquest which the
Irish

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

Apostle of Christianity is said to have gained over the serpents of
Ireland has been doubted, but if it means that he gained a victory over
the serpent-worship, the story seems entitled to credit."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Ancient Ireland was certainly given to serpent-worship.

Allowing for the pre-Christian origin of some Irish crosses, we may
understand why these were accompanied by twining serpents. "Is it not a
singular circumstance," asks Keane, "that in Ireland where no living
serpent exists, such numerous legends of serpents should abound, and
that figures of serpents should be so profusely used to ornament Irish
sculptures? There is scarcely a cross, or a handsome piece of ancient
Irish ornamental work, which has not got its serpent or dragon."

The singular cross of Killamery, Kilkenny Co., exhibits thereon two
Irish serpents. The font of Cashel illustrates the same mystery. The
writer saw several stones at Cashel cathedral with sculptured snakes,
one large specimen ornamenting a sarcophagus. The Crozier, or Pastoral
Staff of Cashel, which was found last century, bears a serpent springing
out of a sheath or vagina. The end of the sheath is adorned with
wreathing serpents. in the handle a man stands on a serpent's head with
a staff, at which the reptile bites. This staff was like that of a Roman
augur, or of an Etruscan and Babylonian priest.

Brash's *Sculptured Crosses of Ireland* refers to one cross, at Clonmel,
having four serpents at the centre, coiled round a spherical boss.
Several instances were known in which the serpents have been more or
less chipped away from off such crosses.

A serpent occupies a large space on the beautiful Irish sculptured
stone, *Clwyn Macnos*, or Clon Macnois. Not long ago, a stone serpent
was discovered, with twelve

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

divisions, marked as for the twelve astronomical signs, reminding one of
the Babylonian serpent encircling the zodiac. Several ancient Irish
fonts have upon them sculptured serpents. Glass snakes of various
colours have also been frequently turned up.

When the author was at Cashel some years since, he saw, among a lot of
fragments of the ancient church, a remarkable stone, bearing a nearly
defaced sculpture of a female--head and bust--but whose legs were
snakes. This object of former worship was not very unlike the image of
the Gauls, that was to be. seen in Paris, though that goddess had two
serpents twisted round her legs, with their heads reposing on her
breasts. The Caribs of Guadaloupe were noticed by the Spaniards
worshipping a wooden statue, the legs of which were enwreathed by
serpents. Auriga is sometimes represented with legs like serpents. The
Abraxis of the Christian Gnostics of the early centuries had serpents
for legs.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Rude carvings of snakes adorn the pyramidal stones overlooking the
plains of Dundalk in Louth County. This is on Killing Hill. The
marvellous megalithic temple of New Grange, one of the finest
antiquities of Ireland, has its curled serpentine monument.

The legends still floating about among the peasantry of the country
parts of Ireland have frequent reference to the *Piastra*, *Piastha*,
*Worm*, or Serpent This creature is always in some lake, or deep pond.
The Fenian heroes are recorded in ancient songs to have killed many of
them. Fionn, in particular, was the traditional dragon-killer of,
Ireland. Of one monster in a lake, it said:--

"It resembled a great mound--  
Its jaws were yawning wide;  
There might lie concealed, though great its fury,  
A hundred champions in its eye-pits.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

Taller in height than eight men,  
Was its tail, which was erect above its back;  
Thicker was the most slender part of its tail,  
Than the forest oak which was sunk by the flood."

Fionn was inquisitive as to the country from which the reptile had come,
and what was the occasion of the visit to Erin. He was answered--

"From Greece, to demand battle from the Fenians."

It seems that it had already swallowed up a number of Fenian warriors,
and finished by gulping down Fionn; but the Hero cleverly opened the
side of the Piast, and released himself and the imprisoned men, and then
killed it. After this the poet added--

"Of all the Piasts that fell by Fionn,  
The number never can be told."

Fionn elsewhere figures in *The Chase of Sliabh Guilleann*, being after
one in Lough Cuan.

"We found a serpent in that lake.  
His being there was no gain to us;  
On looking at it as we approached,  
Its head was larger than a hill.

Larger than any tree in the forest,  
Were its tusks of the ugliest shape;  
Wider than the portals of a city  
Were the ears of the serpent as we approached."

He destroyed serpents in Lough Cuilinn, Lough Neagh, Lough Rea, as well
as the blue serpent of Eirne, and one at Howth. He killed two at Glen
Inny, one in the murmuring Bann, another at Lough Carra, and beheaded a
fearful creature which cast fire at him from Lough Leary.

"Fionn banished from the Raths  
Each serpent he went to meet."

Another poet left this version--

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

"A serpent there was in the Lough of the mountain,  
Which caused the slaughter of the Fianna;  
Twenty hundred or more  
It put to death in one day."

It demanded a ration of fifty horses a day for meals.

Croker, in his *Legend of the Lakes*, gives a modern allusion to the
myth, which relates to Lough Kittane of Killarney. A boy is asked--

"Did you ever hear of a big worm in the lake?

"The worm is it, fakes then, sure enough, there is a big worm in the
lake.

"How large is it?

"Why, then, it's as big as a horse, and has a great mane upon it, so it
has.

"Did you ever see it?

"No, myself never seed the sarpint, but it's all one, for sure Padrig a
Fineen did."

There is in Wexford County a *Lough-na-Piastha*. O'Flaherty calls one
known in Lough Mask, the *Irish crocodile*. No one would dream of
bathing in the lake of Glendalough (of the *Seven Churches*), as a
fearful monster lived there. There was a *Lig-na-piaste* in Derry. The
present *Knocknabaast* was formerly *Cnoc-na-bpiast* in Roscommon. Near
Donegal is *Leenapaste*. A well of Kilkenny is *Tobernapeasta*. A piast
was seen in Kilconly of Kerry. Some names have been changed more
recently; as, Lough-na-diabhail, or Lake of the Devil.

The Dragon of Wantley (in Yorkshire) was winged, and had forty-four iron
teeth, "with a sting in his tail as long as a flail," says an old
ballad.

Scotland, as the author of its *Sculptured Stones* shows, furnished a
number of illustrations of the like Dracolatria. Among the score of
megalithic-serpent Scotch monuments, some have crosses as well. There
is, also, the well-known earthen serpent of Glen Feochan, Loch Nell,
near Oban, in

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

view of the triple cone of Ben Cruachan, being 300 feet long and 20
high. Professor Blackie noted it thus

"Why lies the mighty serpent here,  
  Let him who knoweth tell;  
With its head to the land, and its huge tail near  
  The shore of the fair Loch Nell?

Why lies it here? Not here alone--  
  But far to the East and West;  
The wonder-working snake is known,  
  A mighty god, confessed.

And here the mighty god was known  
  In Europe's early morn;  
In view of Cruachan's triple cone,  
  Before John Bull was born.

And worship knew, on Celtic ground,  
  With trumpets, drums, and bugles;  
Before a trace in Lorn was found  
  Of Campbells and Macdougalls.

And here the serpent lies in pride,  
  His hoary tale to tell;  
And rears his mighty head beside  
  The shore of fair Loch Nell."

Visitors to Argyllshire and to Ireland cannot fail to recognize this
old-time symbol. The mound on the Clyde in Argyllshire, is the head
remains of a serpent earthwork. A lithic temple in serpentine form is
seen west of Bute. Some connect the cup and disc superstition with this
worship. Forlong, however, thinks of a relationship in the
spectacle-ornament with the phallic, though one form of inscription is
decidedly draconic. Serpent stones put into water, were, until lately,
used in the Hebrides to cure diseased cattle.

The Great Serpent mound of the North, at Ach-na-Goul, near Inverary, was
opened by Mr. Skene. Serpent worship was common in Argyll, as that part
of Scotland was Irish by contiguity and racial descent. Keating tells us
that the Gaedhal, derived from Gadelius, got the name of *Glas*,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

or *green*, from the green spot on his neck caused by the bite of the
serpent in the days of Moses.

South Britain can still exhibit vestiges of serpent worship. Among
English fonts bearing reminiscences are those of Stokes-Golding,
Alplington, Fitzwarren, Tintagel, East Haddon, Locking in Somerset, and
Avebury. The three first represent George and the Dragon, or, rather,
Horus of Egypt piercing the monster, In the last case, the serpent's
tail is round the font. The Vicar of Avebury remarks:--

"On the ancient Norman font in Abury Church there is a mutilated figure,
dressed apparently in the Druidical priestly garb, holding a crozier in
one hand, and clasping an open book to his breast with the other. Two
winged dragons or serpents are attacking this figure on either side. May
not this be designed to represent the triumph of Christianity over
Druidism, in which there was much veneration entertained for this
serpent and serpent worship?"

In interviews with the late Archdruid of Wales, a man full of curious
learning and traditional lore, the writer heard much of serpent
adoration in Ancient Britain. Whatever the race or races might have
been, the mystic creature had friends in the British Isles, though
chiefly in Ireland. Long ago Bryant's *Mythology* taught that, "The
chief deity of the Gentile world was almost universally worshipped under
the form of the serpent."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

A rapid glance may be taken over fields, ancient and modern,
illustrating human respect for the serpent. This devotion is not
confined to the Old World, being found in the New. It is not limited by
time, ranging over all periods. It is not peculiar to any race or
colour.

Aboriginal races, so called, have from remote antiquity

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

honoured the serpent. All over Africa, the vast regions of Tartary and
China, the hills and plains of India, the whole extent of America, the
Isles of the Pacific, alike in sweltering tropics and ice-bound coasts,
is the same tale told.

Civilized man,--whether beside the Nile, the Euphrates, or the
Indus,--on the deserts of Arabia, the highlands of Persia, the plains of
Syria, or the Islands of Greece,--among the tribes of Canaan, the many
named peoples of Asia Minor, the philosophers of Athens and Alexandria,
the mariners of Phœnicia, or the warriors of Rome,--bowed to the serpent
god. All religions, past and present, recognize the creature.

The Rev. Dr. D'Eremao, in the *Serpent of Eden*, sees direct serpent
worship in "the worship of the serpent as a god, in himself, and for his
own sake"; but indirect worship in "the use and veneration of the
serpent, not for himself, but merely as the symbol or emblem of some one
or more of the gods." He esteems the Egyptians indirect worshippers. The
Greeks had it as a symbol of Apollo, Minerva, and Juno. The Ophites, of
early Christendom, saw in it a symbol of Christ, or the mundane soul.

The creature spoke from under the tripod of Delphi; it moved about the
holy bread on the altar of the Gnostics; it was a living and moving
symbol in Egypt; it had a place of honour in the temples of Tyre,
Cyprus, Babylon, and India; it crawled in the sacred cave of Triphonius,
and its eyes glistened within the shadows of Elephanta.

As the *Apophis*, pierced by the god Horus, and as the emblem of Typhon,
it was the evil spirit of Egypt; but in the uræus of Osiris, it was the
good one. The Egyptian faith several thousand years before Christ also
included serpent worship. The serpent symbol distinguished Sabaism. It
was in Egypt the illustration of a new birth, as it cast its skin, and
thence gave to man a hope of the Resurrection. In the *Book of the
Dead*, and other Egyptian

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

Scriptures, it is frequently mentioned. The great serpent on human legs
was a solemn mystery. The Agathadæmon was the Guardian of the Dead.

Flinders Petrie, in *Ten Years Digging in Egypt*, when referring to the
fact that the oldest pyramid, Medum, was erected on the principle of the
Mastaba or tomb; declared that in the architecture of that very ancient
structure "there was the cornice of uræus serpents, which is familiar in
later times." This points to an era of, perhaps, seven thousand years
ago.

The neighbouring Assyrians paid no less devotion to. It is known that in
the land of Canaan there was the same Ophiolatreia, as the Hebrew
Scriptures testify. Cypus and Rhodes, not less than all Phœnicia,
abounded in Christianity was early affected by it in Gnosticism.
Epiphanius, relates that the Gnostics kept "a tame serpent in a *cista*,
or sacred ark, and when celebrating their mysteries (the Eucharist),
piled loaves on a table before it and then invoked the serpent to come
forth." The Ophites (serpent worshippers) were derived from the
Gnostics.

The Chinese for the lunar period represents a serpent. The word for an
hour, *Sse*, is the symbol of the serpent. The dragon still presides in
China. Persia, which supplanted, Assyria, copied thence much of its
serpent ideas; so the Semitic conquerors of Babylonia, at an earlier
period receive their theology and letters from the Akkadians The
Zendavesta three-headed serpent had to yield to the Sun god. Ahi, the
great serpent, was in opposition to Zoroastrian deities. Bel and the
Dragon have a place in Oriental literature. Bel and the serpent may be
discerned in excavated Pompeii. Clemens Alexandrinus remarked, "If we
pay attention to the strict sense of the Hebrew, the name Evia (Eve)
aspirated signifies a female, serpent."

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

India, however, is down to our time the high seat of Ophiolatreia.

The Maruts, Rudras, and Pitris are esteemed "Fiery dragons of wisdom,"
as magicians and Druids were of old. Abulfazl states that there are
seven hundred localities where carved figures of snakes are objects of
adoration. There are tribes in the Punjaub that will not kill a snake.
Vishnu is associated with the reptile in various ways. Sesha, the
serpent king, with one hundred heads, holds up the earth. The Nagas are
given up to this peculiar worship. The Buddhist poem *Nagananda* relates
the contest between Garuda, king of the birds, and the prince of the
Naga or snake deities.

India beyond the Ganges has, as in Cambodia, magnificent temples in its
honour. The soul of a tree in Siam may appear as a serpent. "In every
ancient language," writes Madame Blavatski, "the word *Dragon* signified
what it now does in Chinese, *i.e.* the being who excels in
intelligence." The brazen serpent is in the East the Divine Healer.
Æsculapius cannot do without his serpent. In the Hell of the Persians,
says Hyde, "The snake ascends in vast rolls from this dark gulf, and the
inside is full of scorpions and serpents." In the poem *Voluspa* of the
*Edda* we read--"I know there is in Nastzande (Hell) an abode remote
from the sun, the gates of which look towards the north.--It is built of
the carcases of serpents."

The ancient Greeks borrowed their serpent notions from older lands
through the medium of Phœnician traders. Hesiod's monster, the Echidna,
was half "a speckled serpent, terrible and vast." The Atmedan of
Constantinople, showing three brazen serpents **intertwined**, was said
to have been taken by the Greeks from the Persians at Platæa. Apollo,
the Greek Horus, fights the Python of darkness, as a sun-god should do,
but owns a serpent symbol. Euripides

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

notes that in processions "The fire-born serpent leads the way."

Etruria, of which Rome was a colony, probably borrowed its serpent
worship from Egypt. It was there, as elsewhere, a form of sun-worship,
as the reptile hybernates to renew its strength, and casts off its
slough to renew its youth, as the sun is renewed at spring. And yet
Ruskin says, "The true worship must have taken a dark form, when
associated with the Draconian one."

Africa is well known to be still under the cruel bondage, of serpent
worship, and that of the evil Apophis kind. The negro's forefathers
appear to him as serpents. Over the Pacific Ocean, the serpent, carved
in stone, was adored Tales, in Fiji Isles, spoke of a monster dragon
dwelling in a cave Samoa had a serpent form for the god Dengie. Even in
Australia, though in ruder style, the serpent was associated, as in
Oceana, with some idea of a creator.

America astonished Spaniards of the sixteenth century with its parody of
their own faith. The civilized Aztecs and Peruvians adored serpents
Vitzliputuli of Mexico held, like Osiris, a serpent staff
Cihuacohuatziti, wife of the Great Father, was an immense serpent The
name of the goddess Cihuacohuatl means the female serpent.

But the wilder North American Indians bowed to the serpent, as may be
known from Squier's *Serpent Symbol*. A serpentine earthwork in Adam's
County, Ohio, upon a hill, is 1000 ft in length Mounds in Iowa, arranged
in serpentine form, extend over two miles A coiled serpent mound by St
Peter's River, Iowa, is 2310 ft. long. In the desert of Colorado have
been reported lately the remains of a temple. It is said that the
capitals for the two remaining pillars are stone serpents' heads, the
feet of the columns look like rattlesnakes The pillars seem to be
rattlesnakes standing on their tails.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

Europe was, doubtless, indebted to travelling "dragons of wisdom" for
this mystic lore; how, or under what circumstances, we know not. Whether
the older, and long passed away, races were thus learned is a question;
but that peoples, far removed from our era, or but survivals of remoter
tribes, were acquainted with it may be believed, if only from serpentine
mounds, or piles of stones in serpent form.

Rome carried forth the serpent in war, since one of its standards was
the serpent on a pole. Long after, in the church processions on Palm
Sunday, the serpent figured, mounted on a pole. Scandinavia had its
Midgard, encircling the globe with its body. The Norse serpent
Jormungandr had a giantess for mother, and the evil Loki for father.
Muscovites and Lithuanians had serpent gods, while Livonia bowed to the
dragon. Olaus Magnus records serpents being kept in sacred buildings of
the North, and fed on milk. Thor was able to kill a serpentine
embodiment of evil, by striking it with his *tau*, or hammer. In pagan
Russia the serpent was the protector of brides. St. Hilarion, of Ragusa,
got rid of the dangerous snake Boas by lighting a great fire, and
commanding the reptile to go on the top to be burnt. One of the symbols
of both Hercules and the Celtic *Hu* was a serpent. The German white
serpent gave wisdom to the eater of it.

In Gaul it was reverenced. Nathair was a serpent god. Priests, Druidical
or otherwise, had a caduceus of two serpents embracing one another. A
Gaulish goddess had, in like manner, two snakes about its legs and body.
Druids kept live serpents for pious purposes. A French writer notices
one twisted round a lingam, as can be seen now, also, in Pompeii.
Gaulish coins represent a serpent under or over a horse, the sun emblem.

As the Koran informs us, Eblis was brought to Eden

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

in the mouth of the serpent. The Pythia, or Serpent of Delphi, was the
priestess. Snake offerings were made to Bacchus. The phallic character
exhibited in the serpent at Mayence, with the apple of love in its
mouth, upon which creature the Virgin is represented as treading.

France was not without its snake destroyers. In Brittany St. Suliac,
watching the emergence of a great serpent from its cave, put his stole
round its neck and cast it into the sea. Up to 1793, a procession of the
clergy of St. Suliac annually took place, when a Silver cross was
lowered into the serpent cavern of La Guivre.

M. About tells of a serpentine dance he witnessed in Greece. A number of
women and children formed th tail of a serpent, Which incessantly
revolved round itself without the extremities ever Joining In ancient
ornaments an egg is seen with a serpent coiled round it, as if to
fertilize it.

All readers of Welsh Druidism are aware of the pail played therein by
this creeping creature It was the Celtic dragon Draig. It was the
gliding god. Ceridwen is associated with a car and serpent. Abury, gives
us the serpent of the sun. The *Glain neidr*, or serpent's egg, was a
great mystery of the Druids.

Serpent worship has been taken up to the heavens where constellations
have been named after the creeping silent creature. There is the Hydra
killed by Hercules but not till it had poisoned him by its venom. There
an the voluminous folds of Draco. There is that one held by Ophiuchus,
which sought to devour the child of Virgo There is the seven-headed
Draco, each head forming a star in the Little Bear. Thus we may exclaim
with Herschel "The heavens are scribbled over with innumerable snakes.'

Classical mythology tells of a Python, which sought to devour the
offspring of Latona, whose child, Apollo, became

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

the eternal foe of the would-be destroyer. Jupiter himself became a
dragon to deceive Proserpine. Minerva carried a serpent on her breast.
Medusa bore snakes for curls on her head.

What is the meaning of it all?

Betham mentions the fact that the Celtic word for a serpent is
expressive of its wisdom. The same meaning is in other languages, and
the legends are of various nations. A knowing man, one versed in the
mysteries, was called a serpent. Was it the silence which distinguished
it in the animal creation that brought this reputation, and made it a
fitting emblem of the esoteric system?

It was the symbol of productive energy, and was ever associated with the
egg, symbol of the progressive elements of nature. The male was the
Great Father; the female, the Great Mother.

O'Brien, and others, see a close connection between Solar, Phallic, and
Serpent worship, the author of *The Round Towers of Ireland*, saying,
"If all these be identical, where is the occasion of a surprise at our
meeting the sun, phallus, and serpent, the constituent symbols of each,
occurring in combination, embossed upon the same table, and grouped
under the same architrave?"

The connection of the serpent with the starry host has been observed.
Its scales resemble revolving stars. Like them, it moves swiftly, but
noiselessly. The zodiacal girdle appeared like a serpent devouring its
own tail, and it was always deemed of a fiery nature.

Some have supposed the stories of monstrous reptiles--the object of
dread and conflict--to have originated from traditional records of
gigantic and fearful-looking Saurians or serpents that once lived on
earth, and some lingering specimens,, of which might have been seen by
early tribes of mankind. The

Atlanto-Saurus

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

*immanis* was a hundred feet long, with a femur two yards in diameter.

The serpent was certainly the token or symbol of an ancient race
celebrated for wisdom, giving rise to the naming of the learned after
dragons or serpents. The Druid of the Welsh Triads exclaims, "I am a
serpent."

According to J. H. Baecker--"The three, five, seven, or nine-headed
snake is the totem of a race of rulers, who presided over the Aryan
Hindus.--The Snake race was that of the first primæval seafarers.--The
faring-wise serpent race became at the earliest stage of tradition
rulers and civilizers." And Ovid sang--

"As an old serpent casts his scaly vest,  
Wreaths in the sun, in youthful glory dress'd,  
So when Alcides' mortal mould resigned,  
His better part enlarged, and grew refined."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

It must be remembered that even traditions bear testimony to a variety
of races in the Island. The Celts were among the later visitors, coming,
certainly, after the Iberian, whose type remains in south-west Ireland.
One of these early tribes brought the knowledge from afar; or, what may
rather be conjectured, some shipmen from the East found a temporary
sojourn there.

Dr. Phené justly remarks--"The absence of such reptiles in Ireland is
remarkable, but their *absence* could certainly not have originated a
serpent worship through terror; while everything artistic or religious
in old Irish designs from the wonderful illuminations in the *Book of
Kells* to the old Celtic gold ornaments, represent the serpent, and'
indicate, therefore, some very strong religious idea being always
uppermost in connection with it."

A Cyprus amulet gives a goddess, nude and winged, having serpents for
legs. A Typhon has been seen, with its extremities two twisted snakes. A
Buddha has been

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

indicated with two twisted snakes for appendages. The Greek poet also
describes the "divine stubborn-hearted Echidna (mother of Cerberus) half
nymph, with dark eyes and fair cheeks, and half a serpent." The mother
of an ancient Scythian hero was a serpent maiden. A story was told, in
1520, of a Swiss man being in an enchanted cave, and meeting with a
beautiful woman, whose lower part was a serpent, and who tempted him to
kiss her.

As recently reported from France, a lady has there a familiar in the
form of a serpent, able to answer her questions, and cleverly writing
down replies with the point of its tail. There is no saying how this
marvellous creature may enter into future theological controversies.

A book published in the reign of Charles I. had this story--"Ireland,
since its first inhabitation, was pestered with a triple plague, to wit,
with great abundance of venemous beastes, copious store of Diuells
visiblely appearing, and infinit multitudes of magitians."

The Saint's share in the trouble is thus described--Patrick, taking the
staffe or wand of Jesus with his sacred hand, and eleuating it after a
threatning manner, as also by the favourable assistance of Angels, he
gathered together in one place all the venemous beastes that were in
Ireland, after he draue them up before him to a most high mountaine hung
ouer the sea, called then Cruachanailge, and now Cruach Padraig, that is
St. Patricks mountaine, and from thence he cast them downe in that
steepe precipice to be swallowed up by the sea."

The Druids, or Tuaths, or other troublers, fared nearly as badly as the
snakes; as the author affirmed--"Of the magitians, he conuerted and
reclaimed very many, and such as persisted incorrigible, he routed them
out from the face of the earth."

From the *Book of Leinster* we gather the intelligence

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

that three serpents were found in the heart of Mechi, son of the great
queen. After they had been killed by Diancecht, their bodies were burnt,
and the ashes were thrown into the river Barrow, "which so boiled that
it dissolved every animal in it."

As tradition avows, St. Kevin, when he killed one a the remaining
serpents, threw the creature into the lake at Glendalough, which got the
name of Lochnapiast, or serpent loch. Among the sculptures on impost
moulding at Glendalough is one of a dog devouring a serpent.
Snake-stones have been found, consisting of small ring of glass. The
ammonite fossil is known as the snake stone.

Windele, of Kilkenny, shows the persistence of ancient ideas in the
wilder parts of Ireland. "Even as late as the eleventh century," says
he, "we have evidence of the prevalence of the old religion in the
remoter districts, and in many of the islands on our western
coasts.--Many of the secondary doctrines of Druidism hold their ground
at this very day as articles of faith.--Connected with these practice
(belteine, &c.), is the vivid memory still retained of one universal
*Ophiolatreia*, or serpent worship; and the attributing of supernatural
powers and virtues to particular animal such as the bull, the white and
red cow, the boar, the horse, the dog, &c., the memory of which has been
perpetuated in our topographical denominations."

The Irish early Christians long continued the custom entwining their old
serpent god around the cross. One has said, "The ancient Irish crosses
are alive with serpents Their green god-snake was *Gad-el-glas*. The
word *Tirda-glas* meant the tower of the green god. The old Milesian
standard, of a snake twisted round a rod, may seem to indicate a Phallic
connection with the *Sabh*.

The *Book of Lismore* asserts the same distinguished

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

power of serpent expulsion on behalf of St. Columba, as others have done
for St. Patrick, or any other Saint; saying, "Then he turned his face
westward, and said, 'May the Lord bless the Island, with its
indwellers.' And he banished toads and snakes out of it."

Thus have we seen that Ireland, above most countries of the earth,
retained a vivid conception of ancient serpent worship, though some of
the myths were naturally and gratefully associated with the reputed
founders of a purer faith.

"Search where we will," says Kennersley Lewis, "the nuptial tree, round
which coils the serpent, is connected with time and with life as a
necessary condition; and with knowledge--the knowledge of a scientific
priesthood, inheriting records and traditions hoary, perhaps, with the
snows of a glacial epoch."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sun-Worship](idr22)
