[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr24.md) 
[Next](idr26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ANIMAL WORSHIP

THAT religion was early associated with animals admits of no question
The Apis worship of Egypt prevailed several thousand years before
Christ. Animals have served as *Totem*s to the tribes of America and
other parts, but have been certainly regarded as religious symbols in
most lands. The four Evangelists are to this day symbolized by such
creatures. How far this reverence, from association with an idea,
degenerated into absolute worship of the living thing, is a
well-recognized fact of history.

Every one knows that the twelve signs of the Zodiac, to distinguish
periods of time, were named after animals, and are so to this day The
Chinese cycle is called after the rat, ox, tiger, hare, dragon, serpent,
horse, goat, monkey, cock, dog, and pig. Abel Remusat notes "the cycle
of twelve animals, imagined by the Kirghis, and now in use through
nearly all eastern Asia."

Irish literature is full of tales respecting animals, particularly in
connection with sorcery Cats, dogs, bulls, cows, horses, and boars,
figure largely therein. St. Kiaran frustrated the mischief intended by a
cat, in the discharge of a red-hot bar from a blacksmith's forge.
Because so

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

many Irish stories are about the magical feats of lower animals, and
such a number of places in Ireland are named after them, it has been
supposed, said Patrick Kennedy, that the early Irish paid them the same
divine honours as the Egyptians had done.

Birds share in the veneration. The Dove, which was held sacred at
Hierapolis, and the symbol of Mithras, was honoured in West Scotland and
in Ireland; for Bollandus records that "a snow-white dove, with a golden
bill, was wont to sit on the head of St. Kentigarn while occupied in
sacred rites." The name of St. Columba also suggests the dove.

The Wren is not yet forgotten in Ireland. It was thought to be the king
of birds. It was hunted as the Cutty wren, and is still hunted on St.
Stephen's Day, the 26th of December, the winter solstice. There, and in
Western Scotland, it has been known as the Lady of Heaven's hen, with
this refrain

"The wren! the wren! the king of all birds,  
St. Stephen's Day was caught in the furze;  
Although he is little, his family's great,  
I pray you, good landlady, give us a *trate*."

The French hunt and kill it, devotionally, on Twelfth Day. Contributions
should then be collected in a stocking. After the bird has been solemnly
buried in the churchyard, a feast and a dance terminate the ceremony.

The wren in some way symbolized the sun, and was once sacrificed to
Pluto. It perhaps represented the weak sun. Morien tells his
readers--"The Druids, instead of a dove, employed a wren to symbolize
the sun's divinity escaping into an Arkite shrine, to save himself from
his murderous pursuers." "The worshipful animal," says J. G. Frazer, "is
killed with special solemnity once a year; and before or immediately
after death he is promenaded

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

from door to door, that each of his worshippers may receive a portion of
the divine virtues that are supposed to emanate from the dead or dying
god."

The Hare, in like manner, was hunted once a year, but that was on
May-day. The modern Irishman fancied it robbed his milch cows of the
sweet draught that belonged by right to himself. On the other hand,
hares have been styled St. Monacella's Lambs--being placed under her
special protection.

The hare, however, was certainly reverenced in Egypt, and at Dendera was
to be seen the hare-headed deity. Cæsar mentions that the Celts would
not eat of the animal, any more than did the Pythagoreans. In Irish
tales witch-hares are declared to be only caught by a black greyhound.
Elsewhere it is stated, that in the Cashel cathedral an ornament figures
a couple of hares complacently feeding upon some trilobed foliage, as
the shamrock.

Only a few months since a traveller gave an illustration of the
persistence of some meaning being attached to the hare, even among the
educated and Christian fishermen of Aberdeen. When out at sea, and in
some danger from bad weather, it is thought unfortunate, and even
calamitous, for any one in the boat to mention the name of this
creature.

That animal reverence, to say the least of it, continued not in Ireland
alone, but even in Scotland, among those of the same race, to quite
modern times, is manifest from the fierce denunciation of certain
practices relating thereto. The Presbytery of Dingwall, Ross, on
September 5, 1656, made special reference to the heathenish custom then
prevalent in the North, of pouring out libations of milk upon hills, of
adoring stones and wells, and above all, of sacrificing bulls!

The *Ossianic Transactions* contain some references to

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

the Irish Holy Bulls and Cows. The bull has been called the Deity of the
Ark. In Owen Connelan's translation of *Proceedings of the Great Bardic
Institution*, is an account of a magical cow which supplied milk to nine
score nuns of Tuam-daghnalan. This is very like the tale of the Tuath
smith's *Glas Gaibhne*, or Grey Cow, which nourished a large family and
its numerous dependants. Though stolen by the General of the roving
Fomorians, she contrived to lie on, and practise her benevolence until
the fifth century. Her camping places, numerous as they were, are
localities recognized by Irish country folk to this day. There is also
the story of Diarmuid Mac Cearbhall, half Druid, half Christian, who
killed his son, because he had caused the death of a Sacred Cow.

As to the nine score *nuns* of Tuam, it must be noticed that the word
*cailach* served alike for nun and druidess. This led W. Hackett, in the
*Transactions*, to observe--"the probability is that they were pagan
Druidesses, and that the cows were living idols like *Apis*, or in some
sense considered sacred animals."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The PIG must be placed among the sacred animals of Ireland, as it was of
various nations of antiquity. Was not the place known of old as
*Mucinis*, or Hog Island? Did not Giraldus Cambrensis say in the twelfth
century that he had never seen so many swine as in Ireland? And who
would dispute the honour given still to "the gentleman who pays the
rent"?

The Boar was sacred to Diana, who sent forth the destroying Calydonian
boar to ravage the country, but which was slain by Theseus. The Hindoo
divine mother Varahi was the *Earth Sow*. The third Avatar of Vishnu,
Varaha, had a boar's head. A Cyprus gem bears the image of a flying
boar, believed to represent Adonis,

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

who was killed by a boar. Sacrifices of black pigs were made to Mars
Sylvanus. The sow was sacred to Isis, and sacrificed to Osiris. It was
sacred to Demeter or Ceres, as representing the corn spirit. In Egypt,
during later periods, the boar personated Typhon. In the picture of the
Last Judgment, to be seen on the famous sarcophagus at the Sloane Museum
of Lincoln's Inn Fields, the condemned soul is observed transformed into
a pig. One of the Phœnician gods is beheld holding one by the tail.

The Jews were not to keep, eat, or even touch the creature, which was
held sacred, as devoted to evil. Certain passages, as Isa. lxv. 3 and 4,
and lxvi. 3 and 17, are curious in relation to it. "Although swine and
their herdsmen," says Gladstone, "were deemed unclean, there was a very
particular and solemn injunction for the sacrifice of two swine to
Osiris, and to the moon, by every Egyptian. The poor, who could not
supply the animals, offered the figures of swine made of dough." The
Phœnician priests, like those of Druidism, were called *swine*. A sow
figure has been found in the ruins of the Mashonaland Zimbabwe, both on
pottery and carved in soapstone. Mahomet was satisfied that so unclean
an animal did not exist before the Ark days. The pig was once slain for
divination purposes.

The Prophet of old condemned those who sacrificed in gardens, .and who
ate swine's flesh. Was it because the neighbouring Syrians were
accustomed, in fear, to do homage to the destroyer of Adonis? Or, did
the Jews abstain from eating it, from the fear of offending an adverse
power? The Norsemen offered the pig to their sun-god, killed at the
winter solstice. The animal appears on Gaulish coins, under or over a
horse and the *fleur-de-lis*. It was the national symbol of Gaul, as
seen in their standards.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

The sow and its young are oddly associated with a search after a sacred
spot Æneas, when in Italy, was said to have built his town where he met
a sow with thirty sucklings. On the front of Croyland Abbey may still be
seen the sculptured sow and pigs, under a tree, that led the founder of
this monastery to fix his abode on the island of the fens.

A Breton poem, *Ar Rannock*--(the Numbers) mentions a wild sow, with her
five young ones, that called the 'children under an apple-tree, when the
wild boar came to give them a lesson. A Welsh poem begins with--"Give
ear, little pigs "--meaning disciples. One of the Triads speaks of three
powerful swineherds. The priest of Ceridwen or Hwch was Turch, the boar.
The animal is prominent on the Cross of Drosten, Forfarshire.
Glastonbury is said to be derived from Glasteing, who, after a sow with
eight legs, found her with her young ones under an apple-tree; upon
which he was content to die on that spot. Both St. Germanus and St
Patrick are associated with the animal. Down to the Middle Ages, says an
author, some supernatural power is ascribed to it, as we read of a sow
being tried for witchcraft, pronounced guilty, and duly executed. It may
be presumed that no one, however much admiring pork, partook of her
flesh.

The Irish Brehon law had these two references to it--"The pig has a
tripartite division: one-third for her body, one-third for her
expectation, and one-third for her farrow." The "trespass of swine" is
described as "the crimes of the pigs." All such creatures were ordered
to be kept in the stye at night.

The story of the boar of Beann Gulbain, which caused the death of
Diarmuid, the captor of the beautiful Graine, after he had killed it,
through his heel being pierced by its bristles, is very like the
classical one of the death of Adonis.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

Heroes were accustomed to fight against wild boars and enchanters.

Druids were rather fond of pigs, since these had a liking for acorns,
the produce of the saintly oak. Yet they, as priests, were the *Swine of
Mon*, and *Swine of the Sacred Cord*. Like the Cabin, they were *Young
Swine*. The Druids were much given to transforming persons into what
were known as Druidic pigs. When the Milesians sought for Ireland in
their voyage, the Tuatha, by magic, caused a fog to rise so as to make
the land assume the appearance of a large pig; whence it got the
appellation of *Inis na Muici*, or Isle of Pig, or *Muc Inis*, Hog
Island.

A wonderful tale is told of a fabulous pig kept by a King of Leinster,
Mesgegra mac Datho, who fed it daily from the milk of sixty cows Welsh
stories are told of fighting swine. At the end of a Welsh bonfire, the
people used to shout out, "The cropped black sow seize the hindermost!"
when all would run in haste away. The pig--in Irish, *muc, orc*, and
*torc*--when a possessed animal, was a decided danger as well as
nuisance The hero Fionn had several notable adventures in pursuit of
such, as the torc of Glen Torein, and the boar of Slieve Muck.

According to an Ogham inscription at Ballyquin, the pig was sacred to
the goddess Anar Aine. It is said, "A sacrifice of swine is the
sovereign right of Ana." There still sacred pigs in some Buddhist
temples. Tacitus speaks of the Aestii (of North Germany) worshipping the
goddess Friga, after whom our *Friday* is called, in the form of a pig.
As the Rev J. Rice-Byrne translates the passage "They worship the Mother
of the gods. As the emblem of their superstition, they are used to bear
the figures boars": *i.e.* in sacred processions to Friga.

In the *Proceedings of the Great Bardic Institution* (In there is a
paper by W. Hackett, who writes--"In pagan

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

times, the pig was held as sacred in Ireland as it is held at the
present day in the religious systems of India and China." it was his
expressed opinion that "all the legends of porcine animals, which abound
in Ireland, Wales, and Scotland, had reference to the suppression of a
form of idolatry, analogous to, if not identical with, the existing
worship of the Hindoo deity, Vishnu, in his Avatar as a Boar."

Certainly, the Irish, like the Germans, are still admirers of the pig.
Witches and Pigs are mixed up in stories; but, then, Gomme's *Ethnology
in Folklore* tells us --"The connection between witches and the lower
animals is a very close one." It has been affirmed that the footmarks of
St. Manchan's cow can yet be distinguished upon the stones it walked
over in Ireland.

Animals were known to be offered by Irish and Scotch down to the last
century, and it is recorded that a calf was publicly burnt in 1800 by
Cornishmen to stop a murrain. A sheep was sometimes offered for the like
purpose in some parts of England. In 1678 four men were tried "for
sacrificing a bull in a heathenish manner in the Island of St.
Ruffus--for the recovery of health of Cirstane Mackenzie." Animals were
also killed in honour of St. Martin's day.

A remarkable story is quoted by the President of the Folklore Society,
from an old writer, of sheep being offered to a wooden image in times of
sickness. The skin of the sheep was put round the sick person, and the
neighbours devoutly ate the carcase. This occurred at Ballyvourney,
County Cork. The story is related in *the Folly of Pilgrimages*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Shamrock, and Other Sacred Plants](idr26.md)
