[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr32) 
[Next](idr34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CULDEES OF DRUIDICAL DAYS.

So many questions have been raised concerning the mysterious community,
called *Culdees*, and such various opinions have been expressed
concerning them, that one may be excused inquiring whether in their
midst we can trace reminiscences of old Irish faiths. The notion has
been long prevalent that the Culdees were only Scotch, having nothing to
do with Ireland; whereas, they were originally from that country.

Their most bitter enemy in early Christian days was the Venerable Bede,
who denied their claims to orthodoxy. But, since he was a Saxon, and a
priest under Roman rule,

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

his charges have been slightly heeded. Their maintenance of an
hereditary priesthood was not merely Jewish, as he supposed, but of
Druidical sympathy.

Prof. Rhys judiciously remarks--"Irish Druidism absorbed a certain
amount of Christianity, and it would be a problem of considerable
difficulty to fix on the period where it ceased to be Druidism, and from
which onwards it could be said of Christianity in any restricted sense
of that term."

As both St. Patrick and St. Columba have been regarded by some modern
writers as simply Culdees, and not following orthodox views and methods,
might not the many stories told of their conflicts with Druids have been
brought forth by ancient chroniclers, in refutation of the slanders
abroad concerning their heretical, Druidical tendency? The same
supposition may be equally directed against the early Welsh
missionaries, though these were almost all from Ireland. Certainly their
assumed miraculous powers inclined to the old traditions of Druidical
performances. They had all of them a control over the powers of nature,
and had' even raised the dead; at least, their biographers claimed it
for them.

Dr. Carpenter speaks thus:--"The incidents in St. Columba's life have
been originally recorded in the contemporary *fasti* of his religious
foundation, and transmitted in unbroken succession to Abbot Adamnan, who
first compiled a complete *Vita* of his great predecessor, of which
there exists a MS copy, whose authenticity there is no reason to doubt,
which dates back to the early part of the eighth century, not much more
than one hundred. years after St. Columba's death. Now, Adamnan's *Vita*
credits its subject with the possession of every kind of miraculous
power. He cured hundreds of people afflicted with inveterate diseases,
accorded safety to storm-tossed

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

vessels, himself walked across the sea to his island home, drove demons
out of milk-pails, outwitted sorcerers, and gave supernatural powers to
domestic implements."

All this reminds one strongly of the powers attributed by tradition to
the Druids of the period, and points suspiciously to some outgrowth from
Druidism in his case.

Columba was an Irishman of Donegal, and died, as it is said, in 597.
Adamnan declares that his staff (without which a Druid could do but
little), when once left behind at Iona, went of itself over the sea to
its master in Ireland. He founded a monastery at Durmagh, King's Co. At
Iona the ruins are those of the Cluniac monks; for, says Boulbee, "not a
trace can well remain of the primitive settlement of Columba." But Iona
was certainly a Druidical college at first.

Like the Druids before them, the Culdees formed communities. Richey
tells us--"The Church consisted of isolated monasteries, which were
practically independent of each other; the clergy exercised no judicial
power over the laity." On the other hand, Wood-Martin of Sligo supposes,
"Christianity must have been first introduced into Ireland by"
missionaries of the Greek Church." He notes the fact that Bishops were
to be found in almost every village. It is also pointed out that Columba
never sought Papal sanction for the conversion of the Picts.

The Iona tonsure, like that of St. Patrick's time, was the shaving of
all the hair in front of a line drawn over the top of the head from ear
to ear. The Roman, as all know, was a circle at top, and appears to have
been first adopted at Iona early in the eighth century. The first, or
crescent, shape was Druidical.

It was about that date, also, that the Roman way of keeping Easter
succeeded the so called Irish mode. At the Council of Whitby, Colman of
Iona was outvoted, though

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

protesting the antiquity of his own practice. McFirbis's MS. speaks thus
of the year 896--"In this year the men of Erin consented to receive
jurisdiction and one rule from Adamnan respecting the celebration of
Easter on Sunday on the 14th of the moon of April, and the coronal
tonsure of Peter was performed upon the clerics of Erin." Again, it
says, "The clergy of Erin held many Synods and they used to come to
those Synods with weapons, so that pitched battles used to be fought
between them, and many used to be slain." After this authority, one need
not wonder at the assertion that Irish Druids formerly led contending
parties.

Iona had certainly a Druidical college till the community was expelled
by Columba for his own community and the Highlanders still recognize it
as the *Druid's Isle*. An old statistical work says, "The Druids
undoubtedly possessed Iona before the introduction of Christianity." It
must be admitted that the Culdees wore a white dress, as did the Druids,
and that they occupied places which had a Druidical reputation. They
used the Asiatic cross, now called that of St. Andrew's. Dr. J. Moore is
pleased to say, "The Culdees seem to have adopted nearly all the Pagan
symbols of the neighbourhood."

As to the origin of the word, Reeves might well remark in his notes on
Columba's Life, "Culdee is the most abused term in Scotic church
history." As the *Ceile De,* the *Four Masters* mentions them in 806.
Todd writes of them thus--"The earliest Christian missionaries found the
native religion extinct, and themselves took the name of Culdees from
inhabiting the Druids' empty cells." Jamieson styles them *Culdees* or
*Keldees*, *Kyldees, Kylledei*. O'Brien has them the Irish *Ceile De*,
servant of God. Another call them *Clann Dia*, Children of God. Barber
considered them Mithraists.

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

Higgins, in *Celtic Druids*, will have Culdees only changed Druids, and
regarded the Irish hereditary Abbots of Iona, the *Coarbs* or *Curbs*,
as simply Corybantes. Latin writers knew them as *Colidei* or
God-worshippers. Bishop Nicholson thought them *Cool Dubh*, from their
black hoods. As *C* and *G* are commutable letters in Irish, we have
*Giolla De*, Servant of God. The word Culdee was used by Boece in 1526.
Dr. Reeves, in the Irish Academy, calls the *Servus Dei* by the Celtic
*Celi-Dé*, and notes the name *Ceile-n-De* applied to the Sligo Friars
in the *Four Masters*, 1595. Monks were reputed *Keledei* in the
thirteenth century. Brockham's Lexicon finds regulars and seculars
called so in the ninth century.

The *Four Masters* record that "Maenach, a *Celae-Dé*, came across the
sea westward to establish laws in Ireland." In the poem of *Moelruein*,
it is the Rule of the *Celae-n-dé*. The *Keledei* of Scotland, according
to Dr. Reeves, had the same discipline as the Irish *Colidei*. One
*Collideus* of the Armagh church died in 1574. One *Celi-dé* of
Clonmacnois, dying in 1059, left several sons, who became Abbots after
him.

The canons of York were Culdees in Atheistan's time. Ceadda, Wilfrid's
predecessor, was a Culdee. They were also called, from their mode of
celebrating Easter, *Quartadecimans*. The last known in Scotland were in
1352. As Bede says, the Irish, being Culdees, would as soon communicate
with pagans as with Saxons; the later following Latin or Romish
Christianity.

Ireland, as reported by Giraldus, had a chapel of the *Colidei* on an
island of Tipperary, as he declared some were on islands of Wales. They
were in Armagh in 920. Ussher, Archbishop of Armagh, asserts that the
Northern Irish, "continued still their old tradition," in spite of the
declaration of Pope Honorius. In Tirechan's *Life of St Patrick*,
*Cele-de* came from Briton to Ireland in 919; but

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

in 811 some were said to have been miraculously conveyed across the sea.
Bede, who opposed them, whether from Ireland or Scotland, was shocked at
their holding his religion "in no account at all," nor communicating
with his faithful "in anything more than with pagans." He banished those
who came to his quarter.

He found these Irish, Welsh, and Scotch Christians to have, in addition
to many heresies, the Jewish and Druidical system of hereditary
priesthood. Property of the Church even descended from father to son;
and, says Dr. Reeves, "was practically entailed to members of certain
families." He adds that they were understood in the 12th century as "a
religious order of clerks who lived in Societies, under a Superior,
within a common enclosure, but in detached cells; associated in a sort
of collegiate rather than œnobical brotherhood."

Giraldus, as well as Bede, complained of their hereditary priesthood.
The same principle prevailed in the Druidical region of Brittany, and
only yielded to the force of the Council of Tours in 1127.

Although St. Columba had no exalted idea of the other sex, saying,
"Where there is a cow there will be a woman, and where there is a woman
there will be mischief"--yet his followers practised marriage But while,
says Mylin, they "after the usage of the Eastern Church, had wives they
abstained from them, when it came to their turn to minister." The
"Woman's Island" of Loch Lomond was one of the female sanctuaries on
such an occasion. Their opposition to celibacy brought them much
discredit with other priests.

Archbishop Lanfranc was shocked at their not praying to Saints, not
dedicating churches to the Virgin or Saints, not using the Roman
Service, and because, wrote he, "Infants are baptized by immersion,
without the consecrated chrism."

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

St. Bernard was distressed at what he heard of these Irish Culdees, who
had no Confession, never paid tithes, and lived like wild beasts, as
they disdained marriage by the clergy. In his righteous anger, he
stigmatized them as "beasts, absolute barbarians, a stubborn, stiff
necked, and *ungovernable* generation, and abominable; Christian in
name, but in reality pagans." This harsh language is not worse than that
employed by the Pope, when he entreated our Henry II. to take over
Ireland, so as to bring the Irish into the Christian Church, compel them
to pay tithes, and so civilize them.

One would fancy, with Algernon Herbert, that the Culdees performed
secret rites, and indulged, like their Druidical fathers, in human
sacrifice, from the legend of St. Oran being buried underneath the
church erected by Columba, to propitiate the Powers, and secure good
fortune. In that case, however, St. Oran offered to be the victim, so as
to avert evil from bad spirits.

If St. Patrick, St. Columba, and other early Irish Saints had been true
monks, why did St. Bernard, in his *Life of Malachy*, Archbishop of
Armagh, 1130, say that up to that time there was not a monk in Ireland?
Columba certainly took Culdeeism to Scotland from Ireland. In the Bog of
Monaincha are two islands. On one was a monastery for men, their wives
occupying the neighbouring Woman's Isle. Giraldus Cambrensis, who wrote
of the Community of Monaincha in the twelfth century, called it the
church of the old religion, and politely designated as "Demons" all who
belonged to that former church. The Abbey church, the ruins of which
still remain, and which was 38 feet by 18 feet in size, was erected
after the time of Giraldus.

Thus R. F. Gould, in his *Freemasonry*, had some grounds for
saying--"The Druidism of our ancestors must have been powerfully
influenced by the paganism of the Empire

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

at the period when Christianity dawned on Britain." He deemed it
probable that the early clerics of Christianity, "the *cultores deorum,
the worshippers of the gods*, gradually merged into *cultores Dei*,
worshippers of the true God." So it might be that, as Higgins wrote,
"The Culdees were the last remains of the Druids."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Future Life, or Land of the West](idr34)
