[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Wicca &
Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](idr34.md) 
[Next](idr36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ANCIENT IRISH LITERATURE.

THERE are such contradictory views upon the originality, authenticity,
and reliableness of Irish literature among Irish scholars and experts,
that it is necessary to give various

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

ideas of this question, as has been given upon other subjects treated of
in this book.

Some Irish authorities, like not a few Welsh ones, are ready to accept
without hesitation a narrative written by their countrymen, as if it
were a point of patriotism to do so. Others, not so credulous, are
desirous to explain away any seeming errors or incongruities, especially
if regarded in the interest of a Church, or the exigency of a political
party. Then, there are a few, influenced by the modern spirit of
inquiry, or scepticism, prepared not only to reject what are palpable
absurdities, but, sometimes, unreasonably to deny what is not
immediately capable of proof.

Too much praise cannot be given to many, such as Sir Charles Gavan
Duffy, who are trying to popularize ancient Irish literature.

It is harsh, indeed, to say, as Dr. Ledwich does in his *Antiquities of
Ireland*, after quoting a list by Ware and Keating--"It savours, as all
Irish MSS. do, of modern forgery." But no student of history can exempt
the annals of Ireland from the charge of misrepresentation of facts, or
absolute invention of falsehoods. Prof. Harttung, who considered the old
Irish "a distinctly unhistorical and unsettled people," has this opinion
of their ancient literature--"Imagination and the works of scholars,
especially after the tenth century, supplied that which was painfully
wanting in actuality."

No better illustration can be given than the remarkable series of books
on the lives of St. Patrick and St. Columba. One's faith is tried
thereby to the uttermost, leading not a few to deny the very existence
of the two missionaries. That early Irish literature was afterwards much
corrupted may be admitted, without throwing doubt upon all records
because of interpolations and changes, through indiscreet zeal, or love
of the marvellous.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

Spenser, though an Englishman, did justice to Ireland when he wrote--"It
is certain the Irish hath had the use of letters very anciently and long
before England." Let us acknowledge with Faber, that "fictions of
ancient poetry . . . will be found to comprehend some portion of
historic truth." It is Bede, no real friend to the Irish, who tells us
that "many both of the nobles and the low state left their. country,
and, either in search of sacred learning, or a stricter life, removed to
Ireland." Camden quotes St. Sugenius, of the eighth century--

"Exemplo patrum, commotus amore legendi,  
Ivit ad Hibernos Sophiâ mirabile claros."

Skene, in *Celtic Scotland*, observes, "Others of these legends are
undoubtedly purely artificial, and the entire legendary history of
Ireland, prior to the establishment of Christianity in the fifth
century, partakes largely of this character." Dr. Todd, however, warns
us "that the pagan character of a passage fails to prove its
antiquity,"--as "early Christianity itself was deeply tinged by pagan
influences." In the same sense, Eugene O'Curry writes--"The tales
relating to the pre-Christian period have in some form or other floated
down the stream of tradition, preserving in the midst of a
richly-developed Christian mythos much of their original pagan
character."

The latter author draws a comparison between Irish and Welsh literature,
not much to the advantage of the latter, saying, that there is in the
first "a definite localization of all the personages and incidents of
the tales"; whereas the Welsh poems "bear incontestable evidence of
having been recast in the twelfth or thirteenth century." He deplores
the great destruction of Irish MSS. for several centuries before the
Norman conquest of Ireland, much information being only preserved by
tradition. The country must have been for ages in a fearful state of
feud and anarchy

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

before the twelfth century. Toland, in his *History of the Druids*,
agrees with O'Curry in the statement that Irish MSS. are older and more
numerous than Welsh. Many are scattered in the libraries of Europe,
particularly in Paris, Spain, Copenhagen, arid the Vatican.

Leland, time of Henry VIII., accounts for some destruction of MSS. As
the Norman conquerors of Ireland built churches wherever they
established themselves, Leland says that the native Irish made a
practice of burning churches in their hatred to the new men. As the
pious Normans were great patrons of monasteries, these buildings often
shared a similar fate from the like cause, and vast collections of Irish
MSS. so perished in the flames. The Danes, in the pillaging of Armagh,
and other centres of ancient learning, were responsible for much of the
Vandalism.

A curious story is told by Christopher Anderson. "In the reign of
Elizabeth," says he, "the King of Denmark applied to England for proper
persons who might translate the ancient Irish books in his possession;
and an Irishman in London, then in prison, being applied to on the
subject, was ready to engage in the work. But, upon a council being
called, a certain member, it is said, who may be nameless, opposed the
scheme, lest it should be prejudicial to the English interest."

Of one thing there can be no doubt; viz. that Irish scholars find great
difficulties in reading and translating Irish MSS. They are so obscure
and rude, have been so often interpolated at various periods, and are so
liable to be misunderstood by the most conscientious and pains-taking
student, that outsiders are puzzled by the contradictory results of
examination.

It is generally allowed that the Fenian poems are the most classical.
Hardiman, in *Irish Minstrelsy*, is "fully convinced

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

of the antiquity of these Fenian poems"; but, he adds, "the language is
so obsolete that it cannot be understood without a gloss; and even the
gloss itself is frequently so obscure as to be equally difficult with
the text." The mixture of barbarous and abbreviated Latin increases the
embarrassment. English readers of such translations have to take much
upon faith. The Fenian poems are by far the finest extant. The *Pursuit
of Diarmuid*, or Dermot, has been translated into many languages. The
*Battle of Gabhra* and the *Lamentations of Oisin* relate to the final
destruction of the Fenian warriors by the Milesians.

The Irish Academy and other literary institutions have done excellent
service in translations. Walker's *Irish Bards* and Miss Brooke's
*Reliques of Irish Poetry* may be consulted with advantage, as well as
Hardiman's *Irish Minstrelsy*. The collection of Erin's ancient poets
would not by any means approach in size that of the Finnish *Kalevala*,
which were much greater in extent than the *Iliad*, if not equalling it
in quality.

It has been well remarked that "Ireland would have been the richer had
not the fears or bigotry of the priests discouraged the reading of pagan
poems and romances, and thrown thousands of MSS. into the flames." St.
Patrick is declared the destroyer of some hundreds of them. Though a
number, yet preserved, are in Irish letter, the language is but Latin.
The ancient *Domnagh Airgid*, in the Dublin Museum, is in Irish
character, having portions of the Gospels in uncial Latin. That copy was
said to have belonged to St. Patrick.

The reported ages of MSS. may be considered doubtful. Zeuss, the German
philologist, puts the oldest at the ninth century; but many are clearly
copies of earlier ones, now lost. The fifth century has been claimed for
some, and a pre-Christian period for a number of lost originals.

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

The *Cathach* of the O'Donnels, containing some psalms, is in a very
ancient character. The *Leabhar-na-H-Uidhre*, or *Book of the Dun Cow*,
has 138 pages on vellum. The *Leabhar Gabhala*, or *Book of Invasions*,
is historical. The *Book of Kells* was ascribed to Columba, having its
gospels beautifully illustrated. The *Seanchus Môr* is a storehouse of
information. Psalters are ascribed to Cormac of Cashel, and others; the
Psalter of *Tara* is taken from the one of Cashel. The latter records
the fact that "Trosdan, a magician, advised the Irish army to bathe in
the milk of one hundred and fifty white crumple-horned cows, as a sure
antidote against the envenomed arrows of the Britons."

Among the lost MSS. may be named the *Calendar of Cashel*, the
*Cuilinenn*, or *Book of Skins*, &c. The *Leabhar Leccan* has much about
the Tuaths. Historical or mythological tales are numerous. There are
*Annals* of Ulster, of Munster, Leinster, Innisfallen, Donegall,
Tigharnoch, Clonmacnois, the Four Masters, &c. The *Book of Armagh* is
very celebrated for its Irish character, mixed with Greek and Latin.
There are the *Books* of Meath, of St. Kevin of Glendalough, of Leacan,
of Kells, of the Isle of Saints, of Fermoy, of Dianna, of Clonmacnoise,
of Mulling, of Dioma, of Howth, of Durrow, of Ballymote about Tuaths and
Milesians, of Leinster, of Lismore, of Clogher, of Dunnseanchus by
Amergin, &c. There are the *Book of Rights* or Leabhar na-g-Ceart by St.
Benignus, the *Yellow Book of Ferns*, and the *Book of the Angel*. The
*Book of Armagh*, containing the *Confessions* of St. Patrick, has 442
pages. The Four Masters, with some authorities, dates from the
seventeenth century.

Dr. Petrie dates the *Feath Fiudha* or *Guardsman's Cry*, from the
seventh century, though put much later by Todd, and in the twelfth
century by the Rev. W. Kilbride. Of

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

291 words, 16 are Latin, and 30 are obsolete. The antiquarian authority,
J. T. Gilbert, has doubts of any fifth century Latin Vulgate in Ireland.
The Lives of St. Patrick are mostly of mediæval age.

The *Martyrology of Donegal* was by O'Clery, one of the "Four Masters,"
and gives an account of the Irish Saints. The *Saltair Chaisil* was seen
by Sir W. Ware, though since lost. There are two copies of the *Book of
Hymns*, eleventh century. The *Martyrology of Maolmuire O'Gormain* dates
from 1167; the *Metrical Calendar* is put at the ninth century. St.
Patrick's *Hymn to the Trinity* is declared of the sixth century. Among
Foray or cattle-stealing poems may be cited the *Tain-Bo-Cualigne*,
written by St. Kiaran on the skin of his pet dun cow. Irish Triads were
perhaps in imitation of the Welsh ones.

O'Curry had declared the *Tripartite Life* of St. Patrick to be of the
seventh century. Arthur Clive finds it "was certainly written after the
eleventh century. Such are the allusions to the kings and chieftains;
while the MS. called the *Book of Armagh* must have been written after
the Norman Conquest, for it alludes to the Saxons as in occupation of
the Island, and gives expression to a prophecy foretelling their final
expulsion."

Gilbert, the Irish Archivist, in *Calendar of Ancient Records in
Dublin*, tells us that "the early documents are in mediæval Latin,
antique French, and Old or Middle English, written in obscure and
contracted styles, replete with obsolete terms and archaic, undated." He
finds the charters and grants are written in abbreviated Latin. The
Irish was ever a puzzle. There were men to be found in Rome, it was
said, who could speak every language but Irish. Lilly called it the
Angels' language. Our James I. hated it, and declared his conviction
that the Devil himself could not speak it. It might, therefore, on that
account,

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

be regretted that the Irish are more and more adopting English for Erse.

As the Erse has long been regarded as the "poor relation," among the
Celtic family, the following from the *Edinburgh Magazine* for 1800 may
be reassuring to Irishmen--

"The Scottish dialect of the Irish, corrupted as it was with Monkish
Latin, and abundance of Danish, arrived in this country with the
Dalriadæ. The Irish is the real mother-tongue, and retains a very long
list of vocables, either now forgotten, or never used in Scotland. On
the other hand, the Irish vocabulary contains all the words, a few
modern corruptions excepted, to be found in the Scottish Gaelic."

Although Welsh enthusiasts claim the greatest antiquity for their
tongue, many philologists lean to the Irish language. Elton affirms that
it "seems to be of all the Celtic language the farthest removed from the
Latin"; and that "the oldest Irish is found to be the original, not
merely of the modern Erse, but also of the Manx." Ussher found it
nearest to Hebrew. O'Flaherty traced it to Phœnicia. Sir William Temple
regarded it as an original language. H. O'Brien sees Hebrew derived from
this primordial tongue. From Hamilco we should learn that the
Carthaginians of his day thought more of the Sacred Island "extensively
inhabited by the Hiberni," than they did of the Island of Albiones
(Britain).

As to the writing itself, Todd believed in its pagan age; but Dr. Richey
says, "It can scarcely be pretended that writing was known prior to the
introduction of Christianity." The Greek character is seen in its
semi-uncial state. Runic letters are absent, as the Vikings were using
Roman ones. when they began to plague the Irish coasts Patrick has the
credit, with some, of introducing Roman letters. Boece

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

relates of the old Irish, that "in all their secret business they did
not write with common letters used among other people, but with cyphers
and figures of beasts."

Toland wrote--"The use of letters has been very ancient in Ireland,
which at first were cut on the. bark of trees, prepared for that
purpose; or on smooth tables of birch wood, which were called *Taibhe
Fileadh*, poets' tables; as their characters were in general named
*Feadha*, twigs and branch letters, from this shape. Their alphabet was
called *Beth-luis-nion*, from the three first letters of the same, B, L,
N, *Beth*:, *Luis*, *Nion*,--Birch, Quicken, and Ash; for the particular
name of every letter was, for memory sake, from some tree or other
vegetable."

"The Irish Beth-luis-nion is a living monument of a barbarous age," says
Ledwich. At first he informs us they were stenographic, then
steganographic, being called *Feadha*, or *woods*. O'Molloy gives
seventeen letters, O'Conor eighteen, Lhuyd eighteen, with thirteen
diphthongs. Ledwich was convinced that "the speech of the Irish became a
fluctuating jargon." The aspen, fir, elder, broom, heath, willow, yew,
ivy, vine, whitethorn, hazel, furze, and oak, gave names to letters.
There was another alphabet, *Uraiceact-na-Neigeas*, called after men.
Beechen tablets were used before parchment there. G. Massey says, "The
Druidic sprigs belong to this ideographic stage. The Druids were in
possession of the symbolic branch for the types of the youthful sun-god,
who was annually reborn as the offshoot from the tree." The profane
writing of the Druids was known as the *Bobel-loth*, from b, f, l,
beginning the alphabet. The ordinary letters ran

b, l, n, s, f, h, d, t, c, m, g, p, r, a, o, u, e, i.

Ogham writing demands some explanation. O'Curry will not have it derived
from Scandinavian Runes. Sometimes the Latin beside it forms a
bilingual. The ogham

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

is made by notches on the edges of stones or wood, above, below, or upon
a line. The strokes may be one below the line for *b*, one above for
*h*, one across the fleasg, or medial line, for *m*. One small stroke
across may be *a*, two strokes, *e*, three *i*, four *o*, five *u*. Some
are in the form of a dart, or arrow-head. M. Gebelin was struck with the
resemblance between the Irish Ogham and Persian Cuneiform.

There were thirteen single consonants, two double ones, five vowels, and
five diphthongs. The key was found by Dr. Graves, Bishop of Limerick.
The ogham has been claimed for the Welsh by Rhys. Dr. G. Moore sees that
"the grammatical distinction of the letters indicates that--the oghams
came from a southern and an oriental land." He regards oghams as
sepulchral in pagan times. Crowe thinks them older than Sanscrit. The
*craobh* was a branching ogham. The Brehon Law recognized the use of
ogham as evidence of landownership. The Scythians had cryptic ciphers.

The *Book of Invasions* refers to "that ogum which is on the stone." Dr.
Isaac Taylor would derive it from Runic of the eighth century. More
likely, the characters came from the wedge letters on the angles of
Babylonian bricks. Rhys thinks ogham came from the Phœnician alphabet.
He finds "the ogham alphabet is of a double origin, forming a sort of
compromise between the east and the west." Rolt Brash regards it as
often pre-Christian. It is known on one hundred and seventy monuments;
there being one hundred and forty-seven in Kerry, Cork, and Waterford.
Tylor declares it very ancient, and not Runic; so said General
Pitt-Rivers.

The derivation is unsettled. One writer in the Royal Irish Society gets
it from *oe*, *ogh*, or *ogha*, a circle. Ogma was the father of the
Tuath king, and was called Grianann, or, belonging to the sun. G.
Mouncey Atkinson has the

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

word from *Ghuaim*,--the guaim, or wisdom of birds. One of old styled it
a cowboy's inscription. *The Book of Ballymote* had an ogham tract.

In the *Tain-bo-Cuailgne* we read--"Cucullain cut an oak before him
there, and he wrote an ogham on its side."--"He then made an *Id* (rod),
and wrote an ogham in its side, and twisted it round the head of the
pillar stone. The *Id* was put into the hands of Fergus Mac Roi, and he
read the *Id*." O'Curry heard that in the third century there existed,
at Tara, a book of wooden tablets of great age. The museums of Dublin,
Edinburgh, and London have specimens of ogham writing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lia Fail, or the Stone of Destiny](idr36.md)
