# The Works of Lucian of Samosata

Lucian of Samosata was a writer known for his satire. He was born in
what is now eastern Turkey, in Samosata, about 120 C.E. Samosata was
located in the ancient Roman province of Syria (not to be confused with
the modern country); the site was recently inundated by the Atatürk Dam.
Lucian was trained as a rhetorician (somewhat like a trial attorney).
However, he made a living as an itinerant lecturer. Lucian traveled
widely, as far as Greece, Italy and Gaul. He died in Athens, about 180
C.E. Over eighty works, written in Greek, are attributed to him, some
probably spuriously. The best known of his works, A True Story, is
considered to be one of the first science fiction stories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="c_da"></span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[A True Story: Parallel
English/Greek](true/index.md)</span>   <span class="c_b">The original space
odyssey...</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[The Syrian
Goddess](tsg/index.md)</span>  
translated by <span class="c_a">Herbert A. Strong</span> \[<span
class="c_d">1913</span>\]   <span class="c_b">Lucian's hair-raising
description of ancient Goddess worship.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[The Works of
Lucian](fowl/index.md)</span>  
translated by <span class="c_a">H. W. Fowler</span> and <span
class="c_a">F. G. Fowler</span> \[<span class="c_d">1905</span>\]  
<span class="c_b">This four volume set includes the vast majority of
Lucian's works.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[Mimes of the
Courtesans](motc/index.md)</span>  
translated by <span class="c_a">A.L.H.</span> \[<span
class="c_d">1928</span>\]   <span class="c_b">This unexpurgated
translation includes three dialogues left out of Fowler.</span> </span>

<span class="c_da"></span>
