[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fsar01)  [Next](fsar03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9IO12/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Flying Saucers Are Real*, by Donald Keyhoe, \[1950\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER I

IT WAS A strange assignment.

I picked up the telegram from my desk and read it a third time.

NEW YORK, N. Y., MAY 9, 1949

HAVE BEEN INVESTIGATING FLYING SAUCER MYSTERY. FIRST TIP HINTED GIGANTIC
HOAX TO COVER UP OFFICIAL SECRET. BELIEVE IT MAY HAVE BEEN PLANTED TO
HIDE REAL ANSWER. LOOKS LIKE TERRIFIC STORY. CAN YOU TAKE OVER
WASHINGTON END?

KEN W. PURDY, EDITOR, TRUE MAGAZINE

I glanced out at the Potomac, recalling the first saucer story. As a
pilot, I'd been skeptical of flying disks. Then reports had begun to
pour in from Air Force and airline pilots. Apparently alarmed, the Air
Force had ordered fighters to pursue the fast-flying saucers. In one
mysterious chase, a pilot had been killed, and his death was
unexplained. That had been seventeen months ago. Since then, the whole
flying-saucer riddle had been hidden behind a curtain of Air Force
secrecy.

And now, an assignment from True magazine on flying saucers.

Twenty-four hours later, I was in Ken Purdy's office.

"I've had men on this for two months," he told me. "I might as well warn
you, it's a tough story to crack."

"You think it's a Russian missile?" I asked him. "Or an Air Force
secret?"

"We've had several answers. None of them stacks up. But I'm positive one
was deliberately planted when they found we were checking."

He told me the whole story of the work that had been done by the staff
of True and of the reports sent in by competent writers. The deeper he
delved into the mystery, the tougher the assignment got. The more I
learned about flying saucers, the less I knew.

"There's one angle I want rechecked," Purdy said.

"You've heard of the Mantell case?"

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

I nodded.

"O.K. Try to get the details of Mantell's radio report to Godman Tower.
Before he was killed, he described the thing he was chasing--we know
that much. Project 'Saucer' gave out a hint, but they've never released
the transcript. Here's another lead. See if you can find anything about
a secret picture, taken at Harmon Field, Newfoundland--it was around
July 1947. I'll send you other ideas as I get them."

Before I left, Purdy wished me hick and told me that he would work in
closest harmony with me.

"But watch out for fake tips," he said. "You'll probably run into some
people at the Pentagon who'll talk to you 'off the record.' That
handcuffs a writer. Look out they don't lead you into a blind alley.
Even the Air Force statements and the Project 'Saucer' report contradict
each other."

For six months, I worked with other investigators to solve the mystery
of the disks. We checked a hundred sighting reports, frequently crossing
the trail of Project "Saucer" teams and F.B.I. agents. Old records gave
fantastic leads. So did Air Force plans for exploring space. Rocket
experts, astronomers, Air Force officials and pilot gave us clues
pointing to a startling solution. Many intelligent persons--including
scientists--believe that the saucers contain spies from another planet.

When this first phase was ended, we were faced with a hard decision. We
had uncovered important facts, We knew the saucers were real. If it was
handled carefully, we believed the story would be in line with a secret
Air Force policy.

It was finally decided to publish certain alternate conclusions. The Air
Force was informed of *True's* intentions; no attempt was made to block
publication.

In the January 1950 issue of *True*, I reported that we had reached the
following conclusions:

1 The earth has been observed periodically by visitors from another
planet.

2\. This observation has increased markedly in the past two years.

"The only other possible explanation," I wrote, "is that,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

the saucers are extremely high-speed, long-range devices developed here
on earth. Such an advance (which the Air Force has denied) would require
an almost incredible leap in technical progress even for American
scientists and designers."

Nation-wide press and radio comment followed the appearance of the
article. This publicity was obviously greater than the Air Force had
expected. Within twenty-four hours the Pentagon was deluged with
telegrams, letters, and long-distance calls. Apparently fearing a panic,
the Air Force hastily stated that flying-saucer reports--even those made
by its own pilots and high-ranking officers--were mistakes or were
caused by hysteria.<sup>\[1\]</sup>

But three days later, when it was plain that many Americans calmly
accepted *True's* disclosures, the Air Force released a secret project
"Saucer" file containing this significant statement:

"It will never be possible to say with certainty that any individual did
not see a space ship, an enemy missile or other object."

In this same document there appears a confidential analysis of Air
intelligence reports.<sup>\[2\]</sup> It is this summary that contains
the official suggestion Of. space visitors' motives. After stating that
such a civilization would obviously be far ahead of our own, the report
adds:

"Since the acts of mankind most easily observed from a distance are
A-bomb explosions, we should expect some relation to obtain between the
time of the A-bomb explosions, the time at which the space ships are
seen, and the time required for such ships to arrive from and return to
home base."

(In a previous report, which alternately warned and reassured the
public, the Air Force stated that space travel outside the solar system
is almost a certainty.<sup>\[3\]</sup>)

Since 1949 there has been a steady increase in saucer sightings. Most of
them have been authentic reports, which Air Force denials cannot
disprove. In January, mystery

\[1. Air Force press release 629-49, December 27, 1949.

2\. Air Force Project "Saucer" December 30, 1949.

3\. Air Force report M-26-49, Preliminary Studies on Flying saucers,
April 27, 1949.\]

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

disks were reported over Kentucky, Indiana, Texas, Pennsylvania, and
several other states. On the Seattle Anchorage route, an air freighter
was paced for five minutes by a night-flying saucer. When the pilots
tried to close in, the strange craft zoomed at terrific speed. Later,
the airline head reported that Intelligence officers had quizzed the
pilots for hours.

"From their questions," he said, "I could tell they had a good idea of
what the saucers are. One officer admitted they did, but he wouldn't say
any more."

Another peculiar incident occurred at Tucson, Arizona, on February 1.
Just at dusk, a weird, fiery object raced westward over the city,
astonishing hundreds in the streets below. The Tucson Daily Citizen ran
the story next day with a double-banner headline:

FLYING SAUCER OVER TUCSON?

B-29 FAILS TO CATCH OBJECT

Flying saucer? Secret experimental plane? Or perhaps a scout craft from
Mars? Certainly the strange aircraft that blazed a smoke trail over
Tucson at dusk last night defies logical explanation. It was as
mystifying to experienced pilots as to groundlings who have trouble in
identifying conventional planes.

Cannonballing through the sky, some 30,000 feet aloft, was a fiery
object shooting westward so fast it was impossible to gain any clear
impression of its shape or size. . . .

At what must have been top speed the object spewed out light colored
smoke, but almost directly over Tucson it appeared to hover for a few
seconds. The smoke puffed out an angry black and then be came lighter as
the strange missile appeared to gain speed"

The radio operator in the Davis-Monthan air force base control tower
contacted First Lt. Roy L. Jones, taking off for a cross-country flight
in a B-29, and asked him to investigate. Jones revved up his swift
aerial tanker and still the unknown aircraft steadily pulled away toward
California.

Dr. Edwin F. Carpenter, head of the University of

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Arizona department of astronomy, said he was certain that the object was
not a meteor or other natural phenomenon. . . .

*Switchboards Swamped*

Switchboards at the Pima county sheriff's office and Tucson police
station were jammed with inquiries. Hundreds saw the object. Tom Bailey,
1411 E. 10th Street, thought it was a large airplane on fire. \[A later
check showed no planes missing.\] He said it wavered from left to right
as it passed over the mountains. Bailey also noticed that the craft
appeared to slow perceptibly over Tucson. He said the smoke apparently
came out in a thin, almost invisible stream, gaining substance within a
few seconds.

This incident had an odd sequel the following day. Its significance was
not lost on the Daily Citizen. It ran another front-page story,
headlined:

WHAT DO YOU MEAN ONLY VAPOR TRAIL?

As though to prove itself blameless for tilting hundreds of Tucson heads
skyward, the U.S. Air Force yesterday afternoon spent hours etching
vapor trails through the skies over the city.

The demonstration proved conclusively to the satisfaction of most that
the strange path of dark smoke blazed across the evening sky at dusk
Wednesday was no vapor trail and did not emanate from any conventional
airplane.

The Wednesday night spectacle was entirely dissimilar. Then, heavy smoke
boiled and swirled in a broad, dark ribbon fanning out at least a mile
in width and stretching across the sky in a straight line. Since there
was no proof as to what caused the strange predark manifestation, and
because even expert witnesses were unable to explain the appearance, the
matter remains a subject for interesting speculation.

There is strong evidence that this story was deliberately kept off the
press wires. The Associated Press and other wire services in Washington
had no report. Requests for details by Frank Edwards, Mutual newscaster,
and other

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

radio commentators ran into a blank wall. At the Pentagon I was told
that the Air Force had no knowledge of the sighting or the vapor-trail
maneuvers.

On February 22 two similar glowing objects were seen above Boca Chica
Naval Air Station at Key West. A plane sent tip to investigate was
hopelessly outdistanced; it was obvious the things were at a great
height. Back at the station, radarmen tracked the objects as they
hovered for a moment above Key West. They were found to be at least
fifty miles above the earth. After a few seconds, they accelerated at
high speed and streaked out of sight.

On the following day Commander Augusto Orrego, a Chilean naval officer,
reported that saucers had flown above his antarctic base.

"During the bright antarctic night," be said, "we saw flying saucers,
one above the other, turning at tremendous speeds. We have photographs
to prove what we saw."

Early in March, Ken Purdy phoned the latest development in the
investigation. He had just received a tip predicting a flurry of saucer
publicity during March. It had come from an important source in
Washington.

"You know what it probably means," he said. "The same thing we talked
about last month. But why were we tipped off in advance?"

"It's one more piece in the pattern," I said. "If the tip's on the
level, then they're stepping up the program."

Within three days, reports began to pour in--from Peru, Cuba, Mexico,
Turkey, and other parts of the world. Then on March 9 a gleaming
metallic disk was sighted over Dayton, Ohio. Observers at Vandalia
Airport phoned Wright-Patterson Field. Scores of Air Force pilots and
groundmen watched the disk, as fighters raced up in pursuit. The
mysterious object streaked vertically skyward, hovered for a while miles
above the earth, and then disappeared. A secret report was rushed to the
Civil Aeronautics Authority in Washington, then turned over to Air Force
Intelligence.

Soon after this Dr. Craig Hunter, director of a medical supply firm,
reported a huge elliptical saucer flying at a low altitude in
Pennsylvania. He described it as metallic, with a slotted outer rim and
a rotating ring just inside. <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> On top of
this sighting, thousands of people at Farmington, New Mexico, watched a
large formation of disks pass high above the city.

Throughout all these reports, the Air Force refused to admit the
existence of flying saucers. On March 18 it flatly denied they were Air
Force secret missiles or space-exploration devices.

Three days later, a Chicago and Southern airliner crew saw a fast-flying
disk near Stuttgart, Arkansas. The circular craft, blinking a strange
blue-white light, pulled up in an arc at terrific speed. The two pilots
said they glimpsed lighted ports on the lower side as the saucer zoomed
above them. The lights had a soft fluorescence, unlike anything they had
seen.

There was one peculiar angle in the Arkansas incident. There was no
apparent attempt to muzzle the two pilots, as in earlier airline cases.
Instead, a United Press interview was quickly arranged, for nation-wide
publication. In this wire story Captain Jack Adams and First Officer G.
W. Anderson made two statements:

"We firmly believe that the flying saucer we saw over Arkansas was a
secret experimental type aircraft--not a visitor from outer space. . . .

"We know the Air Force has denied there is anything to this
flying-saucer business, but we're both experienced pilots and we're not
easily fooled."

The day after this story appeared, I was discussing it with an airline
official in Washington.

"That's an odd thing," he said. "The Air Force could have persuaded
those pilots--or the line president--to hush the thing up. It looks as
if they wanted that story broadcast."

"You mean the whole thing was planted?"

"I won't say that, though it could have been. Probably they did see
something. But they might have been told what to say about it."

"Any idea why?"

He looked at me sharply. "You and Purdy probably know the answer. At a
guess, I'd say it might have been planned to offset that Navy
commander's report--the one on the White Sands sightings."

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

The White Sands case had puzzled many skeptics, because the Pentagon had
cleared the published report. The author, Commander R. B. McLaughlin,
was a regular Navy officer. As a Navy rocket expert, he had been
stationed at the White Sands Rocket Proving Ground in New Mexico. In his
published article he described three disk sightings at White Sands.

One of the disks, a huge elliptical craft, was tracked by scientists
with precision instruments at five miles per second. That's 18,000 miles
per hour. It was found to be flying fifty-six miles above the earth. Two
other disks, smaller types, were watched from five observation posts on
hills at the proving ground. Circling at incredible speed, the two disks
paced an Army high-altitude rocket that had just been launched, then
speeded up and swiftly outclimbed the projectile.

Commander McLaughlin's report, giving dates and factual details, was
cleared by the Department of Defense. So was a later nation-wide
broadcast.

Then the Air Force made its routine denial.

Why was McLaughlin, a regular Navy officer subject to security
screening, permitted to give out this story? Was it an incredible
slip-up? Or was it part of some carefully thought-out plan? I believe it
was part of an elaborate program to prepare the American people for a
dramatic disclosure.

For almost a year I have watched the behind-the-scenes maneuvers of
those who guide this program. In the following chapters I have tried to
show the strange developments in our search for the answer; the
carefully misleading tips, the blind alleys we entered, the unexpected
assistance, the confidential leads, and the stunning contradictions.

It has been a complicated jigsaw puzzle. Only by seeing all parts of
this intricate picture can you begin to glimpse the reasons for this
stubbornly hidden secret.

The official explanation may be imminent. When it is finally revealed, I
believe the elaborate preparation--even the wide deceit involved--will
be fully justified in the minds of the American people.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](fsar03)
