[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fsar14)  [Next](fsar16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9IO12/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Flying Saucers Are Real*, by Donald Keyhoe, \[1950\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XIV

THAT EVENING, after my talk with Redell, the question kept coming back
in my mind.

What were they like? And what were they doing here?

From the long record of sightings, it was possible to get an answer to
the second question. Observation of the earth followed a general
pattern. According to the reports, Europe, the most populated area, had
been more closely observed than the rest of the globe until about 1870.
By this time, the United States, beginning to rival Europe in industrial
progress, had evidently become of interest to the space-ship crews.

From then on, Europe and the Western Hemisphere, chiefly North America,
shared the observers' attention. The few sightings reported at other
points around the world indicate an occasional check-up on the earth in
general. Apparently World War I had not greatly concerned the space
observers. One reason might be that our aerial operations were still at
a relatively low altitude.

But World War II had drawn more attention, and this had obviously
increased from 1947 up to the present time. Our atomic-bomb explosions
and the V-2 high-altitude experiments might be only coincidence, but I
could think of no other development that might seriously concern
dwellers on other planets.

It was a strange thing to think of some far-off race keeping track of
the earth's progress. If Redell was right, it might even have started in
prehistoric time; a brief survey, perhaps once a century or even further
spaced, then gradually more frequent observation as cities appeared on
the earth.

Somewhere on a distant planet there would be records of that long
survey. I wondered how our development would appear to that far-advanced
race. They would have seen the slow sailing ships, the first steamships,
the lines of steel tracks that carried our first trains.

Watching for our first aircraft, they would see the drifting balloons
that seemed an aerial miracle when the

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

Montgolfiers first succeeded. More than a century later, they would have
noted the slow, clumsy airplanes of the early 1900's. From our gradual
progress to the big planes and bombers of today, they could probably
chart our next steps toward the stratosphere--and then space.

During the last two centuries, they would have watched a dozen wars,
each one fiercer than the last, spreading over the globe. Adding up all
the things they had seen, they could draw an accurate picture of man,
the earth creature, and the increasingly fierce struggle between the
earth races.

The long survey held no sign of menace. If there had been a guiding
purpose of attack and destruction, it could have been carried out years
ago. It was almost certain that any planet race able to traverse space
would have the means for attack.

More than once, during this investigation, I had been asked: "If the
saucers are interplanetary, why haven't they landed here? Why haven't
their crews tried to make contact with us?"

There was always the possibility that the planet race or races could not
survive on earth, or that their communications did not include the
methods that we used. But I found that hard to believe. Such a superior
race would certainly be able to master our radio operations, or anything
else that we had developed, in a fairly short time. And it should be
equally simple to devise some means of survival on earth, just as we
were already planning special suits and helmets for existence on the
moon. During a talk with a former Intelligence officer, I got a key to
the probable explanation.

"Why don't you just reverse it--list what we intend to do when we start
exploring space? That'll give you the approximate picture of what
visitors to the earth would be doing."

Naturally, all the details of space plans have not been worked out, but
the general plan is clear. After the first successful earth satellites,
we will either attempt a space base farther out or else launch a moon
rocket. Probably many round trips to the moon will be made before going
farther in space.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

Which planet will be explored first, after the moon?

According to Air Force reports, it is almost a certainty that planets
outside the solar system are inhabited. But because of the vast
distances involved, expeditions to our neighboring planets may be tried
before the more formidable journeys. More than one prominent astronomer
believes that life, entirely different from our own, may exist on some
solar planets. Besides Mars, Jupiter, and Venus, there are five more
that, like the earth, revolve around the sun.

One of the prominent authorities is Dr. H. Spencer Jones, Astronomer
Royal. In his book *Life on Other Worlds*, Dr. Jones points out that
everything about us is the result of changing processes, begun
millenniums ago and still going on. We cannot define life solely in our
own terms; it can exist in unfamiliar forms.

"It is conceivable," Dr. Jones states in his book, "that we could have
beings, the cells of whose bodies contained silicon instead of the
carbon which is an essential constituent of our cells and of all other
living cells on the earth. And that because of this essential difference
between the constitution of those cells and the cells of which animal
and plant life on the earth are built up, they might be able to exist at
temperatures so high that no terrestrial types of life could survive."

According to Dr. Jones, then, life could be possible on worlds hotter
and drier than ours; it could also exist on a very much colder one, such
as Mars.

Even if a survey of the sun's planets proved fruitless, it would decide
the question of their being populated. Also, it would provide valuable
experience for the much longer journeys into space.

No one expects such a survey until we have a space vehicle able to make
the round trip. One-way trips would tell us nothing, even if volunteers
offered to make such suicidal journeys.

The most probable step will be to launch a space vehicle equipped with
supplies for a long time, perhaps a year or two, within the solar
system. Since Mars has been frequently mentioned as a source of the
flying

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

saucers, let's assume it would be the first solar-system planet to be
explored from the earth.

As the space ship neared Mars, it could be turned to circle the planet
in an orbit, just like our planned earth satellite vehicle. Once in this
orbit, it could circle indefinitely without using fuel except to correct
its course.

From this space base, unmanned remote-control "observer" units with
television "eyes" or other transmitters would be sent down to survey the
planet at close range. If it then seemed fairly safe, a manned unit
could be released to make a more thorough check-up.

Such preliminary caution would be imperative. Our explorers would have
no idea of what awaited them. The planet might be uninhabited. It might
be peopled by a fiercely barbarous race unaware of civilization as we
know it. Or it might have a civilization far in advance of ours.

The explorers would first try to get a general idea of the whole planet.
Then they would attempt to examine the most densely populated areas,
types of armature, any aircraft likely to attack them. Combing the radio
spectrum, they would pick up and record sounds and signals in order to
decipher the language.

As on earth, they might hear a hodgepodge of tongues. The next step
would be to select the most technically advanced nation, listen in, and
try to learn its language, or record it for deciphering afterward on
earth.

Our astronomers already have analyzed Mars's atmosphere, but the
explorers would have to confirm their reports, to find out whether the
atmosphere at the surface would support their lungs if they landed. The
easiest way would be to send down manned or unmanned units with special
apparatus to scoop in atmosphere samples. Later analysis would tell
whether earthlings would need oxygen-helmet suits such as we plan to use
on the moon.

But before risking flight at such low altitudes, the explorers would
first learn everything possible about the planet's aircraft, if any.
They would try to determine their top ceiling, maximum speed,
maneuverability, and if possible their weapons. Mitch of this could be
done by sending down remote-control "observer" disks, or

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

whatever type we decide to use. A manned unit might make a survey at
night, or in daytime with clouds nearby to shield it. By hovering over
the planet's aircraft bases, the explorers could get most of the
picture, and also decide whether the bases were suitable for their own
use later.

It might even be necessary to lure some Martian aircraft into pursuit of
our units, to find out their performance. But our explorers would above
all avoid any sign of hostility; they would hastily. withdraw to show
they had no warlike intentions.

If the appearance of our observer units and manned craft caused too
violent reactions on the planet, the explorers would withdraw to their
orbiting space vehicle and either wait for a lull or else start the long
trip back home. Another interplanetary craft from the earth might take
its place later to resume periodic surveys.

In this way, a vast amount of information could be collected without
once making contact with the strange race. If they seemed belligerent or
uncivilized, we would probably end our survey and check on the next
possibly inhabited planet. If we found they were highly civilized, we
would undoubtedly attempt later contact. But it might take a long time,
decades of observation and analysis, before we were ready for that final
step.

We might find a civilization not quite so advanced as ours. It might not
yet have developed radio and television. We would then have no way of
getting a detailed picture, learning the languages, or communicating
with. the Martians. Analysis of their atmosphere might show a great
hazard to earthlings, one making it impossible to land or requiring
years of research to overcome. There might be other obstacles beyond our
present understanding.

This same procedure would apply to the rest of the solar-system planets
and to more distant systems. Since Wolf 359 is the nearest star outside
our system that is likely to have inhabited planets, one of these
planets would probably be listed as the first to explore in far-distant
space. It would be a tremendous undertaking, unless the speed of light
can be exceeded in space. Since

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

Wolf 359 is eight light-years from the earth, even if a space ship
traveled at the theoretical maximum--just under 186,00 miles a
second--it would take over sixteen years for the round trip. Detailed
observation of the planet would add to this period.

If we assume half that speed--which would still be an incredible
attainment with our present knowledge--our space explorers would have to
dedicate at least thirty-two years to the hazardous, lonely round trip.
However, there has never been a lack of volunteers for grand
undertakings in the history of man.

It is quite possible that in our survey of the solar-system planets we
would find some inhabited, but not advanced enough to be of interest to
us. Periodically, we might make return visits to note their progress.
Meantime, our astronomers would watch these planets, probably developing
new, higher powered telescopes for the purpose, to detect any signs of
unusual activity. Any tremendous explosion on a planet would immediately
concern us.

Such an explosion, on Mars, was reported by astronomers on January 16,
1950. The cause and general effects are still being debated. Sadao
Saeki, the Japanese astronomer who first reported it at Osaka, believes
it was of volcanic nature.

The explosion created a cloud over an area about seven hundred miles in
diameter and forty miles high. It was dull gray with a yellowish tinge
and a different color from the atmospheric phenomena customarily seen
near Mars. Saeki believes the blast might have destroyed any form of
life existing on the planet, but even though the telescopic camera
recorded a violent explosion, other authorities do not believe the
planet was wrecked. The canals first discovered on Mars by Giovanni
Schiaparelli, about 1877, are still apparent on photographs.

Mars is now being carefully watched by astronomers. If there are more of
the strange explosions, the planet will be scanned constantly for some
clue to their nature.

If a mysterious explosion on Mars, or any other planet, were found of
atomic origin, it would cause serious concern on earth. Suppose for a
moment that it happened many years from now, when we will have succeeded
in

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

space explorations. At this time, let us assume our explorers have found
that Mars is experimenting with high-altitude rockets; some of them have
been seen, rising at tremendous speed, in the upper atmosphere of Mars.

Then comes this violent explosion. A scientific analysis of the cloud by
astrophysicists here on earth proves it was of atomic origin.

The first reaction would undoubtedly be an immediate resurvey of Mars.
As quickly as possible, we would establish an orbiting space base--out
of range of Martian rockets--and try to find how far they had advanced
with atomic bombs.

Samples of the Martian atmosphere would be collected and analyzed for
telltale radiation. Observer units would be flown over the planet, with
instruments to locate atom-bomb plants and possibly uranium deposits.
The rocket-launching bases would also come under close observation. We
would try to learn how close the scientists were to escaping the pull of
gravity. Since Mars's gravity is much less than the earth's, the
Martians would not have so far to progress before succeeding in space
travel.

The detailed survey by our space-base observers would probably show that
there was no immediate danger to the earth. It might take one hundred
years--perhaps five hundred--before the Martians could be a problem.
Eventually, the time would come when Mars would send out space-ship
explorers. They would undoubtedly discover that the earth was populated
with a technically advanced civilization. Any warlike ideas they had in
mind could be quickly ended by a show of our superior space craft and
our own atomic weapons--probably far superior to any on Mars. It might
even be possible that by then we would have finally outlawed war; if so,
a promise to share the peaceful benefits of our technical knowledge
might be enough to bring Martian leaders into line.

Regardless of our final decision, we would certainly keep a lose watch
on Mars--or any other planet that seemed a possible threat.

Now, if our space-exploration program is just reversed, it will give a
reasonable picture of how visitors from

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

space might go about investigating the earth. Such an investigation
would tie in with the general pattern of authentic flying-saucer
reports:

1\. World-wide sightings at long intervals up to the middle of the
nineteenth century.

2\. Concentration on Europe, as the most advanced section of the globe,
until late in the nineteenth century.

3\. Frequent surveys of America in the latter part of the nineteenth
century, as we began to develop industrially, with cities springing up
across the land.

4\. Periodic surveys of both America and Europe during the gradual
development of aircraft, from the early 1900's up to World War II.

5\. An increase of observation during World War II, after German V-2's
were launched up into the stratosphere.

6\. A steadily increasing survey after our atomic-bomb explosions in New
Mexico, Japan, Bikini, and Eniwetok.

7\. A second spurt of observations following atom-bomb explosions in
Soviet Russia.

8\. Continuing observations of the earth at regular intervals, with most
attention concentrated on the United States, the present leader in
atomic weapons. (Saucers have been reported seen over the Soviet Union,
but the number is unknown. There is some evidence that Russia has an
investigative unit similar to Project "Saucer.")

There are other points of similarity to the program of American space
exploration that I have outlined. Most of the extremely large saucers
have been at high altitudes, some of them many miles above the earth. At
that height, a space ship would be in no danger from our planes and
antiaircraft guns and rockets. The smaller disks and the mystery lights
have been seen at low altitudes. Occasionally a larger saucer has been
seen to approach the earth briefly, as at Lockbourne Air Force Base, at
Bethel, Alabama, at Macon and Montgomery, and other places. It has been
suggested that this was for the purpose of securing atmospheric samples.
It could also be to afford personal observation by the crews.

The numerous small disks seen in the first part of

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

the scare, in 1947, fit the pattern for preliminary and close
observation by remote-controlled observer units. As the scare increased,
the daytime sightings decreased for a while, and mystery lights began to
be seen more often. This apparent desire to avoid unfavorable attention
could have been caused by our pilots' repeated attempts to chase the
strange flying objects.

Authentic reports have described sightings; over the following Air Force
bases: Chanute, Newark, Andrews, Hickam, Robbins, Godman, Clark,
Fairfield Suisan, Davis-Monthan, Harmon, Wright-Patterson, Holloman,
Clinton County Air Force Base, and air bases in Alaska, Germany, and the
Azores. Saucers have also been sighted over naval air stations at
Dallas, Alameda, and Key West, and from the station at Seattle. They
have been reported maneuvering over the White Sands Proving Ground, over
areas containing atomic developments, above the Muroc Air Base testing
area, and over the super-secret research base near Albuquerque.

Several times saucers have paced both military and civil aircraft; their
actions strongly indicate deliberate encounters to learn our planes'
speed and performance.

It seems obvious that both the planes and the bases were being observed,
and in some cases photographed by remote-control units or manned space
ships.

Although I thought it improbable that the location of our uranium
deposits would be of interest to space men, a Washington official told
me it would be relatively simple to detect the ore areas with airborne
instruments.

"The Geological Survey has already developed special Geiger counters for
planes," he told me. "They had a little trouble from cosmic-ray noise.
They finally had to cover the Geigers with lead shields. Whenever an
important amount of radiation is present in the ground, the plane crew
gets a signal, and they spot the place on their map. It's a quick way of
locating valuable deposits."

When I told him what I had in mind, he suggested an angle I had not
considered.

"Mind you," he said, "I'm not completely sold on the interplanetary
answer. But assuming it's correct that we're being observed, I can think
of a stronger reason

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

than fear of some distant attack. Some atomic scientists say that a
super-atomic bomb, or several set off at once, could knock the earth out
of its orbit. It sounds fantastic, but so is the A-bomb. It's just
possible that some solar-planet race discovered the dangers long ago.
They would have good reason to worry if they found we were on that same
track. There may be some other atomic weapon we don't suspect, even
worse than the A-bomb, one that could destroy the earth and seriously
affect other planets."

At the time, I thought this was just idle speculation. But since then,
several atomic scientists have confirmed this official's suggestion. One
of these was Dr. Paul Elliott, a nuclear physicist who worked on the
A-bomb during the war.

According to Dr. Elliott, if several hydrogen bombs were exploded
simultaneously at a high altitude, it could speed up the earth's
rotation or change its orbit. He based his statement on the rate of
energy the earth receives from the sun, a rate equal to some four pounds
of hydrogen exploded every second. Still other atomic scientists have
said that H-bomb explosions might even knock a large chunk out of the
earth, with unpredictable results.

A dramatic picture of what might happen if the earth were forced far out
of its orbit is indicated in the much-discussed book *Worlds in
Collision*, by Dr. Immanuel Velikovsky, recently published by Macmillan.
After many years of research, Dr. Velikovsky presents strong evidence
that the planet Venus, when still a comet resulting from eruption from a
larger planet, moved erratically about the sky and violently disturbed
both the earth and Mars.

When the comet approached the earth, our planet was forced out of its
orbit, according to Worlds in Collision. For a time, the world was on
the brink of destruction. Quoting many authentic ancient records,
including the Quiché manuscript of the Mayas, the Ipuwer papyrus of the
Egyptians, and the Visiddhi-Magga of the Buddhists, Dr. Velikovsky
describes the cataclysm that took place. "The face of the earth
changed," he writes in his book. The details, reinforced by the
Zend-Avesta of the Persians, tell of tremendous hurricanes, of a major
upheaval

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

in the earth's surface, of oceans rushing over many parts of the land,
while rivers were driven from their beds. Some of the events in this
period are mentioned in the Bible.

Professor Horace M. Kallen, former dean of the New School of Social
Research, strongly endorses Dr. Velikovsky's statements: "It is my
belief that Velikovsky has supported his theses with substantial
evidence and made an effective and persuasive argument."

Many other authorities endorse this work, which is documented with
impressive references. But even if this particular account is not
accepted, all astronomers agree that the effect of a comet passing near
the earth would be appalling. *Worlds in Collision* states that Mars,
like the earth, was pulled out of its orbit by the comet's erratic
passage. It may be that this near disaster to the earth and Mars is
known on other solar planets, or remembered on Mars itself, if the
planet is inhabited.

The possibility of super-bomb explosions on the earth understandably
disturb any dwellers on other solar-system planets.

This may be what was back of the Project "Saucer" statement on the
probable motives of any visitors from space. I mentioned this Air Force
statement in an earlier chapter, but it may be of interest to repeat it
at this time. The comment appeared in a confidential analysis of
Intelligence reports, in the formerly secret Project "Saucer" document,
"Report on Unidentified Aerial and Celestial Objects." It reads as
follows:

"Such a civilization might observe that on earth we now have atomic
bombs and are fast developing rockets. In view of the past history of
mankind, they should be alarmed. We should therefore expect at this time
above all to behold such visitations.

"Since the acts of mankind most easily observed from a distance are
A-bomb explosions, we should expect some relation to obtain between the
time of the A-bomb explosions, the time at which the space ships are
seen, and the time required for such ships to arrive from and return to
home base."

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](fsar16)
