<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-12tx) [Next](dob-13tx)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 298">{p. 298}</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### TO THE

### TEVI*GG*A SUTTA.

   THIS is the only Suttanta, among the thirteen translated in this
volume, in which the discourse does not lead up to Arahatship. It leads
up only to the so-called *Brahma Vihâras*--the supreme conditions--four
states of mind held to result, after death, in a rebirth in the heavenly
worlds of Brahmâ. Why is it--the Buddhist ideal being Arahatship, which
leads to no rebirth at all--that this lower ideal is thus suddenly
introduced?

   It would seem that the particular point here discussed was regarded
as so important that it could scarcely be left out. And when we
recollect that the highest teaching current before the Buddha, and still
preserved in the pre-Buddhistic Upanishads, was precisely about union
with Brahmâ; we may, without much danger of error, explain the position
occupied in the series of dialogues by this Suttanta by the supposition
that it was deliberately inserted here as the Buddhist answer to the
Upanishad theory. In this respect it is noteworthy that the neuter
Brahman is quietly ignored, That is quite in accordance with the method
of the Suttantas. The Buddha is in them often represented as using, in
his own sense, words familiar to his interlocutors in a different sense,
The neuter Brahman is, so far as I am aware, entirely unknown in the
Nikâyas, and of course the Buddha's idea of Brahmâ, in the masculine,
really differs widely from that of the Upanishads.

   There is nothing original in the Buddhist belief that a man's habit
of mind at the time of his death would determine, save only in the one
case of the Arahat, the nature of his rebirth. It is an Indian--not an
exclusively Buddhist--theory. The Buddhist texts represent it as held by
non-Buddhists, and already long before the Buddha's time, and as
accepted by all as a matter of course. And it is even not exclusively
Indian. As I have pointed out elsewhere, it is

<span id="p. 299">{p. 299}</span>

ascribed by Plato to Socrates{1}. The essentially Buddhist parts of the
theory are three. In the first place, the choice of the particular
details they held essential to such a habit of mind as would lead to
rebirth in the Brahmâ-worlds; secondly, their doctrine that there was
not really any 'soul' to be reborn; and thirdly, that the highest ideal
was not to be reborn at all (even only once, and into union with
Brahmâ).

   The *G*âtaka commentary in numerous passages states that the four
Brahma Vihâras were practised, long before the time of the rise of
Buddhism, by the sages of old. I have not found such a statement in the
Nikâyas; and it is most probable therefore that the *G*âtaka commentator
is antedating the particular meditations in question. However this may
be, they remained, throughout the long history of Buddhism, an essential
part of Buddhist practice. They are even mentioned in the *G*âtaka Mâlâ,
a work usually supposed to be Mahâyânist, and dated about a thousand
years later than the Buddha{2}. They are well known to-day in Burma,
Siam, and Ceylon. And it would be interesting to know whether they still
form a part of the regulated meditations which are known to be practised
by Buddhists in Thibet, China, and Japan. But they have not been found
in any Indian book not a Buddhist work, and are therefore almost
certainly exclusively Buddhist. Even the most determined anti-Buddhist
must admit the beauty of the language (in spite of its repetitions §§
76-78), the subtle depth of the ideas, and the great value of the
practice from the point of view of ethical self-training. He would
probably rejoin, and with truth, that similar sentiments are met with in
other (post-Buddhistic) Indian books. But it is one thing to give
expression in isolated passages to such views, and quite another to have
selected just these four as the four cornerstones of habitual endeavour.

   It should be recollected that the argument here is only an
*argumentum ad hominem*. If you want union with Brahmâ--which you had
much better not want--this is the way to attain to it{3}.

{1. Phaedo 69. The full context is given in my 'Hibbert Lectures,'
Appendix viii.

2\. In the well-known story of the Bodhisattva giving his body to feed a
tigress (No. 1, verse 12).

3\. See the remarks above on [p. 206](dob-08in).}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: XIII. Tevi*gg*a Sutta](dob-13tx)
