<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-04tx) [Next](dob-05tx)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 160">{p. 160}</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### TO THE

### KÛ*T*ADANTA SUTTA.

   WHOEVER put this Sutta together must have been deeply imbued with the
spirit of subtle irony that plays no less a part in the Suttas than it
does in so many of the *G*âtakas. I have already called attention to the
great importance for the right understanding of early Buddhist teaching
of a constant appreciation of this sort of subtle humour{1}. It has been
hitherto, so far as I am aware, entirely overlooked--that is, in the
Suttas; everyone recognises it in the *G*âtaka tales. The humour is not
at all intended to raise a laugh, scarcely even a smile. And the aroma
of it, pervading the whole of an exposition--none the less delightful
because of the very serious earnestness of the narrator, all the while,
as regards the ethical point at issue--is apt to be lost sight of
precisely because of that earnestness. And just as a joke may be
explained, but the point of it spoilt in the process, so in the attempt
to write about this irony, much more delicate than any joke, one runs
great danger of smothering it under the explanatory words.

   The attempt, nevertheless, must be made. And it is most easy,
perhaps, to do so by an example which no one will dispute. In the
Râ*g*ovâda *G*âtaka{2} we are told of the two kings, reigning over the
famous lands of Benares and Kosala, who simultaneously determined to
examine into their own faults! No courtier would tell them of any. So
they each went, and went in vain, to the people in the city, outside the
palace on a similar quest. Finding no fault-finders there, they each
went on to the city gate, and then to the surrounding suburbs, all in
vain. So they each made over the kingdom to their respective ministers,
and with a single attendant as charioteer, sallied forth into the world,

{1. See, for instance, the notes above on [p. 33](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2033);
and the remarks, in the [Introduction to the Amba*tth*a](dob-03in), on
the Agga*ññ*a Sutta.

2\. No. 1 in vol. ii of the Pâli text in Prof. Fausböll's edition, and
of the Cambridge translation edited by Prof. Cowell.}

<span id="p. 161">{p. 161}</span>

to find some one to tell them of their faults. Bent on this, so serious,
quest, the two came face to face in a low cart-track with precipitous
sides. Each calls on the other to make way for a king. Both are kings!
How to settle the point? 'I have it,' says one charioteer: 'Let the
younger give way.' The kings turn out to be exactly of an age. 'Then let
the lord of the lesser realm go back.' Their kingdoms are exactly equal
in size. And so on, in succession, are found to be the strength of their
two armies, the amount of their treasure, the glory of their renown, the
fame of their realms, the distinction of their caste, and tribe, and
family. Then at last comes the solution. The king of Kosala overcomes
evil by evil. Of the other, the king of Benares, it is said:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>'Anger he conquers by calmness,<br />
And by goodness the wicked,<br />
The stingy he conquers by gifts,<br />
And by truth the speaker of lies{1}.'</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

And on this being proclaimed, the king of Kosala and his charioteer
alighted from their chariot. And they took out the horses, and removed
their chariot, and made way for the king of Benares.

   There is not a word in the whole story, here told in abstract{2}, to
suggest that it is not all sober history. But of course the whole story
is invented. The two kings are brought on to the stage merely to carry
on their broad shoulders the moral of the tale, and the dry humour of
the predicament in which they find themselves is there to attract
attention to, to add emphasis to, the lesson taught.

   What is the especial point in this fun--a kind of fun quite unknown
in the West? It is the piquancy of the contrast between the mock
seriousness of the extravagant, even impossible details, and the real
serious earnestness of the ethical tone. The fun of the extravagance can
be matched, easily enough, in European, and especially in American
humour. The piquancy of this contrast is Indian, and especially
Buddhist. Even the theosophic myth-makers of the Vedas had a sense of
the humour in the incongruities, the half realities of their myths. One
feels it occasionally even in the Brâhma*n*as. In the Upanishads it is
very marked. The Liturgy of the Dogs, the Fable of the Senses, the War
of the Devas and Asuras, and several other such episodes

{1. This verse is quoted in the Dhammapada (verse 223).

2\. The full version can also be seen in my 'Buddhist Birth Stories,'
pp. xxii-xxvi.}

<span id="p. 162">{p. 162}</span>

have this mixture of unreality and earnestness, and it finds its perhaps
most touching expression in the legend of Na*k*iketas. And the
Buddhists, in their *G*âtaka stories, often adopted and developed old
Indian tales of a similar sort.

   But why should we think that this sort of humour is confined to the
*G*âtakas? We have a *G*âtaka story of the Great King of Glory,
certainly based on the Sutta of the same name, for it expressly quotes
it, and embodies the numerous details which lead up to the sublime
lesson at the end of it{1}. And those details are at least as
extravagant as the details in the Râ*g*ovâda *G*âtaka. Allowing for all
the earnestness undeniably animating both the story-teller and the
hearers, it is clear that they enjoyed, all the time, the dry humour of
the exaggeration and grotesqueness of the details of the story as it
went along. Now the details are given only in the Sutta; and omitted, as
well known, in the *G*âtaka. They build up a gorgeous fairy tale in
which the ancient mythology of the sun-myth is brought into play in
order to show how the greatest possible majesty and glory of the
greatest and best of all possible kings is, after all, but vanity. And
the details, here also, in the Sutta, are enlivened by an intentional
exaggeration, a designed dry humour, similar to that in the Râ*g*ovâda
*G*âtaka, above referred to.

   A similar state of things is found in the Agga*ññ*a Sutta, as pointed
out above in the Introduction to the Amba*tth*a; in the Keva*tt*a Sutta,
translated below; and in many other Suttas. In all of them there is the
same exaggeration, the same dry humour, the same restrained art of the
story-teller. It is impossible not to see that to the early tellers and
hearers of these legends, always striking, often with a special beauty
of their own, the unreality of the whole thing was just as evident, and
was meant to be as evident, as it is now to us. They knew quite well
that the lesson taught was the principal matter, the main point compared
with which all others were quite subservient. And it made no difference
that, for instance, the Great King of Glory was expressly identified
with the Buddha in a former birth. They accepted it all; and entered
none the less into the spirit of the legend as legend, because they
enjoyed both the lesson and the manner of the telling of it.

   And so, I would submit, stands the case also with our present Sutta.
The whole legend is obviously invented *ad hoc*. Its details are not
meant to be taken seriously as

<span class="small">{1. Both *G*âtaka and Sutta are translated in full
in my 'Buddbist Suttas' (vol. xi of the S. B. E., pp. 238-289).}</span>

<span id="p. 163">{p. 163}</span>

historical fact. The forced twist given to the meaning of the words
vidhâ and parikkhâro is not serious. The words could not be used in the
new sense assigned. What we have is a sort of pun, a play upon the
words, a piece of dialectic smartness, delightful to the hearers then,
and unfortunately quite impossible to be rendered adequately, in English
prose, for readers now.

   And it is quite open to question whether this does not apply as much
to the whole Sutta as to the legend of King Wide-realm. The Brahman
Kû*t*adanta (pointed-tooth) is mentioned nowhere else, and is very
likely meant to be rather the hero of a tale than an historical
character. In that case we should have before us a novelette, an
historical romance, in which the Very Reverend Sir Goldstick Sharptooth,
lord of the manor of Khânumata,--cruel enough, no doubt, and very keen
on being sure that his 'soul' should be as comfortable in the next world
as he was, now, in this,--makes up his mind to secure that most
desirable end by the murder of a number of his fellow creatures, in
honour of a god, or as he would put it, by celebrating a sacrifice.

   In order to make certain that not one of the technical details--for
to the accurate performance of all these the god was supposed to attach
great weight--should be done wrong, the intending sacrificer is
ironically represented as doing the very last thing any Brahman of
position, under similar circumstances, would think of doing. He goes to
the Sama*n*a Gotama for advice about the modes of the ritual to be
performed at the sacrifice; and about the requisite utensils, the
altar-furniture, to be used in making it.

   The Buddha's answer is to tell him a wonderful legend of a King
Wide-realm, and of the sacrifice he offered--truly the most
extraordinary sacrifice imaginable. All its marvellous details, each one
settled, be it noted, on the advice of a Brahman, are described with a
deliberate extravagance none the less delicious because of the evident
earnestness of the moral to be inferred.

   The Brahman of our Sutta wants to know the three modes in which the
ritual is to be performed. The three 'modes' are declared in the legend
(§ 15) to be simply three conditions of mind, or rather one condition of
mind at three different times, the harbouring of no regret, either
before or during or after the sacrifice, at the expenditure involved.
And the material accessories required, the altar-furniture, the priest's
outfit, what is that? It is the hearty co-operation with the king of
four divisions of his people, the nobles, the officials, the Brahmans,
and the householders. That

<span id="p. 164">{p. 164}</span>

makes four articles of furniture. And eight personal qualifications of
the king himself. That makes other eight. And four personal
qualifications of his advising Brahman make up the total of the sixteen
articles required. No living thing, either animal or vegetable, is
injured. All the labour is voluntary. And all the world co-operates in
adding its share to the largesse of food, on strict vegetarian
principles, in which, alone, the sacrifice consists. It is offered on
behalf, not only of the king himself, but of all the good. And the king
desires to propitiate, not any god, but living men. And the muttering of
mystic verses over each article used and over mangled and bleeding
bodies of unhappy victims, verses on which all the magic efficacy of a
sacrifice had been supposed to depend, is quietly ignored.

   It is all ironical, of course--just the very contrary, in every
respect, of a typical Vedic sacrifice. And the evident unreality of the
legend may be one explanation of the curious fact that the authors of
the *G*âtaka book (notwithstanding that King Wide-realm's Chaplain is
actually identified in the Sutta with the Buddha himself in a previous
birth) have not included this professedly *G*âtaka story in their
collection. This is the only case, so far discovered, in which a similar
omission has been made.

   Having thus laughed the Brahman ideal of sacrifice out of court with
the gentle irony of a sarcastic travesty, the author or authors of the
Sutta go on to say what they think a sacrifice ought to be. Far from
exalting King Wide-realm's procedure, they put his sacrifice at the very
bottom of a long list of sacrifices each better than the other, and
leading up to the sweetest and highest of all, which is the attainment
of Arahatship.

   Here again, except in the last paragraph, there is nothing
exclusively Buddhistic. That a sacrifice of the heart is better than a
sacrifice of bullocks, the ethical more worthy than any physical
sacrifice, is simply the sensible, rational, human view of the matter.
The whole long history of the development of Indian thought, as carried
on chiefly by Brahmans (however much it may have owed in the earliest
period to the nobles and others), shows that they, the more enlightened
and cultured of the Brahmans, were not only as fully alive to this truth
as any Buddhist, but that they took it all along for granted. Even in
the Vedas themselves there is already the germ of this view in the
mental attitude as regards Aditi and Varu*n*a. And in the pre-Buddhistic
*Kh*ândogya, in the mystic identification of the sacrifice with man{1},
we find

<span class="small">{1. *Kh*ândogya Upanishad III, 16 and 17.}</span>

<span id="p. 165">{p. 165}</span>

certain moral states placed on an equality with certain parts of the
sacrificial procedure. And among these moral states, ahi*m*sâ, the habit
of causing no injury to any living thing, is especially mentioned. This
comes very near to the Hebrew prophet's: 'I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice{1}.' The more characteristically Indian point of view is, no
doubt, in the words of the old saying long afterwards taken up into the
Mahâbhârata, that it is truth (not mercy) that outweighs a thousand
sacrifices{2}. But there is a very great probability that the ahi*m*sâ
doctrine, foreshadowed in the Upanishad, and afterwards so extravagantly
taken up by the Niga*nth*as, the *G*ains of the Buddha's time, was also
a part of the earlier *G*ain doctrine, and therefore not only in germ,
but as a developed teaching, pre-Buddhistic. Though the Buddhists did
not accept this extreme position, there would seem therefore to be no
valid reason for doubting the accuracy of the Buddhist tradition that
their view of sacrifice was based on a very ancient belief which was, in
fact, common ground to the wise, whether inside or outside the ranks of
the Brahmans.

   Our Sutta is, then, merely the oldest extant expression, in so
thorough and uncompromising a way, of an ancient and widely held trend
of opinion. On this question, as on the question of caste or social
privileges, the early Buddhists took up, and pushed to its logical
conclusions, a rational view held also by others. And on this question
of sacrifice their party won. The Vedic sacrifices, of animals, had
practically been given up when the long struggle between Brahmanism and
Buddhism reached its close. Isolated instances of such sacrifices are
known even down to the Muhammadan invasion. But the battle was really
won by the Buddhists and their allies. And the combined ridicule and
earnestness of our Sutta will have had its share in bringing about the
victory.

   That they did win is a suggestive fact. How could they have done so
if the Indians of that time had been, as is so often asserted of them by
European writers, more deeply addicted to all manner of ritual than any
other nation under heaven, more superstitious, more averse to change in
religious ceremonial? There seems to me no reason to believe that they
were very different, in these respects, from

{1. Hosea vi. 6; quoted Matt. ix. 13, and xii. 7. See also Micah vi.
6-8. Prov. xv. 8, and xxi. 13, are, of course, later.

2\. Mahâbhârata I, 3095 nearly = XIII, 1544. Compare XIII, 6073.}

<span id="p. 166">{p. 166}</span>

Greeks or Romans of the same period. On the contrary there was a well
marked lay feeling, a wide-spread antagonism to the priests, a real
sense of humour, a strong fund of common sense. Above all there was then
the most complete and unquestioned freedom of thought and expression in
religious matters that the world had yet witnessed. To regard the Indian
peoples through Brahman spectacles, to judge them from the tone
prevalent in the *S*rauta and G*ri*hya Sûtras, it would seem impossible
that this victory could have been won. But it was won. And our views of
Indian history must be modified accordingly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   There is a curious expression in the stock phrase describing the
learned Brahman, so often found in the Pi*t*akas, which I have left
untranslated in this Sutta, being uncertain as to the meaning in which
it was used at the time when our Sutta was composed. It will be
instructive, in more ways than one, to collect and consider the other
passages in which the word occurs.

   Lokâyata is explained by Wilson as 'the system of atheistical
philosophy taught by *K*ârvâka{1},' and by the Petersburg Dictionary as
'Materialism.' Now the description of the good Brahman as put, in the
Buddhist Suttas, into the mouth of Brahmans theinselves{2}, mentions
Lokâyata as one branch of his learning. The whole paragraph is
complimentary. And though the exact connotation of one or two of the
other terms is doubtful, they are all descriptive of just those things
which a Brahman would have been rightly proud to be judged a master of.
It is evident, therefore, that the Dictionary interpretations of the
word are quite out of place in this connection.

   Yet they are each of them, at least for a later period, well
authenticated. Kumârila Bha*tt*a, in his Vârttika (verse 10), charges
the Mîmâ*m*sâ system with having been, for the most part, converted into
a Lokâyata system, and claims for his own book the merit of bringing it
back to theistic lines{3}. Now of course the Mîmâ*m*sists would
indignantly deny this. Kumârila, who seems to have been a good deal of a
bigot, is here merely hurling at adversaries, who claimed to be as
orthodox as himself, a term of abuse. But it is clear that he uses that
term in the sense of 'atheistic.' The exact phrase

{1. He gives as his authority the Amara Ko*s*a; but the Ko*s*a merely
mentions the word, in a list, without any explanation.

2\. A<u>n</u>guttara I, 163, and other passages.

3\. The passage is quoted in Muir's 'Sanskrit Texts,' III, 95.}

<span id="p. 167">{p. 167}</span>

would be nâstika, as opposed to his own âstika-patha: that is, the
system or the man who says 'there is not,' an infidel. This is somewhat
wider than atheist; it comes however, in Kumârila's mouth, to much the
same thing.

   Sa<u>n</u>karâ*k*ârya uses the word Lokâyata several times{1}, and
always in the same specific sense as the view of those who look upon the
soul as identical with the body, as existing only so long as the body
exists, not continuing, after death, in a new condition and separate
from the body. A very similar, if not indeed the very same view is also
controverted in the Brahma-*g*âlla Sutta (above, [p.
46](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2046)); and is constantly referred to throughout the
Pi*t*akas under the stock phrase ta*m* *g*îva*m* ta*m* sarîra*m*{2}. But
it is never called Lokâyata in the Pi*t*akas. It seems to be the view
that there is a soul; but that it is diffused through the body, and dies
with it; and is not a separate unity, within the body but not of it,
which flies away from the body after death. It is not necessary to
suppose that either *S*a<u>n</u>kara or the Buddhists had in their minds
any book setting forth a philosophy based on this single proposition, or
any actual school using such a book as a manual. It may have been so.
But the expressions used point rather to an opinion held by certain
thinkers, in union with other opinions, and not expounded in any special
treatise. Nor do either the Buddhists or *S*a<u>n</u>kara pretend to set
out that opinion in full. They are dealing with it only so far as is
necessary to enforce their own contrary positions. And though
'materialist,' as a rough and ready translation of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
Lokâyatika, gives a good idea, to a European reader, of the sort of
feeling conveyed to *S*a<u>n</u>kara's Indian readers, yet it is not
quite exact. European 'materialists' (and one or two may be discovered
by careful search) do not hold the view which *S*a<u>n</u>kara describes
to his Lokâyatikas.

   Buddhaghosa in our passage has: Lokâya ta*m* vu*kk*ati
vita*nd*a-vâda-sattha*m*,' the Lokâyata is a text-book of the Vita*nd*as
(Sophists){3}.' This does not help us much; but previously, p. 91, he
explains Lokakkhâyikâ as follows: 'Foolish talk according to the
Lokâyata, that is the Vita*nd*a, such as: "By whom was this world
created? By

{1. For instance in his commentary on the Brahma-Sûtra, I, 1, 2; II, 2,
2; III, 3, 53.

2\. For instance in the [Mahâli](dob-06tx) and [*G*âliya](dob-07tx)
Suttas, both translated below.

3\. Sum. I, 247. The Vita*nd*as are quoted and refuted in the Attha
Sâlinî, pp. 3, 90, 92, 241 (where the word is wrongly spelt).}

<span id="p. 168">{p. 168}</span>

such a one. A crow is white from the whiteness of its bones; cranes are
red from the redness of their blood."'

   Other Pâli comments on the word are the Abhidhâna Padîpikâ (verse
112), which says simply, probably following Buddhaghosa:
Vita*nd*a-sattham vi*ññ*eyya*m* ya*m* ta*m* lokâyata*m*. The date of
this work is the middle of the twelfth century A.D. Much clearer is
Aggava*m*sa in the Sadda-nîti, which is a generation older. He says{1}:

   Loko ti bâla-loko; ettha âyatanti ussâhanti vâyamanti vâdassâdenâti
lokâyata*m*. Ayatati vâ tena loko, na yatati na îhati vâ, lokâyata*m*.
Ta*m* hi gandha*m* nissâya sattâ pu*ññ*a-kiriyâya *k*itta*m* na
uppâdenti. Lokâyata*m* nâma: sabba*m* u*kkh*ittha*m* sabba*m*
anu*kkh*i*tth*a*m* seto kâko kâ*l*o bako iminâ va iminâ va kâranenâti
evam-âdi-niratthaka-kara*n*a-pa*t*isa*m*yutta*m* titthiya-sattha*m*,
ya*m* loke Vita*nd*a-sattha*m* vu*kk*ati, ya*m* sandhâya Bodhisatto
asamadhuro Vidhura-pa*nd*ito:

   Na seve Lokâyatika*m*, n'etam pu*ññ*âya va*ddh*ana*m* ti âha.

   'Loko means the common world. Lokâyata means: "on that they
âyatanti;" that is, they exert themselves about it, strive about it,
through the pleasure they take in discussion. Or perhaps it means: "the
world does not yatati by it;" that is, does not depend on it, move on by
it. For living beings do not stir up their hearts to right-doing by
reason of that book{2}. Now the Lokâyata is the book of the unbelievers
(of the Titthiyas) full of such useless disputations as the following:
"All is impure; all is not impure; the crow is white, the crane is
black; and for this reason or for that"--the book known in the world as
the Vita*nd*a-sattha, of which the Bodisat, the incomparable leader,
Vidhura the pandit, said:

   "Follow not the Lokâyata, that works not for progress in merit."'

{1. Quoted *sub voce* in Subhûti's 'Abhidhânappadîpikâ Sûki,' p. 310.
According to the Sâsana Va*m*sa Dîpikâ (Dr. Mabel Bode's edition, p.
74), he lived at Arimaddana in Burma in 1127 A.D. See also Sâsana
Va*m*sa Dîpo, verse 1238; Gandha Va*m*sa, pp. 63, 67; Forchammer,
'Jardine Prize Essay,' p. 34; J. P. T. S., 1882, p. 103.

2\. With this attempt at derivation may be compared Nîlaka*nth*a on the
passage quoted below from the Mahâbhârata (as given in B. R.), Loka
evâyatante te lokayatikâ. Also Prof. Cowell's suggestion (Sarvad. S., p.
2) that Lokayâta may be analysed etymologically as 'prevalent in the
world.' The exact meaning of âyata is really very doubtful."'}

<span id="p. 169">{p. 169}</span>

   The verse quoted--certainly a very old one--is in the Vidhûra
*G*âtaka{1}, and the commentator there says: 'This means: Follow not
Lokâyata disputation, Vita*nd*a chatter, concerned with useless matters
which neither give paradise nor lead men on into the Path.'

   *S*a<u>n</u>kara says: 'There is thus, according to them, no soul,
separate from the body, and capable of going to the heavenly world or
obtaining release{2}: The unknown author of the *G*âtaka commentary, who
certainly wrote however in the fifth century, gives the allied
proposition as his own conclusion from the uselessness of their
discussions, not as the opinion of the Lokâyatikas themselves. It would
be an easy transition from the one expression to the other. And the
difference is suggestive, especially in the light of other passages in
both Sanskrit and Pâli books.

   For while the Mahâbhârata has precisely the same use of the word as
the Pi*t*akas, later works use it in a manner approximating more and
more nearly to that of *S*a<u>n</u>kara. The passage in the Mahâbhârata
is at I, 2889 ( = Hari Va*m*sa 14O68), where, at the end of a list of
the accomplishments of learned Brahmans, they are said to be 'masters of
the Lokâyata. Being mentioned, as in our passage, at the end of the
list, it is plain that this branch of learning is meant to be taken as
of minor importance. But it is not yet considered unfavourably, much
less opprobiously. And the Petersburg Dictionary, from which I take most
of these references, points out that the word may possibly, in this
passage, have some other meaning than 'Materialism.'

   The Râmâyana goes further. There the word is also in a list, but the
Laukâyatikâ are blamed as 'clever in useless things{3}.' So in the
Saddharma Pu*nd*arîka the good Mahâyânist does not serve or court or
wait upon (among other low people) 'the Lokâyatikas who know by heart
the Lokâyata mantras (mystic verses){4}.' The date of

{1. Fausböll's edition. VI, 286. No less than four bas reliefs,
illustrating this *G*âtaka, have been found at the Bharhut Tope. See my
'Buddhist Birth Stories.' p. cii. On the greater age of the verses, as
compared with the prose, of the *G*âtakas, see ibid. lxxviii.

2\. *Loc. cit.* See Deussen, 'Vedânta-system,' 310; and Thibaut,
'Vedânta-Sutras,' II, 269.

3\. Gorresio's edition, II, 109, 29. Both these passages from the epics
are from later portions of them.

4\. Chapter XIII, at the beginning. Burnouf (p. 168) reads tantras
(instead of mantras), no doubt wrongly, and has a curious blunder in his
note on the passage (p. 409). He says Lokâyata means in Pâli 'fabulous
history, romance'; and quotes, as his authority, the passage given above
from the Abhidhâna Padîpikâ, in which Lokâyatam is simply explained as
vita*nd*a-sattha*m*. This last expression cannot possibly mean anything
of that sort.}

<span id="p. 170">{p. 170}</span>

this may be a century or two after Christ. And in the *G*ain book,
entitled the Bhagavatî, which Weber puts at about the same time, the
Lokâyatikas occur in a similar list of blameworthy persons{1}.

   In the Milinda, which is probably somewhat earlier, the word is
mentioned twice. One passage ascribes a knowledge of the Lokâyata (in a
sentence expanded from the very clause in our Sutta) to the hero of the
story, Nâgasena{2}. Here the Milinda is quite at the old standpoint. The
other passage is in a parenthesis{3} in which the sub-hero, the king, is
described as 'fond of wordy disputations, and in the habit of wrangling
against the quibbles of Lokâyatas and Vita*nd*as.' This may possibly be
a gloss which has crept into the text. But in any case it is evidence
that, at the time when it was written, the later view of the meaning of
the word had become prevalent.

   In the long list of various sorts of hermits given in the Harsha
*K*arita the Lokâyatikas come among others who would be classed by
Vedântists as heretics{4}. We cannot, unfortunately, draw any certain
conclusion as to whether or not there were actually any Lokâyatikas
living in Bâ*n*a's time. In expanding previous descriptions of the
concourse of hermits in the forest, he may be merely including in his
list all the sorts of such people he had ever heard or read of.

   Lastly, the Lokâyata system is, in various works of the fourteenth
century and later, appropriately fathered on *K*ârvâka, a mythical
character in the Mahâbhârata, an ogre, who appears in the garb of a
Brahman{5}. It is not certain whether this is due to the ingenuity of a
friend or a foe. In either case, like the fathering of the later
Sâ<u>n</u>khya on the ancient sage Kapila; or the fathering of the
collection of fables, made by Planudes in the fourteenth century A.D.,
upon Aesop the story-teller of the fifth century B.C., it has been
eminently successful, has deceived many, and is still widely accepted.

   Pending the discovery of other texts, and especially of

{1. Weber, Ueber ein fragment der Bhagavatî, II, 248.

2\. My Milinda, I, 7.

3\. Ibid. I, 17.

4\. Cowell's Translation, p. 236.

5\. Madhusûdana Sarasvatî, Prabodha*k*androdaya,
Sarva-dar*s*ana-sa*m*graha.}

<span id="p. 171">{p. 171}</span>

such as are not only the testimony of opponents, the best working
hypothesis to explain the above facts seems to be that about 500 B.C.
the word Lokâyata was used in a complimentary way as the name of a
branch of Brahman learning, and probably meant *Nature-lore*--wise
sayings, riddles, rhymes, and theories handed down by tradition as to
cosmogony, the elements, the stars, the weather, scraps of astronomy, of
elementary physics, even of anatomy, and knowledge of the nature of
precious stones, and of birds and beasts and plants. To be a master of
such lore was then considered by no means unbecoming to a learned
Brahman, though it ranked, of course, below his other studies. At that
time there was no school so called, and no special handbook of such
knowledge. But portions of it trenched so closely upon, were so often
useful as metaphor in discussing the higher and more especially priestly
wisdom, that we find sayings that may well have belonged to it preserved
in the pre-Buddhistic literature. Such passages, for instance, as B*ri*.
Âr. Up. III, 8, 3, *Kh*ând. Up. IV, 17, 1, and VI, 2-7, on the worlds
and on cosmogony; *Kh*ând. III. on the colour of the rays of the sun;
B*ri*. Âr. Up. II, 1, 5-7, and III, 7, 3-7, on the elements; Ait. Âr.
III, 2, 1, 4, and others, on the parts of the body; and many others of a
similar kind on these and other subjects might be cited as examples.

   The amount then existing of such lore was too small to make a fair
proficiency in it incompatible with other knowledge. As the amount of it
grew larger, and several branches of natural science were regularly
studied, a too exclusive acquaintance with Lokâyata became looked upon
with disfavour. Even before the Christian era masters of the dark
sayings, the mysteries, of such mundane lore were marked with sophists
and casuists. This feeling is increasingly vouched for in the early
centuries of our era. In the fifth century we hear of a book, presumably
on the riddles and mysteries of the craft, as it is called 'a book of
quibbles.' Various branches of mundane science had been by that time
fairly well worked out. Lokâyata was still the name for the old
*Nature-lore*, on the same level as folk-lore, and in contradistinction,
not only to theosophy on the one hand, but to such science as there was
on the other.

   In the first half of the eighth century Kumârila uses the word as a
mere term of abuse, and in the sense of infidel, of his equally orthodox
opponents, the Mîmâmsists. And shortly afterwards *S*a<u>n</u>kara, in
setting forth his theory of the soul, controverts a curious opinion
which he ascribes to Lokâyatikas,--possibly wrongly, as the very same
opinion

<span id="p. 172">{p. 172}</span>

was controverted ages before in the Pi*t*akas, and not there called
Lokâyata, though the word was in use in Pi*t*aka times.

   Finally in the fourteenth century the great theologian
Sâya*n*a-Mâdhava has a longish chapter in which he ascribes to the
Lokâyatikas the most extreme forms of the
let-us-eat-and-drink-for-to-morrow-we-die view of life; of Pyrrhonism in
philosophy, and of atheism in theology. The Lokâyata had no doubt, at
that time, long ceased to exist. His very able description has all the
appearance of being drawn from his own imagination; and is chiefly based
on certain infidel doggrel verses which cannot possibly have formed a
part of the Lokâyata studied by the Brahmans of old{1}. It is the ideal
of what will happen to the man of some intellect, but morally so
depraved that he will not accept the theosophist position.

   Throughout the whole story we have no evidence of any one who called
himself a Lokâyatika, or his own knowledge Lokâyata. After the early use
of the word in some such sense as Nature-lore, folk-lore, there is a
tone of unreality over all the statements we have. And of the real
existence of a school of thought, or of a system of philosophy that
called itself by the name there is no trace. In the middle period the
riddles and quibbles of the Nature-lorists are despised. In the last
period the words Lokâyata, Lokâyatika, become mere hobby horses, pegs on
which certain writers can hang the views that they impute to their
adversaries, and give them, in doing so, an odious name.

<span class="small">{1. Sarva-dar*s*ana-sa*m*graha, Chapter I,
translated by Prof. Cowell in the version published in 1882.}</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: V. Kû*t*adanta Sutta](dob-05tx)
