<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-03tx) [Next](dob-04tx)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 137">{p. 137}</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### TO THE

### SO*N*ADA*ND*A SUTTA.

   THIS Dialogue comes very appropriately immediately after the
Amba*tth*a. That dealt with the general question of pride of birth, or
social position. This deals with the special question of what is the
essential quality which makes a man a Brahman. The conclusion is, no
doubt, substantially the same. But there is a difference, and the
difference is instructive.

   In trying to gain over Amba*tth*a to his (the Buddha's) view of the
essential distinction--rather than birth or social position--between man
and man, Gotama includes the whole list as set out above in the thirteen
divisions of the Sâma*ññ*a-phala{1}. In trying to gain over
So*n*ada*nd*a to his (the Buddha's) view of what is the essential
quality that makes a man a Brahman, he gives the same details, but puts
the *Gh*ânas (the states of Ecstasy) not under Conduct, but under
Pa*ññ*â (Intelligence).

   The reason seems to be simply that the verse, on which the exposition
in the Amba*tth*a turns, mentions only Wisdom and Conduct (containing no
word for Intelligence), and that it is not thought accurate to put the
states of Ecstasy (which are Indian, not specially Buddhist) under
Wisdom. It is true that the Buddhist position is that 'goodness is a
function of intelligence, as beauty is of health' (to quote the words of
Matthew Bassendine). But under Intelligence they always distinguish two
phases--the enquiring, and necessarily therefore doubting, activity, of
the mind; and the final stage of emancipation and peace when the laws of
the universe are clearly seen, and firmly grasped, and cheerfully
acquiesced in.

<span class="small">{1. See the summary above, [pp.
57-59](dob-02in.htm#p.%2057), in the Introduction to the
Sâma*ññ*a-phala.}</span>

<span id="p. 138">{p. 138}</span>

It is this latter phase which they call Wisdom (Vi*gg*â){1}--the
contrary of the Avi*gg*â, which is ignorance of the action of Karma, of
the Four Noble Truths, and of the doctrine of the Âsavas or
Intoxications. The man who knows these; who, finally and permanently out
of the jungle and in the open, quite beyond the stage of 'wasting his
wonder on the fabulous soul,' has attained to, and remains in this state
of Nirvâ*n*a in Arahatship, is not only, in Buddhist terminology, called
a Brahman, but is, in fact, declared to be the only true Brahman.

   It is amazing that So*n*ada*nd*a, as learned as he is wealthy, does
not see that this, the logical outcome of the Buddha's argument, and
carefully led up to in the final paragraph of the exposition{2}, is
really incompatible with the supremacy of the Brahmans in the ordinary
sense of that word. He is baffled by the skill with which he is
gradually led on, by the usual Socratic method adopted in so many of the
Dialogues, to accept one self-evident truth after another. There is
indeed nothing, till we come to that last paragraph, which any
intelligent Brahman could not, with safety, and with due regard to his
own doctrine, fully accept. In other words, the doctrine of Brahman
supremacy was intellectually indefensible. It was really quite
inconsistent with the ethical standard of the times, which the Brahmans,
in common with the rest of the people, fully accepted.

   Our Sutta is by no means the only one in which the same, or a
similar, argument leads up to the same, or a similar, conclusion. It
will aid us in understanding the real gist of our Sutta to mention one
or two of these.

   In the Tika*nn*a and *G*â*n*usso*n*i Suttas of the
A<u>n</u>guttara{3} the question put by the Buddha is: 'What sort of
person do you Brahmans acknowledge to be a Tevi*gg*a Brahman (a Brahman
with threefold lore)?'

   The answer of each of the Brahmans is, in the words of our Sutta, §
4: 'A Brahman well born on both sides, of pure descent, through the
father and through the mother, back through seven generations, with no
slur put upon him, and no reproach, in respect of birth--a repeater (of
the sacred words) knowing the mystic verses by heart, one who has
mastered the Three Vedas, with the indices, the ritual, the phonology,
and the exegesis (as a fourth), and with the

{1. The English equivalents do not exactly cover the corresponding Pâli
terms, which are not, in the texts, used always with scrupulous
distinctiveness.

2\. § 23 of the text, and of the translation below.

3\. Vol. i, pp. 163-168.}

<span id="p. 139">{p. 139}</span>

legends as a fifth--a man learned in the (etymologies of the) words and
in the grammar, versed in Lokâyata (Nature-Lore){1} and in the theory of
the signs on the body of a great man.'

   Whereupon the Buddha rejoins that in the teaching of the Arahats the
'threefold lore' is different; and on being asked what it is, answers in
the words of sections 93, 95, and 97 of the Sâma*ññ*a-phala Sutta, which
are quoted as the last three paragraphs of his exposition in our Sutta,
that is to say,

   *a*. The knowledge of one's own previous births.

   *b*. The knowledge of other people's previous births.

   *c*. The knowledge of the Four Truths, and of the Four Intoxications
(Âsavas), leading on to the emancipation of Arahatship.

   The only difference is that at the end of each section, and after the
words setting forth the emancipation, the following sentence is added:

   'This first (or second, or third) lore hath he required. Ignorance is
dispelled within him, and wisdom has been born. The darkness has been
dissipated, the light has appeared. (And all this) inasmuch as he has
continued in earnestness, in zeal, in mastery of himself.'

   And at the end of the whole the following verses are also added:

   'Him do they honour whose heart,--unswerving in goodness, and wise,  
   Given to earnest thought,--rests in his own control,  
   Pacified, stedfast. And him resolute, able in method,  
   Threefold in knowledge, dispelling the darkness, the conqueror of
Death, who  
   Lived for the weal of gods and of men delivered from folly,  
   Him of the threefold lore, mindful and self-possessed,  
   Him do they honour, the Buddha, our Gotama, wearing now,  
   Conqueror, too, of Birth, the last of his mortal frames!

   ''Tis he who is a Brâhma*n*a indeed  
   Who knows the births that he has lived before;  
   And sees (with Heavenly Eye) the states of bliss,  
   And states of woe, that other men pass through;  
   Has reached the end of all rebirths, become  
   A sage, perfect in insight, Arahat,  
   In these three modes of knowledge threefold wise.

<span class="small">{1. See below in the [Introduction](dob-05in) to the
next Sutta.}</span>

<span id="p. 140">{p. 140}</span>

   Him do I call a Brahman, threefold wise,  
   And not the man who mutters o'er again  
      The mystic verse so often muttered through before.'

   How important a place this doctrine occupied in early Buddhism is
made evident by the fact that this latter stanza, with variations at the
close, is so constantly repeated. We find it in the 99th Sutta of the
Iti-vuttaka (p. 100) and in the 91st Sutta of the Ma*ggh*ima (the
Brahmâyu Sutta). And it is quoted also, not only in this Sutta in the
A<u>n</u>guttara, and in another Sutta in the Sa*m*yutta (I, 167), but
also in the collection of verses from the Pi*t*akas called the
Dhammapada (verse 423); and also in the other collection of such verses
(probably belonging to some other school of Buddhists), now preserved in
the oldest MS. yet discovered in India, the so-called Kharosh*th*i MS.,
portions of which have simultaneously found their way, last year, to
both St. Petersburg and Paris.

   The whole section of the Dhammapada, which contains this quotation,
consists of no less than forty verses, each of which, from one point of
view or another, emphasise this point of the identification, by the
Buddhists, of the Arahat with the Brahman. Twenty-seven of them are
taken from the Vâse*tth*a Sutta of the Sutta Nipâta, in which the
question raised is precisely the same as that raised in our Sutta, and
in which the reply, though different in details, amounts to much the
same as the reply given here.

   Two conclusions force themselves upon us. It is, in the first place,
a striking proof of the high social esteem in which the Brahmans, as
such, and quite irrespective of character, were held by the masses of
the people. We have hitherto only had the views which the Brahmans held
about themselves. And very absurd they seem to readers whose own vivid
sense of superiority rests on a self-complacency quite as inexpugnable
as that of the Brahmans. Here we have evidence from an independent
source,--evidence all the stronger because it is found in Suttas in
which the exclusive claims of the Brahmans by birth are vigorously
contested. When the Buddhists, in selecting a title of honour for those
they valued so highly, for the best of men, for the Arahats, selected
the name of Brahman, it is clear that that word, in the opinion of the
early Buddhists, conveyed to the minds of the people an exalted meaning,
a connotation of real veneration and respect. And it is not likely that
this would have been the case unless the Brahmans had, at least as

<span id="p. 141">{p. 141}</span>

a general rule, deserved it--and on other grounds than the mere
prerogative of birth.

   In the second place, if the contention of the Buddhists had been
universally accepted--if the word Brahman had come to mean, not only a
man of a certain descent, but exclusively a man of a certain character
and insight--then the present caste system of India could never have
grown up. But it was obviously impossible that the contention should
succeed.

   The method, adopted by all reformers, of pouring new wine into old
bottles, putting new meanings into ancient words, can only succeed under
conditions, that, in this case, were non-existent. And it is always open
to the danger that, with the old and hallowed word, the old superstition
associated with it will also survive. It was a method largely adopted by
the Buddhists; and in numerous other cases, to which I have elsewhere
called attention, adopted with success. The subsequent language of India
is full of phrases and words which bear, not the meaning which they
previously bore, but the new and higher meaning put into them by
Buddhists. But in this case the two ideas were too widely apart, too
contradictory. A physical meaning cannot be replaced by an ethical one.
The actual facts of life, which they could not alter,--Could not,
indeed, attempt to alter,--were a constant influence, against their
view, too strong to be overcome. Brahmans by birth, many of them,
perhaps most of them, engaged in various worldly trades and occupations,
and therefore Brahmans *only* by birth, were so constant and so
important a factor in the daily and hourly life of the people, that the
idea of birth could not be dissociated from the word. The Buddhists
failed. And they not only failed, their very choice of the word as a
title of honour, must (through the wide influence they exercised for so
many centuries throughout and beyond the valley of the Ganges) have
actually afforded a fresh strength to the veneration which the word
inspired. The very means they adopted to lend weight to their doctrine
of emancipation became a weapon to be turned against themselves.

   It is unlikely that this really mattered much. The point was only one
detail in a broad scheme which was doomed from the outset to
failure--that is if failure to attain immediate and lasting acceptance
can rightly be called the failure of a theory of life.

   A theory which placed the ideal in Self-conquest, regarded final
salvation as obtainable in this world, and in this world

<span id="p. 142">{p. 142}</span>

only, and only by self-conquest--a view of life that ignored the 'soul'
and brought the very gods themselves under the domain of law--a
religious movement which aimed its keenest shafts against all those
forms of belief in the supernatural and mysterious, appealing most
strongly alike to the hopes and to the fears of the people--a philosophy
that confined itself to going back, step by step, from effect to cause,
and poured scorn on speculations as to the ultimate origin and end of
all things--might gain, by the powerful personality of its founder and
the enthusiasm and zeal of his early followers, a certain measure of
temporary success. But it fought against too many vested interests at
once, it raised up too many enemies, it tried in 'pouring new wine into
the old bottles' to retain too much of the ancient phraseology, for
lasting victory--at least at that time, and in an advancing country then
assimilating to itself surrounding peoples at a lower grade of culture.
The end was inevitable. And it was actually brought about, not by
persecution, but by the gradual weakening of the theory itself, the
gradual creeping back, under new forms and new names, of the more
popular beliefs.

   The very event which seemed, in the eyes of the world, to be the most
striking proof of the success of the new movement, the conversion and
strenuous support of Asoka, the most powerful ruler India had
had--indeed the first real overlord over practically the whole of
India--only hastened the decline. The adhesion of large numbers of
nominal converts, more especially from the newly incorporated and less
advanced provinces, produced weakness, rather than strength, in the
movement for reform. The day of compromise had come. Every relaxation of
the old thoroughgoing position was widely supported by converts only
half converted. And the margin of difference between the Buddhists and
their opponents gradually faded almost entirely away. The soul theory,
step by step, gained again the upper hand. The caste system was
gradually built up into a completely organised system. The social
supremacy of the Brahmans by birth became accepted as an
incontrovertible fact. And the in flood of popular superstition which
overwhelmed the Buddhist movement, overwhelmed also the whole pantheon
of the Vedic gods. Buddhism and Brahmanism alike passed practically
away, and modern Hinduism arose on the ruins of both.

   The struggle is now being renewed under conditions perhaps, on the
whole, more favourable. The tone of worldliness and love of material
comfort, the eager restlessness

<span id="p. 143">{p. 143}</span>

of modern social, and economic competition, the degradation of learning
to a mere means of getting on and making money, are no doubt all
unfavourable to any movement for the social and religious elevation of a
people. But history shows, notably in the case of the Reformation in
Europe, how powerfully the contact of two diverse views of life tends to
widen the thoughts of men. Both India and Europe in the twentieth
century may be fairly expected to afford fresh examples of the same
influence. And in India the powerful aid of the new methods of science
and of historical criticism will lend their invaluable aid to the party
endeavouring, now once again, to place the ideal, not in birth, but in
character and wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: IV. The So*n*ada*nd*a Sutta](dob-04tx)
