<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-05tx) [Next](dob-06tx)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 186">{p. 186}</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### TO THE

### MAHÂLI SUTTA.

   THE form of this Sutta is remarkable. We have two distinct subjects
discussed. First the question of the ability to see heavenly sights and
hear heavenly sounds being raised, the Buddha says that it is not for
the sake of acquiring such powers that people join the Order under him.
And being asked what their object then is, he gradually leads the
questioner on to Arahatship, as the aim, along the Eightfold Path. There
the Sutta might appropriately have ended. But the Buddha himself then
raises a totally different question--whether the soul and the body are
the same. And though, for the reason stated below, he gives no answer,
he leads the discourse again up to Arahatship along the series of mental
states set out in the Sâma*ññ*a-phala.

   This second part of our Dialogue might form a separate Sutta, and it
is in fact added, as a Sutta by itself, to the present division of the
Dialogues. Why then is it also included here? Buddhaghosa's answer is
that the young noble Mahâli, who raises the first point, was known to
harbour the heresy that there is a soul, and that it has form. (The
words the commentator uses are very short, and the context must, I
think, be supplied from the passage translated above, § 10 on [p.
46](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2046).) It was to clear his mind of this notion that
the Buddha specially raised the second point.

   However this may be, the Sutta must have been already a double one,
must have had its present form, before it received a place in that
division of the Buddhist scriptures where it now stands. Each Sutta in
that division incorporates the whole of the very ancient tract called
the Sîlas. The division is therefore called the Sîla Vagga. And no Sutta
not containing the Sîlas can belong to it. Our Sutta only contains the
Sîlas in the second part. That part, therefore, must have belonged to it
when the dialogues were arranged as they now stand.

   The question raised in that second part is one of a group of
questions on which primitive Buddhism expresses no

<span id="p. 187">{p. 187}</span>

opinion. They are called the Ten Avyâkatâni, the Indeterminates, points
not determined. Besides being often mentioned in the Dialogues
translated in the present work and elsewhere, they form the subject of
the Avyâkata Sa*m*yutta (No. 44 in vol. iv of the Sa*m*yutta Nikâya),
and they are as follows{1}:--

|          |                                                                                                        |
|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|    1, 2. | Whether the world is eternal or not.                                                                   |
|    3, 4. | Whether the world is infinite or not.                                                                  |
|    5, 6. | Whether the soul is the same as the body, or distinct from it{2}.                                      |
|    7-10. | Whether a man who has attained to the truth (a Tathâgata) exists, or not, and in any way, after death. |

   There are others mentioned occasionally by themselves; but these form
the usual group. Of them, those numbered 1-4 and 7-10 are speculations
already condemned in the Brahma-*g*âla (above, [pp. 27
foll.](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2027), [pp. 35 foll.](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2035), and
[p. 40](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2040) respectively). The remaining two, those
numbered 5 and 6, form the subject of the *G*âliya, incorporated in our
present Sutta.

   The position taken by the primitive Buddhists as to these
Indeterminates is so often referred to that it undoubtedly was an
important item in the Buddha's actual belief. It is rendered very clear
by the old legend put into the Buddha's mouth in the Udâna just quoted.
There the various non-Buddhist teachers of the time are represented as
expressing strong opinions one way or the other on these questions; and
as getting so excited about them that they came to blows. Gotama
thereupon tells a story how, in ancient days, a similar riot having
taken place, the king had all the blind men in the city brought
together, and had an elephant brought in. Each of the blind men touches
a different part of the elephant. The king then asks them to explain
what an elephant is like. He who had felt the head said it was like a
water-pot. He who had felt the ear said it was like a winnowing basket.
He who had felt the tusk said it was like a plough-share. He who had
felt the trunk said it was like a plough-handle. He who had felt the
body said it was like a granary. He who had felt its legs said it was
like a pillar. He who had felt its back said it

{1. Po*tth*apâda Sutta (translated below). Sa*m*yutta IV, 393; Udâna VI,
4; M. I, 484, &c.

2\. Ta*m* *g*îva*m* ta*m* sarîra*m*. Childers (*sub voce* pa*ñh*o)
renders this: 'Is this the life? is this the body?' but that must be
wrong. See Sum. I, 319.}

<span id="p. 188">{p. 188}</span>

was like a mortar. He who had felt its tail said it was like a pestle.
He who had felt its bristles said it was like a broom. And each one was
so sure he was right that they clamoured one against the other, and came
to blows, to the amusement of the king. Then comes the moral;--

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>'In such points Brahmans and recluses stick<br />
Wrangling on them, they violently discuss--<br />
Poor folk! they see but one side of the shield!'<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   The inference is obvious. To discuss such questions is Mere
speculation, useless, because it is based on insufficient evidence. This
is the philosophic position; and it resembles very closely the position
taken up, in the West, many centuries afterwards, by Hume and his
followers. And, as usual in primitive Buddhism, the ethical corollary is
very emphatically insisted upon. It is several times pointed out in the
Dialogues{1} of these ten speculations that they--

   'The jungle, the desert, the puppet show, the writhing, the
entanglement, of speculation--are accompanied by sorrow, by wrangling,
by resentment, by the fever of excitement; they conduce neither to
detachment of heart, nor to freedom from lusts, nor to tranquillity, nor
to peace, nor to wisdom, nor to the insight of the higher stages of the
Path, nor to Arahatship.'

   In other words the speculations, being based on insufficient
evidence, are not only useless--they are also, therefore, wrong; that
is, from the Buddhist point of view, a disadvantage in the struggle
towards the only aim worth striving for--the perfection and emancipation
of Arahatship.

   As for the special point of our Sutta--the lesson that no wise man
will condescend to discuss the question whether the soul is, or is not,
the same as the body--it must be remembered that the negative is the
view now known to be so widely, indeed universally prevalent among
unthinking people throughout the world that it was almost certainly held
also in India. The general opinion about the soul in the pre-Buddhistic
Upanishads is somewhat different. There (to judge by the passages set
out in my article in the J. R. A. S. for January 1899) it is looked upon
as being, at least during life, smaller than the body, though after
death, when it flies away from the body through an aperture in the top
of the head, it was apparently regarded as a subtle and very impalpable,
but still material, double of the body of the deceased.

   It was the refusal to allow any place for this universal

<span class="small">{1. For instance, II. 1, 485.}</span>

<span id="p. 189">{p. 189}</span>

belief in a semi-material soul in his own system that is the most
striking, and perhaps the most original feature in Gotama's teaching. No
other religion of which we have sufficient records to enable us to form
an opinion on the point has been constructed without the 'soul.' Where
the others said 'soul,' Gotama said usually 'Action,' which comes to
much the same as character.

   In this respect he came very near to our modern use of the word in
such expressions as 'a high-souled man' or 'a soul for music.' And it is
worth calling attention to the fact that even in Shakspere more than
half the times the word is used it is in this secondary, ethical,
emotional sense. Even in the old authorised translation of our Bible, in
which the word occurs altogether 449 times, it is used 55 times merely
in the sense of person{1}, only 85 times in the animistic sense, and 306
times in the sense of emotional or intellectual qualities or
disposition{2}.

   This will make Gotama's position, which is really very simple; more
clear. He rejected entirety the use of the word in the old animistic
sense. He retained it in a personal sense, in the meaning of 'oneself,
himself,' &c.{3} And though, of course, be acknowledged the reality of
the emotional and intellectual dispositions, he refused absolutely to
look upon them as a unity.

   The position is so absolute, so often insisted on, so fundamental to
the right understanding of primitive Buddhism, that it is essential
there should be no mistake about it. Yet the position is also so
original, so fundamentally opposed to what is usually understood as
religious belief, both in India and elsewhere, that there is great
temptation to attempt to find a loophole through which at least a covert
or esoteric belief in the soul and in future life (that is of course of
a soul), can be recognised, in some sort of way, as part of so widely
accepted a religious system. There is no loophole, and the efforts to
find one have always met with unswerving opposition, both in the
Pi*t*akas themselves and in extra-canonical works{4}.

{1. 'We were in the ship two hundred and seventy-six souls,' Acts xxvii.

2\. There are about a score of ambiguous passages; but a different
decision as to them would not change the proportion to any substantial
extent.

3\. Attano; attaaâ, &c., in an the oblique cases. But for the nominative
attâ, the use of which might have been misunderstood, saya*m* is almost
always, if not indeed always, substituted.

4\. See the quotations in my 'American Lectures' (London, 1896), pp.
39-42, and the notes above, pp. [81](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2081),
[87](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2087).}

<span id="p. 190">{p. 190}</span>

   Our available records are not at present sufficient to enable us to
judge either of the numbers, or of the importance, of those Buddhists
who made such attempts. But it is clear from the tone of the first
chapter of the Kathâ Vatthu, and from the express statements of the
commentary on it, that there were such Buddhists as early as the time of
Asoka. They belonged to two out of the eighteen schools of thought which
had then arisen. The names of these schools are the Sammitiyâ and the
Va*gg*i-puttakâ{1}. We may yet hope to recover a work which will contain
their arguments in their own words. But if the opinion condemned at pp.
14-19 of the Kathâ Vatthu be really theirs, as the commentator declares
it is, then it would seem that they held a view practically the same as
that opinion of Mahâli, which the Buddha, in our Sutta, goes out of his
way to raise in the form of a question, and to put aside as unworthy of
discussion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The expression sambodhi-parâyano used in this Sutta, [§
13](dob-06tx.htm#text%20p.%20156), has been hitherto misunderstood.

   The Buddhist ideal is a subjective state to be reached, in this
world, by going along an eightfold path, so called because of the eight
good qualities or characteristics which make up its eight parts.
Progress along this path is divided into four stages in which certain
evil dispositions, the ten so-called Bonds, are got rid of. The Sambodhi
is the insight, wisdom, intelligence, awakening, which is essential to
the three higher stages of this state of Arahatship. And what is
connoted by the term can best, perhaps, be understood by bearing in mind
its seven constituent parts, the Sambo*ggh*angâ--self-possession,
investigation into the truth, energy, calm, joy, concentration, and
magnanimity.

   In describing the first and lowest of the four stages of the Path, it
is always stated (Dîgha I, 156; M. P. S. II, 27; A. II, 238, &c.) of the
disciple--not that he has then attained the sambodhi, he has only
attained abhisamaya--but that he is sambodhi-parâyano. Childers (*sub
voce* parâyano) explains this as 'having the Four Truths as his
support.' But Buddhaghosa (Sum. I, 313) says: 'He has the sambodhi--by
which is meant that of the three higher stages--as his furthermost aim;
in other words, he will attain to that.'

   Buddhaghosa's explanation is the only one possible in

<span class="small">{1. Kathâ-vatthu-ppakara*n*a-a*tth*akathâ, p. 8 (in
the Journal of the Pâli Text Society for 1889).}</span>

<span id="p. 191">{p. 191}</span>

the context, and is confirmed by every other passage in the Pâli
Pi*t*akas where the word sambodhi has been traced. It never means the
wisdom of a Buddha, but always the insight of the higher stages of the
path to Arahatship. But it is necessary to point this out because the
distinction is of the first importance for the history of Buddhism; and
also because the erroneous rendering of Burnouf has been followed by
Childers in the Dictionaty, *sub voce* sambodhi ('attainment of
Buddhaship, Buddhahood'), and has not been corrected by any of the
distinguished scholars who have discussed the meaning of Asoka's eighth
edict in which the word occurs{1}. The king there says that he 'set out
for the sambodhi.' If this means that he had started, in his own
opinion, along the line of the Pârâmitâs, towards the attainment, in
some future birth, of Buddhahood, then it is most interesting and
important as giving us the earliest mention of a doctrine not found in
the Pâli Pi*t*akas, and entirely opposed to their view of Buddhism. But
the word does not necessarily imply this, nor does the context require
it. The doctrine spoken of with contempt, by the Mahâyânist doctors, as
the 'Lesser Vehicle' is quite possible here, and more in accordance with
all the rest of the Asoka expressions. There would seem to be no
sufficient reason why we should not understand Asoka to mean that he had
started, in his own opinion, along the Eightfold Path, towards the
attainment, doubtless in some future birth, of Arahatship. Whether this
be so or not, this is the only meaning of the word so far found in the
Pi*t*akas.

   And further, this entering on the Path--the Eightfold Path to the
wisdom of the Arahat--is a quite different thing from becoming a
Buddhist. There are numerous passages where the very nature of the
discourse held not only to laymen (upâsakas), but even to members of the
Order (bhikkhus), shows that they were not supposed to have attained as
yet to the state of mind described as 'entering upon the Path.' Both the
rules of the Order, and the precepts laid down for laymen, are, from the
Pi*t*aka point of view, on a different plane altogether, lower than,
apart from, that of the Path. Acting up to those rules, carrying out
those precepts, can never even result in 'conversion' without the
awakening of the new life. It is therefore very doubtful whether the
word 'conversion' should be used, in English translations of Buddhist
texts, to express a man's

<span class="small">{1. See Senart, 'Inscriptions de Piyadasi,' I, 186,
and the other authorities referred to at I, 182 and II, 223.}</span>

<span id="p. 192">{p. 192}</span>

becoming an upâsaka or a bhikkhu. For though the word 'conversion' is
used in English in two senses--either that of joining the outward
organisation of a new faith, or that of having one's eyes opened to the
higher life--the second is the more accurate use of the word, and ought
always to be implied in the first.

   The word sambodhi-parâyano occurs in the passage first above quoted
(Dîgha I, 156) in the answer to the question, 'What is the aim of the
life of the recluse (that is, of the member of the Buddhist Order)?'
Opponents and controversialists are fond of asking this question, and it
is interesting to notice how it is answered. It is never the attainment
of Buddhahood, but always (though the phraseology differs) the
attainment of Arahatship. Thus, in the standing phrase used to state
that so and so has become an Arahat (M. P. S., p. 60, at the end of
Chapter V, and often elsewhere), it is said he has realised the aim of
the higher life (brahma*k*ariya-pariyosâna*m*). The Ratha-vinîta and the
Kulla Sakuludâyi Dialogues (Nos. 24 and 79 of the Ma*ggh*ima Collection)
lead up to the same conclusion. In the Sa*m*yutta IV, 51, the aim is
said to be the complete understanding of sorrow (dukkhassa pari*ññ*â),
and the same reply is expanded further on in the same book (IV, 233) by
the explanation that the way of gaining this understanding is to follow
out the whole of the Eightfold Path to Arahatship. And this is repeated
further on (S. V, 6: compare Mil. 49, 101). In the A<u>n</u>guttara (IV,
7) the object is said to be the destruction of the seven bonds, the
destruction of which is precisely Arahatship.

   So sambodhi-patto is used in the Sutta Nipâta, 478, 503, to describe
the Arahat, of whom it is said (Itivuttaka, No. 47, p. 42: compare ibid.
p. 117 = A. II, 14, and also A. II, 200, 202; S. N. 765) that even here,
in this world, he will reach up to the sambodhi, the way to which is
said to be the Eightfold Path (M. I, 431 and the
Dhamma-*k*akka-ppavattana Sutta, &c.). And sambodhi-parâyano, with which
we started, is only another way of stating what is expressed by
amata-parâyano ('having the ambrosia of Arahatship as his aim') in a
Sutta, not yet traced, but quoted by Moggallîputta Tissa at Kathâ Vatthu
XXII, 7{1}. Of course the above is not intended to imply that the Buddha
had not attained the sambodhi. He was an Arahat, and, as such, had all
the graces an Arahat should have{2}.

{1. Compare brahma-parâyano at Mil. 234, brahma*k*ariya-parâyano at A.
III, 75, and da*nd*a-parâyano at M. I, 88.

2\. Childers thinks sambodho is merely another form of sambodhi. As the
former is only found as yet in one ambiguous phrase (M. I, 17; II, 211;
S. IV, 6, 8, 97, 233, &c.), the discussion of its meaning would be
premature.}

<span id="p. 193">{p. 193}</span>

   On the same page of this Sutta we have two instances of a curious
manner of address not infrequent in the Pi*t*akas, but as yet very
imperfectly understood. After being told that Nâgita was the name of the
Buddha's personal attendant, we find him suddenly, and without any
explanation, addressed as Kassapa. And the young Li*kkh*avi, introduced
to us at the beginning of the Sutta by the name 'Hare-lip'
(O*tth*addha), is addressed both by Nâgita and by the Buddha, neither by
his name O*tth*addha, nor as Li*kkh*avi, but (and again without any
explanation) as Mahâli.

   There are several points in this question of address which cannot yet
be solved, but several others are already pretty clear. There are at
least eight different modes of speaking of or to a person:--

   1. *A nickname* arising out of some personal peculiarity. Such are
Lambaka*nn*a (Hanging-eared), Kû*t*adanta (with a protruding tooth),
O*tth*addha (Hare-lipped), Anâthapi*nd*ika (the beggars' friend),
Dârupattika (the man with the wooden bowl). All these are used in a
quite friendly, but familiar way. And such names occur so often that it
would seem as if nearly everybody was known by a nickname.

   2. *A personal name*, called in Pâli the mûla-nâma. This, like our
own so-called Christian names, is not connected with any personal
peculiarity. Some of these names (like similar ones among ourselves) are
of very obscure derivation, but others are clear enough as adjectives
with a good or lucky meaning. Such are Tissa (after the lucky star of
that name), Devadatta (our Theodore), Bhaddiya (nearly the same as our
Frederick), Nanda or Ânanda (Joy), Abhaya (Fearless), and many others.

   3. *The name of the Gotta or gens*, what we should call a surname or
family name. These are usually patronymic in form; such as Opama*ññ*a,
Ka*n*hâyana, Moggallâna, Kassapa, Ka*nd*arâyana, Konda*ññ*a, Vâse*tth*a,
Vessâyana, Bhâradvâ*g*a, Va*kkh*âyana.

   4. *The name of the clan*, called in Pâli Kula-nâma, such as Sakka,
Kâlâma, Buli, Koliya, Li*kkh*avi, Va*gg*i, Malla, &c.

   5. *The name of the mother*, with putta (son) added to it; such as
Sâri-putta (the more usual name by which the famous disciple Upatissa is
called), Vedehi-putta (a name of A*g*âtasattu king of Magadhâ,
Ma*nd*îkâ-putta (= Upaka),

<span id="p. 194">{p. 194}</span>

Mantâ*n*i-putta (= Pu*nn*a), Godhi-putta (= Devadatta), Moggali-putta (=
Tissa, author of the Kathâ Vatthu). Less frequently the reverse is the
case, and a mother or father, whose child has become famous, is simply
referred to as the mother, or father, of so and so.

   It is noteworthy that the name of the father is never used in this
way, and that the mother's name is never a personal name; but always
taken either from the clan, or from the family, to which she belonged.
Occasionally the root-form of the name of the clan, or of the trade, has
-putto added to it in a similar way (Vanganta-putto, Todeyya-putto{1},
rathakâra-putto). But these cases, which are rare, should rather be
classified under the next division.

   6. *The name of the position in society*, or the occupation, of the
person addressed. Such are brâhma*n*a, gahapati, mahârâ*g*a, thapati,
&c.

   7. A mere *general term of courtesy or respect*, not containing any
special application to the person addressed--such as bhante, âvuso,
ayye, &c.

   8. Lastly there is the *local name*, never used in addressing a
person, but prefixed or added to the mûla or gotta name, in narrative
sentences, to distinguish between two or more people of the same name.
Thus of the eighteen different Kassapas mentioned in the books, three
are distinguished, in narrative, as Uruvela- Nadi- and Gaya-Kassapa
respectively; of the eight different *K*ittas one is distinguished as
Ma*kkh*i-kâsandika; of the seventeen different Bhâradvâ*g*as one is
distinguished as Kâpa*th*ika. Other instances are probably Hatthako
Â*l*avako, Bâhiyo Dâru*k*îriyo, Pokkharasâdi Subhagavaniko, &c.

   On the rules regulating the choice as to which one of these various
sorts of names should, under the circumstances, be used in any
particular case, the following observations may be made.

   It is not considered courteous among equals, except in the case of
close familiarity, to use either of the two sorts of personal names,
that is, either the nickname or the mûla-nâma.

   The Buddha addresses Brahmans as Brâhma*n*a (for instance
So*n*ada*nd*a and Kû*t*adanta above in the Suttas so called;
*G*â*n*usso*n*i at M. I, 16, 178; A. I, 56, 159, 166; II, 173; IV, 54;
Sa*ñg*aya at M. II, 127, 132, though his gotta name is

<span class="small">{1. Todeyya-putto may be rendered either 'son of the
man of Tudi' or 'of the sons of the dwellers in Tudi' (a well-known
village), or lastly 'of the Todeyya clan,' 'the Todeyyan.'}</span>

<span id="p. 195">{p. 195}</span>

given, Âkâsa-gotta; Sikha at A. II, 232, though his gotta name is given,
Moggallâna). But we have had one instance above where he addresses a
young Brahman as Amba*tth*a, apparently a clan name (his gotta was
Ka*n*hâya*n*a). This solitary exception may be because of his youth.

   On the other hand the Buddha usually addresses ascetics not as
paribbâ*g*aka, but by their gotta name. Thus at M. I, 228-250 he calls
Sa*kk*ako, the Niga*nth*a, by his gotta name Aggi-vessâyana. At M. I,
497-500 he calls Dîgha-nakho (so called, no doubt, because he kept his
nails long) by his gotta name, which is again Aggi-vessâyana. And at M.
II, 40 he calls Vekha*n*aso by his gotta name of Ka*kk*âna. This is only
in accord with the usage followed by others besides the Buddha. Thus
*G*â*n*usso*n*i, a Brahman, at M. I, 175, addresses the ascetic Pilotika
by his gotta name of Va*kkh*âyana, and Assa*g*i, a member of the
Buddhist order, also calls Sa*kk*ako by his gotta name (*loc. cit.*),
and everybody, not a Buddhist, addresses the Buddha by his gotta name,
as Gotama. When therefore we find other ascetics addressed by the Buddha
by the same name as has been used in the introductory narrative (as, for
instance. in the case of Sarabha, A. I, 186; Potaliya, A. II, 100;
Po*tth*apâda, D. I, 178 foll.), one may conclude that these also are
probably gotta names. This custom of addressing people by their gotta
name, no doubt a common one in certain cases, was expressly forbidden to
Niga*nth*as (Jacobi, '*G*aina-Sûtras,' II, 305). They called their own
Order a gotra (ibid. 321, 327), and apparently thought it worldly to
recognise the existence of any other.

   The Buddha addresses members of his own clan, whether members of his
Order or not, by their personal names (so of Vappa, A. II, 197; of
Mahânâma, M. I, 91, 354; A. I, 220; III, 284). The same holds good of
the junior members of the Order, but some at least of the more
distinguished among them are always addressed by him either by their
gotta, or by their mother's, name (compare Moggallâna, Ka*kk*âna,
Kassapa, Gotamî, Sâriputta). Nâgita, for instance, though he is
addressed as Kassapa by his nephew, the novice Sîha, is addressed by the
Buddha simply as Nâgita.

   Probably every Brahman, and every member of each of the free clans,
had a gotta name. We have no certain instance of such a name in any
other case. The gotta names used in the clans are the same as those
given in Brahman books to Brahmans. It has been concluded that they are
Brahman names, and that the clans must have adopted them from the
Brahmans, each family or gens taking the gotta name of

<span id="p. 196">{p. 196}</span>

their private chaplain, their purohita priest. But in that case we
should surely expect to find some evidence that such priests were
usually maintained in such clans. There is no evidence of the kind. All
that we can fairly conclude is that the clans claimed, by the very use
of these names, to be descended from the same ancestors as the Brahmans,
who also bore the names; and that the claim was admitted to be well
founded. As shown above, even Brahmans use these gotta names of
non-Brahmans. It would seem that the nickname, when once generally
known, tended, in *speaking of* a person, to drive the others out of
use. But it is never used in *speaking to* the person referred to by it.

   From the usage referred to, as followed by the Buddha and others, it
would seem that the gotta name was considered as more honourable than
either of the personal names, and also than the descriptive general name
or title of paribbâgaka (wandering mendicant, recluse). Even the title
Brâhma*n*a was dropped for the gotta name in the case of a recluse.

   There are a number of problems, both as to general principles and as
to details, that still remain, in this matter of names, unsolved. Is
Â*l*âra, for instance, a nickname or a mûla-nâma; is Kâlâmo a gotta name
or a clan name{1}? To what classes of the people was the use of gotta
names limited, and what is the historical explanation of this
limitation? Were there as many as a dozen clan names in Magadhâ and
Kosala combined? What was exactly implied by the clan-name, the
Kula-nâma? The word gotta probably had the same meaning, when the
Pi*t*akas were composed, as gotra has in the later law books written by
the priests. How comes it then that the number of gottas referred to is
so very small? Are there much more than a score altogether? What light
does the meaning of the mûla and gotta names throw on the religious
conceptions and social customs of the people?

   I hope to return to these and similar questicns when I can find time
to publish my Pâli *Onomasticon*, of the names in the Pi*t*akas and in
the older inscriptions. What has here been said is probably sufficient
to make the use of the names in this Sutta clear{2}.

{1. See my note at 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 75, and compare *contra* A. I,
188, 278.

2\. Eva*m*-nâmo eva*m*-gotto at M. II, 33; S. III, 25; D. I, 242 is
followed at D. I, 13 by eva*m*-va*nn*o; but evidence of any effect of
social distinctions on names is at present very slight.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: VI. Mahâli Sutta](dob-06tx)
