<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-09in) [Next](dob-10in)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 244">{p. 244}</span>

## IX. PO*TTH*APÂDA SUTTA.

### \[THE SOUL THEORY.\]

   <span id="text p. 178">\[178\]</span> 1. Thus have I heard. The
Exalted One was once staying at Sâvatthi in Anâtha Pi*nd*ika's
pleasaunce in the *G*eta Wood. Now at that time Po*tth*apâda{1}, the
wandering mendicant, was dwelling at the hall put up in Queen Mallikâ's
park for the discussion of systems of opinion--the hall set round with a
row of Tinduka trees, and known by the name of 'The Hall{2}.' And there
was with him a great following of mendicants; to wit, three hundred
mendicants.

   2{3}. Now the Exalted One, who had put on his under garment in the
early morning, proceeded in his robes, and with his bowl in his hand,
into Sâvatthi for alms.

{1. This, for the reasons given above at [p.
195](dob-06in.htm#p.%20195), is probably a gotta name; and, as such, a
patronymic from the personal name, also Po*tth*apâda, meaning 'born
under Po*tth*apâda (the old name for the 25th lunar asterism, afterwards
called Bhadrapadâ). Buddhaghosa says that as a layman he had been a
wealthy man of the Brahman Va*nn*a. If so, it is noteworthy that he
addresses the Buddha, not as Gotama, but as bhante.

2\. The very fact of the erection of such a place is another proof of
the freedom of thought prevalent in the Eastern valley of the Ganges in
the sixth century B.C. Buddhaghosa tells us that after 'The Hall' had
been established, others near it had been built in honour of various
famous teachers; but the group of buildings continued to be known as
'The Hall.' There Brahmans, Niga*nth*as, A*k*elas, Paribbâ*g*akas, and
other teachers met and expounded, or discussed, their views.

It is mentioned elsewhere. See M. II, 22; Sum. I, 32.

Mallikâ was one of the queens of Pasenadi, king of Kosala. See Gat. III,
405; IV, 437.

3\. §§ 2-6 recur, nearly, at M. I, 513; II, 1, 2; S. IV, 398.}

<span id="p. 245">{p. 245}</span>

And he thought: 'It is too early now to enter Sâvatthi for alms. Let me
go to the Hall, the debating hall in the Mallikâ Park, where
Po*tth*apâda is.' And he did so.

   3. Now at that time Po*tth*apâda was seated with the company of the
mendicants all talking with loud voices, with shouts and tumult, all
sorts of worldly talk: to wit, tales of kings, of robbers, of ministers
of state; tales of war, of terrors, of battles; talks about foods and
drinks, about clothes and beds and garlands and perfumes; talks about
relationships; talks about equipages, villages, towns, cities, and
countries; tales about women and heroes; gossip such as that at street
corners, and places whence water is fetched; ghost stories; desultory
chatter; legends about the creation of the land or sea; and speculations
about existence and non-existence{1}.

   <span id="text p. 179">\[179\]</span> 4. And Po*tth*apâda, the
mendicant, caught sight of the Exalted One approaching in the distance.
And at the sight of him he called the assembly to order, saying: 'Be
still, venerable Sirs, and make no noise. Here is the Sama*n*a Gotama
coming. Now that venerable one delights in quiet, and speaks in praise
of quietude. How well it were if, seeing how quiet the assembly is, he
should see fit to join us!' And when he spake thus, the mendicants kept
silence.

   5. Now the Exalted One came on to where Po*tth*apâda, the mendicant
was. And the latter said to him:

   'May the Exalted One come near. We bid him welcome. It is long since
the Exalted One took the departure{2} of coming our way. Let him take a
seat. Here is a place spread ready.'

   And the Exalted One sat down. And Po*tth*apâda, the mendicant,
brought a low stool, and sat down beside him. And to him thus seated the
Exalted One said:

{1. For notes on this list, see above, p. 14 {[p.
13](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2013)}, § 17.

2\. Idhâgamanâya pariyâya*m* akâsi. So M. I, 252, 326, 481, 514, &c.
Perhaps 'since you made this change in your regular habits.'}

<span id="p. 246">{p. 246}</span>

   'What was the subject, Po*tth*apâda, that you were seated here
together to discuss; and what was the talk among you that has been
interrupted?'

   6. And when he had thus spoken, Po*tth*apâda said:

   'Never mind, Sir, the subject we were seated together to discuss.
There will be no difficulty in the Exalted One hearing afterwards about
that. But long ago, Sir, on several occasions, when various teachers,
Sama*n*as and Brahmans, had met together, and were seated in the
debating hall, the talk fell on trance{1}, and the question was: <span
id="text p. 180">\[180\]</span> "How then, Sirs, is the cessation of
consciousness brought about?"

   'Now on that some said thus: "Ideas come to a man without a reason
and without a cause, and so also do they pass away. At the time when
they spring up within him, then he becomes conscious; when they pass
away, then he becomes unconscious." Thus did they explain the cessation
of consciousness.

   'On that another said: "That, Sirs, will never be so as you say.
Consciousness, Sirs, is a man's soul. It is the soul that comes and
goes. When the soul comes into a man then he becomes conscious, when the
soul goes away out of a man then he becomes unconscious." Thus do others
explain the cessation of consciousness{2}.

   'On that another said: "That, Sirs, will never be as you say. But
there are certain Sama*n*as and Brahmans of great power and influence.
It is they who infuse consciousness into a man, and draw it away out of
him. When they infuse it into him he becomes conscious, when they draw
it away he becomes unconscious." Thus do others explain the cessation of
consciousness{3}.

{1. Abhisa*ññ*â-nirodho, 'the cessation of consciousness.'

2\. Buddhaghosa explains that they came to this conclusion on the ground
of such instances as that of the Rishi Migasingî, who, through love of
the celestial nymph Alambusâ, fell into a trance that lasted for three
years. This must be a different tale from that of the Rishi Isisinga of
*G*âtaka No. 523, whom Alambusâ tries in vain to seduce. Compare Vimâna
Vatthu XVIII, 11; L, 26.

3\. Buddhaghosa explains that the ground for this view is the way in
which sorcerers work charms (Athabbanikâ athabbana*m*
payo*g*enti-perhaps 'Atharva priests work out an Atharva charm') which
make a man appear as dead as if his head had been cut off; and then
bring him back to his natural condition.}

<span id="p. 247">{p. 247}</span>

   'Then, Sir, the memory of the Exalted One arose in me, and I thought:
"Would that the Exalted One, would that the Happy One were here, he who
is so skilled in these psychical states." For the Exalted One would know
how trance is brought about{1}.' How, then, Sir, is there cessation of
consciousness?'

   7. 'Well, as to that, Po*tth*apâda, those Sama*n*as and Brahmans who
said that ideas come to a man and pass away without a reason, and
without a cause, are wrong from the very commencement. For it is
precisely through a reason, by means of a cause, that ideas come and go.
<span id="text p. 181">\[181\]</span> By training some ideas arise. By
training others pass away.

   'And what is that training?' continued the Exalted One.

   \[*He then sets out the first part of the system of self-training for
the* Bhikkhu, *as translated above,* [pp. 78-84](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2078),
*from the* Sâma*ññ*a-phala, as follows:--

   1. *The introductory paragraphs on the appearance of a* Buddha, *his
preaching, the conviction of a hearer and his renunciation of the
world.*

   2. *The tract on the* Sîlas, *the minor details of mere morality.*

   3. *The paragraphs on Confidence.*

   4. *The paragraphs on 'Guarded is the door of his senses.'*

   5. *The paragraphs on 'Mindful and Self-possessed.'*

   6. *The paragraphs on Solitude.*

   7. *The paragraphs on the conquest of the Five Hindrances.*

   And goes on:\]

   <span id="text p. 182">\[182\]</span> 10. 'But when he has realised
that these Five Hindrances have been put away from within him, a
gladness springs up within him, and joy arises to him thus gladdened,
and so rejoicing all his frame

<span class="small">{1. Sa*ññ*â-nirodhassa pakata*ññ*û. So Buddhaghosa.
Compare Vin. II, 199.}</span>

<span id="p. 248">{p. 248}</span>

becomes at ease, and being thus at ease he is filled with a sense of
peace, and in that peace his heart is stayed. Then estranged from lusts,
aloof from evil dispositions, he enters into and remains in the First
Rapture (the First *Gh*âna)--a state of joy and ease born of detachment,
reasoning and investigation going on the while. Then that idea, (that
consciousness){1}, of lusts, that he had before, passes away. And
thereupon there arises within him a subtle, but actual, consciousness of
the joy and peace arising from detachment, and he becomes a person to
whom that idea is consciously present.

   'Thus is it that through training one idea, one sort of
consciousness, arises; and through training another passes away. This is
the training I spoke of,' said the Exalted One.

   11. 'And again, Po*tth*apâda, the Bhikkhu, suppressing all reasoning
and investigation, enters into and abides in the Second Rapture (the
Second *Gh*âna)--a state of joy and ease, born of the serenity of
concentration, when no reasoning or investigation goes on, a state of
elevation of mind, a tranquillisation of the heart within. Then that
subtle, but actual, consciousness of the joy and peace arising from
detachment, that he just had, passes away. And thereupon there arises a
subtle, but actual, consciousness of the joy and peace born of
concentration. And he becomes a person conscious of that.

   <span id="text p. 183">\[183\]</span> 'Thus also is it that through
training one idea, one sort of consciousness, arises; and through
training another passes away. This is the training I spoke of,' said the
Exalted One.

   12. 'And again, Po*tth*apâda, the Bhikkhu, holding aloof from joy,
becomes equable; and, mindful and self-possessed, he experiences in his
body that ease which the Arahats talk of when they say: "The man serene
and self-possessed is well at ease." And so he enters

<span class="small">{1. Sa*ññ*â which is used in a sense covering both
'idea' and' consciousness.' Ekâ sa*ññ*â is therefore rendered below, in
the refrain, 'one idea, one sort of consciousness.'}</span>

<span id="p. 249">{p. 249}</span>

into and abides in the Third Rapture (the Third *Gh*âna). Then that
subtle, but yet actual, consciousness, that he just had, of the joy and
peace born of concentration, passes away. And thereupon there arises a
subtle, but yet actual, consciousness of the bliss of equanimity. And he
becomes a person conscious of that.

   'Thus also is it that through training one idea, one sort of
consciousness, arises; and through training another passes away. This is
the training I spoke of,' said the Exalted One.

   13. 'And again, Po*tth*apâda, the Bhikkhu, by the putting away alike
of ease and of pain, by the passing away of any joy, any elation, he had
previously felt, enters into and abides in the Fourth Rapture (the
Fourth *Gh*âna)--a state of pure self-possession and equanimity, without
pain and without ease. Then that subtle, but yet actual, consciousness,
that he just had, of the bliss of equanimity, passes away. And thereupon
there arises to him a subtle, but yet actual, consciousness of the
absence of pain, and of the absence of ease{1}. And he becomes a person
conscious of that.

   'Thus also is it that through training one idea, one sort of
consciousness, arises; and through training another passes away. This is
the training I spoke of,' said the Exalted One.

   14. 'And again, Po*tth*apâda, the Bhikkhu, by passing beyond the
consciousness of form, by putting an end to the sense of resistance, by
paying no heed to the idea of distinction, thinking: "The space is
infinite," reaches up to and remains in the mental state in which

<span class="small">{1. Sukha and dukkha. Well-fare and ill-fare,
well-being and ill-being, ease and dis-ease, uneasiness, discomfort.
'Pain' is both too strong a word, and has too frequently an exclusively
physical sense, to be a good rendering of dukkha. It is unfortunate that
dis-ease has acquired a special connotation which prevents the word
being used here; and that we have no pair of correlative words
corresponding to those in the Pâli. For pain we have vedanâ often (M. I,
10; M. P. S., chapters 2 and 4; Mil. 134), and sometimes dukkha-vedanâ
(Mil. 112).}</span>

<span id="p. 250">{p. 250}</span>

the mind is concerned only with the consciousness of the infinity of
space. Then the consciousness, that he previously had, of form passes
away, and there arises in him the blissful consciousness, subtle but yet
actual, of his being concerned only with the infinity of space. And he
becomes a person conscious of that.

   'Thus also is it that through training one idea, one sort of
consciousness, arises; and through training another passes away. This is
the training I spoke of,' said the Exalted One.

   <span id="text p. 184">\[184\]</span> 15. 'And again, Po*tth*apâda,
the Bhikkhu, by passing quite beyond the consciousness of space as
infinite, thinking: "Cognition{1} is infinite," reaches up to and
remains in the mental state in which the mind is concerned only with the
infinity of cognition. Then the subtle, but yet actual, consciousness,
that he just had, of the infinity of space, passes away. And there
arises in him a consciousness, subtle but yet actual, of everything
being within the sphere of the infinity of cognition. And he becomes a
person conscious of that.

   'Thus also is it that through training one idea, one sort of
consciousness, arises; and through training another passes away. This is
the training I spoke of,' said the Exalted One.

   16. 'And again, Po*tth*apâda, the Bhikkhu, by passing quite beyond
the consciousness of the infinity of cognition, thinking: "There is
nothing that really is," reaches up to and remains in the mental state
in which the mind is concerned only with the unreality of things. Then
that sense of everything being within the sphere of infinite cognition,
that he just had, passes away. And there arises in him a consciousness,
subtle but yet actual, of unreality as the object of his thought{2}. And
he becomes a person conscious of that.

{1. Vi*ññ*âna; the exact translation of this word is still uncertain.
Perhaps 'mind' is meant.

2\. On these last three sections, which set out the fourth, fifth, and
sixth stages of Deliverance (the Vimokkhas), see my former translation
at p. 52 of my 'Buddhist Suttas' (S. B. E.) and the notes on [pp. 50,
51](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2050). These stages are almost exactly the same as
the views controverted above at [pp. 47, 48](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2047). And
the doctrine of the sixth Vimokkha, as we see from M. I, 164, formed
part of the teaching of Gotama's teacher, Â*l*âra Kâlâma.}

<span id="p. 251">{p. 251}</span>

   'Thus also is it that through training one idea, one sort of
consciousness, arises; and through training another passes away. This is
the training I spoke of,' said the Exalted One.

   17. 'So from the time, Po*tth*apâda, that the Bhikkhu is thus
conscious in a way brought about by himself (from the time of the First
Rapture), he goes on from one stage to the next, and from that to the
next until he reaches the summit of consciousness. And then he is on the
summit it may occur to him: "To be thinking at all is the inferior
state. 'Twere better not to be thinking. Were I to go on thinking and
fancying{1}, these ideas, these states of consciousness, I have reached
to, would pass away, but others, coarser ones, might arise. So I will
neither think nor fancy any more." And he does not. And to him neither
thinking any more, nor fancying, the ideas, the states of consciousness,
he had, pass away; and no others, coarser than they, arise. So he
touches cessation. Thus is it, Po*tth*apâda, that the attainment of the
cessation of conscious ideas takes place step by step.

   18. 'Now what do you think, Po*tth*apâda? Have you ever heard, before
this, of this gradual attainment of the cessation of conscious ideas?'

   'No, Sir, I have not. But I now understand what you say as follows:
\[and he repeated the words of section 17.\]'

   'That is right, Po*tth*apâda{2}.'

   <span id="text p. 185">\[185\]</span> 19. 'And does the Exalted One
teach that there is one summit of consciousness, or that there are
several?'

{1. Abhisa*m*khareyya*m*, perhaps 'perfecting' or 'planning out.'

2\. The foregoing discussion on trance is the earliest one on that
subject in Indian literature. Trance is not mentioned in the
pre-Buddhistic Upanishads.}

<span id="p. 252">{p. 252}</span>

   'In my opinion, Po*tth*apâda, there is one, and there are also
several.'

   'But how can the Exalted teach that there both is one, and that there
are also several?'

   'As he attains to the cessation (of one idea, one state of
consciousness) after another, so does he reach, one after another, to
different summits up to the last. So is it, Po*tth*apâda, that I put
forward both one summit and several.'

   20. 'Now is it, Sir, the idea, the state of consciousness, that
arises first, and then knowledge; or does knowledge arise first, and
then the idea, the state of consciousness; or do both arise
simultaneously, neither of them before or after the other?'

   'It is the idea, Po*tth*apâda, the state of consciousness, that
arises first, and after that knowledge. And the springing up of
knowledge is dependent on the springing up of the idea, of the state of
consciousness{1}. And this may be understood from the fact that a man
recognises: "It is from this cause or that that knowledge has arisen to
me."'

   21. 'Is then, Sir, the consciousness identical with a man's soul, or
is consciousness one thing, and the soul another{2}?'

   'But what then, Po*tth*apâda? Do you really fall back on the soul?'

   <span id="text p. 186">\[186\]</span> 'I take for granted{3}, Sir, a
material soul, having

{1. *Ñ*â*n*a depends on sa*ññ*â; that is, I take it, that the mass of
knowledge a man has, his insight, his power of judgment, depends on the
ideas, the states of consciousness (here, in this connection, those that
arise in the *Gh*ânas, &c.) that are themselves due to the action on his
sense organs of the outside world; but are in so far under his own
control that he can shut out some, and give play to others.

2\. Buddhaghosa says that as a village pig, even if you bathe it in
scented water, and anoint it with perfumes, and deck it with garlands,
and lay it to rest on the best bed, will not feel happy there, but will
go straight back to the dung-heap to take its ease; so Po*tth*apâda,
having tasted the sweet taste of the doctrine of the Three Signs (of the
impermanence, the pain, and the absence of any abiding principle) found
in everythiug, harks back to the superstition of the 'soul.'

3\. Pa*kk*emi. This is another of the words the exact sense of which, in
Pi*t*aka times, is still doubtful. It means primarily 'to goback
towards, to revert,' and is so used in the Pi*t*akas. So in G. V, 196
and in S N. 662 (quoted as verse 125 in the Dhammapada, and recurring
also G. III, 203; S. I, 13, 164). But somewhat in the same way as to go
back home is to go to a place of security; so in a secondary sense, of
opinions or reasons. it means apparently to revert to them, fall back on
them, harp on them, with the connotation of regarding them as certain.
At S. N. 803 it can be taken either way. At S. N. 788, 803, 840 = 908;
M. I, 309, 445, and in the question and answer here, the latter seems to
be the sense.}

<span id="p. 253">{p. 253}</span>

form, built up of the four elements, nourished by solid food{1}.'

   'And if there were such a soul, Po*tth*apâda, then, even so, your
consciousness would be one thing, and your soul another. That,
Po*tth*apâda, you may know by the following considerations. Granting,
Po*tth*apâda, a material soul, having form, built up of the four
elements, nourished by solid food; still some ideas, some states of
consciousness, would arise to the man, and others would pass away. On
this account also, Po*tth*apâda, you can see how consciousness must be
one thing. and soul another.'

   22. 'Then, Sir, I fall back on a soul made of mind, with all its
major and minor parts complete, not deficient in any organ{2}.'

   'And granting, Po*tth*apâda, you had such a soul, the same argument
would apply{3}.'

   <span id="text p. 187">\[187\]</span> 23. 'Then, Sir, I fall back on
a soul without form, and made of consciousness.'

   'And granting, Po*tth*apâda, you had such a soul, still the same
argument would apply{3}.'

{1. Buddhaghosa says this was not his real opinion. He held to that set
out below in § 23. But he advances this, more elementary, proposition,
just to see how the Buddha would meet it. It is nearly the same as the
first of the seven propositions about the soul controverted in the
Brahma-*g*âla (above, [pp. 46-48](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2046)).

2\. This sort of soul is nearly the same as the one referred to above,
in the Brahma-*g*âla (§ 12, [p. 47](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2047)); and in the
Sama*ññ*â-phala (§ 85, [p. 87](dob-02tx.htm#p.%2087)). It is a soul the
exact copy, in every respect, of the body, and material, but so subtle
that it can be described as 'made of mind.'

3\. The text repeats the answer given in § 21. with the necessary
alterations. The supposition in § 23 is quoted at Asl. 360. The argument
is of course that, even if Po*tth*apâda had any one of these three sorts
of soul, then he would regard each of them, in the given case, as a
permanent entity. But the consciousness is not an entity. It is a
'becoming' only; subject, as he must (and would) admit, to constant
change. On his own showing then, it is not 'soul.'}

<span id="p. 254">{p. 254}</span>

   24. 'But is it possible, Sir, for me to understand whether
consciousness is the man's soul, or the one is different from the
other?'

   'Hard is it for you, Po*tth*apâda, holding, as you do, different
views, other things approving themselves to you, setting different aims
before yourself, striving after a different perfection, trained in a
different system of doctrine, to grasp this matter!'

   25-27. 'Then, Sir, if that be so, tell me at least: "Is the world
eternal? Is this alone the truth, and any other view mere folly?"'

   'That, Po*tth*apâda, is a matter on which I have expressed no
opinion.'

   \[Then, in the same terms, Po*tth*apâda asked each of the following
questions;--

   2. Is the world not eternal?--

   3. Is the world finite?--

   4. Is the world infinite?--

   <span id="text p. 188">\[188\]</span> 5. Is the soul the same as the
body?--

   6. Is the soul one thing, and the body another?--

   7. Does one who has gained the truth live again after death?--

   8. Does he not live again after death?--

   9. Does he both live again, and not live again, after death?--

   10. Does he neither live again, nor not live again, after death?--

   And to each question the Exalted One made the same reply:--\]{1}

   'That too, Po*tth*apâda, is a matter on which I have expressed no
opinion.'

   28. 'But why has the Exalted One expressed no opinion on that?'

   'This question is not calculated to profit, it is not

<span class="small">{1. On these Ten Indeterminates see above, in the
[Introduction to the Mahâli Sutta](dob-06in).}</span>

<span id="p. 255">{p. 255}</span>

concerned with the Norm (the Dhamma), it does not redound even to the
elements of right conduct, nor to detachment, nor to purification from
lusts, nor to quietude, nor to tranquillisation of heart, nor to real
knowledge, nor to the insight (of the higher stages of the Path), nor to
Nirvâ*n*a. Therefore is it that I express no opinion upon it.'

   <span id="text p. 189">\[189\]</span> 29. 'Then what is it that the
Exalted One has determined?'

   'I have expounded, Po*tth*apâda, what pain{1} is; I have expounded
what is the origin of pain; I have expounded what is the cessation of
pain; I have expounded what is the method by which one may reach the
cessation of pain{2}.'

   30. 'And why has the Exalted One put forth a statement as to that?'

   'Because that question, Po*tth*apâda, is calculated to profit, is
concerned with the Norm, redounds to the beginnings of right conduct, to
detachment, to purification from lusts, to quietude, to tranquillisation
of heart, to real knowledge, to the insight of the higher stages of the
Path, and to Nirvâ*n*a. Therefore is it, Po*tth*apâda, that I have put
forward a statement as to that.'

   'That is so, O Exalted One. That is so, O Happy One. And now let the
Exalted One do what seemeth to him fit.'

   And the Exalted One rose from his seat, and departed thence.

   31. Now no sooner had the Exalted One gone away than those mendicants
bore down upon Po*tth*apâda, the mendicant, from all sides with a
torrent of jeering and biting words{3}, saying: I Just so, forsooth,
this Po*tth*apâda gives vent to approval of whatsoever the Sama*n*a

{1. Dukkha. See the note above on § 13.

2\. These are the Four Truths, set out more fully in my 'Buddhist
Suttas' (S. B. E.), pp. 148-150.

3\. Vâkaya sannitodakena sa*ñg*ambhari*m* aka*m*su. So also at S. II,
282 and A. I, 187. Probably from the roots tud and *g*ambh.}

<span id="p. 256">{p. 256}</span>

Gotama says, with his: "That is so, O Exalted One. That is so, O Happy
One." Now we, on the other hand, fail to see that the Sama*n*a Gotama
has put forward any doctrine that is distinct with regard to any one of
the ten points raised.' And they went through them all in detail.

   <span id="text p. 190">\[190\]</span> But when they spake thus
Po*tth*apâda, the mendicant, replied: 'Neither do I see that he puts
forward, as certain, any proposition with respect to those points. But
the Sama*n*a Gotama propounds a method in accordance with the nature of
things, true and fit, based on the Norm, and certain by reason of the
Norm. And how could I refuse to approve, as well said, what has been so
well said by the Sama*n*a Gotama as he propounded that?'

   32. Now after the lapse of two or three days *K*itta, the son of the
elephant trainer{1}, and Po*tth*apâda, the mendicant, came to the place
where the Exalted One was staying. And on their arrival *K*itta, the son
of the elephant trainer, bowed low to the Exalted One, and took his seat
on one side. And Po*tth*apâda, the mendicant, exchanged with the Exalted
One the greetings and compliments of courtesy and friendship, and took
his seat on one side, and when he was so seated he told the Exalted One
how the mendicants had jeered at him, and how he had replied.

   <span id="text p. 191">\[191\]</span> 33. 'All those mendicants,
Po*tth*apâda, are blind, and see not. You are the only one, with eyes to
see, among them. Some things, Po*tth*apâda, I have laid down as certain,
other things I have declared uncertain.

<span class="small">{1. There are seven or eight *K*ittas in the books,
one of whom, a layman, was placed by the Buddha at the head of the
expounders of the Norm. The *K*itta of our passage was famous for the
fact that he joined the Buddha's Order, and then, on one pretext or
another, left it again, no less than seven times. (The same thing is
related by I-Tsing of Bhart*ri*hari.) He prided himself on his keenness
in distinguishing subtle differences in the meanings of words. And his
last revolt was owing to a discussion of that sort he had had with Mahâ
Ko*tth*ita. He took refuge with his friend Po*tth*apâda, who, says
Buddhaghosa, brought him along with him, on this occasion, with the
express purpose of bringing about a reconciliation.}</span>

<span id="p. 257">{p. 257}</span>

The latter are those ten questions that you raised, and for the reasons
given I hold them matters of uncertainty. The former are the Four Truths
I expounded, and for the reasons given I hold them to be matters of
certainty.

   <span id="text p. 192">\[192\]</span> 34. 'There are some Sama*n*as
and Brahmans, Po*tth*apâda, who hold the following opinion, indulge in
the following speculation: "The soul is perfectly happy and healthy
after death." And I went to them, and asked them whether that was their
view or not. And they acknowledged that it was{1}. And I asked them
whether, so far as they were in the habit of knowing or perceiving
it{2}, the world (that is, the people in the world) was perfectly happy,
and they answered: "No."

   'Then I asked them: "Or further, Sirs, can you maintain that you
yourselves for a whole night, or for a whole day, or even for half a
night or day, have ever been perfectly happy?" And they answered: "No."

   'Then I said to them: "Or further, Sirs, do you know a way, or a
method, by which you can realise a state that is altogether happy?" And
still to that question they answered: "No."

   'And then I said: "Or have you, Sirs, ever heard the voices of gods
who had realised rebirth in a perfectly happy world, saying: 'Be
earnest, O men, and direct in effort, towards the realisation of
(rebirth in) a world of perfect happiness. For we, in consequence of
similar effort, have been reborn in such a world.'" And still they
answered: "No."

   'Now what think you as to that, Po*tth*apâda? That being so, does not
the talk of those Sama*n*as and Brahmans turn out to be without good
ground{3}?'

{1. Compare above, [pp. 44-47](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2044).

2\. Buddhaghosa takes *g*ana*m* passa*m* as plurals.

3\. Appâ*t*ihîrakata*m*. Buddhaghosa explains this as 'witless'
(patibhâna-virabita*m*). It is the contrary of sappâ*t*i hîrakata*m*
which he explains (on § 45 below) by sappa*t*ivihara*n*a*m*. Perhaps the
meaning of the two words is 'apposite' and 'not apposite' (compare B. R.
on pratihara*n*a).

There is a closely-allied expression at M. P. S., pp. 26, 32, where the
talk is of disciples who, when a discussion on a wrong opinion has
arisen, know how to refute it according to the doctrine (Dharma), and to
preach, on the other hand, a doctrine that is sappâ*t*ihâriya*m*; that
is, a doctrine which, in contra-distinction to the heresy advanced, is
the apposite explanation from the Buddhist point of view. The Pâli word
for miracle comes from the same root (prati-har); but to render here
'unmiraculous' would make nonsense of the passage, and both my own and
Windisch's rendering of the word in the M. P. S. ('Buddhist Suttas,' p.
43; 'Mâra und Buddha,' p. 71) must be also modified accordingly.

On the form compare anuhîramâne, quoted at Sum. I, 61 from the
Mahâ-padhâna Suttanta (No. 14 in the Digha).}

<span id="p. 258">{p. 258}</span>

   <span id="text p. 193">\[193\]</span> 351. 'Just as if a man should
say: "How I long for, how I love the most beautiful woman in the land!"

   'And people should ask him: "Well! good friend! this most beautiful
woman in the land, whom you so love and long for, do you know whether
that beautiful woman is a noble lady, or of priestly rank, or of the
trader class, or of menial birth?"

   'And when so asked, he should answer: "No."

   'And people should ask him: "Well! good friend! This most beautiful
woman in the land, whom you so love and long for, do you know what her
name is, or her family name, or whether she be tall, or short, or of
medium height; whether she be dark or brunette or golden in colour{2};
or in what village, or town, or city she dwells?"--

   'And when so asked, he should answer: "No."

   'And people should say to him: "So then, good friend, whom you know
not, neither have seen, her do you love and long for?"

   'And when so asked, he should answer: "Yes."

   'Now what think you of that, Po*tth*apâda? Would it not turn out,
that being so, that the talk of that man was witless talk?'

{1. This simile recurs in the Tevi*gg*a Sutta (translated in my
'Buddhist Suttas,' S. B. E., XI, 175) and in the Ma*ggh*ima II, 33.

2\. Mangura-*kkh*avî. Perhaps 'of sallow complexion.' Compare M. I, 246
where all these three words for complexion are used. Mangulî itthî at V.
III, 107 = S. II, 260 is an allied form. In all these cases an unhealthy
complexion is inferred. Here it must evidently be taken in a favourable
sense.}

<span id="p. 259">{p. 259}</span>

   <span id="text p. 194">\[194\]</span> 36, 37. 'Then just so also,
Po*tth*apâda, with the Sama*n*as and Brahmans who talk about the soul
being perfectly happy and healthy after death{1}. It is just,
Po*tth*apâda, as if a man were to put up a staircase in a place where
four cross roads meet, to mount up thereby on to the upper storey of a
mansion. And people should say to him: "Well! good friend! this mansion,
to mount up into which you are making this staircase, do you know
whether it is in the East, or in the West, or in the South, or in the
North? whether it is high, or low, or of medium size?"

   'And when so asked, he should answer: "No."

   'And people should say to him: "But then, good friend, you are making
a staircase to mount up into a mansion you know not of, neither have
seen!"

   'And when so asked, he should answer: "Yes."

   'Now what think you of that, Po*tth*apâda? Would it not turn out,
that being so, that the talk of that man was witless talk?'

   'For a truth, Sir, that being so, his talk would turn out to be
witless talk.'

   38. '\[Then surely just so, Po*tth*apâda, with those Sama*n*as and
Brahmans who postulate a soul happy and healthy after death. For they
acknowledge that they know no such state in this world now. They
acknowledge that they cannot say their own souls have been happy here
even for half a day. And they acknowledge that they know no way, no
method, of ensuring such a result{2}.\] Now what think you of that,
Po*tth*apâda. That being so, does not their talk, too, turn out to be
without good ground?'

   <span id="text p. 195">\[195\]</span> 'For a truth, Sir, that being
so, their talk would turn out to be without good ground:

   39. 'The following three modes of personality, Po*tth*apâda, (are
commonly acknowledged in the world):--material, immaterial, and
formless{3}. The

{1. § 34 is here repeated in the text.

2\. § 34 repeated.

3\. O*l*âriko, manomayo, and arûpo atta-pa*t*ilâbho. Buddhaghosa here
explains atta-pa*t*ilâbho by attabhâva-pa*t*ilâbho; and on attabhâva he
says (Asl. 308) that it is used for the body, or the five Skandhas,
because the fool jumps to the conclusion: 'This is my soul.'

These three forms of personality correspond nearly to the planes, or
divisions, into which the worlds are divided in the later Buddhist
theory--(') the eleven kâmâva*k*ara worlds, from purgatory below to the
deva heavens above, both inclusive: (2) the rûpâva*k*ara worlds, which
are the sixteen worlds of the Brahma gods, and are attained to by the
practice of the Four Raptures (the Four *Gh*ânas): (3) the four
arûpava*k*ara worlds, attained to by the practice of four of the
Vimokkhas (Nos. 4-7).

It will be noticed that the lowest of these three planes includes all
the forms of existence known in the West, from hell beneath to heaven
above. And that the others are connected with the pre-Buddhistic idea of
ecstatic meditation leading to special forms of re-existence.

But it is clear from § 58 below that the opinion here put forward is
intended to represent, not any Buddhist theory, but a view commonly
entertained in the world, such as Po*tth*apâda himself would admit, and
indeed has admitted (above, §§ 21-23). In either case, of course, these
modes of existence would be, from the Buddhist point of view, purely
temporary. They are the fleeting union of qualities that make up, for a
time only, an unstable individuality.}

<span id="p. 260">{p. 260}</span>

first has form, is made up of the four elements, and is nourished by
solid food. The second has no form, is made up of mind, has all its
greater and lesser limbs complete, and all the organs perfect. The third
is without form, and is made up of consciousness only.

   40-42. 'Now I teach a doctrine, Po*tth*apâda, with respect to each of
these{1}, that leads to the putting off of that personality; so that if
you walk according to that doctrine, the evil dispositions one has
acquired may be put away{2}; the dispositions which tend to
purification{3} may increase; and one may continue to see face to face,
and by himself come to realise, the full perfection and grandeur of
wisdom.

   <span id="text p. 196">\[196\]</span> 'Now it may well be,
Po*tth*apâda, that you think: "Evil dispositions may be put away, the
dispositions

{1. The whole paragraph is repeated for each of the three modes of
personality.

2\. These sa*m*kilesikâ dhammâ are identified by Buddhaghosa, with the
twelve kâmâva*k*ara-akusala-*k*ittappâdâ of Dhamma Sa*m*ga*n*i 365-430.
But compare, *contra*, Dh. S. 1241 (where, of course, the word
apariyâpannâ must be struck out).

3\. Buddhaghosa explains these as 'tranquillity and insight.'}

<span id="p. 261">{p. 261}</span>

that tend to purification may increase, one may continue to see face to
face, and by himself come to realise, the full perfection and grandeur
of wisdom, but one may continue sad." Now that, Po*tth*apâda, would not
be accurate judgment. When such conditions are fulfilled, then there
will be joy, and happiness, and peace, and in continual mindfulness and
self-mastery, one will dwell at ease.

   <span id="text p. 197">\[197\]</span> 43-45. 'And outsiders,
Po*tth*apâda, might question us thus: "What then, Sir, is that material
(or that mental, or that formless) mode of personality for the putting
away of which you preach such a doctrine as will lead him who walks
according to it to get free from the evil dispositions he has acquired,
to increase in the dispositions that tend to purification, so that he
may continue to see face to face, and by himself come to realise, the
full perfection and grandeur of wisdom?" And to that I should reply
(describing it in the words I have now used to you{1}): "Why this very
personality that you see before you is what I mean."

   <span id="text p. 198">\[198\]</span> 'Now what think you of that,
Po*tth*apâda. That being so, would not the talk turn out to be well
grounded?'

   'For a truth, Sir, it would.'

   46. 'Just, Po*tth*apâda, as if a man should construct a staircase, to
mount up into the upper storey of a palace, at the foot of the very
palace itself. And men should say to him{2}:

   '"Well! good friend! that palace, to mount up into which you are
constructing this staircase, do you know whether it is in the East, or
in the West, or in the

{1. In the words of §§ 39, 40; that is, that whatever the mode of
existence, of temporary individuality, there is happiness obtainable;
but only in one way, by getting rid, namely, of certain evil
dispositions, and by the increase of certain good dispositions.
Buddhaghosa thinks this is said in protest against those who, seeking
for happiness beyond the grave, do not admit that happiness can be
reached here (as above, in § 34).

The above rendering of the elliptical phrase Aya*m* vâ so is confirmed
by the simile in § 46.

2\. See above, § 37.}

<span id="p. 262">{p. 262}</span>

South, or in the North? whether it is high or low or of medium size?"

   'And when so asked, he should answer: "Why! here is the very palace
itself! It is at the very foot of it I am constructing my staircase with
the object of mounting up into it."

   'What would you think, Po*tth*apâda, of that? Would not his talk,
that being so, turn out to be well grounded?'

   'For a truth. Sir it would.'

   <span id="text p. 199">\[199\]</span> 47. 'Then just so.
Po*tth*apâda, when I answer thus{1} to the questions put to me.'

   48. Now when he had thus spoken, *K*itta, the son of the elephant
trainer, said to the Exalted One: 'At that time, Sir, when a man is in
possession of any one of the three modes of personality, are the other
two unreal to him then? Is it only the one he has that is real{2}?'

   49. 'At the time, *K*itta, when any one of the three modes of
personality is going on, then it does not come under the category of
either of the other two. It is known only by the name of the mode going
on.

   <span id="text p. 200">\[200\]</span> 'If people should ask you,
*K*itta, thus: "Were you in the past, or not? Will you be in the future.
or not? Are you now, or not?"--How would you answer?'

   'I should say that I was in the past, and not not; that I shall be in
the future, and not not; that I am now, and not not.'

   50. 'Then if they rejoined: "Well! that past personality that you
had, is that real to you; and the future personality, and the present,
unreal? The future personality that you will have, is that real to you;
and the past personality, and the present, unreal? The personality that
you have now, in the present, is that real to you; and the past
personality, and the future, unreal?"--How would you answer?'

{1. §§ 42-45 repeated in full.

2\. Each of the three cases is given in full.}

<span id="p. 263">{p. 263}</span>

   <span id="text p. 201">\[201\]</span> 'I should say that the past
personality that I had was real to me at the time when I had it; and the
others unreal. And so also in the other two cases.'

   51. 'Well! Just so, *K*itta, when any one of the three modes of
personality is going on, then it does not come under the category of
either of the other two.

   52. 'Just, *K*itta, as from a cow comes milk, and from the milk
curds, and from the curds butter, and from the butter ghee, and from the
ghee junket; but when it is milk it is not called curds, or butter, or
ghee, or junket; and when it is curds it is not called by any of the
other names; and so on--

   <span id="text p. 202">\[202\]</span> 53. 'Just so, *K*itta, when any
one of the three modes of personality is going on, it is not called by
the name of the other. For these, *K*itta, are merely names,
expressions, turns of speech, designations in common use in the world.
And of these a Tathâgata (one who has won the truth) makes use indeed,
but is not led astray by them{1}.'

   54. And when he had thus spoken, Po*tth*apâda, the mendicant, said to
the Exalted One:

   'Most excellent, Sir, are the words of thy mouth; most excellent!
Just as if a man were to set up that which has been thrown down, or were
to reveal that which has been hidden away, or were to point out the
right road to him who has gone astray, or were to bring a light into the
darkness so that those who had eyes could see external forms,--just even
so has the truth

{1. The point is, of course, that just as there is no *substratum* in
the products of the cow, so in man there is no *ego*, no constant unity,
no 'soul' (in the animistic sense of the word, as used by savages).
There are a number of qualities that, when united, make up a
personality--always changing. When the change has reached a certain
point, it is convenient to change the designation, the name, by which
the personality is known--just as in the case of the products of the
cow. But the abstract term is only a convenient *form of expression*.
There never was any personality, *as a separate entity*, all the time.

The author of the Milinda (pp. 25, 27) has a precisely similar
argument.}

<span id="p. 264">{p. 264}</span>

been made known, in many a figure, by the Exalted One. And I, Sir,
betake myself to the Exalted One as my guide, to his Doctrine, and to
his Order. May the Exalted One accept me as an adherent; as one who,
from this day forth as long as life endures, has taken him as his
guide.'

   55. But *K*itta, the son of the elephant trainer, though he made use
of the same words, concluded with the request: 'And may I be permitted
to go forth from the world under the Exalted One; may I receive
admission into his Order.' \[203\]

   56. And his request was granted, and he was received into the Order.
And from immediately after his initiation *K*itta, the son of the
elephant trainer, remained alone and separate, earnest, zealous, and
resolved. And e'er long he attained to that supreme goal of the higher
life for the sake of which the clansmen go forth utterly from the
household life to become houseless wanderers--yea! that supreme goal did
he, by himself, and while yet in this visible world, bring himself to
the knowledge of, and continue to realise, and to see face to face! And
he became conscious that rebirth was at an end; that the higher life had
been fulfilled; that all that should be done had been accomplished; and
that, after this present life, there would be no beyond!

   So the venerable *K*itta, the son of the elephant trainer, became yet
another among the Arahats.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the Po*tth*apâda Suttanta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: Introduction to the Subha
Sutta](dob-10in)
