<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-02in) [Next](dob-03in)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 65">{p. 65}</span>

## II. SÂMA*ÑÑ*A-PHALA SUTTA.

### \[THE FRUITS OF THE LIFE OF A RECLUSE<sup><span class="small">{1}</span></sup>.\]

   <span id="text p. 47">\[47\]</span> I. Thus have I heard. The Blessed
One was once dwelling at Râ*g*agaha in the Mango Grove of *G*îvaka the
children's physician{2}, with a great company of the brethren, with
twelve hundred and fifty of the brethren. Now at that time the king of
Magadha, A*g*âtasattu, the son of the Videha princess{3}, on the
Uposatha day, held on the fifteenth, on Komudi (white

{1. Gogerly's translation of the first part of this Sutta, and Burnouf's
translation of the whole of it, have been reprinted in Grimblot's 'Sept
Suttas Palis.' These versions, of remarkable merit for the time when
they were made, are full of mistakes which the since-published editions
of the Commentary, and of numerous allied texts, enable us now to avoid.
I have not thought it necessary to point out the numerous passages,
occurring indeed in nearly every sentence, in which the present
translation differs from theirs. It should be mentioned here, however,
that Burnouf has missed the whole point of the dialogue by
misunderstanding the constantly repeated phrase sandi*tth*ikam
sâma*ññ*a-phala*m* from which this title is taken. He renders it
throughout as meaning 'foreseen and general fruit' which is
grammatically impossible as regards sandi*tth*ikam, and rests on a false
derivation as regards sâma*ññ*a. This last word means, of course,
'sama*n*aship, being a sama*n*a, living as a sama*n*a, a recluse, a
religieux.'

2\. *G*îvakassa komârabha*kk*assa. Buddhaghosa (Sum. I, 133) naturally
follows the compilers of the Khandakas (V. I, 269) in interpreting the
adjective as 'brought up by the Prince.' But see the note at 'Vinaya
Texts,' II, 174; which shows that the more likely meaning is 'the
bringer-up of children' (child-doctor). Several cures, however, wrought
by him are recorded; and the patients are always adults. There is no
other reference at all to his being a child-doctor, and the Khandaka
which gives the other interpretation is a very ancient document.

3\. See the note in my 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 1. Buddhaghosa (p. 139)
says she was the daughter of the king of Kosala.}

<span id="p. 66">{p. 66}</span>

water-lily), the full moon day of the fourth month{1}, at night, when
the moon was full, was seated on the upper terrace roof of his palace
surrounded by his ministers. And the king, on that sacred day, gave
utterance to a hymn of joy, saying:

   'How pleasant, friends, is the moonlight night!

   How beautiful, friends, is the moonlight night!

   How lovely, friends, is the moonlight night!

   How soothing, friends, is the moonlight night!

   How grand a sign, friends, is the moonlight night!

   'Who is the recluse or Brahman whom we may call upon to-night, who,
when we call upon him, shall be able to satisfy our hearts{2}?'

   2. When he had thus spoken, a certain minister said to the king:
'There is, Sire, Pûra*n*a Kassapa, the head of an order, of a following,
the teacher of a school, well known and of repute as a sophist, revered
by the people, a man of experience, who has long been a recluse, old and
well stricken in years. Let your Majesty pay a visit to him. It may well
be{3} that, on calling upon him, your heart, Sire, shall find peace.'
But when he had thus spoken A*g*âtasattu the king kept silence.

   3-7. Then other five ministers spake in the same terms of Makkhali of
the cow-pen, <span id="text p. 48">\[48\]</span> of A*g*ita of the
garment of hair, of Pakudha Ka*kk*âyana, of Sa*ñg*aya of the Bela*tt*ha
clan, and of the Niga*nth*a of the Nâta clan. And still, to each,
A*g*âtasattu the king kept silence.

{1. This is interesting, as it shows that the year, for the compilers of
our Sutta, began in Sâvana (middle of July to middle of August), that
is, with the rainy season. There were three Uposatha days in each month,
on the 7th, 14th, and 15th day of the month. The full moon night of
Kattika (middle of October to middle of Novemher) is called Komudi (from
Kumuda, a white water-lily), because that flower is supposed to bloom
then. Burnouf is wrong in translating Komudi as the name of the month.

2\. The same lines recur, but in a different order, at *G*ât. I, 105.
Dosinâ, the etymology of which puzzled Childers and also Buddhaghosa (p.
141), is *g*yotsnâ.

3\. Appeva nâma. Both Gogerly and Burnouf take this to mean 'to a
certainty,' but compare D. I, 179, 205; V. II, 85, 262.}

<span id="p. 67">{p. 67}</span>

   8. <span id="text p. 49">\[49\]</span> Now at that time *G*îvaka the
physician was seated, in silence, not far from A*g*âtasattu the king.
And the king said to him: 'But you, friend *G*îvaka, why do you say
nothing?'

   'The Blessed One, Sire, the Arahat, the all-awakened-one, is now
lodging in our Mango Grove, with a great company of the brethren, with
twelve hundred and fifty brethren. And this is the good report that has
been noised abroad as to Gotama the Blessed One: "An Arahat, fully
awakened, is the exalted One, abounding In wisdom and goodness, happy,
with knowledge of the worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to mortals willing
to be led, the teacher of gods and men, a blessed Buddha." Let your
Majesty pay a visit to him. It may well be that, on calling upon him,
your heart, Sire, shall find peace.'

   'Then, friend *G*îvaka, have the riding-elephants made ready.'--

   9. 'Very good, Sire!' said *G*îvaka the physician in assent to the
words of the king. And he had five hundred she-elephants made ready, and
the state elephant the king was wont to ride, and had word brought to
the king: 'The elephants, Sire, are caparisoned. Do now what seemeth to
you meet.' Then the king had five hundred of his women mounted on the
she-elephants, one on each; and himself mounted the state elephant; and
he went forth, the attendants bearing torches, in royal pomp, from
Râ*g*agaha to *G*îvaka the physician's Mango Grove.

   10. And the king, when close upon the Mango Grove, was seized with a
sudden fear and consternation, and the hairs on his body stood erect.
And anxious and excited, he said to *G*îvaka: <span
id="text p. 50">\[50\]</span> 'You are playing me no tricks, *G*îvaka?
You are not deceiving me? You are not betraying me to my foes? How can
it be that there should be no sound at all, not a sneeze nor a cough, in
so large an assembly of the brethren, among twelve hundred and fifty of
the brethren?'

   'Fear not, O king. I play no trick, neither deceive you; nor would I
betray you to the foe. Go on, O king,

<span id="p. 68">{p. 68}</span>

go straight on! There, in the pavilion hall, the lamps are burning.'

   11. Then the king went on, on his elephant as far as the path was
passable for elephants, and then on foot, to the door of the pavilion;
and then said to *G*îvaka:

   'But where, *G*îvaka, is the Blessed One?'

   'That is he, O king, sitting against the middle pillar, and facing
the East, with the brethren around him.'

   12. Then the king went up, and stood respectfully on one side. And as
he stood there and looked on the assembly, seated in perfect silence,
calm as a clear lake, he broke out: 'Would that my son, Udâyi Bhadda,
might have such calm as this assembly of the brethren now has!'

   'Do your thoughts then go where love guides them?'

   'I love the boy, and wish that he, Udâyi Bhadda, might enjoy such
calm as this assembly has.'

   13. Then the king bowed to the Blessed One, and stretching forth his
joined palms in salutation to the Order took his seat aside, <span
id="text p. 51">\[51\]</span> and said to the Blessed One: 'I would fain
question the Blessed One on a certain matter, if he give me opportunity
to set forth the question.'

   'Ask, O king, whatsoever you desire.'

   14. 'There are, Sir, a number of ordinary crafts:--mahouts, horsemen,
charioteers, archers, standard bearers, camp marshalls, camp followers,
high military officers of royal birth, military scouts{1}, men brave as
elephants, champions, heroes, warriors in buckskin, home-born slaves,
cooks, barbers, bath attendants, confectioners, garland-makers,
washermen, weavers, basket-makers, potters, arithmeticians, accountants,
and whatsoever others of like kind there may be. All

<span class="small">{1. Pakkhandino, 'rushers forth.' The exact meaning
of some of these military terms is still uncertain, and was apparently
uncertain to Buddhaghosa. They all recur, with some differences of
reading. in the Milinda (p. 331, in a later and much longer list), and
also in the Anguttara (IV, 107), as the names of the constituent
elements of a standing army.}</span>

<span id="p. 69">{p. 69}</span>

these enjoy, in this very world, the visible fruits of their craft. They
maintain themselves, and their parents and children and friends, in
happiness and comfort. They keep up gifts, the object of which is gain
on high, to recluses and Brahmans,--gifts that lead to rebirth in
heaven, that redound to happiness, and have bliss as their result. Can
you, Sir, declare to me any such immediate fruit, visible in this very
world, of the life of a recluse{1}?'

   15. 'Do you admit to us, O king, that you have put the same question
to other recluses or to Brahmans?'

   'I do, Lord.'

   'Then tell us how they answered it, if you do not mind.'

   'I have no objection where the Blessed One, or others like him, are.'

   <span id="text p. 52">\[52\]</span> 'Then speak, O king.'

   16. "Once I went to Pûra*n*a Kassapa{2}. And after exchanging with
him the greetings and compliments of friendship and courtesy, I seated
myself beside him, and put to him the same question as I have now put,
Lord, to you.

   17. 'Then Pûra*n*a Kassapa said to me: "To him who acts, O king, or
causes another to act, to him who mutilates or causes another to
mutilate, to him who punishes or causes another to punish, to him who
causes grief or torment, to him who trembles or causes others to
tremble, to him who kills a living creature, who takes what is not
given, who breaks into houses, who commits dacoity, or robbery, or
highway robbery, or adultery, or who speaks lies, to him thus acting
there is no guilt. If with a discus with an edge sharp as

{1. Burnouf has made a sad mess of this important and constantly
repeated clause. He has 'Is it then possible, Sir, that one should
declare to them (that is, to the craftsmen just mentioned) in this
world, such a result (of their actions) as foreseen and as the general
fruit of their conduct?' But the king asks the Buddha to tell him (the
king himself) whether the members of the Order derive from their lire
any benefit corresponding to that which the craftsmen derive from
theirs.

2\. According to Buddhaghosa (p. 142) he was one of the teachers who
went about naked.}

<span id="p. 70">{p. 70}</span>

a razor he should make all the living creatures on the earth one heap,
one mass, of flesh, there would be no guilt thence resulting, no
increase of guilt would ensue. Were he to go along the south bank of the
Ganges striking and slaying, mutilating and having men mutilated,
oppressing and having men oppressed, there would be no guilt thence
resulting, no increase of guilt would ensue. Were he to go along the
north bank of the Ganges giving alms, and ordering gifts to be given,
offering sacrifices or causing them to be offered, there would be no
merit thence resulting, no increase of merit. <span
id="text p. 53">\[53\]</span> In generosity, in self-mastery, in control
of the senses, in speaking truth there is neither merit, nor increase of
merit." Thus, Lord, did Pûra*n*a Kassapa, when asked what was the
immediate advantage in the life of a recluse, expound his theory of
non-action{1}. Just, Lord, as if a man, when asked what a mango was,
should explain what a bread fruit is, just so did Pûra*n*a Kassapa, when
asked what was the fruit, in this present state of being, of the life of
a recluse, expound his theory of non-action. Then, Lord, it occurred to
me: "How should such a one as I think of giving dissatisfaction to any
recluse or Brahman in my realm?" So I neither applauded nor blamed what
he said, and though dissatisfied I gave utterance to no expression of
dissatisfaction, and neither accepting nor rejecting that answer of his,
I arose from my seat, and departed thence.

   19. \['In the same manner I went to five other teachers, and
receiving to this same question put an answer not to the point, I
behaved in each case as just set forth. And the answers of the five were
thus:\]{2}

{1. Akiriya*m* vyâkâsi. Gogerly interprets this 'he replied by affirming
that there are no future rewards and punishments.' Burnouf has simply
'm'a donné une réponse vaine.' But the corresponding word in the
subsequent sections summarises the theory of the teacher questioned. On
this theory compare A. I, 62; V. I, 235.

2\. In the text the framework of the interview is repeated each time in
the same words as above. Only the answers differ. The answers all recur
in the Ma*ggh*ima I, 513 foll.}

<span id="p. 71">{p. 71}</span>

   20. 'When one day I had thus asked Makkhali of the cow-pen{1}, he
said: "There is, O king, no cause, either ultimate or remote, for the
depravity of beings; they become depraved without reason and without
cause. There is no cause, either proximate or remote, for the rectitude
of beings; they become pure without reason and without cause. The
attainment of any given condition, of any character, does not depend
either on one's own acts, or on the acts of another, or on human effort.
There is no such thing as power or energy, or human strength or human
vigour. All animals, all creatures (with one, two, or more senses), all
beings (produced from eggs or in a womb), all souls (in plants){2} are
without force and power and energy of their own. They are bent this way
and that by their fate, by the necessary conditions of the class to
which they belong, by their individual nature: and it is according to
their position in one or other of the six classes that they experience
ease or pain.

{1. 'There is a good deal in both the Buddhist and the *G*ain texts
about this Makkhali Gosâla, whose followers were called Â*g*îvakas, and
who was regarded, from the Buddhist point of view, as the worst of the
sophists. Some of the *G*aina passages, and also Buddhaghosa here, are
referred to by Hoernle, 'Uvâsaka dasâo,' pp. 108 foll.: and in the
Appendixes. The principal Pi*t*aka passages are M. I, 31, 198, 238, 250,
483, 516, 524. S. I, 66, 68; III, 69, 211; IV, 398. A. I, 33, 286; III,
276, 384. V. I, 8, 291; II, 111, 130, 165, 284; IV, 74. See also *G*ât.
I, 493 and G. V, 68. As the sect is thrice mentioned in the Asoka Edicts
as receiving royal gifts it is certain that it retained an important
position for several centuries at least. See Senart, 'Inscriptions de
Piyadasi,' II, 82, 209.

From the beginning of the answer down to the end of p. 53 recurs at S.
III, 211, and the rest of it at ibid. 212, and the first part of the
answer is ascribed at ibid. p. 69 to Pûra*n*a Kassapa.

2\. Sabbe sattâ, sabbe pâ*n*â, sabbe bhûtâ, sabbe *g*îvâ. Buddhaghosa
gives details of these four classes of living beings, showing how they
are meant to include all that has life, on this earth, from men down to
plants. The explanation is very confused, and makes the terms by no
means mutually exclusive. They are frequently used in the same order in
the *G*aina-Sûtras, and Professor Jacobi renders them accordingly 'Every
sentient being, every insect, every living thing, whether animal or
vegetable.' '*G*aina-Sutras,' II, xxv. This is much better; but we have,
in our version, to give the sense in whjch the Buddhists supposed Gosâla
to have taken the words.}

<span id="p. 72">{p. 72}</span>

   <span id="text p. 54">\[54\]</span> '"There are fourteen hundred
thousands of the principal sorts of birth, and again six thousand
others, and again six hundred. There are five hundred sorts of Karma,
and again five (according to the five senses), and again three
(according to act, word, and thought); and there is a whole Karma and a
half Karma (the whole being a Karma of act or word, the half a Karma of
thought).

   '"There are sixty-two paths (or modes of conduct), sixty-two periods,
six classes (or distinctions among men){1}, eight stages of a prophet's
existence{2}, forty-nine hundred sorts of occupation{3}, forty-nine
hundred sorts of wandering mendicants, forty-nine hundred regions dwelt
in by Nâgas, two thousand faculties, three thousand purgatories,
thirty-six places where dust accumulates, seven sorts of animate and
seven of inanimate production, and seven of production by grafting,
seven sorts of gods, and of men, and of devils, and of great lakes, and
seven principal and again seven hundred minor sorts of Pa*k*u*t*as{4} of
precipices, and of dreams.

   '"There are eighty-four hundred thousand periods during which both
fools and wise alike, wandering in transmigration, shall at last make an
end of pain. Though the wise should hope: 'By this virtue or this
performance of duty, or this penance, or this righteousness will I make
the Karma (I have inherited), that is not yet mature, mature'--though
the fool should hope, by the same means, to get gradually rid of Karma
that has matured--neither of them can do it. The ease and pain, measured
out, as it were, with a measure, cannot be altered in the course of
transmigration; there

{1. Compare the corresponding theory of the *G*ains as given in the
Uttarâdhyâyana Sûtra in Jacobi's *G*aina-Sûtras, vol. ii, p. 213: and
that of Pûra*n*a Kassapa quoted in A<u>n</u>guttara III, 383.

2\. Buddhaghosa gives the details 'babyhood, playtime, trial time, erect
time, learning time, ascetic time, prophet time, and prostrate time'
with (very necessary) comments on each. One may compare Shakepere's
'Seven Ages of Man.'

3\. Â*g*îva. The Siamese edition reads â*g*îvaka.

4\. I think this is the right reading, but don't know what it means.}

<span id="p. 73">{p. 73}</span>

can be neither increase nor decrease thereof, neither excess nor
deficiency. Just as when a ball of string is cast forth it will spread
out just as far, and no farther, than it can unwind, just so both fools
and wise alike, wandering in transmigration exactly for the allotted
term, shall then, and only then, make an end of pain."

   'Thus, Lord, did Makkhali of the cow-pen, when asked what was the
immediate advantage in the life of a recluse, expound his theory of
purification through transmigration.

   <span id="text p. 55">\[55\]</span> 23. 'When, one day, I had thus
asked A*g*ita of the garment of hair, he said{1}: "There is no such
thing, O king, as alms or sacrifice or offering. There is neither fruit
nor result of good or evil deeds. There is no such thing as this world
or the next. There is neither father nor mother, nor beings springing
into life without them. There are in the world no recluses or Brahmans
who have reached the highest point{2}, who walk perfectly, and who
having understood and realised, by themselves alone, both this world and
the next, make their wisdom known to others.

   '"A human being is built up of the four elements. When he dies the
earthy in him returns and relapses to the earth, the fluid to the water,
the heat to the fire, the windy to the air, and his faculties{3} pass
into space. The four bearers, on the bier as a fifth, take his dead body
away; till they reach the burning-ground men utter forth eulogies, but
there his bones are bleached,

{1. This answer recurs S. III, 307, M. I, 515 (compare Dh. S. 1215,
1362, 1364), as the view of a typical sophist.

2\. Sammag-gato. Buddhaghosa gives here no explanation of this word, but
the *G*âtaka Commentary on *G*ât. III, 305 says it means the man who has
attained the highest fruit; that is, Arahatship. Gato is used here in
the same sense as it has in Tathâgato, in gatatto (in the Niga*nth*a
paragraph below), and in vi*gg*â-gato (S. N. 730, 733, 743), that is,
who has not only attempted to go to, but has actually reached, the aim
(common alike to the orthodox Vedântist Brahmans and to each of the
various schools of independent, dissenting, thinkers and recluses) of
the conquest over ignorance, of the grasp of truth.

3\. Indriyâni, the five senses, and the mind as a sixth.}

<span id="p. 74">{p. 74}</span>

and his offerings{1} end in ashes. It is a doctrine of fools, this talk
of gifts. It is an empty lie, mere idle talk, when men say there is
profit therein. Fools and wise alike, on the dissolution of the body,
are cut off, annihilated, and after death they are not."

   'Thus, Lord, did A*g*ita of the garment of hair, when asked what was
the immediate advantage in the life of a recluse, expound his theory of
annihilation.

   <span id="text p. 56">\[56\]</span> 26. 'When, one day, I had thus
asked Pakudha Ka*kk*âyana, he said: "The following seven things, O king,
are neither made nor commanded to be made, neither created nor caused to
be created, they are barren (so that nothing is produced out of them),
stedfast as a mountain peak, as a pillar firmly fixed. They move not,
neither do they vary, they trench not one upon another, nor avail aught
as to ease or pain or both. And what are the seven? The four
elements--earth, water, fire, and air-and ease, and pain, and the soul
as a seventh. So there is neither slayer nor causer of slaying, hearer
or speaker, knower or explainer. When one with a sharp sword cleaves a
head in twain, no one thereby deprives any one of life, a sword has only
penetrated into the interval between seven elementary substances."

   'Thus, Lord, did Pakudha Ka*kk*âyana, when asked what was the
immediate advantage in the life of a recluse, expound the matter by
expounding something else.

   <span id="text p. 57">\[57\]</span> 28. 'When, one day, I had thus
asked the Niga*nth*a of the Nâta clan, he said: "A Niga*nth*a, O king (a
man free from bonds}, is restrained with a fourfold self-restraint. He
lives restrained as regards all water; restrained as regards all evil;
all evil has he washed away; and he lives suffused with the sense of
evil held at bay. Such is his fourfold self-restraint. And since he is
thus tied with this fourfold

<span class="small">{1. Âhutiyo, See Buddhava*m*sa XXVII, 10; Kathâ
Vatthu 550. The phrase is omitted in the parallel passage in the *G*aina
'Sûtrak*ri*â<u>n</u>ga' pointed out by Jacobi, '*G*aina-Sûtras,' II,
xxiv.}</span>

<span id="p. 75">{p. 75}</span>

bond, therefore is he, the Niga*nth*o (free from bonds), called Gatatto
(whose heart has gone; that is, to the summit, to the attainment, of his
aim) Yatatto (whose heart is kept down; that is, is under command), and
*Th*itatto (whose heart is fixed){1}."

   'Thus, Lord, did the Niga*nth*a of the Nâta clan, when asked what was
the immediate advantage in the life of a recluse, expound his theory of
the fourfold bond.

   <span id="text p. 58">\[58\]</span> 31. 'When, one day, I had thus
asked Sa*ñg*aya of the Bela*tth*a clan, he said: "If you ask me whether
there is another world--well, if I thought there were, I would say so.
But I don't say so. And I don't think it is thus or thus. And I don't
think it is otherwise. And I don't deny it. And I don't say there
neither is, nor is not, another world. And if you ask me about the
beings produced by chance; or whether there is any fruit, any result, of
good or bad actions; or whether a man who has won the truth continues,
or not, after death--to each or any of these questions do I give the
same reply{2}."

   <span id="text p. 59">\[59\]</span> 33. 'Thus, Lord, did Sa*ñg*aya of
the Bela*tth*a clan, when asked what was the immediate advantage in the
life of a recluse, show his manner of prevarication. And to hint, as to
all the others, I expressed neither approval nor dissatisfaction, but
neither accepting nor

{1. The series of riddles in this difficult passage is probably intended
to be an ironical imitation of the Niga*nth*a's way of talking. Gogerly
has caught the general sense fairly enough, but his version is very
free, and wrong as to two of the words, and it gives no idea of the
oracular form in which the original is couched. Burnouf's rendering is
quite wide of the mark.

The first of the 'Four Restraints' is the well-known rule of the *G*ains
not to drink cold water, on the ground that there are 'souls' in it. See
the discussion in the Milinda (II, 85-91 of my translation).

Professor Jacobi ('*G*aina-Sûtras,' II, xxiii) thinks the 'Four
Restraints' are intended to represent the four vows kept by the
followers of Par*s*va. But this surely cannot be so, for these vows were
quite different.

2\. The text repeats the whole paragraph put above (p. 27 of the text)
into the mouth of the Eel-wriggler.}

<span id="p. 76">{p. 76}</span>

rejecting what was said, I arose from my seat, and departed thence{1}.

   34, 'And now, Lord, I put the same question to the Blessed One. Can
you show me any immediate fruit, in this world, of the life of a
recluse, such as those who follow each of the occupations I have
mentioned are, each of them, able tO show?'

   'I can, O king. And to that end I would fain put a question to you.
Answer it as you may think most fit.

   <span id="text p. 60">\[60\]</span> 35. 'Now what do you think, O
king. Suppose among the people of your household there were a slave who
does work for you, rises up in the morning before you do and retires
later to rest, who is keen to carry out your pleasure, anxious to make
himself agreeable in what. he does and says, a man who watches your
every look. Suppose he should think, "Strange is it and wonderful, this
issue of meritorious deeds, this result of merit! Here is this king of
Magadha, A*g*âtasattu, the son of the Videha princess--he is a man, and
so am I. But the king lives in the full enjoyment and possession of the
five pleasures of sense--a very god, methinks--and here am I a slave,
working for him, rising before him and retiring later to rest, keen to
carry out his pleasure, anxious to make myself agreeable in deed and
word, watching his very looks. Would that I were like him, that I too
might earn merit. Why should not I have my hair and beard shaved off,

{1. Of these six teachers Pûra*n*a denies the evil Karma in a bad act
and *vice versa*; A*g*ita, in preaching annihilation at death, shuts out
the possibility of any effect to be worked by Karma; and Makkhali
rejects both Karma and its effect, The theory of Pakudha seems to
exclude responsibility; the Niga*nth*a simply begs the question, by
asserting that a Niga*nth*a has attained the end; and Sa*ñg*aya gives no
answer at all.

The only one of these six theories of life on which independent evidence
is at present accessible is that of the Niga*nth*a (the *G*ain theory),
But no attempt has yet been made to summarise it, or set it out in a
manner intelligible to Western readers. It is very much to be hoped that
this want may soon be supplied by one or other of the excellent scholars
familiar with the texts.}

<span id="p. 77">{p. 77}</span>

and don the yellow robes, and going forth from the household state,
renounce the world?" And suppose, after a time, he should do so. And
having been admitted into an Order, should dwell restrained in act and
word and thought, content with mere food and shelter, delighting in
solitude. And suppose your people should tell you of this, saying: "If
it please your majesty, do you know that such a one, formerly your
slave, who worked for you, and so on (all as before) has now donned the
yellow robes, and has been admitted into an Order, and dwells
restrained, content with mere food and shelter, delighting in solitude?"
Would you then say: "Let the man come back; let him become a slave
again, and work for me"?'

   36. 'Nay, Lord, rather should we greet him with reverence <span
id="text p. 61">\[61\]</span>, and rise up from our seat out of
deference towards him, and press him to be seated. And we should have
robes and a bowl, and a lodging place, and medicine for the sick--all
the requisites of a recluse--made ready, and beg him to accept of them.
And we should order watch and ward and guard to be kept for him
according to the law.'

   'But what do you think, O king. That being so, is there, or is there
not, some fruit, visible in this world, of the life of a recluse?'

   'Certainly, Lord, that is so.'

   'This then, O king, is the first kind of the fruit, visible in this
world, which I maintained to arise from the life of a recluse.'

   37. 'Can you, Lord, show me any other fruit, visible in this world,
of the life of a recluse?'

   'I can, O king. And to that end I would fain put a question, &c. \[as
before, to the end of § 36, the case now put being that of a free man
who cultivates his land, a householder, who pays taxes and thus
increases the king's wealth, but gives up his little property and his
position in his clan, and enters an Order.\]'

   <span id="text p. 62">\[62\]</span> 39. 'Can you, Lord, show me any
other fruit, visible in this world, of the life of a reclase, a fruit
higher and sweeter than these?'

<span id="p. 78">{p. 78}</span>

   'I can, O king. Give ear therefore, O king, and give good heed, and I
will speak.

   40. 'Suppose, O king, there appears in the world one who has won the
truth, an Arahat, a fully awakened one, abounding in wisdom and
goodness; happy, who knows all worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to mortals
willing to be led, a teacher for gods and men, a Blessed One, a Buddha.
He, by himself, thoroughly knows and sees, as it were, face to face this
universe,--including the worlds above of the gods, the Brahmas, and the
Maras, and the world below with its recluses and Brahmans, its princes
and peoples,--and having known it, he makes his knowledge known to
others. The truth, lovely in its origin, lovely in its progress, lovely
in its consummation, doth he proclaim, both in the spirit and in the
letter, the higher life doth he make known, in all its fullness and in
all its purity{1}.

   41. 'A householder{2} or one of his children, or a man of inferior
birth in any class listens to that truth; and on hearing it he has faith
in the Tathâgata (the one who has found the truth); and when he is
possessed of that faith, he considers thus within himself:

   '"Full of hindrances is household life, a path for the dust of
passion. Free as the air is the life of him who has renounced all
worldly things. How difficult is it for the man who dwells at home to
live the higher life in all its fullness, in all its purity, in all its
bright perfection! Let me then cut off my hair and beard, let me clothe
myself in the orange-coloured robes, and let me go forth from the
household life into the homeless state."

   'Then, before long, forsaking his portion of wealth, be it great or
small, forsaking his circle of relatives, be they many or be they few,
he cuts off his hair and beard, he clothes himself in the
orange-coloured robes,

{1. Buddhaghosa applies these last two adjectives to the truth, not to
the life. But it seems more in accord with the next paragraph to refer
them to the life.

2\. Gahapati, which Buddhaghosa takes here in the sense of peasant,
ryot.}

<span id="p. 79">{p. 79}</span>

and he goes forth from the household life into the homeless state.

   42. 'When he has thus become a recluse he lives self-restrained by
that restraint that should be binding on a recluse{1}. Uprightness is
his delight, and he sees danger in the least of those things he should
avoid. He adopts, and trains himself in, the precepts. He encompasses
himself with good deeds in act and word. Pure are his means of
livelihood, good is his conduct, guarded the door of his senses. Mindful
and self-possessed he is altogether happy.

   43. 'And how, O king, is his conduct good?

   'In this, O king, that the Bhikshu, putting away the killing of
living things, holds aloof from the destruction of life. The cudgel and
the sword he has laid aside, and ashamed of roughness, and full of
mercy, he dwells compassionate and kind to all creatures that have life.

   'This is part of the goodness that he has.

   \[Here follow the whole of the Sîlas (the paragraphs on minor
morality), in the words already translated above in the Brahma-*g*âla
Sutta, §§ 8 to 27. Only for 'Gotama the recluse' one should read 'the
Bhikshu'; and alter in each case the words of the refrain accordingly.\]

   <span id="text p. 69">\[69\]</span> 63. 'And then that Bhikshu, O
king, being thus master of the minor moralities, sees no danger from any
side; that is, so far as concerns his self-restraint in conduct. Just, O
king, as a sovereign, duly crowned, whose enemies have been beaten down,
sees no danger from any side; <span id="text p. 70">\[70\]</span> that
is, so far as enemies are concerned, so is the Bhikshu confident. And
endowed with this body of morals, so worthy of honour, he experiences,
within himself, a sense of ease without alloy. Thus is it, O king, that
the Bhikshu becomes righteous.

   64. 'And how. O king, is the Bhikshu guarded as to the doors of his
senses{2}?'

{1. Pâtimokkha-sa*m*vara-sa*m*vuto. Buddhaghosa, I think, takes this to
mean 'restrained according to the rules of the Pâtimokkha.'

2\. On the following important and constantly repeated paragraph compare
M. I, 180, 268; K. V. 424-6, 463-4; Mil., 367; Asl. 400, &c.}

<span id="p. 80">{p. 80}</span>

   'When, O king, he sees an object with his eye he is not entranced in
the general appearance or the details of it{1}. He sets himself to
restrain that which might give occasion for evil states, covetousness
and dejection, to flow in over him so long as he dwells unrestrained as
to his sense of sight. He keeps watch upon his faculty of sight, and he
attains to mastery over it. And so, in like manner, when he hears a
sound with his ear, or smells an odour with his nose, or tastes a
flavour with his tongue, or feels a touch with his body, or when he
cognises a phenomenon with his mind he is not entranced in the general
appearance or the details of it. He sets himself to restrain that which
might give occasion for evil states, covetousness and dejection, to flow
in over him so long as he dwells unrestrained as to his mental
(representative) faculty. He keeps watch upon his representative
faculty, and he attains to mastery over it. And endowed with this
self-restraint, so worthy of honour, as regards the senses, he
experiences, within himself, a sense of ease into which no evil state
can enter{2}. Thus is it, O king, that the Bhikshu becomes guarded as to
the doors of his senses.

   65. 'And how, O king, is the Bhikshu mindful and self-possessed?'

   'In this matter, O king. the Bhikshu in going forth or in coming back
keeps clearly before his mind's eye (all that is wrapt up therein--the
immediate object of

{1. Na nimittaggâhî hoti nânuvya*ñg*anaggâhî. The phrase nimitta*m*
ga*n*hâti means either to seize upon anything as the object of one's
thought to the exclusion of everything else (see, for instance, Vin. I,
183, and Buddhaghosa's note on it given in the 'Vinaya Texts,' II, 9),
or to seize upon the outward sign of anything so keenly as to recognise
what it is the mark of (Vin. III, 17). And when the object is a person
of the other sex this phrase is the idiom used for our 'falling in love
with.' Buddhaghosa gives, as an instance of the nimitta, the general
conclusion that the object seen, heard, &c., is a man or woman; of the
anuvya*ñg*ana, the perception of the detail that he or she is smiling,
talking. &c.

2\. Avyâseka, literally 'with no besprinkling' (of evil, says
Buddhaghosa).}

<span id="p. 81">{p. 81}</span>

the act itself, its ethical significance, whether or not it is conducive
to the high aim set before him, and the real facts underlying the mere
phenomenon of the outward act). And so also in looking forward, or in
looking round; in stretching forth his arm, or in drawing it in again;
in eating or drinking, in masticating or swallowing, in obeying the
calls of nature, in going or standing or sitting, in sleeping or waking,
in speaking or in being still, he keeps himself aware of all it really
means{1}. Thus is it, O king, that the Bhikshu becomes mindful and
self-possessed.

   <span id="text p. 71">\[71\]</span> 66. 'And how, O king, is the
Bhikshu content?

   'In this matter, O king, the Bhikshu is satisfied with sufficient
robes to cherish his body, with sufficient food to keep his stomach
going. Whithersoever he may go forth, these he takes with him as he
goes--just as a bird with his wings, O king, whithersoever he may fly,
carries his wings with him as he flies. Thus is it, 'O king, that the
Bhikshu becomes content{2}.

{1. A small volume might be written on the various expansions of this
text in the Pi*t*akas. Several whole Dialogues are devoted to it, and
various Suttas in others of the oldest texts. Buddhaghosa has many pages
upon it here, and deals with it also at length in the Visuddhi Magga and
elsewhere. What is above added in brackets explains the principal points
of what is implied, according to the Pi*t*akas, in this famous
passage,--the Buddhist analogue to St. Paul's: 'Whether therefore ye eat
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God' (I Cor. x.
31).

By the real fact underlying any action is meant that, in the Buddhist
theory, behind the action (going, seeing, &c.) there is no ego, no actor
(goer, seer, &c.), that can be called a 'soul' (Abbhantare attâ nâma
âloketâ vâ viloketâ vâ n' atthi), but that there is a psychological
explanation sufficient, of itself, without the soul-theory.

2\. 'Consider the fowls of the air,' &c. (Matt. vi. 26).  
         No man can call me servant, and I wander--  
               So said the Exalted One--  
         At will, o'er all the earth, on what I find  
         I feel no need of wages, or of gain,  
   So let the rain pour down now, if it likes, to-night.  
                                          (Dhaniya Sutta 8.)  
And see the context in my 'American Lectures,' p. 168.}

<span id="p. 82">{p. 82}</span>

   67. 'Then, master of this so excellent body of moral precepts, gifted
with this so excellent self-restraint as to the senses, endowed with
this so excellent mindfulness and self-possession, filled with this so
excellent content, he chooses some lonely spot to rest at on his way--in
the woods, at the foot of a tree, on a hill side, in a mountain glen, in
a rocky cave, in a charnel place, or on a heap of straw in the open
field. And returning thither after his round for alms he seats himself,
when his meal is done, cross-legged, keeping his body erect, and his
intelligence alert, intent.

   68. 'Putting away the hankering after the world{1}, he remains with a
heart that hankers not, and purifies his mind of lusts. Putting away the
corruption of the wish to injure, he remains with a heart free from
ill-temper, and purifies his mind of malevolence. Putting away torpor of
heart and mind{2}, keeping his ideas alight{3}, mindful and
self-possessed, he purifies his mind of weakness and of sloth. Putting
away flurry and worry, he remains free from fretfulness, and with heart
serene within, he purifies himself of irritability and vexation of
spirit. Putting away wavering, he remains as one passed beyond
perplexity; and no longer in suspense as to what is good, he purifies
his mind of doubt.

   69. 'Then just, O king, as when a man, after contracting a loan{4},
should set a business on foot, and his

{1. Abhi*ggh*a*m* loke pahâya. Gogerly renders 'banishes desire from
him,' leaving out loke altogether, and rendering abhi*ggh*a in defiance
both of the derivation and of the traditional explanation of the word.
Even Burnouf (who frequently uses 'desire' for words in the Pâli meaning
'lusts' or 'excitement') has here 'cupidité.'

2\. So Buddhaghosa here (p. 211). But the Dhamma Sanga*n*i 1156, 1157
explains it as torpor of mind and body.

3\. Âloka-sa*ññ*î, literally 'whose ideas are light.' Neumann ('Reden
des Gotamo,' I, 434, &c.) translates 'loving the light,' which may be
the right connotation. Burnouf has 'being aware of his visual sensation'
(de son regard), which is certainly wrong.

4\. I*n*a*m* âdâya. Neumann has 'oppressed by debt,' but Buddhaghosa (p.
212) says 'taking goods on interest'; and this is confirmed by *G*ât.
IV, 256, V, 436.}

<span id="p. 83">{p. 83}</span>

business should succeed, and he should not only be able to pay off the
old debt he had incurred, but there should be a surplus over to maintain
a wife. Then would he realise <span id="text p. 72">\[72\]</span>: "I
used to have to carry on my business by getting into debt, but it has
gone so well with me that I have paid off what I owed, and have a
surplus over to maintain a wife." And he would be of good cheer at that,
would be glad of heart at that:--

   70. 'Then just, O king, as if a man were a prey to disease, in pain,
and very ill, and his food would not digest, and there were no strength
left in him; and after a time he were to recover from that disease, and
his food should digest, and his strength come back to him; then, when he
realised his former and his present state, he would be of good cheer at
that, he would be glad of heart at that:--

   71. 'Then just, O king, as if a man were bound in a prison house, and
after a time he should be set free from his bonds, safe and sound, and
without any confiscation of his goods; when he realised his former and
his present state, he would be of good cheer at that, he would be glad
of heart at that:--

   72. 'Then just, O king, as if a man were a slave, not his own master,
subject to another, unable to go whither he would; and after a time he
should be emancipated from that slavery, become his own master, not
subject to others, a free man, free to go whither he would; then, on
realising his former and his present state, he would be of good cheer at
that, he would be glad of heart at that:--

   <span id="text p. 73">\[73\]</span> 73. 'Then just, O king, as if a
man, rich and prosperous, were to find himself on a long road, in a
desert, where no food was, but much danger; and after a time were to
find himself out of the desert, arrived safe; on the borders of his
village, in security and peace; then, on realising his former and his
present state, he would be of good cheer at that, he would be glad of
heart at that:--

   74. 'Just so, O king, the Bhikshu, so long as these

<span id="p. 84">{p. 84}</span>

five Hindrances are not put away within him looks upon himself as in
debt, diseased, in prison, in slavery, lost on a desert road. But when
these five Hindrances have been put away within him, he looks upon
himself as freed from debt, rid of disease, out of jail, a free man, and
secure;

   75. 'And gladness springs up within him on his realising that, and
joy arises to him thus gladdened, and so rejoicing all his frame becomes
at ease, and being thus at ease he is filled with a sense of peace, and
in that peace his heart is stayed{1}.

   75 A. 'Then estranged from lusts, aloof from evil dispositions, he
enters into and remains in the First Rapture--a state of joy and ease
born of detachment{2}, reasoning and investigation going on the while.

   'His very body does he so pervade, drench, permeate, and suffuse with
the joy and ease born of detachment, that there is no spot in his whole
frame not suffused therewith.

   <span id="text p. 74">\[74\]</span> 76. 'Just, O king, as a skilful
bathman or his apprentice will scatter perfumed soap powder in a metal
basin, and then besprinkling it with water, drop by drop, will so knead
it together that the ball of lather, taking up the unctuous moisture, is
drenched with it, pervaded by it, permeated by it within and without,
and there is no leakage possible.

{1. From the beginning of § 68 the text, though here split up into
paragraphs for the convenience of the reader, is really one long
sentence or paragraph of much eloquence and force in the Pâli; and the
peroration, leading on to the *Gh*ânas, is a favourite passage recurring
M. I, 71; Vin. I, 294; Mil. 84. The five similes are to be taken, in
order, as referring to the Five Hindrances (Nîvara*n*â) given in § 68.
The Dhamma Sanga*n*i 1152 gives six hindrances, and M. I, 360-3 gives
eight.

2\. Viveka, 'separation'--physically of the body, 'seclusion';
intellectually, of the objects of thought, 'discrimination'; ethically,
of the heart, 'being separate from the world.' We have no word in
English suggesting these three, all of which are implied. The stress is
upon separation from the world, taking 'world' in the sense of all the
hindrances to spiritual progress, and especially of the five chief
Hindrances (Nîvara*n*â) just above set out. Buddhaghosa has nothing
here, but compare Asl. 166.}

<span id="p. 85">{p. 85}</span>

   'This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of a recluse,
visible in this world, higher and sweeter than the last.

   77. 'Then further, O king, the Bhikshu suppressing all reasoning and
investigation enters into and abides in the Second *Gh*âna, a state of
joy and ease, born of the serenity of concentration, when no reasoning
or investigation goes on,--a state of elevation{1} of mind, a
tranquillisation of the heart within.

   'And his very body does he so pervade, drench, permeate, and suffuse
with the joy and ease born of concentration, that there is no spot in
his whole frame not suffused therewith.

   78. 'Just, O king, as if there were a deep pool, with water welling
up into it from a spring beneath, and with no inlet from the east or
west, from the north or south, and the god should not from time to time
send down showers of rain upon it. Still the current of cool waters
rising up from that spring would pervade, fill, permeate, and suffuse
the pool with cool waters; and there would be no part or portion of the
pool unsuffused therewith.

   <span id="text p. 75">\[75\]</span> 'This, O king, is an immediate
fruit of the life of a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last.

   79. 'Then further, O king, the Bhikshu, holding aloof from joy,
becomes equable{2}; and mindful and self-possessed he experiences in his
body that ease which the Arahats talk of when they say: "The man serene
and self-possessed is well at ease," and so he enters into and abides in
the Third *Gh*âna.

   'And his very body does he so pervade, drench,

{1. Ekodibhâva. Compare Asl. 169, Senart in Mahâvastu I, 554, and the
notes in J. P. T. S., 1884, p. 32 foll.

2\. Upekhako, literally 'looking on,' that is, looking on rival mental
states with equal mind. Imperturbable, impartial, tolerant,
unsusceptible, stoical, composed, are all possible renderings, and all
unsatisfactory. The ten kinds of Upekkhâ 'equanimity,' translated into
English from Sinhalese by Spence Hardy (Manual, p. 505), can now be
corrected from the Pâli at Asl. 172.}

<span id="p. 86">{p. 86}</span>

permeate, and suffuse with that ease that has no joy with it, that there
is no spot in his whole frame not suffused therewith.

   80. "Just, O king, as when in a lotus tank the several lotus flowers,
red or white or blue, born in the water, grown up in the water, not
rising up above the surface of the water, drawing up nourishment from
the depths of the water, are so pervaded, drenched, permeated, and
suffused from their very tips down to their roots with the cool moisture
thereof, that there is no spot in the whole plant, whether of the red
lotus, or of the white, or of the blue, not suffused therewith.

   'This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of a recluse,
visible in this world, and higher and sweeter than the last.

   81. 'Then further, O king, the Bhikshu, by the putting away alike of
ease and of pain, by the passing away alike of any elation, any
dejection, he had previously felt, enters into and abides in the Fourth
*Gh*âna, a state of pure self-possession and equanimity. without pain
and without ease.

   <span id="text p. 76">\[76\]</span> 'And he sits there so suffusing
even his body with that sense of purification, of translucence, of
heart, that there is no spot in his whole frame not suffused therewith.

   82. 'Just, O king, as if a man were sitting so wrapt from head to
foot in a clean white robe, that there were no spot in his whole frame
not in contact with the clean white robe--just so, O king, does the
Bhikshu sit there, so suffusing even his body with that sense of
purification, of translucence, of heart, that there is no spot in his
whole frame not suffused therewith.

   'This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of a recluse, and
higher and sweeter than the last.

   83. 'With his heart thus serene, made pure, translucent, cultured,
devoid of evil, supple, ready to act, firm, and imperturbable, he
applies and bends down his mind to that insight that comes from
knowledge. He grasps the fact: "This body of mine has form, it is built
up of the four elements, it springs from father

<span id="p. 87">{p. 87}</span>

and mother, it is continually renewed by so much boiled rice and juicy
foods, its very nature is impermanence, it is subject to erasion,
abrasion, dissolution, and disintegration{1}; and therein is this
consciousness{2} of mine, too, bound up, on that does it depend."

   84. 'Just, O king, as if there were a Veluriya gem, bright, of the
purest water, with eight facets, excellently cut, clear, translucent,
without a flaw, excellent in every way. And through it a string, blue,
or orange-coloured, or red, or white, or yellow should be threaded. If a
man, who had eyes to see, were to take it into his hand, he would
clearly perceive how the one is bound up with the other{3}.

   <span id="text p. 77">\[77\]</span> 'This, O king, is an immediate
fruit of the life of a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last.

   85. 'With his heart thus serene, made pure, translucent, cultured,
devoid of evil, supple, ready to act, firm, and imperturbable, he
applies and bends down his mind to the calling up of a mental image. He
calls up from this body another body, having form;

{1. This is a favourite description of the body. (See M. I, 500; II, 17;
S. IV, 83; *G*ât. I, 146, &c.) The words for erasion, abrasion, are
cunningly chosen (u*kkh*âdana, parimaddana). They are also familiar
technical terms of the Indian shampooer, and are so used above ([p.
7](dob-01tx.htm#p.%2013), § 16 of the text). The double meaning must
have been clearly present to the Indian hearer, and the words are,
therefore. really untranslatable.

2\. Vi*ññ*â*n*a. 'The five senses, sensations arising from objects, and
all emotions and intellectual processes,' says Buddhaghosa (p. 221).

3\. In spite of this and similar passages the adherents of the soul
theory (having nothing else to fasten on) were apt to fasten on to the
Buddhist Vi*ññ*â*n*a as a possible point of reconciliation with their
own theory. Even an admirer of the Buddha (one Sâti, a member of the
Order) went so far as to tell the Buddha himself that he must, as he
admitted transmigration, have meant that the Vi*ññ*â*n*a did not really
depend upon, was not really bound up with, the body, but that it formed
the link in transmigration. In perhaps the most earnest and emphatic of
all the Dialogues (M. I, 256 foll.), the Buddha meets and refutes at
length this erroneous representation of his view. But it still survives.
I know two living writers on Buddhism who (in blissful ignorance of the
Dialogue in question) still fasten upon Buddha the opinion he so
expressly refused to accept.}

<span id="p. 88">{p. 88}</span>

made of mind, having all (his own body's) limbs and parts, not deprived
of any organ{1}.

   86. 'Just, O king, as if a man were to pull out a reed from its
sheath. He would know: "This is the reed, this the sheath. The reed is
one thing, the sheath another. It is from the sheath that the reed has
been drawn forth{2}." And similarly were he to take a snake out of its
slough, or draw a sword from its scabbard{3}.

   'This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of a recluse,
visible in this life, and higher and sweeter than the last.

   87. 'With his heart thus serene, made pure, translucent, cultured,
devoid of evil, supple, ready to act, firm and imperturbable, he applies
and bends down his mind to the modes of the Wondrous Gift{4}. <span
id="text p. 78">\[78\]</span> He enjoys the Wondrous Gift in its various
modes--being one he becomes many, or having become many becomes one
again; he becomes visible or invisible; he goes, feeling no obstruction,
to the further side of a wall or rampart or hill, as if through air; he
penetrates up and down through solid ground, as if through water; he
walks on water without breaking

{1. Buddhaghosa explains that, if the Bhikshu have his ears unpierced,
so will the image, and so on.

2\. This old simile occurs already in the *S*atapatha-Brâhma*n*a IV, 3,
3, 16.

3\. The point is the similarity. Buddhaghosa explains that the Kara*nd*a
is not a basket (as Burnouf renders it), but the skin which the snake
sloughs off; and that the scabbard is like the sword, whatever the
sword's shape. He adds that of course a man could not take a snake out
of its slough with his hand. He is supposed in the simile to do so in
imagination.

4\. Iddhi, literally 'well-being, prosperity.' The four Iddhis of a king
are personal beauty, length of life, strong health, and popularity (M.
Sud. Sutta in my 'Buddhist Suttas,' pp. 259-261). The Iddhis of Gotama
when at home, as a boy, were the possession of a beautiful garden, soft
clothing, comfortable lodging, pleasant music, and good food (A. I,
145). Worldly Iddhi is distinguished from spiritual at A. I, 93.
Buddhaghosa gives nine sorts of Iddhi, mostly intellectual, at Asl. 91,
and compare 237. There are no examples in the Pi*t*akas of concrete
instances of any of these except the last; but see S. IV, 289, 290; A.
III, 340, 341; M. P. S. 43.}

<span id="p. 89">{p. 89}</span>

through as if on solid ground; he travels cross-legged in the sky, like
the birds on wing; even the Moon and the Sun, so potent, so mighty
though they be, does he touch and feel with his hand; he reaches in the
body even up to the heaven of Brahmâ.

   88. 'Just, O king, as a clever potter or his apprentice could make,
could succeed in getting out of properly prepared clay any shape of
vessel he wanted to have--or an ivory carver out of ivory, or a
goldsmith out of gold.

   <span id="text p. 79">\[79\]</span> 'This, O king, is an immediate
fruit of the life of a recluse, and higher and sweeter than the last.

   89. 'With his heart thus serene, made pure, translucent, cultured,
devoid of evil, supple, ready to act, firm and imperturbable, he applies
and bends down his mind to the Heavenly Ear. With that clear Heavenly
Ear surpassing the ear of men he hears sounds both human and celestial,
whether far or near.

   90. 'Just, O king, as if a man were on the high road and were to hear
the sound of a kettledrum or a tabor or the sound of chank horns and
small drums he would know: "This is the sound of a kettledrum, this is
the sound of a tabor, this of chank horns and of drums{1}."

   'This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of a recluse,
visible in this life, and higher and sweeter than the last.

   91. 'With his heart thus serene (&c. as before), he directs and bends
down his mind to the knowledge which penetrates the heart. Penetrating
with his own heart the hearts of other beings, of other men, he knows
them. He discerns--

   The passionate mind to be passionate, and the calm mind calm;

   <span id="text p. 80">\[80\]</span> The angry mind to be angry, and
the peaceful mind peaceful;

   The dull mind to be dull, and the alert mind alert;

<span class="small">{1. The point of the comparison, says Buddhaghosa
(223), is that if he is in trouble and has lost his way he might be in
doubt. But if calm and secure he can tell the difference.}</span>

<span id="p. 90">{p. 90}</span>

   The attentive mind to be attentive, and the wandering mind wandering;

   The broad mind to be broad, and the narrow mind narrow;

   The mean mind to be mean, and the lofty mind lofty{1};

   The stedfast mind to be stedfast; and the wavering mind to be
wavering;

   The free mind to be free, and the enslaved mind enslaved.

   92. 'Just, O king, as a woman or a man or a lad, young and smart, on
considering attentively the image of his own face in a bright and
brilliant mirror or in a vessel of clear water would, if it had a mole
on it, know that it had, and if not, would know it had not.

   <span id="text p. 81">\[81\]</span> 'This, O king, is an immediate
fruit of the life of a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last.

   93. 'With his heart thus serene (&c. as before), he directs and bends
down his mind to the knowledge of the memory of his previous temporary
states. He recalls to mind his various temporary states in days gone
by--one birth, or two or three or four or five births, or ten or twenty
or thirty or forty or fifty or a hundred or a thousand or a hundred
thousand births, through many an aeon of dissolution, many an aeon of
evolution, many an aeon of both dissolution and evolution{2}. "In such a
place such was my name, such my family, such my caste{3}, such my food,
such my experience of discomfort or of ease, and such the limits of my
life. When I passed away from that state, I took form again in such a
place. There I had

{1. Sa-uttara and anuttara. Unless the interpretation given in the
Dhamma Sanga*n*i 1292, 1293, 1596, 1597 ('occupied with rebirth in
heaven, and occupied with Arahatship') reveals a change in the use of
terms, the evil disposition, in this case only, is put first.

2\. This is based on the Indian theory of the periodic destruction and
renovation of the universe, each of which takes countless years to
accomplish.

3\. Va*nn*a, 'colour.'}

<span id="p. 91">{p. 91}</span>

such and such a name and family and caste and food and experience of
discomfort or of ease, such was the limit of my life. When I passed away
from that state I took form again here"--thus does he call to mind his
temporary state in days gone by in all their details, and in all their
modes.

   94. 'Just, O king, as if a man were to go from his own to another
village, and from that one to another, and from that one should return
home. Then he would know: "From my own village I came to that other one.
There I stood in such and such a way, sat thus, spake thus, and held my
peace thus. Thence I came to that other village; and there I stood in
such and such a way, sat thus, spake thus, and held my peace thus. And
now, from that other village, I have returned back again home{1}."

   <span id="text p. 82">\[82\]</span> 'This, O king, is an immediate
fruit of the life of a recluse. Visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last.

   95. 'With his heart thus serene (&c. as before), he directs and bends
down his mind to the knowledge of the fall and rise of beings. With the
pure Heavenly Eye{2}, surpassing that of men, he sees beings as they
pass away from one form of existence and take shape in another; he
recognises the mean and the noble, the well favoured and the ill
favoured, the happy and the wretched, passing away according to their
deeds: "Such and such beings, brethren, evil in act and word and
thought, revilers of the noble ones, holding to wrong views, acquiring
for themselves that Karma which results from wrong views, they, on the
dissolution of the body, after death, are reborn in some unhappy state
of suffering or woe. But such and such beings, my brethren, well doers
in act and word and thought, not revilers of the noble ones, holding to
right views,

{1. The three villages correspond to the three stages of being, the
three Bhûmis,--the world of lust, the world of form, and the formless
worlds (the Kâma, Rûpa, and Arûpa Lokas).

2\. Dibba-*k*akkhu. See the note below on § 102 at the end of this
Sutta.}

<span id="p. 92">{p. 92}</span>

acquiring for themselves that Karma that results from right views, they,
on the dissolution of the body, after death, are reborn in some happy
state in heaven." Thus with the pure Heavenly Eye, surpassing that of
men, <span id="text p. 83">\[83\]</span> he sees beings as they pass
away from one state of existence, and take form in another; he
recognises the mean and the noble, the well favoured and the ill
favoured, the happy and the wretched, passing away according to their
deeds{1}.

   96. 'Just, O king, as if there were a house with an upper terrace on
it in the midst of a place where four roads meet, and a man standing
thereon, and with eyes to see, should watch men entering a house, and
coming forth out of it, and walking hither and thither along the
street{2}, and seated in the square in the midst. Then he would know:
"Those men are entering a house, and those are leaving it, and those are
walking to and fro in the street, and those are seated in the square in
the midst."

   'This, O king, is an immediate fruit of the life of a recluse,
visible in this world, and higher and sweeter than the last.

   97. 'With his heart thus serene (&c. as before), he directs and bends
down his mind to the knowledge of the destruction of the Deadly
Floods{3}. He knows

{1. This paragraph forms the subject of the discussion in the Kathâ
Vatthu III, 9 (p. 250). The mere knowledge of the general fact of the
action of Karma is there distinguished from the Dibba-*k*akkhu, the
Heavenly Eye; and the instance of Sâriputta is quoted, who had that
knowledge, but not the Heavenly Eye. As he was an Arahat it follows that
the possession of the Heavenly Eye was not a necessary consequence of
Arahatship. Buddhaghosa adds (p. 224) that the sphere of vision of the
Heavenly Eye did not extend to the Formless Worlds. On the
Dhamma-*k*akkhu, 'the Eye for the Truth,' see below, [p.
110](dob-03tx.htm#text%20p.%20110), § 21 of the text.

2\. Vîtisa*ñk*arante is Buddhaghosa's reading. The Siamese has Vithi*m*.
Compare M. I, 279.

3\. Âsavas, Deadly Floods, another untranslatable term. Neumann has
Illusion (Wahn); Burnouf has defilement (souillures). They are sometimes
the three here mentioned (M. I, 23, 155; A. I, 167; S. IV, 256, &c.);
but speculation, theorising (Di*tth*i) is added as a fourlh in the M. P.
S. and elsewhere. Unfortunately, the word has not been yet found in its
concrete, primary, sense; unless indeed Buddhaghosa's statement (at Asl.
48) that well-seasoned spirituous liquors were called âsavâ be taken
literally. It is therefore impossible to be sure what is the simile that
underlies the use of the word in its secondary, ethical sense. Perhaps
after all it is the idea of overwhelming intoxication, and not of flood
or taint or ooze, that we ought to consider.

Subhûti in quoting the above passage from Buddhaghosa (in the Abhidhâna
Padîpikâ Sû*k*i, p. 43) reads pärivas° throughout for pârivâs°.}

<span id="p. 93">{p. 93}</span>

as it really is: "This is pain." <span id="text p. 84">\[84\]</span> He
knows as it really is: "This is the origin of pain." He knows as it
really is: "This is the cessation of pain." He knows as it really is:
"This is the Path that leads to the cessation of pain." He knows as they
really are: "These are the Deadly Floods." He knows as it really is:
"This is the origin of the Deadly Floods." He knows as it really is:
"This is the cessation of the Deadly Floods." He knows as it really is:
"This is the Path that leads to the cessation of the Deadly Floods." To
him, thus knowing, thus seeing, the heart is set free from the Deadly
Taint of Lusts{1}, is set free from the Deadly Taint of Becomings{2}, is
set free from the Deadly Taint of Ignorance{3}. In him, thus set free,
there arises the knowledge of his emancipation, and he knows: "Rebirth
has been destroyed. The higher life has been fulfilled. What had to be
done has been accomplished. After this present life there will be no
beyond!"

   98. 'Just, O king, as if in a mountain fastness there were a pool of
water, clear, translucent, and serene; and a man, standing on the bank,
and with eyes to see, should perceive the oysters and the shells, the
gravel and the pebbles and the shoals of fish, as they move about or lie
within it: he would know: "This

{1. Kamâsavâ, with special reference to the taint of hankering after a
future life in the sensuous plane (Kâma Loka); that is, in the world.

2\. Bhavâsavâ, with special reference to the taint of hankering after a
future life in the plane of form and the formless plane (the Rûpa and
Arûpa Lokas); that is, in heaven.

3\. Avi*gg*âsavâ, with special reference to ignorance of the Four Great
Truths, just above summarised.}

<span id="p. 94">{p. 94}</span>

pool is clear, transparent, and serene, and there within it are the
oysters and the shells, and the sand and gravel, and the shoals of fish
are moving about or lying still{1}."

   <span id="text p. 85">\[85\]</span> 'This, O king, is an immediate
fruit of the life of a recluse, visible in this world, and higher and
sweeter than the last. And there is no fruit of the life of a recluse,
visible in this world, that is higher and sweeter than this{2}.'

   99. And when he had thus spoken, A*g*âtasattu the king said to the
Blessed One: 'Most excellent, Lord, most excellent! Just as if a man
were to set up that which has been thrown down, or were to reveal that
which is hidden away, or were to point out the right road to him who has
gone astray, or were to bring a lamp into the darkness so that those who
have eyes could see external forms--just even so, Lord, has the truth
been made known to me, in many a figure, by the Blessed One. And now I
betake myself, Lord, to the Blessed One as my refuge, to the Truth, and
to the Order. May the Blessed One accept me as a disciple, as one who,
from this day forth, as long as life endures, has taken his refuge in
them. Sin has overcome me, Lord, weak and foolish and wrong that I am,
in that, for the sake of sovranty, I put to death my father, that
righteous man, that righteous king! May the Blessed One accept it of me,
Lord, that do so acknowledge it as a sin, to the end that in future I
may restrain myself.'

   100. 'Verily, O king, it was sin that overcame you in acting thus.
But inasmuch as you look upon it as sin, and confess it according to
what is right, we accept your confession as to that. For that, O king,
is custom in the discipline of the noble ones{3}, that whosoever

{1. The simile recurs M. I, 279; A. I, 9. Compare for the words
sippi-sambuka *G*ât. V, 197; A. III, 395; Trenckner, 'Pâli Miscellany,'
p. 60.

2\. Because, as Buddhaghosa points out, this is really Arahatship,
Nirvâ*n*a; and it was to this, to Arahatship, that all the rest led up.

3\. Ariyâna*m*. That is, either of previous Buddhas, or perhaps of the
Arahats.}

<span id="p. 95">{p. 95}</span>

looks upon his fault as a fault, and rightfully confesses it, shall
attain to self-restraint in future.'

   101. When he had thus spoken, A*g*âtasattu the king said to the
Blessed One: 'Now, Lord, we would fain go. We are busy, and there is
much to do.'

   'Do, O king. whatever seemeth to thee fit.'

   Then A*g*âtasattu the king, pleased and delighted with the words of
the Blessed One, arose from his seat, and bowed to the Blessed One, and
keeping him on the right hand as he passed him, departed thence.

   102. Now the Blessed One, not long after A*g*âtasattu the king had
gone, addressed the brethren, and said: 'This king. brethren, was deeply
affected, he was touched in heart. If, brethren, the king had not put
his father to death, that righteous man, and righteous king, then would
the clear and spotless eye for the truth have arisen in him, even as he
sat there{1}.'

   Thus spake the Blessed One. The brethren were pleased and delighted
at his words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here ends the Discourse on the Fruits of the Life of a Recluse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sâma*ññ*a-phala Sutta is ended.

<span class="small">{1. The Dhamma-*k*akkhu (Eye for the Truth) is a
technical term for conversion, for entering on the Path that ends in
Arahatship. It is higher than the Heavenly Eye (dibba-*k*akkhu, above,
[p. 82](#text%20p.%2082) of the text, § 95) which sees other people's
previous births, and below the Eye of Wisdom (pa*ññ*â-*k*akkhu) which is
the wisdom of the Arahat (Itivuttaka, p. 52, § 61).}</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: Introduction to the Amba*tth*a
Sutta](dob-03in)
