<span id="top"></span>

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Buddhism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](dob-09tx) [Next](dob-10tx)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 265">{p. 265}</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### TO THE

### SUBHA SUTTA.

   As this Sutta is almost word for word the same as the
Sâma*ññ*a-phala, the question arises why it was considered advisable to
include it in our collection as a separate Sutta. The chief difference
is that the states of mind enumerated in the Sâma*ññ*a-phala as fruits
of the life of a recluse are here divided under the three heads of Sîla,
Samâdhi, and Pa*ññ*â (Conduct, Concentration, and Intelligence).

   Samâdhi has not yet been found in any Indian book older than the
Pi*t*akas. And, as in them, it is used exclusively of a mental state,
never in a concrete sense, its meaning is not easy to fix exactly. It is
not the same as *Gh*âna, which is a pre-Buddhistic term applied to four
special forms of meditation, culminating in self-induced ecstasy.
Samâdhi on the other hand is a constant habit, or faculty, of mind. The
oldest Sanskrit text in which it occurs is the Maitrî Upanishad; and it
probably has there the same meaning as it has in the Pi*t*akas.

   In our prescnt Sutta--and the principal reason for its existence as a
separate Sutta is that it points out just this--it is pointed out that
Samâdhi includes, it is true, the *Gh*ânas, but also other, and very
different things. These are the habit of guarding the doors of one's
senses; constant mindfulness and self-possession; and the faculty of
being content with little. From the negative point of view it is said to
include emancipation from ill-temper, inertness of mind and body, worry,
and perplexity; from the positive point of view it is said to include a
constant state of joy and peace.

   Wilson's Sanskrit Dictionary (1819) gives the meaning 'devout
meditation'; and the rendering 'meditation' has been used for it in
subsequent works in English by Western scholars. It is quite clear that
this would be a very inadequate and misleading rendering in our Sutta.
But exigencies of space preclude the discussion here, either of the
meaning, or of the very interesting and suggestive history of the word
in India.

<span id="p. 266">{p. 266}</span>

   How far was the word (literally 'allocation') invented or adopted by
the Buddhists, or by their immediate spiritual forerunners, to express
'self-concentration' with implied coordination, harmonisation, of the
mental faculties--an idea they wanted, in the statement of their most
essential and ethical doctrines, to be used in preference to the more
limited, more physical, notion of *Gh*âna? (It is Samâdhi, and not
*Gh*âna, that we find in the Four Truths, in the Noble Path, and in the
thirty-seven constituent parts of Arahatship.) How far, through the
constant association of the two ideas, did the larger, as ethical
feeling died away, become swallowed up by the smaller? At what date, in
what circles, and under what reservations, did the word Samâdhi come to
mean nothing more than meditation? The history of the two ideas, Samâdhi
and *Gh*âna, has constant analogies with the history of the two
similarly related ideas of Tâpasa and Bhikshu, and, like it, is of the
first importance in following the evolution of philosophical and
religious thought in India.

   I have made some detailed contributions to the discussion of such
questions in my 'Yogâvacara Manual' (Pâli Text Society, 1896, pp.
xiv-xxviii); and must confine myself, here, to referring to those pages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Return to top](#top)   [Next: X. Subha Sutta](dob-10tx)
