[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba16)  [Next](mba18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="an_ch-11"></span>

#### CHAPTER XI

#### The Golden Age of Babylonia

<span class="small">Rise of the Sun God--Amorites and Elamites struggle
for Ascendancy--The Conquering Ancestors of Hammurabi--Sumerian Cities
Destroyed--Widespread Race Movements--Phœnician Migration from Persian
Gulf--Wanderings of Abraham and Lot--Biblical References to Hittites and
Amorites--Battles of Four Kings with Five--Amraphel, Arioch, and
Tidal--Hammurabi's Brilliant Reign--Elamite Power Stamped Out--Babylon's
Great General and Statesman--The Growth of Commerce, Agriculture, and
Education--An Ancient School--Business and Private Correspondence--A
Love Letter--Postal System--Hammurabi's Successors--The Earliest
Kassites--The Sealand Dynasty--Hittite Raid on Babylon and Hyksos
Invasion of Egypt.</span>

SUN worship came into prominence in its most fully developed form during
the obscure period which followed the decline of the Dynasty of Isin.
This was probably due to the changed political conditions which brought
about the ascendancy for a time of Larsa, the seat of the Sumerian sun
cult, and of Sippar, the seat of the Akkadian sun cult. Larsa was
selected as the capital of the Elamite conquerors, while their rivals,
the Amorites, appear to have first established their power at Sippar.

Babbar, the sun god of Sippar, whose Semitic name was Shamash, must have
been credited with the early successes of the Amorites, who became
domiciled under his care, and it was possibly on that account that the
ruling family subsequently devoted so much attention to his worship in
Merodach's city of Babylon, where a sun temple was erected, and Shamash
received devout recognition

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

as an abstract deity of righteousness and law, who reflected the ideals
of well organized and firmly governed communities.

The first Amoritic king was Sumu-abum, but little is known regarding him
except that he reigned at Sippar. He was succeeded by Sumu-la-ilu, a
deified monarch, who moved from Sippar to Babylon, the great wall of
which he either repaired or entirely reconstructed in his fifth year.
With these two monarchs began the brilliant Hammurabi, or First Dynasty
of Babylonia, which endured for three centuries. Except Sumu-abum, who
seems to stand alone, all its kings belonged to the same family, and son
succeeded father in unbroken succession.

Sumu-la-ilu was evidently a great general and conqueror of the type of
Thothmes III of Egypt. His empire, it is believed, included the rising
city states of Assyria, and extended southward as far as ancient Lagash.

Of special interest on religious as well as political grounds was his
association with Kish. That city had become the stronghold of a rival
family of Amoritic kings, some of whom were powerful enough to assert
their independence. They formed the Third Dynasty of Kish. The local god
was Zamama, the Tammuz-like deity, who, like Nin-Girsu of Lagash, was
subsequently identified with Merodach of Babylon. But prominence was
also given to the moon god Nannar, to whom a temple had been erected, a
fact which suggests that sun worship was not more pronounced among the
Semites than the Arabians, and may not, indeed, have been of Semitic
origin at all. Perhaps the lunar temple was a relic of the influential
Dynasty of Ur.

Sumu-la-ilu attacked and captured Kish, but did not slay Bunutakhtunila,
its king, who became his vassal. Under the overlordship of Sumu-la-ilu,
the next ruler of

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kish, whose name
was Immerum, gave prominence to the public worship of Shamash. Politics
and religion went evidently hand in hand.

Sumu-la-ilu strengthened the defences of Sippar, restored the wall and
temple of Cuthah, and promoted the worship of Merodach and his consort
Zerpanitu<sup>m</sup> at Babylon. He was undoubtedly one of the forceful
personalities of his dynasty. His son, Zabium, had a short but
successful reign, and appears to have continued the policy of his father
in consolidating the power of Babylon and securing the allegiance of
subject cities. He enlarged Merodach's temple, E-sagila, restored the
Kish temple of Zamama, and placed a golden image of himself in the
temple of the sun god at Sippar. Apil-Sin, his son, surrounded Babylon
with a new wall, erected a temple to Ishtar, and presented a throne of
gold and silver to Shamash in that city, while he also strengthened
Borsippa, renewed Nergal's temple at Cuthah, and dug canals.

The next monarch was Sin-muballit, son of Apil-Sin and father of
Hammurabi. He engaged himself in extending and strengthening the area
controlled by Babylon by building city fortifications and improving the
irrigation system. It is recorded that he honoured Shamash with the gift
of a shrine and a golden altar adorned with jewels. Like Sumu-la-ilu, he
was a great battle lord, and was specially concerned in challenging the
supremacy of Elam in Sumeria and in the western land of the Amorites.

For a brief period a great conqueror, named Rim-Anum, had established an
empire which extended from Kish to Larsa, but little is known regarding
him. Then several kings flourished at Larsa who claimed to have ruled
over Ur. The first monarch with an Elamite name who became connected
with Larsa was Kudur-Mabug,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

son of Shimti-Shilkhak, the father of Warad-Sin and Rim-Sin.

It was from one of these Elamite monarchs that Sin-muballit captured
Isin, and probably the Elamites were also the leaders of the army of Ur
which he had routed before that event took place. He was not successful,
however, in driving the Elamites from the land, and possibly he arranged
with them a treaty of peace or perhaps of alliance.

Much controversy has been waged over the historical problems connected
with this disturbed age. The records are exceedingly scanty, because the
kings were not in the habit of commemorating battles which proved
disastrous to them, and their fragmentary references to successes are
not sufficient to indicate what permanent results accrued from their
various campaigns. All we know for certain is that for a considerable
period, extending perhaps over a century, a tremendous and disastrous
struggle was waged at intervals, which desolated middle Babylonia. At
least five great cities were destroyed by fire, as is testified by the
evidence accumulated by excavators. These were Lagash, Umma, Shurruppak,
Kisurra, and Adab. The ancient metropolis of Lagash, whose glory had
been revived by Gudea and his kinsmen, fell soon after the rise of
Larsa, and lay in ruins until the second century B.C., when, during the
Seleucid Period, it was again occupied for a time. From its mound at
Tello, and the buried ruins of the other cities, most of the relics of
ancient Sumerian civilization have been recovered.

It was probably during one of the intervals of this stormy period that
the rival kings in Babylonia joined forces against a common enemy and
invaded the Western Land. Probably there was much unrest there. Great
ethnic disturbances were in progress which were changing

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

the political complexion of Western Asia. In addition to the outpourings
of Arabian peoples into Palestine and Syria, which propelled other
tribes to invade Mesopotamia, northern Babylonia, and Assyria, there was
also much unrest all over the wide area to north and west of Elam.
Indeed, the Elamite migration into southern Babylonia may not have been
unconnected with the southward drift of roving bands from Media and the
Iranian plateau.

It is believed that these migrations were primarily due to changing
climatic conditions, a prolonged "Dry Cycle" having caused a shortage of
herbage, with the result that pastoral peoples were compelled to go
farther and farther afield in quest of "fresh woods and pastures new".
Innumerable currents and cross currents were set in motion once these
race movements swept towards settled districts either to flood them with
human waves, or surround them like islands in the midst of
tempest-lashed seas, fretting the frontiers with restless fury, and ever
groping for an inlet through which to flow with irresistible force.

The Elamite occupation of Southern Babylonia appears to have propelled
migrations of not inconsiderable numbers of its inhabitants. No doubt
the various sections moved towards districts which were suitable for
their habits of life. Agriculturists, for instance, must have shown
preference for those areas which were capable of agricultural
development, while pastoral folks sought grassy steppes and valleys, and
seafarers the shores of alien seas.

Northern Babylonia and Assyria probably attracted the tillers of the
soil. But the movements of seafarers must have followed a different
route. It is possible that about this time the Phœnicians began to
migrate towards the "Upper Sea". According to their own traditions their
racial cradle was on the northern shore of the Persian

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gulf. So far as we
know, they first made their appearance on the Mediterranean coast about
2000 B.C., where they subsequently entered into competition as sea
traders with the mariners of ancient Crete. Apparently the pastoral
nomads pressed northward through Mesopotamia and towards Canaan. As much
is suggested by the Biblical narrative which deals with the wanderings
of Terah, Abraham, and Lot. Taking with them their "flocks and herds and
tents", and accompanied by wives, and families, and servants, they
migrated, it is stated, from the Sumerian city of Ur northwards to Haran
"and dwelt there". After Terah's death the tribe wandered through Canaan
and kept moving southward, unable, it would seem, to settle permanently
in any particular district. At length "there was a famine in the
land"--an interesting reference to the "Dry Cycle"--and the wanderers
found it necessary to take refuge for a time in Egypt. There they appear
to have prospered. Indeed, so greatly did their flocks and herds
increase that when they returned to Canaan they found that "the land was
not able to bear them", although the conditions had improved somewhat
during the interval. "There was", as a result, "strife between the
herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle."

It is evident that the area which these pastoral flocks were allowed to
occupy must have been strictly circumscribed, for more than once it is
stated significantly that "the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled in
the land". The two kinsmen found it necessary, therefore, to part
company. Lot elected to go towards Sodom in the plain of Jordan, and
Abraham then moved towards the plain of Mamre, the Amorite, in the
Hebron district. <span id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_271) With Mamre, and
his brothers, Eshcol and Aner, the

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hebrew patriarch
formed a confederacy for mutual protection. <span
id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_272)

Other tribes which were in Palestine at this period included the
Horites, the Rephaims, the Zuzims, the Zamzummims, and the Emims. These
were probably representatives of the older stocks. Like the Amorites,
the Hittites or "children of Heth" were evidently "late corners", and
conquerors. When Abraham purchased the burial cave at Hebron, the
landowner with whom he had to deal was one Ephron, son of Zohar, the
Hittite. <span id="fr_274"></span>[2](#fn_273) This illuminating
statement agrees with what we know regarding Hittite expansion about
2000 B.C. The "Hatti" or "Khatti" had constituted military aristocracies
throughout Syria and extended their influence by forming alliances. Many
of their settlers were owners of estates, and traders who intermarried
with the indigenous peoples and the Arabian invaders. As has been
indicated ([Chapter 1](mba07.htm#an_ch-01)), the large-nosed Armenoid
section of the Hittite confederacy appear to have contributed to the
racial blend known vaguely as the Semitic. Probably the particular group
of Amorites with whom Abraham became associated had those pronounced
Armenoid traits which can still be traced in representatives of the
Hebrew people. Of special interest in this connection is Ezekiel's
declaration regarding the ethnics of Jerusalem: "Thy birth and thy
nativity", he said, "is of the land of Canaan; thy father was an
Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite." <span
id="fr_275"></span>[3](#fn_274)

It was during Abraham's residence in Hebron that the Western Land was
raided by a confederacy of Babylonian and Elamite battle lords. The
Biblical narrative which deals with this episode is of particular
interest and has long engaged the attention of European scholars:

"And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Hammurabi) king
of Shinar (Sumer), Arioch (Eri-aku or Warad-Sin) king of Ellasar
(Larsa), Chedor-laomer (Kudur-Mabug) king of Elam, and Tidal (Tudhula)
king of nations; that these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with
Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of
Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar. All these joined together
in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea. Twelve years they served
Chedor-laomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled." <span
id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_275) Apparently the Elamites had conquered
part of Syria after entering southern Babylonia.

Chedor-laomer and his allies routed the Rephaims, the Zuzims, the Emims,
the Horites and others, and having sacked Sodom and Gomorrah, carried
away Lot and "his goods". On hearing of this disaster, Abraham collected
a force of three hundred and eighteen men, all of whom were no doubt
accustomed to guerrilla warfare, and delivered a night attack on the
tail of the victorious army which was withdrawing through the area
afterwards allotted to the Hebrew tribe of Dan. The surprise was
complete; Abraham "smote" the enemy and "pursued them unto Hobah, which
is on the left hand of Damascus. And he brought back all the goods, and
also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also,
and the people." <span id="fr_277"></span>[2](#fn_276)

The identification of Hammurabi with Amraphel is now generally accepted.
At first the guttural "h", which gives the English rendering
"Khammurabi", presented a serious difficulty, but in time the form
"Ammurapi" which appears on a tablet became known, and the conclusion
was reached that the softer "h" sound was used and not the guttural. The
"l" in the Biblical Amraphel

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

has suggested "Ammurapi-ilu", "Hammurabi, the god", but it has been
argued, on the other hand, that the change may have been due to western
habitual phonetic conditions, or perhaps the slight alteration of an
alphabetical sign. Chedor-laomer, identified with Kudur-Mabug, may have
had several local names. One of his sons, either Warad-Sin or Rim-Sin,
but probably the former, had his name Semitized as Eri-Aku, and this
variant appears in inscriptions. "Tidal, king of nations", has not been
identified. The suggestion that he was "King of the Gutium" remains in
the realm of suggestion. Two late tablets have fragmentary inscriptions
which read like legends with some historical basis. One mentions
Kudur-lahmal (?Chedor-laomer) and the other gives the form
"Kudur-lahgumal", and calls him "King of the land of Elam". Eri-Eaku
(?Eri-aku) and Tudhula (?Tidal) are also mentioned. Attacks had been
delivered on Babylon, and the city and its great temple E-sagila were
flooded. It is asserted that the Elamites "exercised sovereignty in
Babylon" for a period. These interesting tablets have been published by
Professor Pinches.

The fact that the four leaders of the expedition to Canaan are all
referred to as "kings" in the Biblical narrative need not present any
difficulty. Princes and other subject rulers who governed under an
overlord might be and, as a matter of fact, were referred to as kings.
"I am a king, son of a king", an unidentified monarch recorded on one of
the two tablets just referred to. Kudur-Mabug, King of Elam, during his
lifetime called his son Warad-Sin (Eri-Aku = Arioch) "King of Larsa". It
is of interest to note, too, in connection with the Biblical narrative
regarding the invasion of Syria and Palestine, that he styled himself
"overseer of the Amurru (Amorites)".

 

<span id="img_24800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HAMMURABI
RECEIVING THE ''CODE OF LAWS'' FROM THE SUN GOD&lt;br&gt;
(&lt;i&gt;Louvre, Paris&lt;/i&gt;)&lt;br&gt; Photo.
Giraudon](tn/24800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24800.jpg)  
HAMMURABI RECEIVING THE ''CODE OF LAWS'' FROM THE SUN GOD  
(*Louvre, Paris*)  
Photo. Giraudon  
</span>

 

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

No traces have yet been found in Palestine of its conquest by the
Elamites, nor have the excavators been able to substantiate the claim of
Lugal-zaggizi of a previous age to have extended his empire to the
shores of the Mediterranean. Any relics which these and other eastern
conquerors may have left were possibly destroyed by the Egyptians and
Hittites.

When Hammurabi came to the throne he had apparently to recognize the
overlordship of the Elamite king or his royal son at Larsa. Although
Sin-muballit had captured Isin, it was retaken, probably after the death
of the Babylonian war-lord, by Rim-Sin, who succeeded his brother
Warad-Sin, and for a time held sway in Lagash, Nippur, and Erech, as
well as Larsa.

It was not until the thirty-first year of his reign that Hammurabi
achieved ascendancy over his powerful rival. Having repulsed an Elamite
raid, which was probably intended to destroy the growing power of
Babylon, he "smote down Rim-Sin", whose power he reduced almost to
vanishing point. For about twenty years afterwards that subdued monarch
lived in comparative obscurity; then he led a force of allies against
Hammurabi's son and successor, Samsu-iluna, who defeated him and put him
to death, capturing, in the course of his campaign, the revolting cities
of Emutbalum, Erech, and Isin. So was the last smouldering ember of
Elamite power stamped out in Babylonia.

Hammurabi, statesman and general, is one of the great personalities of
the ancient world. No more celebrated monarch ever held sway in Western
Asia. He was proud of his military achievements, but preferred to be
remembered as a servant of the gods, a just ruler, a father of his
people, and "the shepherd that gives peace". In the epilogue to his code
of laws he refers to "the burden

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

of royalty", and declares that he "cut off the enemy" and "lorded it
over the conquered" so that his subjects might have security. Indeed,
his anxiety for their welfare was the most pronounced feature of his
character. "I carried all the people of Sumer and Akkad in my bosom", he
declared in his epilogue. "By my protection, I guided in peace its
brothers. By my wisdom I provided for them." He set up his stele, on
which the legal code was inscribed, so "that the great should not
oppress the weak" and "to counsel the widow and orphan", and "to succour
the injured . . . The king that is gentle, king of the city, exalted am
I." <span id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_277)

Hammurabi was no mere framer of laws but a practical administrator as
well. He acted as supreme judge, and his subjects could appeal to him as
the Romans could to Cæsar. Nor was any case too trivial for his
attention. The humblest man was assured that justice would be done if
his grievance were laid before the king. Hammurabi was no respecter of
persons, and treated alike all his subjects high and low. He punished
corrupt judges, protected citizens against unjust governors, reviewed
the transactions of moneylenders with determination to curb extortionate
demands, and kept a watchful eye on the operations of taxgatherers.

There can be little doubt but that he won the hearts of his subjects,
who enjoyed the blessings of just administration under a well-ordained
political system. He must also have endeared himself to them as an
exemplary exponent of religious tolerance. He respected the various
deities in whom the various groups of people reposed their faith,
restored despoiled temples, and reendowed them with characteristic
generosity. By so doing he not only

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

afforded the pious full freedom and opportunity to perform their
religious ordinances, but also promoted the material welfare of his
subjects, for the temples were centres of culture and the priests were
the teachers of the young. Excavators have discovered at Sippar traces
of a school which dates from the Hammurabi Dynasty. Pupils learned to
read and write, and received instruction in arithmetic and mensuration.
They copied historical tablets, practised the art of composition, and
studied geography.

Although there were many professional scribes, a not inconsiderable
proportion of the people of both sexes were able to write private and
business letters. Sons wrote from a distance to their fathers when in
need of money then as now, and with the same air of undeserved martyrdom
and subdued but confident appeal. One son indited a long complaint
regarding the quality of the food he was given in his lodgings. Lovers
appealed to forgetful ladies, showing great concern regarding their
health. "Inform me how it fares with thee," one wrote four thousand
years ago. "I went up to Babylon so that I might meet thee, but did not,
and was much depressed. Let me know why thou didst go away so that I may
be made glad. And do come hither. Ever have care of thy health,
remembering me." Even begging-letter writers were not unknown. An
ancient representative of this class once wrote to his employer from
prison. He expressed astonishment that he had been arrested, and, having
protested his innocence, he made touching appeal for little luxuries
which were denied to him, adding that the last consignment which had
been forwarded had never reached him.

Letters were often sent by messengers who were named, but there also
appears to have been some sort of postal system. Letter carriers,
however, could not

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

have performed their duties without the assistance of beasts of burden.
Papyri were not used as in Egypt. Nor was ink required. Babylonian
letters were shapely little bricks resembling cushions. The angular
alphabetical characters, bristling with thorn-like projections, were
impressed with a wedge-shaped stylus on tablets of soft clay which were
afterwards carefully baked in an oven. Then the letters were placed in
baked clay envelopes, sealed and addressed, or wrapped in pieces of
sacking transfixed by seals. If the ancient people had a festive season
which was regarded, like the European Yuletide or the Indian Durga
fortnight, as an occasion suitable for the general exchange of
expressions of good-will, the Babylonian streets and highways must have
been greatly congested by the postal traffic, while muscular postmen
worked overtime distributing the contents of heavy and bulky letter
sacks. Door to door deliveries would certainly have presented
difficulties. Wood being dear, everyone could not afford doors, and some
houses were entered by stairways leading to the flat and partly open
roofs.

King Hammurabi had to deal daily with a voluminous correspondence. He
received reports from governors in all parts of his realm, legal
documents containing appeals, and private communications from relatives
and others. He paid minute attention to details, and was probably one of
the busiest men in Babylonia. Every day while at home, after worshipping
Merodach at E-sagila, he dictated letters to his scribes, gave audiences
to officials, heard legal appeals and issued interlocutors, and dealt
with the reports regarding his private estates. He looks a typical man
of affairs in sculptured representations--shrewd, resolute, and
unassuming, feeling "the burden of royalty", but ever ready and well
qualified to discharge

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

his duties with thoroughness and insight. His grasp of detail was
equalled only by his power to conceive of great enterprises which
appealed to his imagination. It was a work of genius on his part to weld
together that great empire of miscellaneous states extending from
southern Babylonia to Assyria, and from the borders of Elam to the
Mediterranean coast, by a universal legal Code which secured
tranquillity and equal rights to all, promoted business, and set before
his subjects the ideals of right thinking and right living.

Hammurabi recognized that conquest was of little avail unless followed
by the establishment of a just and well-arranged political system, and
the inauguration of practical measures to secure the domestic,
industrial, and commercial welfare of the people as a whole. He engaged
himself greatly, therefore, in developing the natural resources of each
particular district. The network of irrigating canals was extended in
the homeland so that agriculture might prosper: these canals also
promoted trade, for they were utilized for travelling by boat and for
the distribution of commodities. As a result of his activities Babylon
became not only the administrative, but also the commercial centre of
his Empire--the London of Western Asia--and it enjoyed a spell of
prosperity which was never surpassed in subsequent times. Yet it never
lost its pre-eminent position despite the attempts of rival states,
jealous of its glory and influence, to suspend its activities. It had
been too firmly established during the Hammurabi Age, which was the
Golden Age of Babylonia, as the heartlike distributor and controller of
business life through a vast network of veins and arteries, to be
displaced by any other Mesopotamian city to pleasure even a mighty
monarch. For two thousand years, from the time of Hammurabi until the
dawn of the

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christian era, the
city of Babylon remained amidst many political changes the metropolis of
Western Asiatic commerce and culture, and none was more eloquent in its
praises than the scholarly pilgrim from Greece who wondered at its
magnificence and reverenced its antiquities.

Hammurabi's reign was long as it was prosperous. There is no general
agreement as to when he ascended the throne--some say in 2123 B.C.,
others hold that it was after 2000 B.C.--but it is certain that he
presided over the destinies of Babylon for the long period of
forty-three years.

There are interesting references to the military successes of his reign
in the prologue to the legal Code. It is related that when he "avenged
Larsa", the seat of Rim-Sin, he restored there the temple of the sun
god. Other temples were built up at various ancient centres, so that
these cultural organizations might contribute to the welfare of the
localities over which they held sway. At Nippur he thus honoured Enlil,
at Eridu the god Ea, at Ur the god Sin, at Erech the god Anu and the
goddess Nana (Ishtar), at Kish the god Zamama and the goddess Ma-ma, at
Cuthah the god Nergal, at Lagash the god Nin-Girsu, while at Adab and
Akkad, "celebrated for its wide squares", and other centres he carried
out religious and public works. In Assyria he restored the colossus of
Ashur, which had evidently been carried away by a conqueror, and he
developed the canal system of Nineveh.

Apparently Lagash and Adab had not been completely deserted during his
reign, although their ruins have not yielded evidence that they
flourished after their fall during the long struggle with the aggressive
and plundering Elamites.

Hammurabi referred to himself in the Prologue as "a king who commanded
obedience in all the four

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

quarters". He was the sort of benevolent despot whom Carlyle on one
occasion clamoured vainly for--not an Oriental despot in the commonly
accepted sense of the term. As a German writer puts it, his despotism
was a form of Patriarchal Absolutism. "When Marduk (Merodach)", as the
great king recorded, "brought me to direct all people, and commissioned
me to give judgment, I laid down justice and right in the provinces, I
made all flesh to prosper." <span id="fr_279"></span>[1](#fn_278) That
was the keynote of his long life; he regarded himself as the earthly
representative of the Ruler of all--Merodach, "the lord god of right",
who carried out the decrees of Anu, the sky god of Destiny.

The next king, Samsu-iluna, reigned nearly as long as his illustrious
father, and similarly lived a strenuous and pious life. Soon after he
came to the throne the forces of disorder were let loose, but, as has
been stated, he crushed and slew his most formidable opponent, Rim-Sin,
the Elamite king, who had gathered together an army of allies. During
his reign a Kassite invasion was repulsed. The earliest Kassites, a
people of uncertain racial affinities, began to settle in the land
during Hammurabi's lifetime. Some writers connect them with the
Hittites, and others with the Iranians, vaguely termed as Indo-European
or Indo-Germanic folk. Ethnologists as a rule regard them as identical
with the Cossæi, whom the Greeks found settled between Babylon and
Media, east of the Tigris and north of Elam. The Hittites came south as
raiders about a century later. It is possible that the invading Kassites
had overrun Elam and composed part of Rim-Sin's army. After settled
conditions were secured many of them remained in Babylonia, where they
engaged like

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

their pioneers in agricultural pursuits. No doubt they were welcomed in
that capacity, for owing to the continuous spread of culture and the
development of commerce, rural labour had become scarce and dear.
Farmers had a long-standing complaint, "The harvest truly is plenteous,
but the labourers are few". <span id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_279)
"Despite the existence of slaves, who were for the most part domestic
servants, there was", writes Mr. Johns, "considerable demand for free
labour in ancient Babylonia. This is clear from the large number of
contracts relating to hire which have come down to us. . . . As a rule,
the man was hired for the harvest and was free directly after. But there
are many examples in which the term of service was different--one month,
half a year, or a whole year. . . . Harvest labour was probably far
dearer than any other, because of its importance, the skill and exertion
demanded, and the fact that so many were seeking for it at once." When a
farm worker was engaged he received a shekel for "earnest money" or
arles, and was penalized for non-appearance or late arrival. <span
id="fr_281"></span>[2](#fn_280)

So great was the political upheaval caused by Rim-Sin and his allies and
imitators in southern Babylonia, that it was not until the seventeenth
year of his reign that Samsu-iluna had recaptured Erech and Ur and
restored their walls. Among other cities which had to be chastised was
ancient Akkad, where a rival monarch endeavoured to establish himself.
Several years were afterwards spent in building new fortifications,
setting up memorials in temples, and cutting and clearing canals. On
more than one occasion during the latter part of his reign he had to
deal with aggressive bands of Amorites.

The greatest danger to the Empire, however, was threatened by a new
kingdom which had been formed in

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bit-Jakin, a part
of Sealand which was afterwards controlled by the mysterious Chaldeans.
Here may have collected evicted and rebel bands of Elamites and
Sumerians and various "gentlemen of fortune" who were opposed to the
Hammurabi regime. After the fall of Rim-Sin it became powerful under a
king called Ilu-ma-ilu. Samsu-iluna conducted at least two campaigns
against his rival, but without much success. Indeed, he was in the end
compelled to retreat with considerable loss owing to the difficult
character of that marshy country.

Abeshu, the next Babylonian king, endeavoured to shatter the cause of
the Sealanders, and made it possible for himself to strike at them by
damming up the Tigris canal. He achieved a victory, but the wily
Ilu-ma-ilu eluded him, and after a reign of sixty years was succeeded by
his son, Kiannib. The Sealand Dynasty, of which little is known, lasted
for over three and a half centuries, and certain of its later monarchs
were able to extend their sway over part of Babylonia, but its power was
strictly circumscribed so long as Hammurabi's descendants held sway.

During Abeshu's reign of twenty-eight years, of which but scanty records
survive, he appears to have proved an able statesman and general. He
founded a new city called Lukhaia, and appears to have repulsed a
Kassite raid.

His son, Ammiditana, who succeeded him, apparently inherited a
prosperous and well-organized Empire, for during the first fifteen years
of his reign he attended chiefly to the adornment of temples and other
pious undertakings. He was a patron of the arts with archæological
leanings, and displayed traits which suggest that he inclined, like
Sumu-la-ilu, to ancestor worship. Entemena, the pious patesi of Lagash,
whose memory is

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

associated with the famous silver vase decorated with the lion-headed
eagle form of Nin-Girsu, had been raised to the dignity of a god, and
Ammiditana caused his statue to be erected so that offerings might be
made to it. He set up several images of himself also, and celebrated the
centenary of the accession to the throne of his grandfather,
Samsu-iluna, "the warrior lord", by unveiling his statue with much
ceremony at Kish. About the middle of his reign he put down a Sumerian
rising, and towards its close had to capture a city which is believed to
be Isin, but the reference is too obscure to indicate what political
significance attached to this incident. His son, Ammizaduga, reigned for
over twenty years quite peacefully so far as is known, and was succeeded
by Samsuditana, whose rule extended over a quarter of a century. Like
Ammiditana, these two monarchs set up images of themselves as well as of
the gods, so that they might be worshipped, no doubt. They also promoted
the interests of agriculture and commerce, and incidentally increased
the revenue from taxation by paying much attention to the canals and
extending the cultivatable areas.

But the days of the brilliant Hammurabi Dynasty were drawing to a close.
It endured for about a century longer than the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt,
which came to an end, according to the Berlin calculations, in 1788 B.C.
Apparently some of the Hammurabi and Amenemhet kings were
contemporaries, but there is no evidence that they came into direct
touch with one another. It was not until at about two centuries after
Hammurabi's day that Egypt first invaded Syria, with which, however, it
had for a long period previously conducted a brisk trade. Evidently the
influence of the Hittites and their Amoritic allies predominated between
Mesopotamia and the Delta

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

frontier of Egypt, and it is significant to find in this connection that
the "Khatti" or "Hatti" were referred to for the first time in Egypt
during the Twelfth Dynasty, and in Babylonia during the Hammurabi
Dynasty, sometime shortly before or after 2000 B.C. About 1800 B.C. a
Hittite raid resulted in overthrow of the last king of the Hammurabi
family at Babylon. The Hyksos invasion of Egypt took place after 1788
B.C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_271"></span>[245:1](mba17.htm#fr_272) *Genesis*, xii and
xiii.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[246:1](mba17.htm#fr_273) *Genesis*, xiv, 13.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[246:2](mba17.htm#fr_274) *Ibid*., xxiii.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[246:3](mba17.htm#fr_275) *Ezekiel*, xvi, 3.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[247:1](mba17.htm#fr_276) *Genesis*, xiv, 1-4.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[247:2](mba17.htm#fr_277) *Ibid*., 5-24.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[250:1](mba17.htm#fr_278) *Babylonian and
Assyrian Laws, Contracts, and Letters*, C. H. W. Johns, pp. 392 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[255:1](mba17.htm#fr_279) Translation by Johns
in *Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, Contracts, and Letters*, pp. 390 *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[256:1](mba17.htm#fr_280) *Matthew*, ix, 37.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[256:2](mba17.htm#fr_281) Johns's *Babylonian
and Assyrian Laws*, &c., pp. 371-2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Rise of the Hittites, Mitannians, Kassites, Hyksos,
and Assyrians](mba18)
