[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba18)  [Next](mba20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span id="an_ch-13"></span>

### CHAPTER XIII

### Astrology and Astronomy

<span class="small">Culture and Superstition--Primitive Star
Myths--Naturalism, Totemism, and Animism--Stars as Ghosts of Men,
Giants, and Wild Animals--Gods as Constellations and Planets--Babylonian
and Egyptian Mysticism--Osiris, Tammuz, and Merodach--Ishtar and Isis as
Bisexual Deities--The Babylonian Planetary Deities--Planets as Forms of
Tammuz and Ghosts of Gods--The Signs of the Zodiac--The "Four
Quarters"--Cosmic Periods in Babylonia, India, Greece, and
Ireland--Babylonian System of Calculation--Traced in Indian Yuga
System--Astrology--Beliefs of the Masses--Rise of Astronomy--Conflicting
Views of Authorities--Greece and Babylonia--Eclipses Foretold--The Dial
of Ahaz--Omens of Heaven and Air--Biblical References to
Constellations--The Past in the Present.</span>

THE empire builders of old who enriched themselves with the spoils of
war and the tribute of subject States, not only satisfied personal
ambition and afforded protection for industrious traders and workers,
but also incidentally promoted culture and endowed research. When a
conqueror returned to his capital laden with treasure, he made generous
gifts to the temples. He believed that his successes were rewards for
his piety, that his battles were won for him by his god or goddess of
war. It was necessary, therefore, that he should continue to find favour
in the eyes of the deity who had been proved to be more powerful than
the god of his enemies. Besides, he had to make provision during his
absence on long campaigns, or while absorbed in administrative work, for
the constant performance of religious rites, so that the various deities
of water, earth, weather, and corn might be

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

sustained or propitiated with sacrificial offerings, or held in magical
control by the performance of ceremonial rites. Consequently an endowed
priesthood became a necessity in all powerful and well-organized states.

Thus came into existence in Babylonia, as elsewhere, as a result of the
accumulation of wealth, a leisured official class, whose duties tended
to promote intellectual activity, although they were primarily directed
to perpetuate gross superstitious practices. Culture was really a
by-product of temple activities; it flowed forth like pure gold from
furnaces of thought which were walled up by the crude ores of magic and
immemorial tradition.

No doubt in ancient Babylonia, as in Europe during the Middle Ages, the
men of refinement and intellect among the upper classes were attracted
to the temples, while the more robust types preferred the outdoor life,
and especially the life of the soldier. <span
id="fr_303"></span>[1](#fn_301) The permanent triumphs of Babylonian
civilization were achieved either by the priests, or in consequence of
the influence they exercised. They were the grammarians and the scribes,
the mathematicians and the philosophers of that ancient country, the
teachers of the young, and the patrons of the arts and crafts. It was
because the temples were centres of intellectual activity that the
Sumerian language remained the language of culture for long centuries
after it ceased to be the everyday speech of the people.

Reference has already been made to the growth of art, and the
probability that all the arts had their origin in magical practices, and
to the growth of popular education necessitated by the centralization of
business in the

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

temples. It remains with us to deal now with priestly contributions to
the more abstruse sciences. In India the ritualists among the Brahmans,
who concerned themselves greatly regarding the exact construction and
measurements of altars, gave the world algebra; the pyramid builders of
Egypt, who erected vast tombs to protect royal mummies, had perforce to
lay the groundwork of the science of geometry; and the Babylonian
priests who elaborated the study of astrology became great astronomers
because they found it necessary to observe and record accurately the
movements of the heavenly bodies.

From the earliest times of which we have knowledge, the religious
beliefs of the Sumerians had vague stellar associations. But it does not
follow that their myths were star myths to begin with. A people who
called constellations "the ram", "the bull", "the lion", or "the
scorpion", did not do so because astral groups suggested the forms of
animals, but rather because the animals had an earlier connection with
their religious life.

At the same time it should be recognized that the mystery of the stars
must ever have haunted the minds of primitive men. Night with all its
terrors appealed more strongly to their imaginations than refulgent day
when they felt more secure; they were concerned most regarding what they
feared most. Brooding in darkness regarding their fate, they evidently
associated the stars with the forces which influenced their lives--the
ghosts of ancestors, of totems, the spirits that brought food or famine
and controlled the seasons. As children see images in a fire, so they
saw human life reflected in the starry sky. To the simple minds of early
folks the great moon seemed to be the parent of the numerous twinkling
and moving orbs. In Babylon, indeed, the moon was regarded as the father
not only of the stars but of the sun

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

also; there, as elsewhere, lunar worship was older than solar worship.

Primitive beliefs regarding the stars were of similar character in
various parts of the world. But the importance which they assumed in
local mythologies depended in the first place on local phenomena. On the
northern Eur-Asian steppes, for instance, where stars vanished during
summer's blue nights, and were often obscured by clouds in winter, they
did not impress men's minds so persistently and deeply as in Babylonia,
where for the greater part of the year they gleamed in darkness through
a dry transparent atmosphere with awesome intensity. The development of
an elaborate system of astral myths, besides, was only possible in a
country where the people had attained to a high degree of civilization,
and men enjoyed leisure and security to make observations and compile
records. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that Babylonia was the
cradle of astronomy. But before this science had destroyed the theory
which it was fostered to prove, it lay smothered for long ages in the
debris of immemorial beliefs. It is necessary, therefore, in dealing
with Babylonian astral myths to endeavour to approach within reasonable
distance of the point of view, or points of view, of the people who
framed them.

Babylonian religious thought was of highly complex character. Its
progress was ever hampered by blended traditions. The earliest settlers
in the Tigro-Euphrates valley no doubt imported many crude beliefs which
they had inherited from their Palæolithic ancestors--the modes of
thought which were the moulds of new theories arising from new
experiences. When consideration is given to the existing religious
beliefs of various peoples throughout the world, in low stages of
culture, it is found that the highly developed creeds of Babylonia,

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egypt, and other
countries where civilization flourished were never divested wholly of
their primitive traits.

Among savage peoples two grades of religious ideas have been identified,
and classified as Naturalism and Animism. In the plane of Naturalism the
belief obtains that a vague impersonal force, which may have more than
one manifestation and is yet manifested in everything, controls the
world and the lives of human beings. An illustration of this stage of
religious consciousness is afforded by Mr. Risley, who, in dealing with
the religion of the jungle dwellers of Chota Nagpur, India, says that
"in most cases the indefinite something which they fear and attempt to
propitiate is not a person at all in any sense of the word; if one must
state the case in positive terms, I should say that the idea which lies
at the root of their religion is that of a power rather than many
powers". <span id="fr_304"></span>[1](#fn_302)

Traces of Naturalism appear to have survived in Sumeria in the belief
that "the spiritual, the Zi, was that which manifested life. . . . The
test of the manifestation of life was movement." <span
id="fr_305"></span>[2](#fn_303) All things that moved, it was conceived
in the plane of Naturalism, possessed "self power"; the river was a
living thing, as was also the fountain; a stone that fell from a hill
fell of its own accord; a tree groaned because the wind caused it to
suffer pain. This idea that inanimate objects had conscious existence
survived in the religion of the Aryo-Indians. In the Nala story of the
Indian epic, the *Mahàbhàrata*, the disconsolate wife Damayanti
addresses a mountain when searching for her lost husband:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">This, the monarch of all mountains, ask I of the
king of men;  
"O all-honoured Prince of Mountains, with thy heavenward soaring peaks .
. . <span id="page_292">p. 292</span>  
Hast thou seen the kingly Nala in this dark and awful wood?. . .  
Why repliest thou not, O Mountain?"</span>

</div>

She similarly addresses the Asoka tree:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Hast thou seen Nishadha's monarch, hast thou seen
my only love? . . .  
That I may depart ungrieving, fair Asoka, answer me. . . ."  
Many a tree she stood and gazed on. . . . <span
id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_304)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It will be
recognized that when primitive men gave names to mountains, rivers, or
the ocean, these possessed for them a deeper significance than they do
for us at the present day. The earliest peoples of Indo-European speech
who called the sky "dyeus", and those of Sumerian speech who called it
"ana", regarded it not as the sky "and nothing more", but as something
which had conscious existence and "self power". Our remote ancestors
resembled, in this respect, those imaginative children who hold
conversations with articles of furniture, and administer punishment to
stones which, they believe, have tripped them up voluntarily and with
desire to commit an offence.

In this early stage of development the widespread totemic beliefs appear
to have had origin. Families or tribes believed that they were descended
from mountains, trees, or wild animals.

Æsop's fable about the mountain which gave birth to a mouse may be a
relic of Totemism; so also may be the mountain symbols on the standards
of Egyptian ships which appear on pre-dynastic pottery; the black dwarfs
of Teutonic mythology were earth children. <span
id="fr_307"></span>[2](#fn_305)

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

Adonis sprang from a tree; his mother may have, according to primitive
belief, been simply a tree; Dagda, the patriarchal Irish corn god, was
an oak; indeed, the idea of a "world tree", which occurs in Sumerian,
Vedic-Indian, Teutonic, and other mythologies, was probably a product of
Totemism.

Wild animals were considered to be other forms of human beings who could
marry princes and princesses as they do in so many fairy tales.
Damayanti addressed the tiger, as well as the mountain and tree, saying:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                   I approach him without fear.  
"Of the beasts art thou the monarch, all this forest thy domain; . . .  
Thou, O king of beasts, console me, if my Nala thou hast seen." <span
id="fr_308"></span>[1](#fn_306)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A tribal totem
exercised sway over a tribal district. In Egypt, as Herodotus recorded,
the crocodile was worshipped in one district and hunted down in another.
Tribes fought against tribes when totemic animals were slain. The
Babylonian and Indian myths about the conflicts between eagles and
serpents may have originated as records of battles between eagle clans
and serpent clans. Totemic animals were tabooed. The Set pig of Egypt
and the devil pig of Ireland, Scotland, and Wales were not eaten except
sacrificially. Families were supposed to be descended from swans and
were named Swans, or from seals and were named Seals, like the Gaelic
"Mac Codrums", whose surname signifies "son of the seal"; the nickname
of the Campbells, "sons of the pig", may refer to their totemic boar's
head crest, which commemorated the slaying, perhaps the sacrificial
slaying, of the boar by their ancestor Diarmid. Mr. Garstang, in *The
Syrian Goddess*, thinks it possible that the boar which killed

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Adonis was of
totemic origin. So may have been the fish form of the Sumerian god Ea.
When an animal totem was sacrificed once a year, and eaten sacrificially
so that the strength of the clan might be maintained, the priest who
wrapped himself in its skin was supposed to have transmitted to him
certain magical powers; he became identified with the totem and
prophesied and gave instruction as the totem. Ea was depicted clad in
the fish's skin.

Animism, the other early stage of human development, also produced
distinctive modes of thought. Men conceived that the world swarmed with
spirits, that a spirit groaned in the wind-shaken tree, that the howling
wind was an invisible spirit, that there were spirits in fountains,
rivers, valleys, hills, and in ocean, and in all animals; and that a
hostile spirit might possess an individual and change his nature. The
sun and the moon were the abodes of spirits, or the vessels in which
great spirits sailed over the sea of the sky; the stars were all
spirits, the "host of heaven". These spirits existed in groups of seven,
or groups of three, and the multiple of three, or in pairs, or operated
as single individuals.

Although certain spirits might confer gifts upon mankind, they were at
certain seasons and in certain localities hostile and vengeful, like the
grass-green fairies in winter, or the earth-black elves when their gold
was sought for in forbidden and secret places. These spirits were the
artisans of creation and vegetation, like the Egyptian Khnumu and the
Indian Rhibus; they fashioned the grass blades and the stalks of corn,
but at times of seasonal change they might ride on their tempest steeds,
or issue forth from flooding rivers and lakes. Man was greatly concerned
about striking

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

bargains with them to secure their services, and about propitiating
them, or warding off their attacks with protective charms, and by
performing "ceremonies of riddance". The ghosts of the dead, being
spirits, were similarly propitious or harmful on occasion; as emissaries
of Fate they could injure the living.

Ancestor worship, the worship of ghosts, had origin in the stage of
Animism. But ancestor worship was not developed in Babylonia as in
China, for instance, although traces of it survived in the worship of
stars as ghosts, in the deification of kings, and the worship of
patriarchs, who might be exalted as gods or identified with a supreme
god. The Egyptian Pharaoh Unas became the sun god and the constellation
of Orion by devouring his predecessors. <span
id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_307) He ate his god as a tribe ate its animal
totem; he became the "bull of heaven".

There were star totems as well as mountain totems. A St. Andrew's cross
sign, on one of the Egyptian ship standards referred to, may represent a
star. The Babylonian goddess Ishtar was symbolized as a star, and she
was the "world mother". Many primitive currents of thought shaped the
fretted rocks of ancient mythologies.

In various countries all round the globe the belief prevailed that the
stars were ghosts of the mighty dead--of giants, kings, or princes, or
princesses, or of pious people whom the gods loved, or of animals which
were worshipped. A few instances may be selected at random. When the
Teutonic gods slew the giant Thjasse, he appeared in the heavens as
Sirius. In India the ghosts of the "seven Rishis", who were semi-divine
Patriarchs, formed the constellation of the Great Bear, which in Vedic
times was called the "seven bears". The wives of the seven Rishis were
the stars of the Pleiades. In Greece

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

the Pleiades were the ghosts of the seven daughters of Atlas and
Pleione, and in Australia they were and are a queen and six handmaidens.
In these countries, as elsewhere, stories were told to account for the
"lost Pleiad", a fact which suggests that primitive men were more
constant observers of the heavenly bodies than might otherwise be
supposed. The Arcadians believed that they were descended, as Hesiod
recorded, from a princess who was transformed by Zeus into a bear; in
this form Artemis slew her and she became the "Great Bear" of the sky.
The Egyptian Isis was the star Sirius, whose rising coincided with the
beginning of the Nile inundation. Her first tear for the dead Osiris
fell into the river on "the night of the drop". The flood which ensued
brought the food supply. Thus the star was not only the Great Mother of
all, but the sustainer of all.

The brightest stars were regarded as being the greatest and most
influential. In Babylonia all the planets were identified with great
deities. Jupiter, for instance, was Merodach, and one of the astral
forms of Ishtar was Venus. Merodach was also connected with "the fish of
Ea" (Pisces), so that it is not improbable that Ea worship had stellar
associations. Constellations were given recognition before the planets
were identified.

A strange blending of primitive beliefs occurred when the deities were
given astral forms. As has been shown ([Chapter
III](mba09.htm#an_ch-03)) gods were supposed to die annually. The
Egyptian priests pointed out to Herodotus the grave of Osiris and also
his star. There are "giants' graves" also in those countries in which
the gods were simply ferocious giants. A god might assume various forms;
he might take the form of an insect, like Indra, and hide in a plant, or
become a mouse, or a serpent, like the gods of Erech in the Gilgamesh
epic. The further theory that a god

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

could exist in various forms at one and the same time suggests that it
had its origin among a people who accepted the idea of a personal god
while yet in the stage of Naturalism. In Egypt Osiris, for instance, was
the moon, which came as a beautiful child each month and was devoured as
the wasting "old moon" by the demon Set; he was the young god who was
slain in his prime each year; he was at once the father, husband, and
son of Isis; he was the Patriarch who reigned over men and became the
Judge of the Dead; he was the earth spirit, he was the bisexual Nile
spirit, he was the spring sun; he was the Apis bull of Memphis, and the
ram of Mendes; he was the reigning Pharaoh. In his fusion with Ra, who
was threefold--Khepera, Ra, and Tum--he died each day as an old man; he
appeared in heaven at night as the constellation Orion, which was his
ghost, or was, perhaps, rather the Sumerian Zi, the spiritual essence of
life. Osiris, who resembled Tammuz, a god of many forms also, was
addressed as follows in one of the Isis chants:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">There proceedeth from thee the strong Orion in
heaven at evening, at the resting of every day!  
Lo it is I (Isis), at the approach of the Sothis (Sirius) period, who
doth watch for him (the child Osiris),  
Nor will I leave off watching for him; for that which proceedeth from
thee (the living Osiris) is revered.  
An emanation from thee causeth life to gods and men, reptiles and
animals, and they live by means thereof.  
Come thou to us from thy chamber, in the day when thy soul begetteth
emanations,--  
The day when offerings upon offerings are made to thy spirit, which
causeth the gods and men likewise to live. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_308)</span>

</div>

This extract emphasizes how unsafe it is to confine certain deities
within narrow limits by terming them simply

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "solar gods",
"lunar gods", "astral gods", or "earth gods". One deity may have been
simultaneously a sun god and moon god, an air god and an earth god, one
who was dead and also alive, unborn and also old. The priests of
Babylonia and Egypt were less accustomed to concrete and logical
definitions than their critics and expositors of the twentieth century.
Simple explanations of ancient beliefs are often by reason of their very
simplicity highly improbable. Recognition must ever be given to the
puzzling complexity of religious thought in Babylonia and Egypt, and to
the possibility that even to the priests the doctrines of a particular
cult, which embraced the accumulated ideas of centuries, were invariably
confusing and vague, and full of inconsistencies; they were mystical in
the sense that the understanding could not grasp them although it
permitted their acceptance. A god, for instance, might be addressed at
once in the singular and plural, perhaps because he had developed from
an animistic group of spirits, or, perhaps, for reasons we cannot
discover. This is shown clearly by the following pregnant extract from a
Babylonian tablet: "*Powerful, O Sevenfold, one are ye*". Mr. L. W.
King, the translator, comments upon it as follows: "There is no doubt
that the name was applied to a group of gods who were so closely
connected that, though addressed in the plural, they could in the same
sentence be regarded as forming a single personality". <span
id="fr_311"></span>[1](#fn_309)

Like the Egyptian Osiris, the Babylonian Merodach was a highly complex
deity. He was the son of Ea, god of the deep; he died to give origin to
human life when he commanded that his head should be cut off so that the
first human beings might be fashioned by mixing his blood with the
earth; he was the wind god, who gave

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "the air of life";
he was the deity of thunder and the sky; he was the sun of spring in his
Tammuz character; he was the daily sun, and the planets Jupiter and
Mercury as well as Sharru (Regulus); he had various astral associations
at various seasons. Ishtar, the goddess, was Iku (Capella), the water
channel star, in January--February, and Merodach was Iku in May--June.
This strange system of identifying the chief deity with different stars
at different periods, or simultaneously, must not be confused with the
monotheistic identification of him with other gods. Merodach changed his
forms with Ishtar, and had similarly many forms. This goddess, for
instance, was, even when connected with one particular heavenly body,
liable to change. According to a tablet fragment she was, as the planet
Venus, "a female at sunset and a male at sunrise" <span
id="fr_312"></span>[1](#fn_310)--that is, a bisexual deity like Nannar
of Ur, the father and mother deity combined, and Isis of Egypt. Nannar
is addressed in a famous hymn:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Father Nannar, Lord, God Sin, ruler among the gods.
. . .  
*Mother body which produceth all things*. . . .  
Merciful, gracious Father, in whose hand the life of the whole land is
contained.</span>

</div>

One of the Isis chants of Egypt sets forth, addressing Osiris:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">There cometh unto thee Isis, lady of the horizon,
who hath begotten herself alone in the image of the gods . . .  
She hath taken vengeance before Horus, *the woman who was made a male by
her father Osiris*. <span id="fr_313"></span>[2](#fn_311)</span>

</div>

Merodach, like Osiris-Sokar, was a "lord of many existences", and
likewise "the mysterious one, he who is unknown to mankind". <span
id="fr_314"></span>[3](#fn_312) It was impossible for the human mind "a
greater than itself to know".

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

Evidence has not yet been forthcoming to enable us to determine the
period at which the chief Babylonian deities were identified with the
planets, but it is clear that Merodach's ascendancy in astral form could
not have occurred prior to the rise of that city god of Babylon as chief
of the pantheon by displacing Enlil. At the same time it must be
recognized that long before the Hammurabi age the star-gazers of the
Tigro-Euphrates valley must have been acquainted with the movements of
the chief planets and stars, and, no doubt, they connected them with
seasonal changes as in Egypt, where Isis was identified with Sirius long
before the Ptolemaic age, when Babylonian astronomy was imported. Horus
was identified not only with the sun but also with Saturn, Jupiter, and
Mars. <span id="fr_315"></span>[1](#fn_313) Even the primitive
Australians, as has been indicated, have their star myths; they refer to
the stars Castor and Pollux as two young men, like the ancient Greeks,
while the African Bushmen assert that these stars are two girls. It
would be a mistake, however, to assume that the prehistoric Sumerians
were exact astronomers. Probably they were, like the Aryo-Indians of the
Vedic period, "not very accurate observers". <span
id="fr_316"></span>[2](#fn_314)

It is of special interest to find that the stars were grouped by the
Babylonians at the earliest period in companies of seven. The importance
of this magical number is emphasized by the group of seven demons which
rose from the deep to rage over the land ([p. 71](mba10.htm#page_71)).
Perhaps the sanctity of Seven was suggested by Orion, the Bears, and the
Pleiad, one of which constellations may have been the "Sevenfold" deity
addressed as "one". At any rate arbitrary groupings of other stars into
companies of seven took place, for references are made to

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

the seven Tikshi, the seven Lumashi, and the seven Mashi, which are
older than the signs of the Zodiac; so far as can be ascertained these
groups were selected from various constellations. When the five planets
were identified, they were associated with the sun and moon and
connected with the chief gods of the Hammurabi pantheon. A bilingual
list in the British Museum arranges the sevenfold planetary group in the
following order:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The moon, Sin.  
The sun, Shamash.  
Jupiter, Merodach.  
Venus, Ishtar.  
Saturn, Ninip (Nirig).  
Mercury, Nebo.  
Mars, Nergal.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> An ancient name of
the moon was Aa, Â, or Ai, which recalls the Egyptian Aâh or Ah. The
Sumerian moon was Aku, "the measurer", like Thoth of Egypt, who in his
lunar character as a Fate measured out the lives of men, and was a god
of architects, mathematicians, and scribes. The moon was the parent of
the sun or its spouse; and might be male, or female, or both as a
bi-sexual deity.

As the "bull of light" Jupiter had solar associations; he was also the
shepherd of the stars, a title shared by Tammuz as Orion; Nin-Girsu, a
developed form of Tammuz, was identified with both Orion and Jupiter.

Ishtar's identification with Venus is of special interest. When that
planet was at its brightest phase, its rays were referred to as "the
beard" of the goddess; she was the "bearded Aphrodite"--a bisexual deity
evidently. The astrologers regarded the bright Venus as lucky and the
rayless Venus as unlucky.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

Saturn was Nirig, who is best known as Ninip, a deity who was displaced
by Enlil, the elder Bel, and afterwards regarded as his son. His story
has not been recovered, but from the references made to it there is
little doubt that it was a version of the widespread myth about the
elder deity who was slain by his son, as Saturn was by Jupiter and Dyaus
by Indra. It may have resembled the lost Egyptian myth which explained
the existence of the two Horuses--Horus the elder, and Horus, the
posthumous son of Osiris. At any rate, it is of interest to find in this
connection that in Egypt the planet Saturn was Her-Ka, "Horus the Bull".
Ninip was also identified with the bull. Both deities were also
connected with the spring sun, like Tammuz, and were terrible slayers of
their enemies. Ninip raged through Babylonia like a storm flood, and
Horus swept down the Nile, slaying the followers of Set. As the divine
sower of seed, Ninip may have developed from Tammuz as Horus did from
Osiris. Each were at once the father and the son, different forms of the
same deity at various seasons of the year. The elder god was displaced
by the son (spring), and when the son grew old his son slew him in turn.
As the planet Saturn, Ninip was the ghost of the elder god, and as the
son of Bel he was the solar war god of spring, the great wild bull, the
god of fertility. He was also as Ber "lord of the wild boar", an animal
associated with Rimmon. <span id="fr_317"></span>[1](#fn_315)

Nebo (Nabu), who was identified with Mercury, was a god of Borsippa. He
was a messenger and "announcer" of the gods, as the Egyptian Horus in
his connection with Jupiter was Her-ap-sheta, "Horus the opener of that
which is secret". <span id="fr_318"></span>[2](#fn_316) Nebo's original
character is obscure.

 

<span id="img_30200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE GOD NINIP AND
ANOTHER DEITY&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;Marble slab from Kenyan jib (Nineveh):
now in the British Museum&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; Photo
Mansell](tn/30200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/30200.jpg)  
THE GOD NINIP AND ANOTHER DEITY  
*Marble slab from Kenyan jib (Nineveh): now in the British Museum*.  
Photo Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He appears to have
been a highly developed deity of a people well advanced in civilization
when he was exalted as the divine patron of Borsippa. Although Hammurabi
ignored him, he was subsequently invoked with Merodach, and had probably
much in common with Merodach. Indeed, Merodach was also identified with
the planet Mercury. Like the Greek Hermes, Nebo was a messenger of the
gods and an instructor of mankind. Jastrow regards him as "a counterpart
of Ea", and says: "Like Ea, he is the embodiment and source of wisdom.
The art of writing--and therefore of all literature--is more
particularly associated with him. A common form of his name designates
him as the 'god of the stylus'." <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_317)
He appears also to have been a developed form of Tammuz, who was an
incarnation of Ea. Professor Pinches shows that one of his names,
Mermer, was also a non-Semitic name of Ramman. <span
id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_318) Tammuz resembled Ramman in his character
as a spring god of war. It would seem that Merodach as Jupiter displaced
at Babylon Nebo as Saturn, the elder god, as Bel Enlil displaced the
elder Ninip at Nippur.

The god of Mars was Nergal, the patron deity of Cuthah, <span
id="fr_321"></span>[3](#fn_319) who descended into the Underworld and
forced into submission Eresh-ki-gal (Persephone), with whom he was
afterwards associated. His "name", says Professor Pinches, "is supposed
to mean 'lord of the great habitation', which would be a parallel to
that of his spouse, Eresh-ki-gal". <span id="fr_322"></span>[4](#fn_320)
At Erech he symbolized the destroying influence of the sun, and was
accompanied by the demons of pestilence. Mars was a planet of evil,
plague, and death; its animal form was the wolf. In Egypt it was

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

called Herdesher, "the Red Horus", and in Greece it was associated with
Ares (the Roman Mars), the war god, who assumed his boar form to slay
Adonis (Tammuz).

Nergal was also a fire god like the Aryo-Indian Agni, who, as has been
shown, links with Tammuz as a demon slayer and a god of fertility. It
may be that Nergal was a specialized form of Tammuz, who, in a version
of the myth, was reputed to have entered the Underworld as a conqueror
when claimed by Eresh-ki-gal, and to have become, like Osiris, the lord
of the dead. If so, Nergal was at once the slayer and the slain.

The various Babylonian deities who were identified with the planets had
their characters sharply defined as members of an organized pantheon.
But before this development took place certain of the prominent heavenly
bodies, perhaps all the planets, were evidently regarded as
manifestations of one deity, the primeval Tammuz, who was a form of Ea,
or of the twin deities Ea and Anu. Tammuz may have been the "sevenfold
one" of the hymns. At a still earlier period the stars were
manifestations of the Power whom the jungle dwellers of Chota Nagpur
attempt to propitiate--the "world soul" of the cultured Brahmans of the
post-Vedic Indian Age. As much is suggested by the resemblances which
the conventionalized planetary deities bear to Tammuz, whose attributes
they symbolized, and by the Egyptian conception that the sun, Jupiter,
Saturn, and Mars were manifestations of Horus. Tammuz and Horus may have
been personifications of the Power or World Soul vaguely recognized in
the stage of Naturalism.

The influence of animistic modes of thought may be traced in the idea
that the planets and stars were the ghosts of gods who were superseded
by their sons. These sons were identical with their fathers; they
became, as

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

in Egypt, "husbands of their mothers". This idea was perpetuated in the
Aryo-Indian Laws of Manu, in which it is set forth that "the husband,
after conception by his wife, becomes an embryo and is born again of
her". <span id="fr_323"></span>[1](#fn_321) The deities died every year,
but death was simply change. Yet they remained in the separate forms
they assumed in their progress round "the wide circle of necessity".
Horus was remembered as various planets--as the falcon, as the elder sun
god, and as the son of Osiris; and Tammuz was the spring sun, the child,
youth, warrior, the deity of fertility, and the lord of death
(Orion-Nergal), and, as has been suggested, all the planets.

The stars were also the ghosts of deities who died daily. When the sun
perished as an old man at evening, it rose in the heavens as Orion, or
went out and in among the stars as the shepherd of the flock, Jupiter,
the planet of Merodach in Babylonia, and Attis in Asia Minor. The flock
was the group of heavenly spirits invisible by day, the "host of
heaven"--manifestations or ghosts of the emissaries of the controlling
power or powers.

The planets presided over various months of the year. Sin (the moon) was
associated with the third month; it also controlled the calendar; Ninip
(Saturn) was associated with the fourth month, Ishtar (Venus) with the
sixth, Shamash (the sun) with the seventh, Merodach (Jupiter) with the
eighth, Nergal (Mars) with the ninth, and a messenger of the gods,
probably Nebo (Mercury), with the tenth.

Each month was also controlled by a zodiacal constellation. In the
Creation myth of Babylon it is stated that when Merodach engaged in the
work of setting the Universe in order he "set all the great gods in
their

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

several stations", and "also created their images, the stars of the
Zodiac, <span id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_322) and fixed them all" ([p.
147](mba13.htm#page_147)).

Our signs of the Zodiac are of Babylonian origin. They were passed on to
the Greeks by the Phœnicians and Hittites. "There was a time", says
Professor Sayce, "when the Hittites were profoundly affected by
Babylonian civilization, religion, and art. . . ." They "carried the
time-worn civilizations of Babylonia and Egypt to the furthest boundary
of Egypt, and there handed them over to the West in the grey dawn of
European history. . . . Greek traditions affirmed that the rulers of
Mykenæ had come from Lydia, bringing with them the civilization and
treasures of Asia Minor. The tradition has been confirmed by modern
research. While certain elements belonging to the prehistoric culture of
Greece, as revealed at Mykenæ and elsewhere, were derived from Egypt and
Phoenicia, there are others which point to Asia Minor as their source.
And the culture of Asia Minor was Hittite." <span
id="fr_325"></span>[2](#fn_323)

The early Babylonian astronomers did not know, of course, that the earth
revolved round the sun. They believed that the sun travelled across the
heavens flying like a bird or sailing like a boat. <span
id="fr_326"></span>[3](#fn_324) In studying its movements they observed
that it always travelled from west to east along a broad path, swinging
from side to side of it in the course of the year. This path is the
Zodiac--the celestial "circle of necessity". The middle

 

<span id="img_30600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SYMBOLS OF DEITIES
AS ASTRONOMICAL SIGNS&lt;br&gt; Sculptured on a stone recording
privileges granted to Ritti-Marduk by Nebuchadnezzar I&lt;br&gt;
(&lt;i&gt;British Museum&lt;/i&gt;)](tn/30600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/30600.jpg)  
SYMBOLS OF DEITIES AS ASTRONOMICAL SIGNS  
Sculptured on a stone recording privileges granted to Ritti-Marduk by
Nebuchadnezzar I  
(*British Museum*)  
</span>

 

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

line of the sun's path is the Ecliptic. The Babylonian scientists
divided the Ecliptic into twelve equal parts, and grouped in each part
the stars which formed their constellations; these are also called
"Signs of the Zodiac". Each month had thus its sign or constellation.

The names borne at the present day by the signs of the Zodiac are easily
remembered even by children, who are encouraged to repeat the following
familiar lines:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The *Ram*, the *Bull*, the heavenly *Twins*,  
And next the *Crab*, the *Lion* shines.  
     The *Virgin* and the *Scales*;  
The *Scorpion*, *Archer*, and *Sea goat*,  
The man that holds the water pot,  
     And *Fish* with glitt’ring <span id="fr_327"></span>[1](#fn_325)
tails.</span>

</div>

The table on [p. 308](#page_308) shows that our signs are derived from
ancient Babylonia.

The celestial regions were also divided into three or more parts. Three
"fields" were allotted to the ancient triad formed by Ea, Anu, and Bel.
The zodiacal "path" ran through these "fields". Ea's field was in the
west, and was associated with Amurru, the land of the Amorites; Anu's
field was in the south, and was associated with Elam; and Bel's central
"field" was associated with the land of Akkad. When the rulers of Akkad
called themselves "kings of the four quarters", the reference was to the
countries associated with the three divine fields and to Gutium <span
id="fr_328"></span>[2](#fn_326) (east = our north-east). Was Gutium
associated with demons, as in Scandinavia the north-east was associated
with the giants against whom Thor waged war?

The Babylonian Creation myth states that Merodach, having fixed the
stars of the Zodiac, made three stars for

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Constellations.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Date of Sun's Entry<br />
(Babylonian Month in brackets).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Babylonian Equivalent.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Aries (the Ram).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>20th March<br />
(Nisan = March-April).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>The Labourer or Messenger.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Taurus (the Bull).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>20th April<br />
(Iyyar = April-May).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>A divine figure and the "bull of heaven".</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Gemini (the Twins).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>21st May<br />
(Sivan = May-June).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>The Faithful Shepherd and Twins side by side, or head to head and feet to feet.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Cancer (the Crab).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>21st June<br />
(Tammuz = June-July).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Crab or Scorpion.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Leo (the Lion).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>22nd July<br />
(Ab = July-August).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>The big dog (Lion).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Virgo (the Virgin).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>23rd August<br />
(Elul = August-Sept.).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Ishtar, the Virgin's ear of corn.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Libra (the Balance).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>23rd September<br />
(Tisri = Sept.-Oct.).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>The Balance.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Scorpio (the Scorpion).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>23rd October<br />
(Marcheswan = Oct.-Nov.).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Scorpion of darkness.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Sagittarius (the Archer).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>22nd November<br />
(Chisleu = Nov.-Dec.).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Man or man-horse with bow, or an arrow symbol.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Capricornus (the Goat).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>21st December<br />
(Tebet = Dec.-Jan.).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Ea's goat-fish.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Aquarius (the Water Carrier).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>19th January<br />
(Sebat = Jan.-Feb.).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>God with water urn.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Pisces (the Fishes).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>18th February<br />
(Adar = Feb.-March).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="218"><p>Fish tails in canal.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

each month ([p. 147](mba13.htm#page_147)). Mr. Robert Brown, jun., who
has dealt as exhaustively with the astronomical problems of Babylonia as
the available data permitted him, is of opinion that the leading stars
of three constellations are referred

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

to, viz.: (1) the central or zodiacal constellations, (2) the northern
constellations, and (3) the southern constellations. We have thus a
scheme of thirty-six constellations. The "twelve zodiacal stars were
flanked on either side by twelve non-zodiacal stars". Mr. Brown quotes
Diodorus, who gave a résumé of Babylonian astronomico-astrology, in this
connection. He said that "the five planets were called 'Interpreters';
and in subjection to these were marshalled 'Thirty Stars', which were
styled 'Divinities of the Council'. . . The chiefs of the Divinities are
twelve in number, to each of whom they assign a month and one of the
twelve signs of the Zodiac." Through these twelve signs sun, moon, and
planets run their courses. "And with the zodiacal circle they mark out
twenty-four stars, half of which they say are arranged in the north and
half in the south." <span id="fr_329"></span>[1](#fn_327) Mr. Brown
shows that the thirty stars referred to "constituted the original
Euphratean Lunar Zodiac, the parent of the seven ancient lunar zodiacs
which have come down to us, namely, the Persian, Sogdian, Khorasmian,
Chinese, Indian, Arab, and Coptic schemes".

The three constellations associated with each month had each a symbolic
significance: they reflected the characters of their months. At the
height of the rainy season, for instance, the month of Ramman, the
thunder god, was presided over by the zodiacal constellation of the
water urn, the northern constellation "Fish of the Canal", and the
southern "the Horse". In India the black horse was sacrificed at
rain-getting and fertility ceremonies. The months of growth, pestilence,
and scorching sun heat were in turn symbolized. The "Great Bear" was the
"chariot" = "Charles's Wain", and the "Milky Way" the "river of the high
cloud", the Celestial Euphrates, as in Egypt it was the Celestial Nile.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

Of special interest among the many problems presented by Babylonian
astronomical lore is the theory of Cosmic periods or Ages of the
Universe. In the Indian, Greek, and Irish mythologies there are four
Ages--the Silvern (white), Golden (yellow), the Bronze (red), and the
Iron (black). As has been already indicated, Mr. R. Brown, jun., shows
that "the Indian system of Yugas, or ages of the world, presents many
features which forcibly remind us of the Euphratean scheme". The
Babylonians had ten antediluvian kings, who were reputed to have reigned
for vast periods, the total of which amounted to 120 saroi, or 432,000
years. These figures at once recall the Indian Maha-yuga of 4,320,000
years = 432,000 X 10. Apparently the Babylonian and Indian systems of
calculation were of common origin. In both countries the measurements of
time and space were arrived at by utilizing the numerals 10 and 6.

When primitive man began to count he adopted a method which comes
naturally to every schoolboy; he utilized his fingers. Twice five gave
him ten, and from ten he progressed to twenty, and then on to a hundred
and beyond. In making measurements his hands, arms, and feet were at his
service. We are still measuring by feet and yards (standardized strides)
in this country, while those who engage in the immemorial art of
knitting, and, in doing so, repeat designs found on neolithic pottery,
continue to measure in finger breadths, finger lengths, and hand
breadths as did the ancient folks who called an arm length a cubit. Nor
has the span been forgotten, especially by boys in their games with
marbles; the space from the end of the thumb to the end of the little
finger when the hand is extended must have been an important measurement
from the earliest times.

As he made progress in calculations, the primitive

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Babylonian appears
to have been struck by other details in his anatomy besides his sets of
five fingers and five toes. He observed, for instance, that his fingers
were divided into three parts and his thumb into two parts only; <span
id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_328) four fingers multiplied by three gave
him twelve, and multiplying 12 by 3 he reached 36. Apparently the figure
6 attracted him. His body was divided into 6 parts--2 arms, 2 legs, the
head, and the trunk; his 2 ears, 2 eyes, and mouth, and nose also gave
him 6. The basal 6, multiplied by his la fingers, gave him 60, and 60 x
2 (for his 2 hands) gave him 120. In Babylonian arithmetic 6 and 60 are
important numbers, and it is not surprising to find that in the system
of numerals the signs for 1 and 10 combined represent 60.

In fixing the length of a mythical period his first great calculation of
120 came naturally to the Babylonian, and when he undertook to measure
the Zodiac he equated time and space by fixing on 120 degrees. His first
zodiac was the Sumerian lunar zodiac, which contained thirty moon
chambers associated with the "Thirty Stars" of the tablets, and referred
to by Diodorus as "Divinities of the Council". The chiefs of the Thirty
numbered twelve. In this system the year began in the winter solstice.
Mr. Hewitt has shown that the chief annual

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

festival of the Indian Dravidians begins with the first full moon after
the winter festival, and Mr. Brown emphasizes the fact that the list of
Tamil (Dravidian) lunar and solar months are named like the Babylonian
constellations. <span id="fr_331"></span>[1](#fn_329) "Lunar
chronology", wrote Professor Max Müller, "seems everywhere to have
preceded solar chronology." <span id="fr_332"></span>[2](#fn_330) The
later Semitic Babylonian system had twelve solar chambers and the
thirty-six constellations.

Each degree was divided into sixty minutes, and each minute into sixty
seconds. The hours of the day and night each numbered twelve.

Multiplying 6 by 10 (pur), the Babylonian arrived at 60 (soss); 60 x 10
gave him 600 (ner), and 600 x 6, 3600 (sar), while 3600 x 10 gave him
36,000, and 36,000 x 12, 432,000 years, or 120 saroi, which is equal to
the "sar" multiplied by the "soss" x 2. "Pur" signifies "heap"--the ten
fingers closed after being counted; and "ner" signifies "foot". Mr.
George Bertin suggests that when 6 x 10 fingers gave 60 this number was
multiplied by the ten toes, with the result that 600 was afterwards
associated with the feet (ner). The Babylonian sign for 10 resembles the
impression of two feet with heels closed and toes apart. This suggests a
primitive record of the first round of finger counting.

In India this Babylonian system of calculation was developed during the
Brahmanical period. The four Yugas or Ages, representing the four
fingers used by the primitive mathematicians, totalled 12,000 divine
years, a period which was called a Maha-yuga; it equalled the Babylonian
120 saroi, multiplied by 100. Ten times a hundred of these periods gave
a "Day of Brahma". Each day of the gods, it was explained by the

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahmans, was a
year to mortals. Multiplied by 360 days, 12,000 divine years equalled
4,320,000 human years. This Maha-yuga, multiplied by 1000, gave the "Day
of Brahma" as 4,320,000,000 human years.

The shortest Indian Yuga is the Babylonian 120 saroi multiplied by 10 =
1200 divine years for the Kali Yuga; twice that number gives the Dvapara
Yuga of 2400 divine years; then the Treta Yuga is 2400 + 1200 = 3600
divine years, and Krita Yuga 3600 + 1200=4800 divine years.

The influence of Babylonia is apparent in these calculations. During the
Vedic period "Yuga" usually signified a "generation", and there are no
certain references to the four Ages as such. The names "Kali",
"Dvapara", "Treta", and "Krita" "occur as the designations of throws of
dice". <span id="fr_333"></span>[1](#fn_331) It was after the arrival of
the "late corners", the post-Vedic Aryans, that the Yuga system was
developed in India. <span id="fr_334"></span>[2](#fn_332)

In *Indian Myth and Legend* <span id="fr_335"></span>[3](#fn_333) it is
shown that the Indian and Irish Ages have the same colour sequence: (1)
White or Silvern, (2) Red or Bronze, (3) Yellow or Golden, and (4) Black
or Iron. The Greek order is: (1) Golden, (2) Silvern, (3) Bronze, and
(4) Iron.

The Babylonians coloured the seven planets as follows: the moon,
silvern; the sun, golden; Mars, red; Saturn, black; Jupiter, orange;
Venus, yellow; and Mercury, blue.

As the ten antediluvian kings who reigned for 120 saroi had an astral
significance, their long reigns corresponding "with the distances
separating certain of the principal stars in or near the
ecliptic", <span id="fr_336"></span>[4](#fn_334) it seems highly

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

probable that the planets were similarly connected with mythical ages
which were equated with the "four quarters" of the celestial regions and
the four regions of the earth, which in Gaelic story are called "the
four red divisions of the world".

Three of the planets may have been heralds of change. Venus, as
"Dilbat", was the "Proclaimer", and both Jupiter and Mercury were called
"Face voices of light", and "Heroes of the rising sun" among other
names. Jupiter may have been the herald of the "Golden Age" as a morning
star. This planet was also associated with bronze, as "Kakkub Urud",
"the star of bronze", while Mars was "Kakkub Aban Kha-urud", "the star
of the bronze fish stone". Mercury, the lapis lazuli planet, may have
been connected with the black Saturn, the ghost of the dead sun, the
demoniac elder god; in Egypt lapis lazuli was the hair colour of Ra when
he grew old, and Egyptologists translate it as black. <span
id="fr_337"></span>[1](#fn_335) The rare and regular appearances of
Mercury may have suggested the planet's connection with a recurring Age.
Venus as an evening star might be regarded as the herald of the lunar or
silver age; she was propitious as a bearded deity and interchanged with
Merodach as a seasonal herald.

Connecting Jupiter with the sun as a propitious planet, and with Mars as
a destroying planet, Venus with the moon, and Mercury with Saturn, we
have left four colour schemes which suggest the Golden, Silvern, Bronze,
and Iron Ages. The Greek order of mythical ages may have had a solar
significance, beginning as it does with the "golden" period. On the
other hand the Indian and Irish systems begin with the Silvern or white
lunar period.

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In India the White
Age (Treta Yuga) was the age of perfect men, and in Greece the Golden
Age was the age of men who lived like gods. Thus the first ages in both
cases were "Perfect" Ages. The Bronze Age of Greece was the age of
notorious fighters and takers of life; in Babylonia the bronze planet
Mars was the symbol of the destroying Nergal, god of war and pestilence,
while Jupiter was also a destroyer as Merodach, the slayer of Tiamat. In
India the Black Age is the age of wickedness. The Babylonian Saturn, as
we have seen, is black, and its god, Ninip, was the destroying boar,
which recalls the black boar of the Egyptian demon (or elder god) Set.
The Greek Cronos was a destroyer even of his own children. All the elder
gods had demoniac traits like the ghosts of human beings.

As the Babylonian lunar zodiac was imported into India before solar
worship and the solar zodiac were developed, so too may have been the
germs of the Yuga doctrine, which appears to have a long history.
Greece, on the other hand, came under the influence of Babylon at a much
later period. In Egypt Ra, the sun god, was an antediluvian king, and he
was followed by Osiris. Osiris was slain by Set, who was depicted
sometimes red and sometimes black. There was also a Horus Age.

The Irish system of ages suggests an early cultural drift into Europe,
through Asia Minor, and along the uplands occupied by the
representatives of the Alpine or Armenoid peoples who have been traced
from Hindu Kush to Brittany. The culture of Gaul resembles that of India
in certain particulars; both the Gauls and the post-Vedic Aryans, for
instance, believed in the doctrine of Transmigration of Souls, and
practised "suttee". After the Roman occupation of Gaul, Ireland appears
to have been the refuge of Gaulish scholars, who imported

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

their beliefs and traditions and laid the foundations of that brilliant
culture which shed lustre on the Green Isle in late Pagan and early
Christian times.

The part played by the Mitanni people of Aryan speech in distributing
Asiatic culture throughout Europe may have been considerable, but we
know little or nothing regarding their movements and influence, nor has
sufficient evidence been forthcoming to connect them with the cremating
invaders of the Bronze Age, who penetrated as far as northern Scotland
and Scandinavia. On the other hand it is certain that the Hittites
adopted the planetary system of Babylonia and passed it on to Europeans,
including the Greeks. The five planets Ninip, Merodach, Nergal, Ishtar,
and Nebo were called by the Greeks after their gods Kronos, Zeus, Ares,
Aphrodite, and Hermes, and by the Romans Saturnus, Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
and Mercurius. It must be recognized, however, that these equations were
somewhat arbitrary. Ninip resembled Kronos and Saturnus as a father, but
he was also at the same time a son; he was the Egyptian Horus the elder
and Horus the younger in one. Merodach was similarly of complex
character--a combination of Ea, Aim, Enlil, and Tammuz, who acquired,
when exalted by the Amoritic Dynasty of Babylon, the attributes of the
thunder god Adad-Ramman in the form of Amurru, "lord of the mountains".
During the Hammurabi Age Amurru was significantly popular in personal
names. It is as Amurru-Ramman that Merodach bears comparison with Zeus.
He also links with Hercules. Too much must not be made, therefore, of
the Greek and Roman identifications of alien deities with their own.
Mulla, the Gaulish mule god, may have resembled Mars somewhat, but it is
a "far cry" from Mars-Mulla to Mars-Nergal, as it is also from the
Gaulish Moccus, the boar, called

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Mercury", to
Nebo, the god of culture, who was the "Mercury" of the Tigro-Euphrates
valley. Similarly the differences between "Jupiter-Amon" of Egypt and
"Jupiter-Merodach" of Babylon were more pronounced than the
resemblances.

The basal idea in Babylonian astrology appears to be the recognition of
the astral bodies as spirits or fates, who exercised an influence over
the gods, the world, and mankind. These were worshipped in groups when
they were yet nameless. The group addressed, "Powerful, O sevenfold, one
are ye", may have been a constellation consisting of seven stars. <span
id="fr_338"></span>[1](#fn_336) The worship of stars and planets, which
were identified and named, "seems never to have spread", says Professor
Sayce, "beyond the learned classes, and to have remained to the last an
artificial system. The mass of the people worshipped the stars as a
whole, but it was only as a whole and not individually." <span
id="fr_339"></span>[2](#fn_337) The masses perpetuated ancient animistic
beliefs, like the pre-Hellenic inhabitants of Greece. "The Pelasgians,
as I was informed at Dodona," wrote Herodotus, "formerly offered all
things indiscriminately to the gods. They distinguished them by no name
or surname, for they were hitherto unacquainted with either; but they
called them gods, which by its etymology means disposers, from observing
the orderly disposition and distribution of the various parts of the
universe." <span id="fr_340"></span>[3](#fn_338) The oldest deities are
those which bore no individual names. They were simply "Fates" or groups
called "Sevenfold". The crude giant gods of Scotland are "Fomhairean"
(Fomorians), and do not have individual names as in Ireland. Families
and tribes were controlled by the Fates or nameless gods,

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

which might appear as beasts or birds, or be heard knocking or
screaming.

In the Babylonian astral hymns, the star spirits are associated with the
gods, and are revealers of the decrees of Fate. "Ye brilliant stars . .
. ye bright ones . . . to destroy evil did Anu create you. . . . At thy
command mankind was named (created)! Give thou the Word, and with thee
let the great gods stand! Give thou my judgment, make my
decision!" <span id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_339)

The Indian evidence shows that the constellations, and especially the
bright stars, were identified before the planets. Indeed, in Vedic
literature there is no certain reference to a single planet, although
constellations are named. It seems highly probable that before the
Babylonian gods were associated with the astral bodies, the belief
obtained that the stars exercised an influence over human lives. In one
of the Indian "Forest Books", for instance, reference is made to a man
who was "born under the Nakshatra Rohini". <span
id="fr_342"></span>[2](#fn_340) "Nakshatras" are stars in the *Rigveda*
and later, and "lunar mansions" in Brahmanical compositions. <span
id="fr_343"></span>[3](#fn_341) "Rohini, 'ruddy', is the name of a
conspicuously reddish star, α Tauri or Aldebaran, and denotes the group
of the Hyades." <span id="fr_344"></span>[4](#fn_342) This reference may
be dated before 600 B.C., perhaps 800 B.C.

From Greece comes the evidence of Plutarch regarding the principles of
Babylonian astrology. "Respecting the planets, which they call *the
birth-ruling divinities*, the Chaldeans", he wrote, "lay down that two
(Venus and Jupiter) are propitious, and two (Mars and Saturn) malign,
and three (Sun, Moon, and Mercury) of a middle nature, and one common."
"That is," Mr. Brown comments,

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "an astrologer
would say, these three are propitious with the good, and may be malign
with the bad." <span id="fr_345"></span>[1](#fn_343)

Jastrow's views in this connection seem highly controversial. He holds
that Babylonian astrology dealt simply with national affairs, and had no
concern with "the conditions under which the individual was born"; it
did not predict "the fate in store for him". He believes that the Greeks
transformed Babylonian astrology and infused it with the spirit of
individualism which is a characteristic of their religion, and that they
were the first to give astrology a personal significance.

Jastrow also perpetuates the idea that astronomy began with the Greeks.
"Several centuries before the days of Alexander the Great," he says,
"the Greeks had begun to cultivate the study of the heavens, not for
purposes of divination, but prompted by a scientific spirit as an
intellectual discipline that might help them to solve the mysteries of
the universe." It is possible, however, to overrate the "scientific
spirit" of the Greeks, who, like the Japanese in our own day, were
accomplished borrowers from other civilizations. That astronomy had
humble beginnings in Greece as elsewhere is highly probable. The late
Mr. Andrew Lang wrote in this connection: "The very oddest example of
the survival of the notion that the stars are men and women is found in
the *Pax* of Aristophanes. Trygæus in that comedy has just made an
expedition to heaven. A slave meets him, and asks him: 'Is not the story
true, then, that we become stars when we die?' The answer is,
'Certainly'; and Trygæus points out the star into which Ion of Chios has
just been metamorphosed." Mr. Lang added: "Aristophanes is making fun of
some popular Greek superstition". The Eskimos, Persians, Aryo-Indians,

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Germans, New
Zealanders, and others had a similar superstition. <span
id="fr_346"></span>[1](#fn_344)

Jastrow goes on to say that the Greeks "imparted their scientific view
of the Universe to the East. They became the teachers of the East in
astronomy as in medicine and other sciences, and the credit of having
discovered the law of the precession of the equinoxes belongs to
Hipparchus, the Greek astronomer, who announced this important theory
about the year 130 B.C." <span id="fr_347"></span>[2](#fn_345)
Undoubtedly the Greeks contributed to the advancement of the science of
astronomy, with which, as other authorities believe, they became
acquainted after it had become well developed as a science by the
Assyrians and Babylonians.

"In return for improved methods of astronomical calculation which,"
Jastrow says, "*it may be assumed* (the italics are ours), contact with
Greek science gave to the Babylonian astronomers, the Greeks accepted
from the Babylonians the names of the constellations of the
ecliptic." <span id="fr_348"></span>[3](#fn_346) This is a grudging
admission; they evidently accepted more than the mere names.

Jastrow's hypothesis is certainly interesting, especially as he is an
Oriental linguist of high repute. But it is not generally accepted. The
sudden advance made by the Tigro-Euphratean astronomers when Assyria was
at the height of its glory, may have been due to the discoveries made by
great native scientists, the Newtons and the Herschels of past ages, who
had studied the data accumulated by generations of astrologers, the
earliest recorders of the movements of the heavenly bodies. It is hard
to believe that the Greeks made much progress

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

as scientists before they had identified the planets, and become
familiar with the Babylonian constellations through the medium of the
Hittites or the Phœnicians. What is known for certain is that long
centuries before the Greek science was heard of, there were scientists
in Babylonia. During the Sumerian period "the forms and relations of
geometry", says Professor Goodspeed, "were employed for purposes of
augury. The heavens were mapped out, and the courses of the heavenly
bodies traced to determine the bearing of their movements upon human
destinies." <span id="fr_349"></span>[1](#fn_347)

Several centuries before Hipparchus was born, the Assyrian kings had in
their palaces official astronomers who were able to foretell, with
varying degrees of accuracy, when eclipses would take place.
Instructions were sent to various observatories, in the king's name, to
send in reports of forthcoming eclipses. A translation of one of these
official documents sent from the observatory of Babylon to Nineveh, has
been published by Professor Harper. The following are extracts from it:
"As for the eclipse of the moon about which the king my lord has written
to me, a watch was kept for it in the cities of Akkad, Borsippa, and
Nippur. We observed it ourselves in the city of Akkad. . . . And whereas
the king my lord ordered me to observe also the eclipse of the sun, I
watched to see whether it took place or not, and what passed before my
eyes I now report to the king my lord. It was an eclipse of the moon
that took place. . . . It was total over Syria, and the shadow fell on
the land of the Amorites, the land of the Hittites, and in part on the
land of the Chaldees." Professor Sayce comments: "We gather from this
letter that there were no less than three observatories in Northern
Babylonia: one at Akkad,

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

near Sippara; one at Nippur, now Niffer; and one at Borsippa, within
sight of Babylon. As Borsippa possessed a university, it was natural
that one of the three observatories should be established there." <span
id="fr_350"></span>[1](#fn_348)

It is evident that before the astronomers at Nineveh could foretell
eclipses, they had achieved considerable progress as scientists. The
data at their disposal probably covered nearly two thousand years. Mr.
Brown, junior, calculates that the signs of the Zodiac were fixed in the
year 2084 B.C. <span id="fr_351"></span>[2](#fn_349) These star groups
do not now occupy the positions in which they were observed by the early
astronomers, because the revolving earth is rocking like a top, with the
result that the pole does not always keep pointing at the same spot in
the heavens. Each year the meeting-place of the imaginary lines of the
ecliptic and equator is moving westward at the rate of about fifty
seconds. In time--ages hence--the pole will circle round to the point it
spun at when the constellations were named by the Babylonians. It is by
calculating the period occupied by this world-curve that the date 2084
B.C. has been arrived at.

As a result of the world-rocking process, the present-day "signs of the
Zodiac" do not correspond with the constellations. In March, for
instance, when the sun crosses the equator it enters the sign of the Ram
(Aries), but does not reach the constellation till the 20th, as the
comparative table shows on [p. 308](#page_308).

When "the ecliptic was marked off into the twelve regions" and the signs
of the Zodiac were designated, "the year of three hundred sixty-five and
one-fourth days was known", says Goodspeed, "though the common year was
reckoned according to twelve months of thirty

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

days each, <span id="fr_352"></span>[1](#fn_350) and equated with the
solar year by intercalating a month at the proper times. . . . The month
was divided into weeks of seven days. . . . The clepsydra and the
sundial were Babylonian inventions for measuring time." <span
id="fr_353"></span>[2](#fn_351)

The sundial of Ahaz was probably of Babylonian design. When the shadow
went "ten degrees backward" (*2 Kings*, xx, 11) ambassadors were sent
from Babylon "to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land" (*2
Chron*., xxxii, 31). It was believed that the king's illness was
connected with the incident. According to astronomical calculation there
was a partial eclipse of the sun which was visible at Jerusalem on 11th
January, 689 B.C., about 11.30 a.m. When the upper part of the solar
disc was obscured, the shadow on the dial was strangely affected.

The Babylonian astrologers in their official documents were more
concerned regarding international omens than those which affected
individuals. They made observations not only of the stars, but also the
moon, which, as has been shown, was one of their planets, and took note
of the clouds and the wind likewise.

As portions of the heavens were assigned to various countries, so was
the moon divided into four quarters for the same purpose--the upper part
for the north, Gutium, the lower for the south, Akkad or Babylonia, the
eastern part for Elam, and the western for Amurru. The crescent was also
divided in like manner; looking southward the astrologers assigned the
right horn to the west and the left to the east. In addition, certain
days and certain months were connected with the different regions. Lunar
astrology was therefore of complicated character. When

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

the moon was dim at the particular phase which was connected with
Amurru, it was believed that the fortunes of that region were in
decline, and if it happened to shine brightly in the Babylonian phase
the time was considered auspicious to wage war in the west. Great
importance was attached to eclipses, which were fortunately recorded,
with the result that the ancient astronomers were ultimately enabled to
forecast them.

The destinies of the various states in the four quarters were similarly
influenced by the planets. When Venus, for instance, rose brightly in
the field of Anu, it was a "prosperor" for Elam; if it were dim it
foretold misfortune. Much importance was also attached to the positions
occupied by the constellations when the planets were propitious or
otherwise; no king would venture forth on an expedition under a "yoke of
inauspicious stars".

Biblical references to the stars make mention of well-known Babylonian
constellations:

Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of
Orion? Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth (?the Zodiac) in his season? or
canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons? Knowest thou the ordinances of
heaven? canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth? *Job*,
xxxviii, 31-33.

Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the
south. *Job*, ix, 9.

Seek him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and turneth the shadow
of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night. *Amos*,
v, 8.

The so-called science of astrology, which had origin in ancient
Babylonia and spread eastward and west, is not yet extinct, and has its
believers even in our own country at the present day, although they are
not nearly so numerous as when Shakespeare made Malvolio read:

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

<span class="small">In my stars I am above thee; but be not afraid of
greatness: some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have
greatness thrust upon ’em. Thy Fates open their hands. . . . <span
id="fr_354"></span>[1](#fn_352)</span>

or when Byron wrote:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Ye stars! which are the poetry of heaven!  
If in your bright leaves we would read the fate  
Of men and empires--'t is to be forgiven  
That in our aspirations to be great,  
Our destinies o’erleap their mortal state  
And claim a kindred with you. . . . <span
id="fr_355"></span>[2](#fn_353)</span>

</div>

Our grave astronomers are no longer astrologers, but they still call
certain constellations by the names given them in Babylonia. Every time
we look at our watches we are reminded of the ancient mathematicians who
counted on their fingers and multiplied 10 by 6, to give us minutes and
seconds, and divided the day and the night into twelve hours by
multiplying six by the two leaden feet of Time. The past lives in the
present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_301"></span>[288:1](mba19.htm#fr_303) "It may be worth
while to note again", says Beddoe, "how often finely developed skulls
are discovered in the graveyards of old monasteries, and how likely
seems Galton's conjecture, that progress was arrested in the Middle
Ages, because the celibacy of the clergy brought about the extinction of
the best strains of blood." *The Anthropological History of Europe*, p.
161 (1912).

<span id="fn_302"></span>[291:1](mba19.htm#fr_304) *Census of India*,
vol. i, part i, pp. 352 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[291:2](mba19.htm#fr_305) *Hibbert Lectures*,
Professor Sayce, p. 328.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[292:1](mba19.htm#fr_306) *The Story of Nala*,
Monier Williams, pp. 68-9 and 77.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[292:2](mba19.htm#fr_307) "In Ymer's flesh (the
earth) the dwarfs were engendered and began to move and live. . . . The
dwarfs had been bred in the mould of the earth, just as worms are in a
dead body." *The Prose Edda*.

"The gods . . . took counsel whom they should make the lord of dwarfs
out of <span id="page_293">p. 293</span> Ymer's blood (the sea) and his
swarthy limbs (the earth)." *The Elder Edda* (*Voluspa*, stanza 9).

<span id="fn_306"></span>[293:1](mba19.htm#fr_308) *The Story of Nala*,
Monier Williams, p. 67.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[295:1](mba19.htm#fr_309) *Egyptian Myth and
Legend*, pp. 168 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[297:1](mba19.htm#fr_310) *The Burden of Isis*,
Dennis, p. 24.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[298:1](mba19.htm#fr_311) *Babylonian Magic and
Sorcery*, p. 117.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[299:1](mba19.htm#fr_312) *Babylonian and
Assyrian Religion*, T. G. Pinches, p. 100.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[299:2](mba19.htm#fr_313) *The Burden of Isis*,
J. T. Dennis, p. 49.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[299:3](mba19.htm#fr_314) *Ibid*., p. 52.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[300:1](mba19.htm#fr_315) *Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians*, A. Wiedemann, p. 30.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[300:2](mba19.htm#fr_316) *Vedic Index*,
Macdonell & Keith, vol. i, pp. 423 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[302:1](mba19.htm#fr_317) *Religion of the
Ancient Babylonians*, Sayce, p. 153, n. 6.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[302:2](mba19.htm#fr_318) *Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians*, A. Wiedemann, p. 30.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[303:1](mba19.htm#fr_319) *Aspects of Religious
Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria*, p. 95.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[303:2](mba19.htm#fr_320) *Babylonian and
Assyrian Religion*, pp. 63 and 83.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[303:3](mba19.htm#fr_321) When the King of
Assyria transported the Babylonians, &c., to Samaria "the men of Cuth
made Nergal", *2 Kings*, xvii, 30.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[303:4](mba19.htm#fr_322) *Babylonian and
Assyrian Religion*, p. 80.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[305:1](mba19.htm#fr_323) *Indian Myth and
Legend*, p. 13.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[306:1](mba19.htm#fr_324) Derived from the
Greek *zōon*, an animal.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[306:2](mba19.htm#fr_325) *The Hittites*, pp.
116, 119, 120, 272.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[306:3](mba19.htm#fr_326) "The sun . . . is as
a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to
run a race." (*Psalm* xix, . *et seq*.) The marriage of the sun
bridegroom with the moon bride appears to occur in Hittite mythology. In
Aryo-Indian Vedic mythology the bride of the sun (Surya) is Ushas, the
Dawn. The sun maiden also married the moon god. The Vedic gods ran a
race and Indra and Agni were the winners. The sun was "of the nature of
Agni". *Indian Myth and Legend*, pp. 14, 36, 37.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[307:1](mba19.htm#fr_327) Or golden.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[307:2](mba19.htm#fr_328) The later reference
is to Assyria. There was no Assyrian kingdom when these early beliefs
were developed.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[309:1](mba19.htm#fr_329) *Primitive
Constellations*, R. Brown, jun., vol. ii, p. 1 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[311:1](mba19.htm#fr_330) In India "finger
counting" (Kaur guna) is associated with prayer or the repeating of
mantras. The counting is performed by the thumb, which, when the hand is
drawn up, touches the upper part of the third finger. The two upper
"chambers" of the third finger are counted, then the two upper
"chambers" of the little finger; the thumb then touches the tip of each
finger from the little finger to the first; when it comes down into the
upper chamber of the first finger 9 is counted. By a similar process
each round of 9 on the right hand is recorded by the left up to 12; 12 X
9 = 108 repetitions of a mantra. The upper "chambers" of the fingers are
the "best" or "highest" (uttama), the lower (adhama) chambers are not
utilized in the prayer-counting process. When Hindus sit cross-legged at
prayers, with closed eyes, the right hand is raised from the elbow in
front of the body, and the thumb moves each time a mantra is repeated;
the left hand lies palm upward on the left knee, and the thumb moves
each time nine mantras have been counted.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[312:1](mba19.htm#fr_331) *Primitive
Constellations*, R. Brown, jun., vol. ii, p. 61; and *Early History of
Northern India*, J. F. Hewitt, pp. 551-2.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[312:2](mba19.htm#fr_332) *Rigveda-Samhita*,
vol. iv (1892), p. 67.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[313:1](mba19.htm#fr_333) *Vedic Index*,
Macdonell & Keith, vol. ii, pp. 192 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[313:2](mba19.htm#fr_334) *Indian Myth and
Legend*.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[313:3](mba19.htm#fr_335) Pp. 107 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[313:4](mba19.htm#fr_336) *Primitive
Constellations*, R. Brown, jun., vol. i, 1. 333. A table is given
showing how 120 saroi equals 360 degrees, each king being identified
with a star.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[314:1](mba19.htm#fr_337) "Behold, his majesty
the god Ra is grown old; his bones are become silver, his limbs gold,
and his hair pure lapis lazuli." *Religion of the Ancient Egyptians*, A.
Wiedemann, p. 58. Ra became a destroyer after completing his reign as an
earthly king.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[317:1](mba19.htm#fr_338) As Nin-Girsu, Tammuz
was associated with "sevenfold" Orion.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[317:2](mba19.htm#fr_339) *Babylonian and
Assyrian Life*, pp. 61, 62.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[317:3](mba19.htm#fr_340) *Herodotus* (ii, 52)
as quoted in *Egypt and Scythia* (London, 1886), p. 49.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[318:1](mba19.htm#fr_341) *Babylonian Magic and
Sorcery*, L. W. King (London, 1896), pp. 43 and 115.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[318:2](mba19.htm#fr_342) *Vedic Index*,
Macdonell & Keith, vol. ii, p. 229.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[318:3](mba19.htm#fr_343) *Ibid*., vol. i, pp.
409, 410.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[318:4](mba19.htm#fr_344) *Ibid*., vol. i, p.
415.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[319:1](mba19.htm#fr_345) *Primitive
Constellations*, vol. i, p. 343.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[320:1](mba19.htm#fr_346) *Custom and Myth*,
pp. 133 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[320:2](mba19.htm#fr_347) Dr. Alfred Jeremias
gives very forcible reasons for believing that the ancient Babylonians
were acquainted with the precession of the equinoxes. *Das Alter der
Babylonischen Astronomie* (Hinrichs, Leipzig, 1908), pp. 47 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[320:3](mba19.htm#fr_348) *Aspects of Religious
Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria*, pp. 207 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[321:1](mba19.htm#fr_349) *A History of the
Babylonians and Assyrians*, p. 93.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[322:1](mba19.htm#fr_350) *Babylonians and
Assyrians: Life and Customs*, pp. 219, 220.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[322:2](mba19.htm#fr_351) *Primitive
Constellations*, vol. ii, pp. 147 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[323:1](mba19.htm#fr_352) The Aryo-Indians had
a lunar year of 360 days (*Vedic Index*, ii, 158).

<span id="fn_351"></span>[323:2](mba19.htm#fr_353) *A History of the
Babylonians and Assyrians*, p. 94.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[325:1](mba19.htm#fr_354) *Twelfth Night*, act
ii, scene 5.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[325:2](mba19.htm#fr_355) *Childe Harold*,
canto iii, v, 88.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Ashur the National God of Assyria](mba20)
