[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba24)  [Next](mba26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span id="an_ch-19"></span>

### CHAPTER XIX

### Assyria's Age of Splendour

<span class="small">Tiglath-pileser IV, the Biblical Pul--Babylonian
Campaign--Urartian Ambitions in North Syria--Battle of Two Kings and
Flight of Sharduris--Conquest of Syro-Cappadocian States--Hebrew History
from Jehu to Menahem--Israel subject to Assyria--Urartu's Power
broken--Ahaz 's Appeal to Assyria--Damascus and Israel
subdued--Babylonia united to Assyria--Shalmaneser and Hoshea--Sargon
deports the "Lost Ten Tribes"--Merodach Baladan King of
Babylonia--Egyptian Army of Allies routed--Ahaz and Isaiah--Frontier
Campaigns--Merodach Baladan overthrown--Sennacherib and the Hittite
States--Merodach Baladan's second and brief Reign--Hezekiah and
Sennacherib--Destruction of Assyrian Army--Sack of
Babylon--Esarhaddon--A Second Semiramis--Raids of Elamites, Cimmerians,
Scythians, and Medes--Sack of Sidon--Manasseh and Isaiah's
Fate--Esarhaddon conquers Lower Egypt--Revolt of Assyrian
Nobles--Ashurbanipal.</span>

WE now enter upon the last and most brilliant phase of Assyrian
civilization--the period of the Third or New Empire during which
flourished Tiglath-pileser IV, the mighty conqueror; the Shalmaneser of
the Bible; "Sargon the Later", who transported the "lost ten tribes" of
Israel; Sennacherib, the destroyer of Babylon, and Esarhaddon, who made
Lower Egypt an Assyrian province. We also meet with notable figures of
Biblical fame, in-chiding Ahaz, Hezekiah, Isaiah, and the idolatrous
Manasseh.

Tiglath-pileser IV, who deposed Ashur-nirari IV, was known to the
Babylonians as Pulu, which, some think, was a term of contempt
signifying "wild animal". In the Bible he is referred to as Pul,
Tiglath-pilneser, and

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Tiglath-pileser. <span id="fr_504"></span>[1](#fn_502) He came to the
Assyrian throne towards the end of April in 745 B.C. and reigned until
727 B.C. We know nothing regarding his origin, but it seems clear that
he was not of royal descent. He appears to have been a popular leader of
the revolt against Ashur-nirari, who, like certain of his predecessors,
had pronounced pro-Babylonian tendencies. It is significant to note in
this connection that the new king was an unswerving adherent of the cult
of Ashur, by the adherents of which he was probably strongly supported.

Tiglath-pileser combined in equal measure those qualities of generalship
and statesmanship which were necessary for the reorganization of the
Assyrian state and the revival of its military prestige. At the
beginning of his reign there was much social discontent and suffering.
The national exchequer had been exhausted by the loss of tribute from
revolting provinces, trade was paralysed, and the industries were in a
languishing condition. Plundering bands of Aramæans were menacing the
western frontiers and had overrun part of northern Babylonia. New
political confederacies in Syria kept the north-west regions in a
constant state of unrest, and the now powerful Urartian kingdom was
threatening the Syro-Cappadocian states as if its rulers had dreams of
building up a great world empire on the ruins of that of Assyria.

Tiglath-pileser first paid attention to Babylonia, and extinguished the
resistance of the Aramæans in Akkad. He appears to have been welcomed by
Nabonassar, who became his vassal, and he offered sacrifices in the
cities of Babylon, Sippar, Cuthah, and Nippur. Sippar had been occupied
by Aramæans, as on a previous occasion when they destroyed the temple of
the sun god Shamash which was restored by Nabu-aplu-iddina of Babylon.

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

Tiglath-pileser did not overrun Chaldæa, but he destroyed its capital,
Sarrabanu, and impaled King Nabu-ushabshi. He proclaimed himself "King
of Sumer and Akkad" and "King of the Four Quarters". The frontier states
of Elam and Media were visited and subdued.

Having disposed of the Aramæans and other raiders, the Assyrian monarch
had next to deal with his most powerful rival, Urartu. Argistis I had
been succeeded by Sharduris III, who had formed an alliance with the
north Mesopotamian king, Mati-ilu of Agusi, on whom Ashur-nirari had
reposed his faith. Ere long Sharduris pressed southward from Malatia and
compelled the north Syrian Hittite states, including Carchemish, to
acknowledge his suzerainty. A struggle then ensued between Urartu and
Assyria for the possession of the Syro-Cappadocian states.

At this time the reputation of Tiglath-pileser hung in the balance. If
he failed in his attack on Urartu, his prestige would vanish at home and
abroad and Sharduris might, after establishing himself in northern
Syria, invade Assyria and compel its allegiance.

Two courses lay before Tiglath-pileser. He could either cross the
mountains and invade Urartu, or strike at his rival in north Syria,
where the influence of Assyria had been completely extinguished. The
latter appeared to him to be the most feasible and judicious procedure,
for if he succeeded in expelling the invaders he would at the same time
compel the allegiance of the rebellious Hittite states.

In the spring of 743 B.C. Tiglath-pileser led his army across the
Euphrates and reached Arpad without meeting with any resistance. The
city appears to have opened its gates to him although it was in the
kingdom of Mati-ilu, who acknowledged Urartian sway. Its foreign
garrison

 

<span id="img_44600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TIGLATH-PILESER IV
IN HIS CHARIOT&lt;br&gt; Photo. Mansell](tn/44600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/44600.jpg)  
TIGLATH-PILESER IV IN HIS CHARIOT  
Photo. Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

was slaughtered. Well might Sharduris exclaim, in the words of the
prophet, "Where is the king of Arpad? where are the gods of
Arpad?" <span id="fr_505"></span>[1](#fn_503)

Leaving Arpad, Tiglath-pileser advanced to meet Sharduris, who was
apparently hastening southward to attack the Assyrians in the rear.
Tiglath-pileser, however, crossed the Euphrates and, moving northward,
delivered an unexpected attack on the Urartian army in Qummukh. A fierce
battle ensued, and one of its dramatic incidents was a single combat
between the rival kings. The tide of battle flowed in Assyria's favour,
and when evening was falling the chariots and cavalry of Urartu were
thrown into confusion. An attempt was made to capture King Sharduris,
who leapt from his chariot and made hasty escape on horseback, hotly
pursued in the gathering darkness by an Assyrian contingent of cavalry.
Not until "the bridge of the Euphrates" was reached was the exciting
night chase abandoned.

Tiglath-pileser had achieved an overwhelming victory against an army
superior to his own in numbers. Over 70,000 of the enemy were slain or
taken captive, while the Urartian camp with its stores and horses and
followers fell into the hands of the triumphant Assyrians.
Tiglath-pileser burned the royal tent and throne as an offering to
Ashur, and carried Sharduris's bed to the temple of the goddess of
Nineveh, whither he returned to prepare a new plan of campaign against
his northern rival.

Despite the blow dealt against Urartu, Assyria did not immediately
regain possession of north Syria. The shifty Mati-ilu either cherished
the hope that Sharduris would recover strength and again invade north
Syria, or that he might himself establish an empire in that region.
Tiglath-pileser had therefore to march westward again.

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For three years he
conducted vigorous campaigns in "the western land", where he met with
vigorous resistance. In 740 B.C. Arpad was captured and Mati-ilu deposed
and probably put to death. Two years later Kullani and Hamath fell, and
the districts which they controlled were included in the Assyrian empire
and governed by Crown officials.

Once again the Hebrews came into contact with Assyria. The Dynasty of
Jehu had come to an end by this time. Its fall may not have been
unconnected with the trend of events in Assyria during the closing years
of the Middle Empire.

Supported by Assyria, the kings of Israel had become powerful and
haughty. Jehoash, the grandson of Jehu, had achieved successes in
conflict with Damascus. In Judah the unstable Amaziah, son of Joash, was
strong enough to lay a heavy hand on Edom, and flushed with triumph then
resolved to readjust his relations with his overlord, the king of
Israel. Accordingly he sent a communication to Jehoash which contained
some proposal regarding their political relations, concluding with the
offer or challenge, "Come, let us look one another in the face". A
contemptuous answer was returned.

Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The
thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon,
saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild
beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle. Thou hast indeed
smitten Edom, and thine heart hath lifted thee up: glory of this, and
tarry at home, for why shouldest thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou
shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?

But Amaziah would not hear. Therefore Jehoash king of Israel went up;
and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at
Beth-shemesh \[city of Shamash, the sun god\], which belongeth to Judah.
And Judah was put to the worse before Israel; and they fled every man to
their tents.

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

Jehoash afterwards destroyed a large portion of the wall of Jerusalem
and plundered the temple and palace, returning home to Samaria with rich
booty and hostages. <span id="fr_506"></span>[1](#fn_504) Judah thus
remained a vassal state of Israel's.

Jeroboam, son of Jehoash, had a long and prosperous reign. About 773
B.C. he appears to have co-operated with Assyria and conquered Damascus
and Hamath. His son Zachariah, the last king of the Jehu Dynasty of
Israel, came to the throne in 740 B.C. towards the close of the reign of
Azariah, son of Amaziah, king of Judah. Six months afterwards he was
assassinated by Shallum. This usurper held sway at Samaria for only a
month. "For Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came to
Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him,
and reigned in his stead." <span id="fr_507"></span>[2](#fn_505)

Tiglath-pileser was operating successfully in middle Syria when he had
dealings with, among others, "Menihimme (Menahem) of the city of the
Samarians", who paid tribute. No resistance was possible on the part of
Menahem, the usurper, who was probably ready to welcome the Assyrian
conqueror, so that, by arranging an alliance, he might secure his own
position. The Biblical reference is as follows: "And Pul the king of
Assyria came against the land: and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents
of silver, that his hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his
hand. And Menahem exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty
men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the king
of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and stayed not there in
the land." <span id="fr_508"></span>[3](#fn_506) Rezin of Damascus,
Hiram of Tyre, and Zabibi, queen of the Arabians, also sent gifts to
Tiglath-pileser at this time (738 B.C.). Aramæan revolts on the borders
of Elam were suppressed by

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Assyrian
governors, and large numbers of the inhabitants were transported to
various places in Syria.

Tiglath-pileser next operated against the Median and other hill tribes
in the north-east. In 735 B.C. he invaded Urartu, the great Armenian
state which had threatened the supremacy of Assyria in north Syria and
Cappadocia. King Sharduris was unable to protect his frontier or hamper
the progress of the advancing army, which penetrated to his capital.
Dhuspas was soon captured, but Sharduris took refuge in his rocky
citadel which he and his predecessors had laboured to render
impregnable. There he was able to defy the might of Assyria, for the
fortress could he approached on the western side alone by a narrow path
between high walls and towers, so that only a small force could find
room to operate against the numerous garrison.

Tiglath-pileser had to content himself by devastating the city on the
plain and the neighbouring villages. He overthrew buildings, destroyed
orchards, and transported to Nineveh those of the inhabitants he had not
put to the sword, with all the live stock he could lay hands on. Thus
was Urartu crippled and humiliated: it never regained its former
prestige among the northern states.

In the following year Tiglath-pileser returned to Syria. The
circumstances which made this expedition necessary are of special
interest on account of its Biblical associations. Menahem, king of
Israel, had died, and was succeeded by his son Pekahiah. "But Pekah the
son of Remaliah, a captain of his, conspired against him and smote him
in Samaria, in the palace of the king's house, . . . and he killed him,
and reigned in his room." <span id="fr_509"></span>[1](#fn_507) When
Pekah was on the throne, Ahaz began to reign over Judah.

Judah had taken advantage of the disturbed conditions

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

in Israel to assert its independence. The walls of Jerusalem were
repaired by Jotham, father of Ahaz, and a tunnel constructed to supply
it with water. Isaiah refers to this tunnel: "Go forth and meet Ahaz . .
. at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the
fuller's field" (*Isaiah*, vii, 3).

Pekah had to deal with a powerful party in Israel which favoured the
re-establishment of David's kingdom in Palestine. Their most prominent
leader was the prophet Amos, whose eloquent exhortations were couched in
no uncertain terms. He condemned Israel for its idolatries, and cried:

<span class="small">For thus saith the Lord unto the house of Israel,
Seek ye me and ye shall live. . . . Have ye offered unto me sacrifices
and offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel? But ye
have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star
of your god, which ye made to yourselves. <span
id="fr_510"></span>[1](#fn_508)</span>

Pekah sought to extinguish the orthodox party's movement by subduing
Judah. So he plotted with Rezin, king of Damascus. Amos prophesied,

<span class="small">Thus saith the Lord. . . . I will send a fire into
the house of Hazael, which will devour the palaces of Ben-hadad. I will
break also the bar of Damascus . . . and the people of Syria shall go
into captivity unto Kir. . . . The remnant of the Philistines shall
perish.</span>

Tyre, Edom, and Ammon would also be punished. <span
id="fr_511"></span>[2](#fn_509)

Judah was completely isolated by the allies who acknowledged the
suzerainty of Damascus. Soon after Ahaz came to the throne he found
himself hemmed in on every side by adversaries who desired to accomplish
his fall. "At that time Rezin, king of Syria, and Pekah . . . came up to
Jerusalem to war: and they besieged

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ahaz, but could
not overcome him." <span id="fr_512"></span>[1](#fn_510) Judah, however,
was overrun; the city of Elath was captured and restored to Edom, while
the Philistines were liberated from the control of Jerusalem.

Isaiah visited Ahaz and said,

<span class="small">Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be
faint-hearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the
fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. Because
Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against
thee, saying, Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a
breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son
of Tabeal: Thus saith the Lord God, It shall not stand, neither shall it
come to pass. <span id="fr_513"></span>[2](#fn_511)</span>

The unstable Ahaz had sought assistance from the Baal, and "made his son
to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the
heathen". <span id="fr_514"></span>[3](#fn_512) Then he resolved to
purchase the sympathy of one of the great Powers. There was no hope of
assistance from "the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of
Egypt", for the Ethiopian Pharaohs had not yet conquered the Delta
region, so he turned to "the bee that is in the land of Assyria". <span
id="fr_515"></span>[4](#fn_513) Assyria was the last resource of the
king of Judah.

So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, I am
thy servant and thy son: come up and save me out of the hand of Syria
and out of the hand of the king of Israel, which rise up against me. And
Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the Lord,
and in the treasures of the king's house, and sent it for a present to
the king of Assyria.

And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him: for the king of Assyria went
up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it captive
to Kir <span id="fr_516"></span>[5](#fn_514) and slew Rezin. <span
id="fr_517"></span>[6](#fn_515)

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

Tiglath-pileser recorded that Rezin took refuge in his city like "a
mouse". Israel was also dealt with.

<span class="small">In the days of Pekah king of Israel came
Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and took Ijon and Abel-beth-maachah,
and Janoah and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land
of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Assyria. And Hoshea the son of
Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him,
and slew him, and reigned in his stead. <span
id="fr_518"></span>[1](#fn_516)</span>

Tiglath-pileser recorded: "They overthrew Paqaha (Pekah), their king,
and placed Ausi´a (Hoshea) over them". He swept through Israel "like a
hurricane". The Philistines and the Arabians of the desert were also
subdued. Tribute was sent to the Assyrian monarch by Phoenicia, Moab,
Ammon, and Edom. It was a proud day for Ahaz when he paid a visit to
Tiglath-pileser at Damascus. <span id="fr_519"></span>[2](#fn_517) An
Assyrian governor was appointed to rule over Syria and its subject
states.

Babylon next claimed the attention of Tiglath-pileser. Nabonassar had
died and was succeeded by his son Nabu-nadin-zeri, who, after reigning
for two years, was slain in a rebellion. The throne was then seized by
Nabu-shum-ukin, but in less than two months this usurper was
assassinated and the Chaldæans had one of their chiefs, Ukinzer,
proclaimed king (732 B.C.).

When the Assyrian king returned from Syria in 731 B.C. he invaded
Babylonia. He was met with a stubborn resistance. Ukinzer took refuge in
his capital, Shapia, which held out successfully, although the
surrounding country was ravaged and despoiled. Two years afterwards
Tiglath-pileser returned, captured Shapia, and restored peace throughout
Babylonia. He was welcomed in Babylon, which opened its gates to him,
and he had himself

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

proclaimed king of Sumer and Akkad. The Chaldæans paid tribute.

Tiglath-pileser had now reached the height of his ambition. He had not
only extended his empire in the west from Cappadocia to the river of
Egypt, crippled Urartu and pacified his eastern frontier, but brought
Assyria into close union with Babylonia, the mother land, the home of
culture and the land of the ancient gods. He did not live long, however,
to enjoy his final triumph, for he died a little over twelve months
after he "took the hands of Bel (Merodach)" at Babylon.

He was succeeded by Shalmaneser V (727-722 B.C.), who may have been his
son, but this is not quite certain. Little is known regarding his brief
reign. In 725 B.C. he led an expedition to Syria and Phoenicia. Several
of the vassal peoples had revolted when they heard of the death of
Tiglath-pileser. These included the Phœnicians, the Philistines, and the
Israelites who were intriguing with either Egypt or Mutsri.

Apparently Hoshea, king of Israel, pretended when the Assyrians entered
his country that he remained friendly. Shalmaneser, however, was well
informed, and made Hoshea a prisoner. Samaria closed its gates against
him although their king had been dispatched to Assyria.

The Biblical account of the campaign is as follows: "Against him
(Hoshea) came up Shalmaneser king of Assyria; and Hoshea became his
servant, and gave him presents. And the king of Assyria found conspiracy
in Hoshea: for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt, <span
id="fr_520"></span>[1](#fn_518) and brought no present to the king of
Assyria,

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

as he had done year by year; therefore the king of Assyria shut him up
and bound him in prison.

"Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, and went up
to Samaria, and besieged it three years." <span
id="fr_521"></span>[1](#fn_519)

Shalmaneser died before Samaria was captured, and may have been
assassinated. The next Assyrian monarch, Sargon II (722-705 B.C.), was
not related to either of his two predecessors. He is referred to by
Isaiah, <span id="fr_522"></span>[2](#fn_520) and is the Arkeanos of
Ptolemy. He was the Assyrian monarch who deported the "Lost Ten Tribes".

"In the ninth year of Hoshea" (and the first of Sargon) "the king of
Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away into Assyria, and placed
them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of
the Medes." <span id="fr_523"></span>[3](#fn_521) In all, according to
Sargon's record, "27,290 people dwelling in the midst of it (Samaria) I
carried off".

They (the Israelites) left all the commandments of the Lord their God,
and made them molten images, even two calves, and made a grove, and
worshipped all the host of heaven (the stars), and served Baal. And they
caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire, and used
divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the sight
of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. Therefore the Lord was very angry
with Israel, and removed them out of his sight: there was none left but
the tribe of Judah only.

And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and
from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the
cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel: and they possessed
Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof. . . . And the men of Babylon
made Succoth-benoth, and the men of Cuth (Cuthah) made Nergal, and the
men of Hamath made

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

<span class="small">Ashima, and the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and
the Sepharites burnt their children in fire to Adram-melech and
Anam-melech, the gods of Sepharvaim.</span>

A number of the new settlers were slain by lions, and the king of
Assyria ordered that a Samaritan priest should be sent to "teach them
the manner of the God of the land". This man was evidently an orthodox
Hebrew, for he taught them "how they should fear the Lord. . . . So they
feared the Lord", but also "served their own gods . . . their graven
images". <span id="fr_524"></span>[1](#fn_522)

There is no evidence to suggest that the "Ten Lost Tribes", "regarding
whom so many nonsensical theories have been formed", were not ultimately
absorbed by the peoples among whom they settled between Mesopotamia and
the Median Highlands. <span id="fr_525"></span>[2](#fn_523) The various
sections must have soon lost touch with one another. They were not
united like the Jews (the people of Judah), who were transported to
Babylonia a century and a half later, by a common religious bond, for
although a few remained faithful to Abraham's God, the majority of the
Israelites worshipped either the Baal or the Queen of Heaven.

The Assyrian policy of transporting the rebellious inhabitants of one
part of their empire to another was intended to break their national
spirit and compel them to become good and faithful subjects amongst the
aliens, who must have disliked them. "The colonists," says Professor
Maspero, "exposed to the same hatred as the original Assyrian
conquerors, soon forgot to look upon the latter as the oppressors of
all, and, allowing their present grudge to efface the memory of past
injuries, did

 

<span id="img_45600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![COLOSSAL WINGED
AND HUMAN-HEADED BULL AND MYTHOLOGICAL BEING&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From
doorway in Palace of Sargon at Khorsabad: now in British
Museum&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; Photo. Mansell](tn/45600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/45600.jpg)  
COLOSSAL WINGED AND HUMAN-HEADED BULL AND MYTHOLOGICAL BEING  
*From doorway in Palace of Sargon at Khorsabad: now in British
Museum*.  
Photo. Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

not hesitate to make common cause with them. In time of peace the
(Assyrian) governor did his best to protect them against molestation on
the part of the natives, and in return for this they rallied round him
whenever the latter threatened to get out of hand, and helped him to
stifle the revolt, or hold it in check until the arrival of
reinforcements. Thanks to their help, the empire was consolidated and
maintained without too many violent outbreaks in regions far removed
from the capital, and beyond the immediate reach of the
sovereign." <span id="fr_526"></span>[1](#fn_524)

While Sargon was absent in the west, a revolt broke out in Babylonia. A
Chaldæan king, Merodach Baladan III, had allied himself with the
Elamites, and occupied Babylon. A battle was fought at Dur-ilu and the
Elamites retreated. Although Sargon swept triumphantly through the land,
he had to leave his rival, the tyrannous Chaldæan, in possession of the
capital, and he reigned there for over eleven years.

Trouble was brewing in Syria. It was apparently fostered by an Egyptian
king--probably Bocchoris of Sais, the sole Pharaoh so far as can be
ascertained of the Twenty-fourth Dynasty, who had allied himself with
the local dynasts of Lower Egypt and apparently sought to extend his
sway into Asia, the Ethiopians being supreme in Upper Egypt. An alliance
had been formed to cast off the yoke of Assyria. The city states
involved Arpad, Simirra, Damascus, Samaria, and Gaza. Hanno of Gaza had
fled to Egypt after Tiglath-pileser came to the relief of Judah and
broke up the league of conspirators by capturing Damascus, and punishing
Samaria, Gaza, and other cities. His return in Sargon's reign was
evidently connected with the new rising in which he took part. The
throne of Hamath had been seized by an adventurer,

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

named Ilu-bi´di, a smith. The Philistines of Ashdod and the Arabians
being strongly pro-Egyptian in tendency, were willing sympathizers and
helpers against the hated Assyrians.

Sargon appeared in the west with a strong army before the allies had
matured their plans. He met the smith king of Hamath in battle at
Qarqar, and, having defeated him, had him skinned alive. Then he marched
southward. At Rapiki (Raphia) he routed an army of allies. Shabi (? So),
the Tartan (commander-in-chief) of Pi´ru <span
id="fr_527"></span>[1](#fn_525) (Pharaoh), King of Mutsri (an Arabian
state confused, perhaps, with Misraim = Egypt), escaped "like to a
shepherd whose sheep have been taken". Piru and other two southern
kings, Samsi and Itamara, afterwards paid tribute to Sargon. Hanno of
Gaza was transported to Asshur.

In 715 B.C. Sargon, according to his records, appeared with his army in
Arabia, and received gifts in token of homage from Piru of Mutsri, Samsi
of Aribi, and Itamara of Saba.

Four years later a revolt broke out in Ashdod which was, it would
appear, directly due to the influence of Shabaka, the Ethiopian Pharaoh,
who had deposed Bocchoris of Sais. Another league was about to be formed
against Assyria. King Azuri of Ashdod had been deposed because of his
Egyptian sympathies by the Assyrian governor, and his brother Akhimiti
was placed on the throne. The citizens, however, overthrew Akhimiti, and
an adventurer from Cyprus was proclaimed king (711 B.C.).

It would appear that advances were made by the anti-Assyrians

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

to Ahaz of Judah. That monarch was placed in a difficult position. He
knew that if the allies succeeded in stamping out Assyrian authority in
Syria and Palestine they would certainly depose him, but if on the other
hand he joined them and Assyria triumphed, its emperor would show him
small mercy. As Babylon defied Sargon and received the active support of
Elam, and there were rumours of risings in the north, it must have
seemed to the western kings as if the Assyrian empire was likely once
again to go to pieces.

Fortunately for Ahaz he had a wise counsellor at this time in the great
statesman and prophet, the scholarly Isaiah. The Lord spake by Isaiah
saying, "Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy
shoe from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. And the
Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot
three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia; so shall
the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners. . . . And they
(the allies) shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation,
and of Egypt their glory." <span id="fr_528"></span>[1](#fn_526)

Isaiah warned Ahaz against joining the league, "in the year that
Tartan <span id="fr_529"></span>[2](#fn_527) came unto Ashdod (when
Sargon the king of Assyria sent him)". The Tartan "fought against Ashdod
and took it". <span id="fr_530"></span>[3](#fn_528) According to
Sargon's record the Pretender of Ashdod fled to Arabia, where he was
seized by an Arabian chief and delivered up to Assyria. The pro-Egyptian
party in Palestine went under a cloud for a period thereafter.

Before Sargon could deal with Merodach Baladan of Babylon, he found it
necessary to pursue the arduous task of breaking up a powerful league
which had been formed against him in the north. The Syro-Cappadocian
Hittite

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

states, including Tabal in Asia Minor and Carchemish in north Syria,
were combining for the last time against Assyria, supported by Mita
(Midas), king of the Muski-Phrygians, and Rusas, son of Sharduris III,
king of Urartu.

Urartu had recovered somewhat from the disasters which it had suffered
at the hands of Tiglath-pileser, and was winning back portions of its
lost territory on the north-east frontier of Assyria. A buffer state had
been formed in that area by Tiglath-pileser, who had assisted the king
of the Mannai to weld together the hill tribes-men between Lake Van and
Lake Urmia into an organized nation. Iranzu, its ruler, remained
faithful to Assyria and consequently became involved in war with Rusas
of Urartu, who either captured or won over several cities of the Mannai.
Iranzu was succeeded by his son Aza, and this king was so pronounced a
pro-Assyrian that his pro-Urartian subjects assassinated him and set on
the throne Bagdatti of Umildish.

Soon after Sargon began his operations in the north he captured Bagdatti
and had him skinned alive. The flag of revolt, however, was kept flying
by his brother, Ullusunu, but ere long this ambitious man found it
prudent to submit to Sargon on condition that he would retain the throne
as a faithful Assyrian vassal. His sudden change of policy appears to
have been due to the steady advance of the Median tribes into the
territory of the Mannai. Sargon conducted a vigorous and successful
campaign against the raiders, and extended Ullusunu's area of control.

The way was now clear to Urartu. In 714 B.C. Sargon attacked the
revolting king of Zikirtu, who was supported by an army led by Rusas,
his overlord. A fierce battle was fought in which the Assyrians achieved

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

a great victory. King Rusas fled, and when he found that the Assyrians
pressed home their triumph by laying waste the country before them, he
committed suicide, according to the Assyrian records, although those of
Urartu indicate that he subsequently took part in the struggle against
Sargon. The Armenian peoples were compelled to acknowledge the
suzerainty of Assyria, and the conqueror received gifts from various
tribes between Lake Van and the Caspian Sea, and along the frontiers
from Lake Van towards the south-east as far as the borders of Elam.

Rusas of Urartu was succeeded by Argistes II, who reigned over a
shrunken kingdom. He intrigued with neighbouring states against Assyria,
but was closely watched. Ere long he found himself caught between two
fires. During his reign the notorious Cimmerians and Scythians displayed
much activity in the north and raided his territory.

The pressure of fresh infusions of Thraco-Phrygian tribes into western
Asia Minor had stirred Midas of the Muski to co-operate with the
Urartian power in an attempt to stamp out Assyrian influence in Cilicia,
Cappadocia, and north Syria. A revolt in Tabal in 718 B.C. was
extinguished by Sargon, but in the following year evidences were
forthcoming of a more serious and wide-spread rising. Pisiris, king of
Carchemish, threw off the Assyrian yoke. Before, however, his allies
could hasten to his assistance he was overcome by the vigilant Sargon,
who deported a large proportion of the city's inhabitants and
incorporated it in an Assyrian province. Tabal revolted in 713 B.C. and
was similarly dealt with. In 712 B.C. Milid had to be overcome. The
inhabitants were transported, and "Suti" Aramæan peoples settled in
their homes. The king of Commagene, having

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

remained faithful, received large extensions of territory. Finally in
709 B.C. Midas of the Muski-Phrygians was compelled to acknowledge the
suzerainty of Assyria. The northern confederacy was thus completely
worsted and broken up. Tribute was paid by many peoples, including the
rulers of Cyprus.

Sargon was now able to deal with Babylonia, which for about twelve years
had been ruled by Merodach Baladan, who oppressed the people and set at
defiance ancient laws by seizing private estates and transferring them
to his Chaldæan kinsmen. He still received the active support of Elam.

Sargon's first move was to interpose his army between those of the
Babylonians and Elamites. Pushing southward, he subdued the Aramæans on
the eastern banks of the Tigris, and drove the Elamites into the
mountains. Then he invaded middle Babylonia from the east. Merodach
Baladan hastily evacuated Babylon, and, moving southward, succeeded in
evading Sargon's army. Finding Elam was unable to help him, he took
refuge in the Chaldæan capital, Bit Jakin, in southern Babylonia.

Sargon was visited by the priests of Babylon and Borsippa, and hailed as
the saviour of the ancient kingdom. He was afterwards proclaimed king at
E-sagila, where he "took the hands of Bel". Then having expelled the
Aramæans from Sippar, he hastened southward, attacked Bit Jakin and
captured it. Merodach Baladan escaped into Elam. The whole of Chaldæa
was subdued.

Thus "Sargon the Later" entered at length into full possession of the
empire of Sargon of Akkad. In Babylonia he posed as an incarnation of
his ancient namesake, and had similarly Messianic pretensions which were
no doubt inspired by the Babylonian priesthood. Under him Assyria
attained its highest degree of splendour.

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He recorded
proudly not only his great conquests but also his works of public
utility: he restored ancient cities, irrigated vast tracts of country,
fostered trade, and promoted the industries. Like the pious Pharaohs of
Egypt he boasted that he fed the hungry and protected the weak against
the strong.

Sargon found time during his strenuous career as a conqueror to lay out
and build a new city, called Dur-Sharrukin, "the burgh of Sargon", to
the north of Nineveh. It was completed before he undertook the
Babylonian campaign. The new palace was occupied in 708 B.C. Previous to
that period he had resided principally at Kalkhi, in the restored palace
of Ashur-natsir-pal III.

He was a worshipper of many gods. Although he claimed to have restored
the supremacy of Asshur "which had come to an end", he not only adored
Ashur but also revived the ancient triad of Anu, Bel, and Ea, and
fostered the growth of the immemorial "mother-cult" of Ishtar. Before he
died he appointed one of his sons, Sennacherib, viceroy of the northern
portion of the empire. He was either assassinated at a military review
or in some frontier war. As much is suggested by the following entry in
an eponym list.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Eponymy of Upahhir-belu, prefect of the city of
Amedu . . .  
According to the oracle of the Kulummite(s) . . .  
A soldier (entered) the camp of the king of Assyria (and killed him?),
month Ab, day 12th, Sennacherib (sat on the throne). <span
id="fr_531"></span>[1](#fn_529)</span>

</div>

The fact that Sennacherib lamented his father's sins suggests that the
old king had in some manner offended

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

the priesthood. Perhaps, like some of the Middle Empire monarchs, he
succumbed to the influence of Babylon during the closing years of his
life. It is stated that "he was not buried in his house", which suggests
that the customary religious rites were denied him, and that his lost
soul was supposed to be a wanderer which had to eat offal and drink
impure water like the ghost of a pauper or a criminal.

The task which lay before Sennacherib (705-680 B.C.) was to maintain the
unity of the great empire of his distinguished father. He waged minor
wars against the Kassite and Illipi tribes on the Elamite border, and
the Muski and Hittite tribes in Cappadocia and Cilicia. The Kassites,
however, were no longer of any importance, and the Hittite power had
been extinguished, for ere the states could recover from the blows dealt
by the Assyrians the Cimmerian hordes ravaged their territory. Urartu
was also overrun by the fierce barbarians from the north. It was one of
these last visits of the Assyrians to Tabal of the Hittites and the land
of the Muski (Meshech) which the Hebrew prophet referred to in
after-time when he exclaimed:

<span class="small">Asshur is there and all her company: his graves are
about him: all of them slain, fallen by the sword. . . . There is
Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude: her graves are round about him:
all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they caused their
terror in the land of the living. . . . (*Ezekiel*, xxxii.)</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sennacherib found
that Ionians had settled in Cilicia, and he deported large numbers of
them to Nineveh. The metal and ivory work at Nineveh show traces of
Greek influence after this period.

A great conspiracy was fomented in several states against Sennacherib
when the intelligence of Sargon's

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

death was bruited abroad. Egypt was concerned in it. Taharka (the
Biblical Tirhakah <span id="fr_532"></span>[1](#fn_530)), the last
Pharaoh of the Ethiopian Dynasty, had dreams of re-establishing Egyptian
supremacy in Palestine and Syria, and leagued himself with Luli, king of
Tyre, Hezekiah, king of Judah, and others. Merodach Baladan, the
Chaldæan king, whom Sargon had deposed, supported by Elamites and
Aramæans, was also a party to the conspiracy. "At that time Merodach
Baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present
to Hezekiah . . . And Hezekiah was glad of them." <span
id="fr_533"></span>[2](#fn_531)

Merodach Baladan again seized the throne of Babylon. Sargon's son, who
had been appointed governor, was murdered and a pretender sat on the
throne for a brief period, but Merodach Baladan thrust him aside and
reigned for nine months, during which period he busied himself by
encouraging the kings of Judah and Tyre to revolt. Sennacherib invaded
Babylonia with a strong army, deposed Merodach Baladan, routed the
Chaldæans and Aramæans, and appointed as vassal king Bel-ibni, a native
prince, who remained faithful to Assyria for about three years.

In 707 B.C. Sennacherib appeared in the west. When he approached Tyre,
Luli, the king, fled to Cyprus. The city was not captured, but much of
its territory was ceded to the king of Sidon. Askalon was afterwards
reduced. At Eltekeh Sennacherib came into conflict with an army of
allies, including Ethiopian, Egyptian, and Arabian Mutsri forces, which
he routed. Then he captured a number of cities in Judah and transported
200,150 people. He was unable, however, to enter Jerusalem, in which
Hezekiah was compelled to remain "like a bird in a cage". It appears
that Hezekiah "bought off" the Assyrians on

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

this occasion with gifts of gold and silver and jewels, costly
furniture, musicians, and female slaves.

In 689 B.C. Sennacherib found it necessary to penetrate Arabia.
Apparently another conspiracy was brewing, for Hezekiah again revolted.
On his return from the south--according to Berosus he had been in
Egypt--the Assyrian king marched against the king of Judah.

<span class="small">And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, and
that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem, he took counsel with
the princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which
were without the city: and they did help him. . . . Why should the kings
of Assyria come and find much water?</span>

Sennacherib sent messengers to Jerusalem to attempt to stir up the
people against Hezekiah. C1 He wrote also letters to rail on the Lord
God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the
nations of other lands have not delivered their people out of mine hand,
so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine
hand." <span id="fr_534"></span>[1](#fn_532)

Hezekiah sent his servants to Isaiah, who was in Jerusalem at the time,
and the prophet said to them:

<span class="small">Thus shall ye say to your master. Thus saith the
Lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, with which the
servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. Behold, I will send
a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and shall return to his
own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own
land. <span id="fr_535"></span>[2](#fn_533)</span>

According to Berosus, the Babylonian priestly historian, the camp of
Sennacherib was visited in the night by swarms of field mice which ate
up the quivers and bows and the (leather) handles of shields. Next
morning the army fled.

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

The Biblical account of the disaster is as follows:

<span class="small">And it came to pass that night, that the angel of
the Lord went out, and smote the camp of the Assyrians an hundred and
four score and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning,
behold, they were all dead corpses. So Sennacherib king of Assyria
departed, and went and returned and dwelt at Nineveh. <span
id="fr_536"></span>[1](#fn_534)</span>

A pestilence may have broken out in the camp, the infection, perhaps,
having been carried by field mice. Byron's imagination was stirred by
the vision of the broken army of Assyria.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold,  
And his cohorts were gleaming with purple and gold;  
And the sheen of their spears was like stars of the sea,  
When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee.

Like the leaves of the forest when summer is green,  
That host with their banners at sunset were seen;  
Like the leaves of the forest when autumn hath blown,  
That host on the morrow lay withered and strown.

For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast,  
And breathed on the face of the foe as he passed;  
And the eyes of the sleepers waxed deadly and chill,  
And their hearts but once heaved--and forever grew still!

And there lay the steed with his nostril all wide,  
But through it there rolled not the breath of his pride;  
And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf,  
And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf.

And there lay the rider distorted and pale,  
With the dew on his brow, and the rust on his mail;  
And the tents were all silent--the banners alone--  
The lances uplifted--the trumpet unblown.

And the widows of Asshur are loud in their wail,  
And the idols are broke in the temple of Baal; <span id="page_468">p.
468</span>  
And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword,  
Hath melted like snow in the glance of the Lord.

</div>

Before this disaster occurred Sennacherib had to invade Babylonia again,
for the vassal king, Bel-ibni, had allied himself with the Chaldæans and
raised the standard of revolt. The city of Babylon was besieged and
captured, and its unfaithful king deported with a number of nobles to
Assyria. Old Merodach Baladan was concerned in the plot and took refuge
on the Elamite coast, where the Chaldæans had formed a colony. He died
soon afterwards.

Sennacherib operated in southern Babylonia and invaded Elam. But ere he
could return to Assyria he was opposed by a strong army of allies,
including Babylonians, Chaldæans, Aramæans, Elamites, and Persians, led
by Samunu, son of Merodach Baladan. A desperate battle was fought.
Although Sennacherib claimed a victory, he was unable to follow it up.
This was in 692 B.C. A Chaldæan named Mushezib-Merodach seized the
Babylonian throne.

In 691 B.C. Sennacherib again struck a blow for Babylonia, but was
unable to depose Mushezib-Merodach. His opportunity came, however, in
689 B.C. Elam had been crippled by raids of the men of Parsua (Persia),
and was unable to co-operate with the Chaldæan king of Babylon.
Sennacherib captured the great commercial metropolis, took
Mushezib-Merodach prisoner, and dispatched him to Nineveh. Then he
wreaked his vengeance on Babylon. For several days the Assyrian soldiers
looted the houses and temples, and slaughtered the inhabitants without
mercy. E-sagila was robbed of its treasures, images of deities were
either broken in pieces or sent to Nineveh: the statue of Bel-Merodach
was dispatched to

 

<span id="img_46800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ASSAULT ON THE
CITY OF . . .ALAMMU (? JERUSALEM) BY THE ASSYRIANS UNDER
SENNACHERIB&lt;br&gt; The besieging archers are protected by wicker
screens&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;Marble Slab from Kouyunjik (Nineveh): now in
British Museum&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; Photo. Mansell](tn/46800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/46800.jpg)  
ASSAULT ON THE CITY OF . . .ALAMMU (? JERUSALEM) BY THE ASSYRIANS UNDER
SENNACHERIB  
The besieging archers are protected by wicker screens  
*Marble Slab from Kouyunjik (Nineveh): now in British Museum*.  
Photo. Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Asshur so that he
might take his place among the gods who were vassals of Ashur. "The city
and its houses," Sennacherib recorded, "from foundation to roof; I
destroyed them, I demolished them, I burned them with fire; walls,
gateways, sacred chapels, and the towers of earth and tiles, I laid them
low and cast them into the Arakhtu." <span
id="fr_537"></span>[1](#fn_535)

"So thorough was Sennacherib's destruction of the city in 689 B.C.,"
writes Mr. King, "that after several years of work, Dr. Koldewey
concluded that all traces of earlier buildings had been destroyed on
that occasion. More recently some remains of earlier strata have been
recognized, and contract-tablets have been found which date from the
period of the First Dynasty. Moreover, a number of earlier pot-burials
have been unearthed, but a careful examination of the greater part of
the ruins has added little to our knowledge of this most famous city
before the Neo-Babylonian period." <span id="fr_538"></span>[2](#fn_536)

It is possible that Sennacherib desired to supplant Babylon as a
commercial metropolis by Nineveh. He extended and fortified that city,
surrounding it with two walls protected by moats. According to Diodorus,
the walls were a hundred feet high and about fifty feet wide. Excavators
have found that at the gates they were about a hundred feet in breadth.
The water supply of the city was ensured by the construction of dams and
canals, and strong quays were erected to prevent flooding. Sennacherib
repaired a lofty platform which was isolated by a canal, and erected
upon it his great palace. On another platform he had an arsenal built.

Sennacherib's palace was the most magnificent building of its kind ever
erected by an Assyrian emperor. It was

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

lavishly decorated, and its bas-reliefs display native art at its
highest pitch of excellence. The literary remains of the time also give
indication of the growth of culture: the inscriptions are distinguished
by their prose style. It is evident that men of culture and refinement
were numerous in Assyria. The royal library of Kalkhi received many
additions during the reign of the destroyer of Babylon.

Like his father, Sennacherib died a violent death. According to the
Babylonian Chronicle he was slain in a revolt by his son "on the
twentieth day of Tebet" (680 B.C.). The revolt continued from the "20th
of Tebet" (early in January) until the 2nd day of Adar (the middle of
February). On the 18th of Adar, Esarhaddon, son of Sennacherib, was
proclaimed king.

Berosus states that Sennacherib was murdered by two of his sons, but
Esarhaddon was not one of the conspirators. The Biblical reference is as
follows: "Sennacherib . . . dwelt at Nineveh. And it came to pass, as he
was worshipping in the house of Nisroch (?Ashur) his god, that
Adrammelech and Sharezer (Ashur-shar-etir) his sons smote him with the
sword: and they escaped into the land of Armenia (Urartu). And
Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead." Ashur-shar-etir appears to
have been the claimant to the throne.

Esarhaddon (680-668 B.C.) was a man of different type from his father.
He adopted towards vassal states a policy of conciliation, and did much
to secure peace within the empire by his magnanimous treatment of rebel
kings who had been intimidated by their neighbours and forced to entwine
themselves in the meshes of intrigue. His wars were directed mainly to
secure the protection of outlying provinces against aggressive raiders.

The monarch was strongly influenced by his mother, Naki´a, a Babylonian
princess who appears to have been

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

as distinguished a lady as the famous Sammu-rammat. Indeed, it is
possible that traditions regarding her contributed to the Semiramis
legends. But it was not only due to her that Esarhaddon espoused the
cause of the pro-Babylonian party. He appears to be identical with the
Axerdes of Berosus, who ruled over the southern kingdom for eight years.
Apparently he had been appointed governor by Sennacherib after the
destruction of Babylon, and it may be that during his term of office in
Babylonia he was attracted by its ethical ideals, and developed those
traits of character which distinguished him from his father and
grandfather. He married a Babylonian princess, and one of his sons,
Shamash-shum-ukin, was born in a Babylonian palace, probably at Sippar.
He was a worshipper of the mother goddess Ishtar of Nineveh and Ishtar
of Arbela, and of Shamash, as well as of the national god Ashur.

As soon as Esarhaddon came to the throne he undertook the restoration of
Babylon, to which many of the inhabitants were drifting back. In three
years the city resumed its pre-eminent position as a trading and
industrial centre. Withal, he won the hearts of the natives by expelling
Chaldæans from the private estates which they had seized during the
Merodach-Baladan regime, and restoring them to the rightful heirs.

A Chaldæan revolt was inevitable. Two of Merodach Baladan's sons gave
trouble in the south, but were routed in battle. One fled to Elam, where
he was assassinated; the other sued for peace, and was accepted by the
diplomatic Esarhaddon as a vassal king.

Egypt was intriguing in the west. Its Ethiopian king, Taharka (the
Biblical Tirhakah) had stirred up Hezekiah to revolt during
Sennacherib's reign. An Assyrian ambassador who had visited Jerusalem
"heard

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

say concerning Tirhakah. . . . He sent messengers to Hezekiah saying . .
. Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee saying, Jerusalem
shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria. Behold, thou
hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands by
destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered? Have the gods of
the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed, as Gozan,
and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Telassar?
Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the
city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah?" <span
id="fr_539"></span>[1](#fn_537) Sidon was a party to the pro-Egyptian
league which had been formed in Palestine and Syria.

Early in his reign Esarhaddon conducted military operations in the west,
and during his absence the queen-mother Naki´a held the reins of
government. The Elamites regarded this innovation as a sign of weakness,
and invaded Babylon. Sippar was plundered, and its gods carried away.
The Assyrian governors, however, ultimately repulsed the Elamite king,
who was deposed soon after he returned home. His son, who succeeded him,
restored the stolen gods, and cultivated good relations with Esarhaddon.
There was great unrest in Elam at this period: it suffered greatly from
the inroads of Median and Persian pastoral fighting folk.

In the north the Cimmerians and Scythians, who were constantly warring
against Urartu, and against each other, had spread themselves westward
and east. Esarhaddon drove Cimmerian invaders out of Cappadocia, and
they swamped Phrygia.

The Scythian peril on the north-east frontier was, however, of more
pronounced character. The fierce mountaineers had allied themselves with
Median tribes

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

and overrun the buffer State of the Mannai. Both Urartu and Assyria were
sufferers from the brigandage of these allies. Esarhaddon's generals,
however, were able to deal with the situation, and one of the notable
results of the pacification of the north-eastern area was the conclusion
of an alliance with Urartu.

The most serious situation with which the emperor had to deal was in the
west. The King of Sidon, who had been so greatly favoured by
Sennacherib, had espoused the Egyptian cause. He allied himself with the
King of Cilicia, who, however, was unable to help him much. Sidon was
besieged and captured; the royal allies escaped, but a few years later
were caught and beheaded. The famous seaport was destroyed, and its vast
treasures deported to Assyria (about 676 B.C.). Esarhaddon replaced it
by a new city called Kar-Esarhaddon, which formed the nucleus of the new
Sidon.

It is believed that Judah and other disaffected States were dealt with
about this time. Manasseh had succeeded Hezekiah at Jerusalem when but a
boy of twelve years. He appears to have come under the influence of
heathen teachers.

<span class="small">For he built up again the high places which Hezekiah
his father had destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and made a
grove, as did Ahab king of Israel; and worshipped all the host of
heaven, and served them. . . . And he built altars for all the host of
heaven in the two courts of the house of the Lord. And he made his son
pass through the fire, and observed times, and used enchantments, and
dealt with familiar spirits and wizards: he wrought much wickedness in
the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. And he set a graven
image of the grove that he had made in the house, of which the Lord said
to David, and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which
I have chosen out of all tribes of Israel, will I put my name for
ever. <span id="fr_540"></span>[1](#fn_538)</span>

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

Isaiah ceased to prophesy after Manasseh came to the throne. According
to Rabbinic traditions he was seized by his enemies and enclosed in the
hollow trunk of a tree, which was sawn through. Other orthodox teachers
appear to have been slain also. "Manasseh shed innocent blood very much,
till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another." <span
id="fr_541"></span>[1](#fn_539) It is possible that there is a reference
to Isaiah's fate in an early Christian lament regarding the persecutions
of the faithful: "Others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings,
yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: they were stoned, *they were
sawn asunder*, were tempted, were slain with the sword". <span
id="fr_542"></span>[2](#fn_540) There is no Assyrian evidence regarding
the captivity of Manasseh. "Wherefore the Lord brought upon them (the
people of Judah) the captains of the host of the king of Assyria, which
took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried
him to Babylon. And when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his
God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, and
prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his
supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his
kingdom." <span id="fr_543"></span>[3](#fn_541) It was, however, in
keeping with the policy of Esarhaddon to deal in this manner with an
erring vassal. The Assyrian records include Manasseh of Judah (Menasê of
the city of Yaudu) with the kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre, Ashdod,
Gaza, Byblos, &c., and "twenty-two kings of Khatti" as payers of tribute
to Esarhaddon, their overlord. Hazael of Arabia was conciliated by
having restored to him his gods which Sennacherib had carried away.

Egypt continued to intrigue against Assyria, and Esarhaddon

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

resolved to deal effectively with Taharka, the last Ethiopian Pharaoh.
In 674 B.C. he invaded Egypt, but suffered a reverse and had to retreat.
Tyre revolted soon afterwards (673 B.C.).

Esarhaddon, however, made elaborate preparations for his next campaign.
In 671 B.C. he went westward with a much more powerful army. A
detachment advanced to Tyre and invested it. The main force meanwhile
pushed on, crossed the Delta frontier, and swept victoriously as far
south as Memphis, where Taharka suffered a crushing defeat. That great
Egyptian metropolis was then occupied and plundered by the soldiers of
Esarhaddon. Lower Egypt became an Assyrian province; the various petty
kings, including Necho of Sais, had set over them Assyrian governors.
Tyre was also captured.

When he returned home Esarhaddon erected at the Syro-Cappadocian city of
Singirli <span id="fr_544"></span>[1](#fn_542) a statue of victory,
which is now in the Berlin museum. On this memorial the Assyrian "King
of the kings of Egypt" is depicted as a giant. With one hand he pours
out an oblation to a god; in the other he grasps his sceptre and two
cords attached to rings, which pierce the lips of dwarfish figures
representing the Pharaoh Taharka of Egypt and the unfaithful King of
Tyre.

In 668 B.C. Taharka, who had fled to Napata in Ethiopia, returned to
Upper Egypt, and began to stir up revolts. Esarhaddon planned out
another expedition, so that he might shatter the last vestige of power
possessed by his rival. But before he left home he found it necessary to
set his kingdom in order.

During his absence from home the old Assyrian party, who disliked the
emperor because of Babylonian sympathies, had been intriguing regarding
the succession to

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

the throne. According to the Babylonian Chronicle, "the king remained in
Assyria" during 669 B.C., "and he slew with the sword many noble men".
Ashur-bani-pal was evidently concerned in the conspiracy, and it is
significant to find that he pleaded on behalf of certain of the
conspirators. The crown prince Sinidinabal was dead: perhaps he had been
assassinated.

At the feast of the goddess Gula (identical with Bau, consort of Ninip),
towards the end of April in 668 B.C., Esarhaddon divided his empire
between two of his sons. Ashur-bani-pal was selected to be King of
Assyria, and Shamash-shum-ukin to be King of Babylon and the vassal of
Ashur-banipal. Other sons received important priestly appointments.

Soon after these arrangements were completed Esarhaddon, who was
suffering from bad health, set out for Egypt. He died towards the end of
October, and the early incidents of his campaign were included in the
records of Ashur-bani-pal's reign. Taharka was defeated at Memphis, and
retreated southward to Thebes.

So passed away the man who has been eulogized as "the noblest and most
sympathetic figure among the Assyrian kings". There was certainly much
which was attractive in his character. He inaugurated many social
reforms, and appears to have held in check his overbearing nobles. Trade
flourished during his reign. He did not undertake the erection of a new
city, like his father, but won the gratitude of the priesthood by his
activities as a builder and restorer of temples. He founded a new "house
of Ashur" at Nineveh, and reconstructed several temples in Babylonia.
His son Ashur-bani-pal was the last great Assyrian ruler.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_502"></span>[445:1](mba25.htm#fr_504) *2 Kings*, xv, 19 and
29; *2 Chronicles*, xxviii, 20.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[447:1](mba25.htm#fr_505) *2 Kings*, xviii, 34
and xix, 13.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[449:1](mba25.htm#fr_506) *2 Kings*, xiv, 1-14.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[449:2](mba25.htm#fr_507) *2 Kings*, xv, 1-14.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[449:3](mba25.htm#fr_508) *2 Kings*, xv, 19,
20.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[450:1](mba25.htm#fr_509) *2 Kings*, xv, 25.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[451:1](mba25.htm#fr_510) *Amos*, v.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[451:2](mba25.htm#fr_511) *Amos*, i.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[452:1](mba25.htm#fr_512) *2 Kings*, xvi, 5.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[452:2](mba25.htm#fr_513) *Isaiah*, vii, 3-7.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[452:3](mba25.htm#fr_514) *2 Kings*, xv, 3.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[452:4](mba25.htm#fr_515) *Isaiah*, vii, s 8.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[452:5](mba25.htm#fr_516) Kir was probably on
the borders of Elam.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[452:6](mba25.htm#fr_517) *2 Kings*, xvi, 7-9.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[453:1](mba25.htm#fr_518) *2 Kings*, xv, 29,
30.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[453:2](mba25.htm#fr_519) *2 Kings*, xvi, 10.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[454:1](mba25.htm#fr_520) In the Hebrew text
this monarch is called Sua, Seveh, and So, says Maspero. The Assyrian
texts refer to him as Sebek, Shibahi, Shabè, &c. He has been identified
with Pharaoh Shabaka of the Twenty-fifth Egyptian Dynasty; that monarch
may have been a petty king before he founded his Dynasty. Another theory
is that he was Seve, <span id="page_455">p. 455</span> king of Mutsri,
and still another that he was a petty king of an Egyptian state in the
Delta and not Shabaka.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[455:1](mba25.htm#fr_521) *2 Kings*, xvii, 3-5.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[455:2](mba25.htm#fr_522) *Isaiah*, xx, 1.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[455:3](mba25.htm#fr_523) *2 Kings*, xvii, 6.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[456:1](mba25.htm#fr_524) *2 Kings*, xvii,
16-41.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[456:2](mba25.htm#fr_525) The people carried
away would not be the whole of the inhabitants--only, one would suppose,
the more important personages, enough to make up the number 27,290 given
above.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[457:1](mba25.htm#fr_526) *Passing of the
Empires*, pp. 200-1.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[458:1](mba25.htm#fr_527) Those who, like
Breasted, identify "Piru of Mutsri" with "Pharaoh of Egypt" adopt the
view that Bocchoris of Sais paid tribute to Sargon. Piru, however, is
subsequently referred to with two Arabian kings as tribute payers to
Sargon apparently after Lower Egypt had come under the sway of Shabaka,
the first king of the Ethiopian or Twenty-fifth Dynasty.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[459:1](mba25.htm#fr_528) *Isaiah*, xx, 2-5.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[459:2](mba25.htm#fr_529) Commander-in-chief.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[459:3](mba25.htm#fr_530) *Isaiah*, xx, 1.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[463:1](mba25.htm#fr_531) *The Old Testament in
the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and
Babylonia*, T. G. Pinches, p. 392.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[465:1](mba25.htm#fr_532) *Isaiah*, xxxvii, 9.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[465:2](mba25.htm#fr_533) *Isaiah*, xxxix, 1,
2.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[466:1](mba25.htm#fr_534) *2 Chronicles*,
xxxii, 9-17.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[466:2](mba25.htm#fr_535) *2 Kings*, xix, 6, 7.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[467:1](mba25.htm#fr_536) *2 Kings*, xix, 35,
36.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[469:1](mba25.htm#fr_537) Smith-Sayce, *History
of Sennacherib*, pp. 132-5.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[469:2](mba25.htm#fr_538) *A History of Sumer
and Akkad*, p. 37.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[472:1](mba25.htm#fr_539) *Isaiah*, xxxvii,
8-13.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[473:1](mba25.htm#fr_540) *2 Kings*, xxi, 3-7.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[474:1](mba25.htm#fr_541) *2 Kings*, xxi, 16.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[474:2](mba25.htm#fr_542) *Hebrews*, xi, 36,
37.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[474:3](mba25.htm#fr_543) *2 Chronicles*,
xxxiii, 11-3. It may be that Manasseh was taken to Babylon during
Ashur-bani-pal's reign. See [next chapter](mba26.htm#an_ch-20).

<span id="fn_542"></span>[475:1](mba25.htm#fr_544) Pronounce *g* as in
*gem*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Last Days of Assyria and Babylonia](mba26)
