[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mba22)  [Next](mba24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GYVU7A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths of Babylonia and Assyria*, by Donald A. MacKenzie, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span id="an_ch-17"></span>

### CHAPTER XVII

### The Hebrews in Assyrian History

<span class="small">Revival of Assyrian Power--The Syro-Cappadocian
Hittites--The Aramæan State of Damascus--Reign of Terror in
Mesopotamia--Barbarities of Ashur-natsir-pal III--Babylonia and Chaldæa
subdued--Glimpse of the Kalkhi Valley--The Hebrew Kingdoms of Judah and
Israel--Rival Monarchs and their Wars--How Judah became subject to
Damascus--Ahab and the Phœnician Jezebel--Persecution of Elijah and
other Prophets--Israelites fight against Assyrians--Shalmaneser as
Overlord of Babylonia--Revolts of Jehu in Israel and Hazael in
Damascus--Shalmaneser defeats Hazael--Jehu sends Tribute to
Shalmaneser--Baal Worship Supplanted by Golden Calf Worship in
Israel--Queen Athaliah of Judah--Crowning of the Boy King
Joash--Damascus supreme in Syria and Palestine--Civil War in
Assyria--Triumphs of Shamshi-Adad VII--Babylonia becomes an Assyrian
Province.</span>

IN one of the Scottish versions of the Seven Sleepers legend a shepherd
enters a cave, in which the great heroes of other days lie wrapped in
magic slumber, and blows two blasts on the horn which hangs suspended
from the roof. The sleepers open their eyes and raise themselves on
their elbows. Then the shepherd hears a warning voice which comes and
goes like the wind, saying: "If the horn is blown once again, the world
will be upset altogether". Terrified by the Voice and the ferocious
appearance of the heroes, the shepherd retreats hurriedly, locking the
door behind him; he casts the key into the sea. The story proceeds: "If
anyone should find the key and open the door, and blow but a single
blast on the horn, Finn and all the Feans would come forth. And that
would be a great day in Alban." <span id="fr_429"></span>[1](#fn_427)

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

After the lapse of an obscure century the national heroes of Assyria
were awakened as if from sleep by the repeated blasts from the horn of
the triumphant thunder god amidst the northern and western
mountains--Adad or Rimmon of Syria, Teshup of Armenia, Tarku of the
western Hittites. The great kings who came forth to "upset the world"
bore the familiar names, Ashur-natsir-pal, Shalmaneser, Shamash-Adad,
Ashur-dan, Adad-nirari, and Ashur-nirari. They revived and increased the
ancient glory of Assyria during its Middle Empire period.

The Syro-Cappadocian Hittites had grown once again powerful and
prosperous, but no great leader like Subbi-luliuma arose to weld the
various States into an Empire, so as to ensure the protection of the
mingled peoples from the operations of the aggressive and ambitious
war-lords of Assyria. One kingdom had its capital at Hamath and another
at Carchemish on the Euphrates. The kingdom of Tabal flourished in
Cilicia (Khilakku); it included several city States like Tarsus, Tiana,
and Comana (Kammanu). Farther west was the dominion of the
Thraco-Phrygian Muski. The tribes round the shores of Lake Van had
asserted themselves and extended their sphere of influence. The State of
Urartu was of growing importance, and the Nairi tribes had spread round
the south-eastern shores of Lake Van. The northern frontier of Assyria
was continually menaced by groups of independent hill States which would
have been irresistible had they operated together against a common
enemy, but were liable to be extinguished when attacked in detail.

A number of Aramæan kingdoms had come into existence in Mesopotamia and
throughout Syria. The most influential of these was the State of
Damascus, the king of which was the overlord of the Hebrew

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

kingdoms of Israel and Judah when Ashur-natsir-pal III ascended the
Assyrian throne about 885 B.C. Groups of the Aramæans had acquired a
high degree of culture and become traders and artisans. Large numbers
had filtered, as well, not only into Babylonia but also Assyria and the
north Syrian area of Hittite control. Accustomed for generations to
desert warfare, they were fearless warriors. Their armies had great
mobility, being composed mostly of mounted infantry, and were not easily
overpowered by the Assyrian forces of footmen and charioteers. Indeed,
it was not until cavalry was included in the standing army of Assyria
that operations against the Aramæans were attended with permanent
success.

Ashur-natsir-pal III <span id="fr_430"></span>[1](#fn_428) was preceded
by two vigorous Assyrian rulers, Adad-nirari III (911-890 B.C.) and
Tukulti-Ninip II (890-885 B.C.). The former had raided North Syria and
apparently penetrated as far as the Mediterranean coast. In consequence
he came into conflict with Babylonia, but he ultimately formed an
alliance with that kingdom. His son, Tukulti-Ninip, operated in southern
Mesopotamia, and apparently captured Sippar. In the north he had to
drive back invading bands of the Muski. Although, like his father, he
carried out great works at Asshur, he appears to have transferred his
Court to Nineveh, a sure indication that Assyria was once again becoming
powerful in northern Mesopotamia and the regions towards Armenia.

Ashur-natsir-pal III, son of Tukulti-Ninip II, inaugurated a veritable
reign of terror in Mesopotamia and northern Syria. His methods of
dealing with revolting tribes were of a most savage character. Chiefs
were skinned alive, and when he sacked their cities, not only
fighting-men but women and children were either

 

<span id="img_39600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![STATUE OF
ASHUR-NATSIR-PAL, WITH INSCRIPTIONS&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From S.W. Palace
of Nimroud: now in British Museum&lt;/i&gt;.&lt;br&gt; Photo.
Mansell](tn/39600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/39600.jpg)  
STATUE OF ASHUR-NATSIR-PAL, WITH INSCRIPTIONS  
*From S.W. Palace of Nimroud: now in British Museum*.  
Photo. Mansell  
</span>

 

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

slaughtered or burned at the stake. It is not surprising to find
therefore that, on more than one occasion, the kings of petty States
made submission to him without resistance as soon as he invaded their
domains.

In his first year he overran the mountainous district between Lake Van
and the upper sources of the Tigris. Bubu, the rebel son of the governor
of Nishtun, who had been taken prisoner, was transported to Arbela,
where he was skinned alive. Like his father, Ashur-natsir-pal fought
against the Muski, whose power was declining. Then he turned southward
from the borders of Asia Minor and dealt with a rebellion in northern
Mesopotamia.

An Aramæan pretender named Akhiababa had established himself at Suru in
the region to the east of the Euphrates, enclosed by its tributaries the
Khabar and the Balikh. He had come from the neighbouring Aramæan State
of Bit-Adini, and was preparing, it would appear, to form a powerful
confederacy against the Assyrians.

When Ashur-natsir-pal approached Suru, a part of its population welcomed
him. He entered the city, seized the pretender and many of his
followers. These he disposed of with characteristic barbarity. Some were
skinned alive and some impaled on stakes, while others were enclosed in
a pillar which the king had erected to remind the Aramæans of his
determination to brook no opposition. Akhiababa the pretender was sent
to Nineveh with a few supporters; and when they had been flayed their
skins were nailed upon the city walls.

Another revolt broke out in the Kirkhi district between the upper
reaches of the Tigris and the south-western shores of Lake Van. It was
promoted by the Nairi tribes, and even supported by some Assyrian
officials. Terrible reprisals were meted out to the rebels.

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When the city of
Kinabu was captured, no fewer than 3000 prisoners were burned alive, the
unfaithful governor being flayed. The city of Damdamusa was set on fire.
Then Tela was attacked. Ashur-natsir-pal's own account of the operations
runs as follows:--

<span class="small">The city (of Tello) was very strong; three walls
surrounded it. The inhabitants trusted to their strong walls and
numerous soldiers; they did not come down or embrace my feet. With
battle and slaughter I assaulted and took the city. Three thousand
warriors I slew in battle. Their booty and possessions, cattle, sheep, I
carried away; many captives I burned with fire. Many of their soldiers I
took alive; of some I cut off hands and limbs; of others the noses,
ears, and arms; of many soldiers I put out the eyes. I reared a column
of the living and a column of heads. I hung on high their heads on trees
in the vicinity of their city. Their boys and girls I burned up in
flames. I devastated the city, dug it up, in fire burned it; I
annihilated it. <span id="fr_431"></span>[1](#fn_429)</span>

The Assyrian war-lord afterwards forced several Nairi kings to
acknowledge him as their overlord. He was so greatly feared by the
Syro-Cappadocian Hittites that when he approached their territory they
sent him tribute, yielding without a struggle.

For several years the great conqueror engaged himself in thus subduing
rebellious tribes and extending his territory. His military headquarters
were at Kalkhi, to which city the Court had been transferred. Thither he
drafted thousands of prisoners, the great majority of whom he
incorporated in the Assyrian army. Assyrian colonies were established in
various districts for strategical purposes, and officials supplanted the
petty kings in certain of the northern city States.

The Aramæans of Mesopotamia gave much trouble to Ashur-natsir-pal.
Although he had laid a heavy hand

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

on Suru, the southern tribes, the Sukhi, stirred up revolts in
Mesopotamia as the allies of the Babylonians. On one occasion
Ashur-natsir-pal swept southward through this region, and attacked a
combined force of Sukhi Aramæans and Babylonians. The Babylonians were
commanded by Zabdanu, brother of Nabu-aplu-iddin, king of Babylonia, who
was evidently anxious to regain control of the western trade route. The
Assyrian war-lord, however, proved to be too powerful a rival. He
achieved so complete a victory that he captured the Babylonian general
and 3000 of his followers. The people of Kashshi (Babylonia) and Kaldu
(Chaldæa) were "stricken with terror", and had to agree to pay increased
tribute.

Ashur-natsir-pal reigned for about a quarter of a century, but his wars
occupied less than half of that period. Having accumulated great booty,
he engaged himself; as soon as peace was secured throughout his empire,
in rebuilding the city of Kalkhi, where he erected a great palace and
made records of his achievements. He also extended and redecorated the
royal palace at Nineveh, and devoted much attention to the temples.

Tribute poured in from the subject States. The mountain and valley
tribes in the north furnished in abundance wine and corn, sheep and
cattle and horses, and from the Aramæans of Mesopotamia and the
Syro-Cappadocian Hittites came much silver and gold, copper and lead,
jewels and ivory, as well as richly decorated furniture, armour and
weapons. Artists and artisans were also provided by the vassals of
Assyria. There are traces of Phœnician influence in the art of this
period.

Ashur-natsir-pal's great palace at Kalkhi was excavated by Layard, who
has given a vivid description of the verdant plain on which the ancient
city was situated, as it appeared in spring. "Its pasture lands, known
as the 'Jaif', are

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

renowned", he wrote, "for their rich and luxuriant herbage. In times of
quiet, the studs of the Pasha and of the Turkish authorities, with the
horses of the cavalry and of the inhabitants of Mosul, are sent here to
graze. . . . Flowers of every hue enamelled the meadows; not thinly
scattered over the grass as in northern climes, but in such thick and
gathering clusters that the whole plain seemed a patchwork of many
colours. The dogs, as they returned from hunting, issued from the long
grass dyed red, yellow, or blue, according to the flowers through which
they had last forced their way. . . . In the evening, after the labour
of the day, I often sat at the door of my tent, giving myself up to the
full enjoyment of that calm and repose which are imparted to the senses
by such scenes as these. . . . As the sun went down behind the low hills
which separate the river from the desert--even their rocky sides had
struggled to emulate the verdant clothing of the plain--its receding
rays were gradually withdrawn, like a transparent veil of light from the
landscape. Over the pure cloudless sky was the glow of the last light.
In the distance and beyond the Zab, Keshaf, another venerable ruin, rose
indistinctly into the evening mist. Still more distant, and still more
indistinct, was a solitary hill overlooking the ancient city of Arbela.
The Kurdish mountains, whose snowy summits cherished the dying sunbeams,
yet struggled with the twilight. The bleating of sheep and lowing of
cattle, at first faint, became louder as the flocks returned from their
pastures and wandered amongst the tents. Girls hurried over the
greensward to seek their fathers' cattle, or crouched down to milk those
which had returned alone to their well-remembered folds. Some were
coming from the river bearing the replenished pitcher on their heads or
shoulders; others, no less graceful in their form, and erect in their

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

carriage, were carrying the heavy loads of long grass which they had cut
in the meadows." <span id="fr_432"></span>[1](#fn_430)

Across the meadows so beautiful in March the great armies of
Ashur-natsir-pal returned with the booty of great campaigns--horses and
cattle and sheep, bales of embroidered cloth, ivory and jewels, silver
and gold, the products of many countries; while thousands of prisoners
were assembled there to rear stately buildings which ultimately fell
into decay and were buried by drifting sands.

Layard excavated the emperor's palace and dispatched to London, among
other treasures of antiquity, the sublime winged human-headed lions
which guarded the entrance, and many bas reliefs.

The Assyrian sculptures of this period lack the technical skill, the
delicacy and imagination of Sumerian and Akkadian art, but they are full
of energy, dignified and massive, and strong and lifelike. They reflect
the spirit of Assyria's greatness, which, however, had a materialistic
basis. Assyrian art found expression in delineating the outward form
rather than in striving to create a "thing of beauty" which is "a joy
for ever".

When Ashur-natsir-pal died, he was succeeded by his son Shalmaneser III
(860-825 B.C.), whose military activities extended over his whole reign.
No fewer than thirty-two expeditions were recorded on his famous black
obelisk.

As Shalmaneser was the first Assyrian king who came into direct touch
with the Hebrews, it will be of interest here to review the history of
the divided kingdoms of Israel and Judah, as recorded in the Bible,
because of the light it throws on international politics and the
situation which confronted Shalmaneser in Mesopotamia and Syria in the
early part of his reign.

After Solomon died, the kingdom of his son Rehoboam

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

was restricted to Judah, Benjamin, Moab, and Edom. The "ten tribes" of
Israel had revolted and were ruled over by Jeroboam, whose capital was
at Tirzah. <span id="fr_433"></span>[1](#fn_431) "There were wars
between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually." <span
id="fr_434"></span>[2](#fn_432)

The religious organization which had united the Hebrews under David and
Solomon was thus broken up. Jeroboam established the religion of the
Canaanites and made "gods and molten images". He was condemned for his
idolatry by the prophet Ahijah, who declared, "The Lord shall smite
Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water; and he shall root up Israel
out of this good land, which he gave to their fathers, and shall scatter
them beyond the river, because they have made their groves, provoking
the Lord to anger. And he shall give Israel up because of the sins of
Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel to sin." <span
id="fr_435"></span>[3](#fn_433)

In Judah Rehoboam similarly "did evil in the sight of the Lord"; his
subjects "also built them high places and images and groves, on every
high hill, and under every green tree". <span
id="fr_436"></span>[4](#fn_434) After the raid of the Egyptian Pharaoh
Shishak (Sheshonk) Rehoboam repented, however. "And when he humbled
himself, the wrath of the Lord turned from him, that he would not
destroy him altogether: and also in Judah things went well." <span
id="fr_437"></span>[5](#fn_435)

Rehoboam was succeeded by his son Abijah, who shattered the power of
Jeroboam, defeating that monarch in battle after he was surrounded as
Rameses II had been by the Hittite army. "The children of Israel fled
before Judah: and God delivered them into their hand. And Abijah and his
people slew them with a great slaughter: so there fell down slain in
Israel five hundred thousand

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

chosen men. Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time,
and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the Lord
God of their fathers. And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities
from him, Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns
thereof, and Ephraim with the towns thereof. Neither did Jeroboam
recover strength again in the days of Abijah, and the Lord struck him
and he died." <span id="fr_438"></span>[1](#fn_436)

Ere Jeroboam died, however, "Abijah slept with his fathers, and they
buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead.
In his days the land was quiet ten years. And Asa did that which was
good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God. For he took away the
altars of the strange gods, and the high places, and brake down the
images, and cut down the groves. And commanded Judah to seek the Lord
God of their fathers and to do the law and the commandment. Also he took
away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the images: and
the kingdom was quiet before him. And he built fenced cities in Judah:
for the land had rest, and he had no war in those years; because the
Lord had given him rest." <span id="fr_439"></span>[2](#fn_437)

Jeroboam died in the second year of Asa's reign, and was succeeded by
his son Nadab, who "did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the
way of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to
sin". <span id="fr_440"></span>[3](#fn_438) Nadab waged war against the
Philistines, and was besieging Gibbethon when Baasha revolted and slew
him. Thus ended the First Dynasty of the Kingdom of Israel.

Baasha was declared king, and proceeded to operate against Judah. Having
successfully waged war against Asa, he proceeded to fortify Ramah, a few
miles to the

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

north of Jerusalem, "that he might not suffer any to go out or come in
to Asa king of Judah". <span id="fr_441"></span>[1](#fn_439)

Now Israel was at this time one of the allies of the powerful Aramæan
State of Damascus, which had resisted the advance of the Assyrian armies
during the reign of Ashur-natsir-pal I, and apparently supported the
rebellions of the northern Mesopotamian kings. Judah was nominally
subject to Egypt, which, however, was weakened by internal troubles, and
therefore unable either to assert its authority in Judah or help its
king to resist the advance of the Israelites.

In the hour of peril Judah sought the aid of the king of Damascus. "Asa
took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the
house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king's house, and delivered
them into the hand of his servants: and King Asa sent them to Ben-hadad,
the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, that dwelt at
Damascus, saying, There is a league between me and thee, and between my
father and thy father: behold, I have sent unto thee a present of silver
and gold: come and break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he
may depart from me". <span id="fr_442"></span>[2](#fn_440)

Ben-hadad accepted the invitation readily. He waged war against Israel,
and Baasha was compelled to abandon the building of the fortifications
at Ramah. "Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah; none
was exempted: and they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber
thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built with them Geba
of Benjamin, and Mizpah." <span id="fr_443"></span>[3](#fn_441)

Judah and Israel thus became subject to Damascus, and had to recognize
the king of that city as arbiter in all their disputes.

After reigning about twenty-four years, Baasha of

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel died in 886
B.C. and was succeeded by his son Elah, who came to the throne "in the
twenty and sixth year of Asa". He had ruled a little over a year when he
was murdered by "his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots", while
he was "drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza steward of his house
in Tirzah". <span id="fr_444"></span>[1](#fn_442) Thus ended the Second
Dynasty of the Kingdom of Israel.

Zimri's revolt was shortlived. He reigned only "seven days in Tirzah".
The army was "encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the
Philistines. And the people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath
conspired and hath also slain the king; wherefore all Israel made Omri,
the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp. And Omri
went up from Gibbethon and all Israel with him, and they besieged
Tirzah. And it came to pass when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that
he went into the palace of the king's house, and burnt the king's house
over him with fire, and died." <span id="fr_445"></span>[2](#fn_443)

Omri's claim to the throne was disputed by a rival named Tibni. "But the
people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that followed
Tibni, son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri reigned." <span
id="fr_446"></span>[3](#fn_444)

Omri was the builder of Samaria, whither his Court was transferred from
Tirzah towards the close of his six years reign. He was followed by his
son Ahab, who ascended the throne "in the thirty and eighth year of Asa
king of Judah . . . And Ahab . . . did evil in the sight of the Lord
above all that were before him." So notorious indeed were father and son
that the prophet Micah declared to the backsliders of his day, "For the
statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab, and
ye walk in their counsel; that I should

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing:
therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people". <span
id="fr_447"></span>[1](#fn_445)

Ahab was evidently an ally of Sidon as well as a vassal of Damascus, for
he married the notorious princess Jezebel, the daughter of the king of
that city State. He also became a worshipper of the Phœnician god Baal,
to whom a temple had been erected in Samaria. "And Ahab made a grove;
and Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all
the kings of Israel that were before him." <span
id="fr_448"></span>[2](#fn_446) Obadiah, who "feared the Lord greatly",
was the governor of Ahab's house, but the outspoken prophet Elijah,
whose arch enemy was the notorious Queen Jezebel, was an outcast like
the hundred prophets concealed by Obadiah in two mountain caves. <span
id="fr_449"></span>[3](#fn_447)

Ahab became so powerful a king that Ben-hadad II of Damascus picked a
quarrel with him, and marched against Samaria. It was on this occasion
that Ahab sent the famous message to Ben-hadad: "Let not him that
girdeth on his harness (armour) boast himself as he that putteth it
off". The Israelites issued forth from Samaria and scattered the
attacking force. "And Israel pursued them: and Ben-hadad the king of
Syria escaped on a horse with the horseman. And the king of Israel went
out, and smote the horses and chariots, and slew the Syrians with a
great slaughter." Ben-hadad was made to believe afterwards by his
counsellors that he owed his defeat to the fact that the gods of Israel
were "gods of the hills; therefore they are stronger than we". They
added: "Let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be
stronger than they". In the following year Ben-hadad fought against the
Israelites

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

at Aphek, but was again defeated. He then found it necessary to make "a
covenant" with Ahab. <span id="fr_450"></span>[1](#fn_448)

In 854 B.C. Shalmaneser III of Assyria was engaged in military
operations against the Aramæan Syrians. Two years previously he had
broken the power of Akhuni, king of Bit-Adini in northern Mesopotamia,
the leader of a strong confederacy of petty States. Thereafter the
Assyrian monarch turned towards the south-west and attacked the Hittite
State of Hamath and the Aramæan State of Damascus. The various rival
kingdoms of Syria united against him, and an army of 70,000 allies
attempted to thwart his progress at Qarqar on the Orontes. Although
Shalmaneser claimed a victory on this occasion, it was of no great
advantage to him, for he was unable to follow it up. Among the Syrian
allies were Bir-idri (Ben-hadad II) of Damascus, and Ahab of Israel
("Akhabbu of the land of the Sir’ilites"). The latter had a force of
10,000 men under his command.

Four years after Ahab began to reign, Asa died at Jerusalem and his son
Jehoshaphat was proclaimed king of Judah. "And he walked in all the ways
of Asa his father; he turned not aside from it, doing that which was
right in the eyes of the Lord: nevertheless the high places were not
taken away; for the people offered and burnt incense yet in the high
places." <span id="fr_451"></span>[2](#fn_449)

There is no record of any wars between Israel and Judah during this
period, but it is evident that the two kingdoms had been drawn together
and that Israel was the predominating power. Jehoshaphat "joined
affinity with Ahab", and some years afterwards visited Samaria, where he
was hospitably entertained. <span id="fr_452"></span>[3](#fn_450) The
two monarchs plotted together. Apparently Israel and Judah desired

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

to throw off the yoke of Damascus, which was being kept constantly on
the defence by Assyria. It is recorded in the Bible that they joined
forces and set out on an expedition to attack Ramoth in Gilead, which
Israel claimed, and take it "out of the hand of the king of
Syria". <span id="fr_453"></span>[1](#fn_451) In the battle which ensued
(in 853 B.C.) Ahab was mortally wounded, "and about the time of the sun
going down he died". He was succeeded by his son Ahaziah, who
acknowledged the suzerainty of Damascus. After a reign of two years
Ahaziah was succeeded by Joram.

Jehoshaphat did not again come into conflict with Damascus. He devoted
himself to the development of his kingdom, and attempted to revive the
sea trade on the Persian gulf which had flourished under Solomon. "He
made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold; but they went not; for
the ships were broken (wrecked) at Ezion-geber." Ahaziah offered him
sailors--probably Phœnicians--but they were refused. <span
id="fr_454"></span>[2](#fn_452) Apparently Jehoshaphat had close trading
relations with the Chaldæans, who were encroaching on the territory of
the king of Babylon, and menacing the power of that monarch. Jehoram
succeeded Jehoshaphat and reigned eight years.

After repulsing the Syrian allies at Qarqar on the Orontes in 854 B.C.,
Shalmaneser III of Assyria found it necessary to invade Babylonia. Soon
after he came to the throne he had formed an alliance with
Nabu-aplu-iddin of that kingdom, and was thus able to operate in the
north-west without fear of complications with the rival claimant of
Mesopotamia. When Nabu-aplu-iddin died, his two sons Marduk-zakir-shum
and Marduk-bel-usate were rivals for the throne. The former, the
rightful heir, appealed for help to Shalmaneser, and that

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

monarch at once hastened to assert his authority in the southern
kingdom. In 851 B.C. Marduk-bel-usate, who was supported by an Aramæan
army, was defeated and put to death.

Marduk-zakir-shum afterwards reigned over Babylonia as the vassal of
Assyria, and Shalmaneser, his over-lord, made offerings to the gods at
Babylon, Borsippa, and Cuthah. The Chaldæans were afterwards subdued,
and compelled to pay annual tribute.

In the following year Shalmaneser had to lead an expedition into
northern Mesopotamia and suppress a fresh revolt in that troubled
region. But the western allies soon gathered strength again, and in 846
B.C. he found it necessary to return with a great army, but was not
successful in achieving any permanent success, although he put his
enemies to flight. The various western kingdoms, including Damascus,
Israel, and Tyre and Sidon, remained unconquered, and continued to
conspire against him.

The resisting power of the Syrian allies, however, was being greatly
weakened by internal revolts, which may have been stirred up by Assyrian
emissaries. Edom threw off the yoke of Judah and became independent.
Jehoram, who had married Athaliah, a royal princess of Israel, was dead.
His son Ahaziah, who succeeded him, joined forces with his cousin and
overlord, King Joram of Israel, to assist him in capturing Ramoth-gilead
from the king of Damascus. Joram took possession of the city, but was
wounded, and returned to Jezreel to be healed. <span
id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_453) He was the last king of the Omri Dynasty
of Israel. The prophet Elisha sent a messenger to Jehu, a military
leader, who was at Ramoth-gilead, with a box of oil and the ominous
message, "Thus saith the Lord,

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have anointed
thee king over Israel. And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy
master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the
blood of all the servants of the Lord, at the hand of Jezebel . . . And
the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel, and there shall be
none to bury her."

Jehu "conspired against Joram", and then, accompanied by an escort,
"rode in a chariot and went to Jezreel", so that he might be the first
to announce the revolt to the king whom he was to depose.

The watchman on the tower of Jezreel saw Jehu and his company
approaching and informed Joram, who twice sent out a messenger to
enquire, "Is it peace?" Neither messenger returned, and the watchman
informed the wounded monarch of Israel, "He came even unto them, and
cometh not again; and the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of
Nimshi; for he driveth furiously".

King Joram went out himself to meet the famous charioteer, but turned to
flee when he discovered that he came as an enemy. Then Jehu drew his bow
and shot Joram through the heart. Ahaziah endeavoured to conceal himself
in Samaria, but was slain also. Jezebel was thrown down from a window of
the royal harem and trodden under foot by the horsemen of Jehu; her body
was devoured by dogs. <span id="fr_456"></span>[1](#fn_454)

The Syrian king against whom Joram fought at Ramoth-gilead was Hazael.
He had murdered Ben-hadad II as he lay on a bed of sickness by
smothering him with a thick cloth soaked in water. Then he had himself
proclaimed the ruler of the Aramæan State of Damascus. The prophet
Elisha had previously wept before him, saying, cc I know the evil that
thou wilt do

 

<span id="img_41000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![DETAILS FROM
SECOND SIDE OF BLACK OBELISK OF SHALMANESER III&lt;br&gt; (1) Tribute
bearers of Jehu, King of Israel. (2) Tributary Animals. (3) Tribute
bearers with shawls and bags&lt;br&gt; (&lt;i&gt;British
Museum&lt;/i&gt;)](tn/41000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/41000.jpg)  
DETAILS FROM SECOND SIDE OF BLACK OBELISK OF SHALMANESER III  
(1) Tribute bearers of Jehu, King of Israel. (2) Tributary Animals. (3)
Tribute bearers with shawls and bags  
(*British Museum*)  
</span>

 

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

unto the children of Israel; their strongholds wilt thou set on fire,
and their young men wilt thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their
children and rip up their women with child". <span
id="fr_457"></span>[1](#fn_455)

The time seemed ripe for Assyrian conquest. In 843 B.C. Shalmaneser III
crossed the Euphrates into Syria for the sixteenth time. His first
objective was Aleppo, where he was welcomed. He made offerings there to
Hadad, the local Thor, and then suddenly marched southward. Hazael went
out to oppose the advancing Assyrians, and came into conflict with them
in the vicinity of Mount Hermon. "I fought with him", Shalmaneser
recorded, "and accomplished his defeat; I slew with the sword 1600 of
his warriors and captured 1121 chariots and 470 horses. He fled to save
his life."

Hazael took refuge within the walls of Damascus, which the Assyrians
besieged, but failed, however, to capture. Shalmaneser's soldiers
meanwhile wasted and burned cities without number, and carried away
great booty. "In those days", Shalmaneser recorded, "I received tribute
from the Tyrians and Sidonians and from Yaua (Jehu) son (successor) of
Khumri (Omri)." The following is a translation from a bas relief by
Professor Pinches of a passage detailing Jehu's tribute:

<span class="small">The tribute of Yaua, son of Khumri: silver, gold, a
golden cup, golden vases, golden vessels, golden buckets, lead, a staff
for the hand of the king (and) sceptres, I received. <span
id="fr_458"></span>[2](#fn_456)</span>

The scholarly translator adds, "It is noteworthy that the Assyrian form
of the name, Yaua, shows that the unpronounced aleph at the end was at
that time sounded,

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

so that the Hebrews must have called him Yahua (Jehua)".

Shalmaneser did not again attack Damascus. His sphere of influence was
therefore confined to North Syria. He found it more profitable, indeed,
to extend his territories into Asia Minor. For several years he engaged
himself in securing control of the north-western caravan road, and did
not rest until he had subdued Cilicia and overrun the Hittite kingdoms
of Tabal and Malatia.

Hazael of Damascus avenged himself meanwhile on his unfaithful allies
who had so readily acknowledged the shadowy suzerainty of Assyria. "In
those days the Lord began to cut Israel short: and Hazael smote them in
all the coasts of Israel; from Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead,
the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the Manassites, from Aroer, which
is by the river Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan." <span
id="fr_459"></span>[1](#fn_457) Israel thus came completely under the
sway of Damascus.

Jehu appears to have cherished the ambition of uniting Israel and Judah
under one crown. His revolt received the support of the orthodox
Hebrews, and he began well by inaugurating reforms in the northern
kingdom with purpose apparently to re-establish the worship of David's
God. He persecuted the prophets of Baal, but soon became a backslider,
for although he stamped out the Phœnician religion he began to worship
"the golden calves that were in Bethel and that were in Dan. . . . He
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin." <span
id="fr_460"></span>[2](#fn_458) Apparently he found it necessary to
secure the support of the idolators of the ancient cult of the "Queen of
Heaven".

The crown of Judah had been seized by the Israelitish

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Queen mother
Athaliah after the death of her son Ahaziah at the hands of Jehu. <span
id="fr_461"></span>[1](#fn_459) She endeavoured to destroy "all the seed
royal of the house of Judah". But another woman thwarted the completion
of her monstrous design. This was Jehoshabeath, sister of Ahaziah and
wife of the priest Jehoiada, who concealed the young prince Joash "and
put him and his nurse in a bed-chamber", in "the house of God". There
Joash was strictly guarded for six years. <span
id="fr_462"></span>[2](#fn_460)

In time Jehoiada stirred up a revolt against the Baal-worshipping queen
of Judah. Having secured the support of the captains of the royal guard
and a portion of the army, he brought out from the temple the seven
years old prince Joash, "the king's son, and put upon him the crown, and
gave him the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons
anointed him, and said, God save the king.

"Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising
the king, she came to the people into the house of the Lord: and she
looked, and, behold the king stood at his pillar at the entering in, and
the princes and the trumpets by the king: and all the people of the land
rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the singers with instruments
of musick, and such as taught to sing praise. Then Athaliah rent her
clothes, and said, Treason, Treason.

"Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were
set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the ranges: and
whoso followeth her, let him be slain by the sword. For the priest said,
Slay her not in the house of the Lord. So they laid hands on her; and
when she was come to the entering of the horse gate by the king's house,
they slew her there.

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

"And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the people,
and between the king, that they should be the Lord's people. Then all
the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his
altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal
before the altars." <span id="fr_463"></span>[1](#fn_461)

When Jehu of Israel died, he was succeeded by Jehoahaz. "The Lord was
kindled against Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of Ben-hadad
the son of Hazael all their days." Then Jehoahaz repented. He "besought
the Lord, and the Lord hearkened unto him: for he saw the oppression of
Israel, because the king of Syria oppressed them. And the Lord gave
Israel a saviour, so that they went out from under the hands of the
Syrians." <span id="fr_464"></span>[2](#fn_462) The "saviour", as will
be shown, was Assyria. Not only Israel, but Judah, under King Joash,
Edom, the Philistines and the Ammonites were compelled to acknowledge
the suzerainty of Damascus.

Shalmaneser III swayed an extensive and powerful empire, and kept his
generals continually employed suppressing revolts on his frontiers.
After he subdued the Hittites, Kati, king of Tabal, sent him his
daughter, who was received into the royal harem. Tribes of the Medes
came under his power: the Nairi and Urartian tribes continued battling
with his soldiers on his northern borders like the frontier tribes of
India against the British troops. The kingdom of Urartu was growing more
and more powerful.

In 829 B.C. the great empire was suddenly shaken to its foundations by
the outbreak of civil war. The party of rebellion was led by
Shalmaneser's son Ashur-danin-apli, who evidently desired to supplant
the crown prince Shamshi-Adad. He was a popular hero and received

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

the support of most of the important Assyrian cities, including Nineveh,
Asshur, Arbela, Imgurbel, and Durbalat, as well as some of the
dependencies. Shalmaneser retained Kalkhi and the provinces of northern
Mesopotamia, and it appears that the greater part of the army also
remained loyal to him.

After four years of civil war Shalmaneser died. His chosen heir,
Shamshi-Adad VII, had to continue the struggle for the throne for two
more years.

When at length the new king had stamped out the last embers of revolt
within the kingdom, he had to undertake the reconquest of those
provinces which in the interval had thrown off their allegiance to
Assyria. Urartu in the north had grown more aggressive, the Syrians were
openly defiant, the Medes were conducting bold raids, and the
Babylonians were plotting with the Chaldæans, Elamites, and Aramæans to
oppose the new ruler. Shamshi-Adad, however, proved to be as great a
general as his father. He subdued the Medes and the Nairi tribes, burned
many cities and collected enormous tribute, while thousands of prisoners
were taken and forced to serve the conqueror.

Having established his power in the north, Shamshi-Adad then turned
attention to Babylonia. On his way southward he subdued many villages.
He fell upon the first strong force of Babylonian allies at Dur-papsukal
in Akkad, and achieved a great victory, killing 13,000 and taking 3000
captives. Then the Babylonian king, Marduk-balatsu-ikbi, advanced to
meet him with his mixed force of Babylonians, Chaldæans, Elamites, and
Aramæans, but was defeated in a fierce battle on the banks of the Daban
canal. The Babylonian camp was captured, and the prisoners taken by the
Assyrians included 5000 foot-men, 200 horsemen, and 100 chariots

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

Shamshi-Adad conducted in all five campaigns in Babylonia and Chaldæa,
which he completely subdued, penetrating as far as the shores of the
Persian Gulf. In the end he took prisoner the new king, Bau-akh-iddina,
the successor of Marduk-balatsu-ikbi, and transported him to Assyria,
and offered up sacrifices as the overlord of the ancient land at
Babylon, Borsippa, and Cuthah. For over half a century after this
disaster Babylonia was a province of Assyria. During that period,
however, the influence which it exercised over the Assyrian Court was so
great that it contributed to the downfall of the royal line of the
Second Empire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_427"></span>[394:1](mba23.htm#fr_429) *Finn and His Warrior
Band*, pp. 245 *et seq*. (London, 1911).

<span id="fn_428"></span>[396:1](mba23.htm#fr_430) Also rendered
Ashur-na´sir-pal.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[398:1](mba23.htm#fr_431) *A History of the
Babylonians and Assyrians*, G. S. Goodspeed, p. 197.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[401:1](mba23.htm#fr_432) *Discoveries at
Nineveh*, Sir A. H. Layard (London, 1856), pp. 55, 56.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[402:1](mba23.htm#fr_433) "Thou art beautiful,
O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem." *Solomon's Song*, vi, 4.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[402:2](mba23.htm#fr_434) *2 Chronicles*, xii,
15.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[402:3](mba23.htm#fr_435) *1 Kings*, xiv, 1-20.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[402:4](mba23.htm#fr_436) *Ibid*., 21-3.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[402:5](mba23.htm#fr_437) *2 Chronicles*, xii,
1-12.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[403:1](mba23.htm#fr_438) *2 Chronicles*, xiii,
1-20.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[403:2](mba23.htm#fr_439) *Ibid*., xiv, 1-6.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[403:3](mba23.htm#fr_440) *1 Kings*, xv, 25-6.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[404:1](mba23.htm#fr_441) *1 Kings*, xv, 16-7.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[404:2](mba23.htm#fr_442) *Ibid*., 18-9.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[404:3](mba23.htm#fr_443) *Ibid*., 20-2.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[405:1](mba23.htm#fr_444) *1 Kings*, xvi, 9-10.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[405:2](mba23.htm#fr_445) *Ibid*., 15-8.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[405:3](mba23.htm#fr_446) *Ibid*., 21-2.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[406:1](mba23.htm#fr_447) *Micah*, vi, 16.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[406:2](mba23.htm#fr_448) *1 Kings*, xvi,
29-33.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[406:3](mba23.htm#fr_449) *Ibid*., xviii, 1-4.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[407:1](mba23.htm#fr_450) *1 Kings*, xx.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[407:2](mba23.htm#fr_451) *Ibid*., xxii, 43.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[407:3](mba23.htm#fr_452) *2 Chronicles*,
xviii, 1-2.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[408:1](mba23.htm#fr_453) *1 Kings*, xxii and
*2 Chronicles*, xviii.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[408:2](mba23.htm#fr_454) *1 Kings*, xxii,
48-9.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[409:1](mba23.htm#fr_455) *1 Kings*, viii.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[410:1](mba23.htm#fr_456) *2 Kings*, ix and *2
Chronicles*, xxii.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[411:1](mba23.htm#fr_457) *2 Kings*, viii,
1-15.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[411:2](mba23.htm#fr_458) *The Old Testament in
the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and
Babylonia*, pp. 337 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[412:1](mba23.htm#fr_459) *2 Kings*, x, 32-3.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[412:2](mba23.htm#fr_460) *Ibid*., 1-31.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[413:1](mba23.htm#fr_461) *2 Kings*, xi, 1-3.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[413:2](mba23.htm#fr_462) *2 Chronicles*, xxii,
10-12.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[414:1](mba23.htm#fr_463) *2 Chronicles*,
xxiii, 1-17.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[414:2](mba23.htm#fr_464) *2 Kings*, xiii, 1-5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Age of Semiramis](mba24)
