[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild29) 
[Next](wild31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 30

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> has been my expression that, for
instance, African fakirs achieved the harmless impalement of children by
a process that would ordinarily be called imposing the imaginary upon
the physical, but that is called by me imposing the imaginary-physical
upon the physical-imaginary. I think that this is the conscious power
and method of adepts: but I think that in the great majority of our
stories, effects have been wrought unconsciously, so far as went active
awareness, by witches and wizards. I am impressed more

<span id="page_1049">p. 1049</span>

with an experience of my own than with any record of other doings. I
looked, or stared, at a picture on a wall. Somewhere in my mind were
many impressions of falling pictures. But I was not actively thinking of
falling pictures. The picture fell from the wall.

See back to the Blackman case—the four judges, who "died suddenly." It
was Blackman, who called attention to these deaths. Why? Vanity of the
magician? I think that more likely these victims were removed by a
wizardry of Blackman's of which he was unconscious. I think that if a
man so earnestly objected to paying alimony that, instead, he went to
jail four times, he'd overlook his judges and take a shorter cut, on
behalf of his income, if he consciously reasoned about it.

It would seem that visualizations have had nothing to do with many
occurrences told of in this book. Still, by a wild talent I mean
something that comes and goes, and is under no control, but that may be
caught and trained. Also there are cases that look very much like
controlled uses of visualizations upon physical affairs. In this view, I
have noted an aspect of doings that is a support for our expression upon
*transmediumization*.

The *real*, as it is called, or the objective, the external, the
material, cannot be absolutely set apart from the subjective, or the
imaginary: but there are quasi-attributes of the imaginary. There have
been occurrences that I think were *transmediumizations*, because I
think that they were marked by indications of having carried over, from
an imaginative origin, into physical being, or into what is called "real
life," the quasi-attributes of their origin.

A peculiarity of fires that are called—or that used to be
called—"spontaneous combustions of human bodies," is that the fires do
not communicate to surrounding objects and fabrics, or that they extend
only to a small degree around. There are stories of other such fires,
which cannot be "real fires," as compared with fires called "real." In
the *St. Louis Globe-Democrat*, October 2, or about Oct. 2, 1889, there
is a story of restricted fires, said to have occurred in the home of
Samuel Miller, upon a farm, six miles west of Findlay, Ohio. A bed had
burst into flames, burning down to a heap of ashes, but setting nothing
else afire, not even scorching the floor underneath. The next day,
"about the same time in the afternoon," a chest

<span id="page_1050">p. 1050</span>

of clothes flamed, and was consumed, without setting anything else
afire. The third day, at the same time, another bed, and nothing but the
bed burned. See back to the fires in the house in Bladenboro, N. C.,
February, 1932. A long account of these fires, from a San Diego (Cal.)
newspaper, was sent to me by Margaret M. Page, of San Diego. In it one
of the phenomena considered most remarkable was that fires broke out
close to inflammable materials that were unaffected by the flames. Names
of several witnesses—Mayor J. A. Bridger, of Bladenboro, J. B. Edwards,
a Wilmington health officer, and Dr. S. S. Hutchinson, of Bladenboro.

It is as if somebody had vengefully imagined fires, and in special
places had localized fires, according to his visualizations. Such
localizing, or focusing, omitting surroundings, is a quasi-attribute of
all visualizations. One vividly visualizes a face, and a body is ignored
by the imagination. Let somebody visualize a bed afire, and exhaust his
imaginative powers in this specialization: I conceive of the bed
burning, as imagined, and nothing else burning, because nothing else was
included in the mental picture that *transmediumized*, it having been
taken for granted, by the visualizer, that, like a fire of physical
origin, this fire would extend. It seems to me to be only ordinarily
impossible to understand the burning of a woman on an unscorched bed as
the "realization" of an imagined scene in which the burning body was
pictured, with neglect of anything else consuming.

See back to unsatisfactory attempts to attribute punctures of
windowpanes and automobile shields, to a missile-less weapon. The
invisible bullets stopped short, after penetrating glass. If we can
think of an intent, more mischievous than malicious, that was only upon
shooting through glass, and that gave no consideration to subsequent
courses of bullets, we can think of occurrences that took place, as
visualized, and as restricted by visualizations.

Doings in closed rooms—but my monism, by which I accept that all
psychical magic links somewhere with more or less commonplace physical
magic

*New York Times*, June 18, 1880—Rochester, N. Y.—a woman dead in her
bed, and the bed post hacked as if with a hatchet. It

<span id="page_1051">p. 1051</span>

was known that nobody had entered this room. But something had killed
this woman, leaving no sign of either entrance or exit.

It was during a thunderstorm, and the woman had been killed by
lightning.

The man of one of our stories—J. Temple Thurston—alone in his room—and
that a pictorial representation of his death by fire was enacting in a
distant mind—and that into the phase of existence that is called "real"
stole the imaginary—scorching his body, but not his clothes, because so
was pictured the burning of him—and that, hours later, there came into
the mind of the sorcerer a fear that this imposition of what is called
the imaginary upon what is called the physical bore quasi-attributes of
its origin, or was not realistic, or would be, in physical terms,
unaccountable, and would attract attention—and that the fire in the
house was visualized, and was "realized," but by a visualization that in
turn left some particulars unaccounted for.

Lavinia Farrar was a woman of "independent means." Hosts of men and
women have been shot, or stabbed, or poisoned, because of their
"independent means." But that Mrs. Farrar was thought to death—or that
upon her, too, out of the imaginary world in somebody's mind, stole a
story—that it made of her, too, so fictional a being that of her death
there is no explanation in ordinary, realistic terms

That here, too, there was an after-thought, or an after-picturation,
which, by way of attempted explanation, "realized" a knife and blood on
the floor, but overlooked other details that made this occurrence
inexplicable in terms of ordinary murders—or that this woman had been
stabbed in the heart, through unpunctured clothes, because it was, with
the neglect of everything else, the wound in the heart that had been
visualized.

The germ of this expression is in anybody's acceptance that a stigmatic
girl can transfer a wound, as pictured in her mind, into appearance upon
her body. The expression requires that there may be external, as well as
personal, stigmatism.

It seems to me to be as nearly unquestionable as anything in human
affairs goes, that there have been stigmatic girls. There may have been
many cases of different kinds of personal stigmatism,

<span id="page_1052">p. 1052</span>

There are emotions that are as intense as religious excitation. One of
them is terror.

The story of Isidor Fink is a story of a fear that preceded a murder. It
could be that Fink's was a specific fear, of somebody whom he had
harmed, and not a general fear of the hold-ups that, at the time, were
so prevalent in New York City. According to Police Commissioner
Mulrooney, it was impossible, in terms of ordinary human experience, to
explain this closed-room murder

Or Isidor Fink, at work in his laundry—and his mind upon somebody whom
he had injured—and that his fears of revenge were picturing an
assassination of which he was the victim—that his physical body was
seized upon by his own picturization of himself, as shot by an enemy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31](wild31)
