[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild19) 
[Next](wild21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_974">p. 974</span>

### 20

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> importance of the invisible—

That I'd starve to death, in the midst of eatables, were it not for the
invisible means of locomotion by which I go and get them, and the
untouchable and unseeable processes by which I digest them—

That every stout and determined materialist, arguing his rejection of
the unseeable and the untouchable, lives in a phantom existence, from
which he would fade away were it not for his support by invisibles—

The heat of his body—and heat has never been seen.

His own unseeable thoughts, by which he argues against the existence of
the invisible.

Nobody has ever seen steam. Electricity is invisible. The science of
physics is occultism. Experts in the uses of steam and electricity are
sorcerers. Mostly we do not think of their practices as witchcraft, but
we have an opinion upon what would have been thought of them, in earlier
stages of the Dark Age we're living in.

Or by the "occult," or by what is called the "supernatural," I mean
something like an experience that I once saw occur to some acquaintances
of mine.

A neighbor had pigeons, and the pigeons loafed on my window sill. They
were tempted to come in, but for weeks, stretched necks, fearing to
enter. I wished they would come in. I went four blocks to get them
sunflower seeds. Though I will go thousands of miles for data, it is
most unusual for me to go four blocks—it's eight blocks, counting both
ways—for anybody. One time I found three of them, who had flown through
an open window, and were upon the frame of a closed window. I went to
them slowly, so as not to alarm them. It seems that I am of a romantic
disposition, and, if I take a liking to anybody, who seems female, like
almost all birds, I want her to perch on my finger. So I put out a
finger. But

<span id="page_975">p. 975</span>

all three birds tried to fly through the glass. They could not learn, by
rebuffs, but kept on trying to escape through the glass. If, back in the
coop, these pigeons could have told their story, it would have been that
they were perched somewhere, when suddenly the air hardened. Everything
in front was as clearly visible as before, but the air had suddenly
turned impenetrable. Most likely the other pigeons would have said: "Oh,
go tell that to the sparrows!"

There is a moral in this, and it applies to a great deal in this book,
which is upon the realization of wishes. I had wished for pigeons. I got
them. After the investigation by the three pioneers all of them came in.
There were nine of them. It was the unusually warm summer of 1931, and
the windows had to be kept open. Pigeons on the backs of chairs. They
came up on the table, and inspected what I had for dinner. Other times
they spent on the rug, in stately groups and processions, except every
now and then,, when they were not so dignified. I could not shoo them
out, because I had invited them. Finally, I did get screens: but it
takes. weeks to be so intelligent. So the moral is in the observation
that, if you wish for something, you had better look out, because you
may be so unfortunate as to get it. It is better to be humble and
contented with almost nothing, because there's no knowing what something
may do to you. Much is said of the "cruelty of Nature": but, when a man
is denied his "heart's desire," that is mercy.

But I am suspicious of all this wisdom, because it makes for humility
and contentment. These thoughts are community-thoughts, and tend to
suppress the individual. They are corollaries of mechanistic philosophy,
and I represent revolt against mechanistic philosophy, not as applying
to a great deal, but as absolute.

Nevertheless, by the "occult," or the "supernatural," I do not mean that
I think that it is altogether exemplified by the experience of the
pigeons. In our existence of law-lawlessness, I conceive of two magics:
one as representing unknown law, and the other as expressing
lawlessness—or that a man may fall from a roof, and alight unharmed,
because of anti-gravitational law; and that another man may fall from a
roof, and alight unharmed, as an expression of the exceptional, of the
defiance of gravitation, of universal inconsistency, of defiance of
everything.

<span id="page_976">p. 976</span>

London *Times*, October—

Oh, well, just as an exception of our own—never mind the data, this
time—take my word for it that I could cite instances of remarkable
falls, if I wanted to.

It looks to me as if, for instance, some fishes climb trees, as an
expression of lawlessness, by which there is somewhere an exception to
the generalization that fishes must be aquatic. I think that *Thou Shalt
Not* was written on high, addressed to fishes. Whereupon a fish climbed
a tree. Or that it is law that hybrids shall be sterile—and that, not
two, but three, animals went into a conspiracy, out of which came the
okapi. There is a "law" of specialization. Evolutionists make much of
it. Stores specialize, so that dealers in pants do not sell prunes. But
then appear drugstores, which sell drugs, books, soups, and mouse traps.

I have had what I think is about the average experience with magic. But,
except in several periods, I have taken notes upon my experiences: and
most persons do not do this, and forget. We forget so easily that I have
looked over notes, and have come upon details of which I had no
remembrance. From records of my own experiences, I take an account of a
series of small occurrences, several particulars of which are of
importance to our general argument.

I was living in London—39 Marchmont Street, W. C. 1. I was gathering
data, in the British Museum Library. In my searches, I had noted
instances of pictures falling from walls, at times of poltergeist
disturbances: but I note here that my data upon physical subjects, such
as earthquakes and auroral beams and lights on dark parts of the moon
were about five to one, as compared with numbers of data upon matters of
psychic research. Later, the preponderance shifted the other way. The
subject of pictures falling from walls was in my mind, but it was much
submerged by other subjects and aspects of subjects. It was so inactive
in my mind that, when I was told of several pictures that had fallen
from walls in our house, I put that down to household insecurities, and
paid no more attention.

The abbreviations in the notes are *A*, for my wife; Mrs. *M*., for the
landlady; *E*, the landlady's daughter; the *C's* the tenants upstairs.

<span id="page_977">p. 977</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> According to me,
this is not the unsatisfactoriness of so many stories about a *Mr. X*,
or a *Mrs. Y.*, because, according to me, only two of us, whom I
identify, were more than minor figures: also we may suspect that, of
these two, one was rather more central than the other—according to me.
However, also, I suspect that, if *E* should tell this story, I'd be put
down, much minored, as *Mr. F. A* and I occupied the middle floor, which
was of two rooms, one of them used by us as a kitchen, though it was
furnished to rent as a furnished room.

March 1, 1924—see Charles Fort's *Notes*, Letter E, Box 27—"I was
reading last night, in the kitchen, when I heard a thump. Sometimes I am
not easily startled, and I looked around in a leisurely manner, seeing
that a picture had fallen, glass not breaking, having fallen upon a pile
of magazines in a corner. Two lace curtains at sides of window. Picture
fell at foot of left curtain. Now, according to my impression, the
bottom of the right-hand curtain was vigorously shaken, for several
seconds, an appreciable length of time after the fall of the picture.

“Morning of the 12th—find that one of the brass rings, on the back of
the picture frame, to which the cord was attached, had been broken in
two places—metal bright at the fractures.

“A reminded me that, in the *C's* room, two pictures had fallen
recently.“

I have kept this little brass ring, broken through in one place, and the
segment between the breaks, hanging by a metal shred at the point of the
other break. The picture was not heavy. The look is that there had been
a sharp, strong pull on the picture cord, so doubly to break this ring.

“March 18, 1924—about 5 P.M., I was sitting in the corner, where the
picture fell. There was a startling, crackling sound, as if of window
glass breaking. It was so sharp and loud that for hours afterward I had
a sense of alertness to dodge missiles. It was so loud that Mrs. *C.*,
upstairs, heard it.“

But nothing had broken a windowpane. I found one small crack in a
corner, but the edges were grimy, indicating that it had been made long
before.

“March 28, 1924—This morning, I found a second picture—or the

<span id="page_978">p. 978</span>

fourth, including the falls in the rooms upstairs—on the floor, in the
same corner. It had fallen from a place about three feet above a bureau,
upon which are piled my boxes of notes. It seems clear that the picture
did not ordinarily fall, or it would have hit the notes, and there would
have been a heartbreaking mess of notes all over the floor.”

Oh, very. Sometimes I knock over a box of notes, and it's a job of hours
to get them back in their places. I don't know whether it has any
meaning, but I think about this: the accounts of pictures falling from
walls, which were among these notes.

"The glass in the picture was not broken. This time, the cord, and not a
ring, was broken. I quickly tied the broken cord, and put the picture
back. I suppose I should have had *A* for a witness. Partly I did not
want to alarm her, and partly I did not want her to tell, and start a
ghost-scare centering around me."

I would have it that, in some unknown way, I was the one who was doing
this. I'd like to meet *Mrs. C.*, sometime, and perhaps listen to her
hint that she has psychic powers, and hint that she was the one who went
around psychically, knocking down pictures in our house.

The cord of this second, or fourth, picture was heavy and strong. It was
beyond my strength to break a length of it. But something had broken
this strong cord. I looked at the small nail in the wall. It showed no
sign of strain.

Of course I was reasoning about all this. Said I: "If, when this house
was furnished, all the pictures were put up about the same time, their
cords may all weaken about the same time." But a ring broke, one of the
times. Upstairs, one of the pictures had fallen in a kitchen, and the
other in a living room, where conditions were different. Smoke in a
kitchen has chemical effects upon picture cords.

"April 18, 1924—*A* took a picture down from the kitchen wall, to wash
the glass—London smoke. The picture seemed to fall from the wall into
her hands. *A* said: 'Another picture cord rotten.' Then: 'No: the nail
came out.' But the cord had not broken, and the nail was in the wall.
Later, that day, *A* said: 'I don't understand how that picture came
down.'"

<span id="page_979">p. 979</span>

There was nothing resembling a "scare" in the house. There were no
discussions. I think that there was an occasional laughing
suggestion—"Must be spooks around." I had three or four reasons for
saying nothing about the matter to anybody.

"July 26, 1924—Heard a sound downstairs. Then Fannie called up: 'Mrs.
Fort, did you hear that? A picture fell right off the wall.'"

I go on with my account, or with the mistake that I am making. Just so
long as I gave the *New York Something or Another*, or the *Tasmanian
Whatever*, for reference, that was all very well. But now I tell a story
of my own, and everybody who hasn't had pictures drop from walls, in his
presence, will resent pictures falling from walls, because of my occult
powers.

There are several notes that may indicate a relation between my thoughts
upon falling pictures, and then, later, a falling picture.

"Oct. 22, 1924—Yesterday, I was in the front room, thinking casually of
the pictures that fell from the walls. This evening, my eyes bad. Unable
to read. Was sitting, staring at the kitchen wall, fiddling with a piece
of string. Anything to pass away time. I was staring right at a picture
above corner of bureau, where the notes are, but having no consciousness
of the picture. It fell. It hit boxes of notes, dropped to floor, frame
at a corner broken, glass broken."

There was another circumstance. I remember nothing about it. The notes
upon it are as brief as if I had not been especially impressed by
something that I now think was one of the strangest particulars—that is,
if by indicating that I had searched for something, I meant that I had
searched thoroughly.

"The cord was broken several inches from one of the fastenings on back
of picture. But there should have been this fastening, a dangling piece
of cord, several inches long. This missing. I can't find it."

"Night of Sept. 28-29, 1925—a picture fell in *Mrs. M's* room." Note the
lapse of time.

I am sorry to record that a note, dated Nov. 3, 1926, is missing. As I
remember it, and according to allusions, in notes of November 4th, it
was only a remark of mine that for more than a year no picture had
fallen.

<span id="page_980">p. 980</span>

"Nov. 4, 1926—This is worth noting. Last night, I noted about the
pictures, because earlier in the evening, talking over psychic
experiences with France and others, I had mentioned falling pictures in
our house. Tonight, when I came home, *A* told me of a loud sound that
had been heard, and how welcome it was to her, because it had
interrupted *E*, in a long, tiresome account of the plot of a moving
picture. Later, *A* exclaimed: 'Here's what made the noise!' She had
turned on the light, in the front room, and on the floor was a large
picture. I had not mentioned to *A* that yesterday my mind was upon
falling pictures. I took that note after she had gone to bed. I looked
at the picture—cord broken, with frayed ends. I have kept a loop of this
cord. The break is under a knot in it. Nov. 5—I have not strongly enough
emphasized *A's* state of mind, at the time of the fall of the picture.
*E's* long account of a movie had annoyed her almost beyond endurance,
and probably her hope for an interruption was keen." Here is an
admission that I did not think, or suspect, that it was I, who was the
magician, this time.

In October, 1929, we were living in New York, or, anyway, in the Bronx.
I do not have pictures on walls, in places of my own. I can't get the
pictures I'd like to have: so I don't have any. I haven't been able to
get around to painting my own pictures, but, if I ever do, maybe I'll
have the right kind to put up.

"October 15, 1929—I was looking over these notes, and I called *A* from
the kitchen to discuss them. I note that *A* had been doing nothing in
the kitchen. She had just come in: had gone to the kitchen to see what
the birds were doing. While discussing those falling pictures, we heard
a loud sound. Ran back, and found on the kitchen floor a pan that had
fallen from a pile of utensils in a closet."

"Oct. 18, 1930—I made an experiment. I read these notes aloud to *A*, to
see whether there would be a repetition of the experience of Oct. 15,
1929. Nothing fell."

"Nov. 19, 1931—tried that again. Nothing moved. Well, then, if I'm not a
wizard, I'm not going to let anybody else tell me that he's a wizard."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21](wild21)
