[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild27) 
[Next](wild29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1043">p. 1043</span>

### 28

<span class="smallcaps">That</span> everything that is desirable is not
worth having—that happiness and unhappiness are emotional rhythms that
are so nearly independent of one's circumstances that good news or bad
news only stimulate the amplitude of these waves, without affecting the
ratio of ups to downs—or that one might as well try to make, in a pond,
waves that are altitudes only as to try to be happy without suffering
equal and corresponding unhappiness.

But, so severely stated, this is mechanistic philosophy.

And I am a mechanist-immechanist.

Sometimes something that is desirable is not only not worth having, but
is a damn sight worse than that.

Is life worth living? Like everybody else, I have many times asked that
question, usually deciding negatively, because I am most likely to ask
myself whether life is worth living at times when I am convinced it
isn't. One day, in one of my frequent, and probably incurable,
scientific moments, it occurred to me to find out. For a month, at the
end of each day, I set down a plus sign, or a minus sign, indicating
that, in my opinion, life had, or had not, been worth living, that day.
At the end of the month, I totaled up, and I can't say that I was
altogether pleased to learn that the pluses had won the game. It is not
dignified to be optimistic.

I had no units by which to make my alleged determinations. Some of the
plus days may have been only faintly positive, and, here and there, one
of the minus days may have been so ferociously negative as to balance a
dozen faintly positive days. Of course I did attempt gradations of
notation, but they were only cutting pseudo-units into smaller
pseudo-units. Also, out of a highly negative, or very distressing,
experience, one may learn something that will mean a row of pluses in
the future. Also, some pluses simply mean that one has misinterpreted
events of a day, and is in for much minus—

Or that nothing—a joy or a sorrow, the planet Jupiter, or an electron—

<span id="page_1044">p. 1044</span>

can be picked out of its environment, so as finally to be labeled either
plus or minus, because as a finally identifiable thing it does not
exist—or that such attempted isolations and determinations are only
scientific.

I have picked out witchcraft, as if there were witchcraft, as an
identifiable thing, state, or activity. But, if by witchcraft, I mean
phenomena as diverse as the mimicry of a leaf by a leaf-insect, and
illnesses in a house where "Typhoid Mary" was cooking, and the harmless
impalement, on spears, of children, I mean, by witchcraft in general,
nothing that can be picked out of one commonality of phenomena. All
phenomena are rhythmic, somewhere between the metrical and the frenzied,
with final extremes unreachable in an existence of the
metrical-unmetrical. The mechanical theory of existence is as narrowly
lopsided as would be a theory that all things are good, large, or hot.
It is Puritanism. It is the text-book science that tells of the
clock-work revolutions of the planet Jupiter, and omits mention of
Jupiter's little, vagabond moons, which would be fired from any job, in
human affairs, because of their unpunctualities—and omits mention that
there's a good deal the matter with the clock-work of most clocks.
Mechanistic philosophy is a dream of a finality of exact responses to
stimuli, and of absolute equivalences. Inasmuch as the advantages and
disadvantages of anything can no more be picked out, isolated,
identified, and quantitatively determined, than can the rise of a wave
be clipped from its fall, it is only scientific dreamery to say what
anything is equal and opposite to.

And, at the same time, in the midst of a submergence in commonality,
there is a permeation of all phenomena by an individuality that is so
marked that, just as truly as all things merge indistinguishably into
all other things, all things represent the unmergeable. So then there is
something pervasive of every action and every advantage that makes it
alone, incommensurable, and incomparable with a reaction, or a
disadvantage.

Our state of the hyphen is the state of the gamble. Go to no den of a
mathematician for enlightenment. Try Monte Carlo. Out of science is
fading certainty as fast as ever it departed from theology. In its place
we have adventure. Accepting that there is witchcraft,

<span id="page_1045">p. 1045</span>

in the sense in which we accept that there is electricity, magnetism, or
life, the acceptance is that there is no absolute poise between
advantages and disadvantages

Or that practical witchcraft, or the development of wild talents, might
be of such benefits as to draw in future records of human affairs the
new dividing line of *A. W.* and *B. W.*—or might be a catastrophe that
would drive all human life back into Indians, or Zulus, or things
furrier—

If by any chance the evils of witchcraft could compare with, or beat to
an issue, the demoralizations of law, justice, business, sex,
literature, education, pacifism, militarism, idealism, materialism,
which at present, are incomprehensibly not yet equal and opposite to
stabilizations that are saving us from, or are denying us, the jungles—

Or let all persons of foresight, if of sedentary habits, shift positions
occasionally, so as not to suppress too much their vertebral stubs that
their descendants may need as the bases of more graceful appendages.

But my own expression is that any state of being that can so survive its
altruists and its egotists, its benefactors and its exploiters, its
artists, gunmen, bankers, lawyers, and doctors would be almost immune to
the eviler magics of witchcraft, because it is itself a miracle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29](wild29)
