[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild01.md) 
[Next](wild03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2

<span class="smallcaps">I am</span> a collector of notes upon subjects
that have diversity—such as deviations from concentricity in the lunar
crater Copernicus, and a sudden appearance of purple
Englishmen—stationary meteor-radiants, and a reported growth of hair on
the bald head of a mummy—and "Did the girl swallow the octopus?"

But my liveliest interest is not so much in things, as in relations of
things. I have spent much time thinking about the alleged
pseudo-relations that are called coincidences. What if some of them
should not be coincidences?

Ambrose Small disappeared, and to only one person could be attributed a
motive for his disappearance. Only to one person's motives could the
fires in the house in Derby be attributed. Only

<span id="page_847">p. 847</span>

to one person's motives could be attributed the probable murder of Henry
Chappell. But, according to the verdicts in all these cases, the meaning
of all is of nothing but coincidence between motives and events.

Before I looked into the case of Ambrose Small, I was attracted to it by
another seeming coincidence. That there could be any meaning in it
seemed so preposterous that, as influenced by much experience, I gave it
serious thought. About six years before the disappearance of Ambrose
Small, Ambrose Bierce had disappeared. Newspapers all over the world had
made much of the mystery of Ambrose Bierce. But what could the
disappearance of one Ambrose, in Texas, have to do with the
disappearance of another Ambrose, in Canada? Was somebody collecting
Ambroses? There was in these questions an appearance of childishness
that attracted my respectful attention.

*Lloyd's Sunday News* (London) June 20, r920—that, near the town of
Stretton, Leicestershire, had been found the body of a cyclist, Annie
Bella Wright. She had been killed by a wound in her head. The
correspondent who wrote this story was an illogical fellow, who loaded
his story with an unrelated circumstance: or, with a dim suspicion of an
unexplained relationship, he noted that in a field, not far from where
the body of the girl lay, was found the body of a crow.

In the explanation of *coincidence* there is much of laziness, and
helplessness, and response to an instinctive fear that a scientific
dogma will be endangered. It is a tag, or a label: but of course every
tag, or label, fits well enough at times. A while ago, I noted a case of
detectives who were searching for a glass-eyed man named Jackson. A
Jackson, with a glass eye, was arrested in Boston. But he was not the
Jackson they wanted, and pretty soon they got their glass-eyed Jackson,
in Philadelphia. I never developed anything out of this item—such as
that, if there's a Murphy with a hare lip, in Chicago, there must be
another hare-lipped Murphy somewhere else. It would be a comforting idea
to optimists, who think that ours is a balanced existence: all that I
report is that I haven't confirmed it.

But the body of a girl, and the body of a crow—

<span id="page_848">p. 848</span>

And, going over files of newspapers, I came upon this:

The body of a woman, found in the River Dee, near the town of Eccleston
(*London Daily Express*, June 12, 1911). And near by was found the body
of another woman. One of these women was a resident of Eccleston: the
other was a visitor from the Isle of Man. They had been unknown to each
other. About ten o'clock, morning of June 10th, they had gone out from
houses in opposite parts of the town.

*New York American*, Oct. 20, 1929—"Two bodies found in desert mystery."
In the Coachella desert, near Indio, California, had been found two dead
men, about Too yards apart. One had been a resident of Coachella, but
the other was not identified. "Authorities believe there was no
connection between the two deaths."

In the *New York Herald*, Nov. 26, 1911, there is an account of the
hanging of three men, for the murder of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, on
Greenberry Hill, London. The names of the murderers were Green, Berry,
and Hill. It does seem that this was only a matter of chance. Still, it
may have been no coincidence, but a savage pun mixed with murder. *New
York Sun*, Oct. 7, 1930—arm of William Lumsden, of Roslyn, Washington,
crushed under a tractor. He was the third person, in three generations,
in his family, to lose a left arm. This was coincidence, or I shall have
to come out, accepting that there may be "curses" on families. But, near
the beginning of a book, I don't like to come out so definitely. And
we're getting away from our subject, which is Bodies.

"Unexplained drownings in Douglas Harbor, Isle of Man." In the London
*Daily News*, Aug. 19, 1910, it was said that the bodies of a young man
and of a girl had been found in the harbor. They were known as a "young
couple," and their drowning would be understandable in terms of a common
emotion, were it not that also there was a body of a middle-aged man
"not known in any way connected with them."

London *Daily Chronicle*, Sept. 10, 1924—"Near Saltdean, Sussex, Mr. F.
Pender, with two passengers in his sidecar, collided with a post, and
all were seriously injured. In a field, by the side of the road, was
found the body of a Rodwell shepherd, named Funnell, who had no known
relation with the accident."

<span id="page_849">p. 849</span>

An occurrence of the 14th of June, 1931, is told of, in the *Home News*
(Bronx) of the 15th. "When Policeman Talbot, of the E. 126th St.
station, went into Mt. Morris Park, at 10 A.M., yesterday, to awaken a
man apparently asleep on a bench near the 124th St. gate, he found the
man dead. Dr. Patterson, of Harlem Hospital, said that death had
probably been caused by heart failure." *New York Sun*, June 15—that
soon after the finding of this body on the bench, another dead man was
found on a bench near by.

I have two stories, which resemble the foregoing stories, but I should
like to have them considered together.

In November, 1888 (*St. Louis Globe-Democrat*, Dec. 20, 1888), two
residents of Birmingham, Alabama, were murdered, and their bodies were
found in the woods. "Then there was such a new mystery that these
murder-mysteries were being overlooked." In the woods, near Birmingham,
was found a third body. But this was the body of a stranger. "The body
lies unidentified at the undertaker's rooms. No one who had seen it can
remember having seen the man in life, and identification seems
impossible. The dead man was evidently in good circumstances, if not
wealthy, and what he could have been doing at the spot where his body
was found is a mystery. Several persons who have seen the body are of
the opinion that the man was a foreigner. Anyway he was an entire
stranger in this vicinity, and his coming must have been as mysterious
as his death."

I noted these circumstances, simply as a mystery. But when a situation
repeats, I notice with my livelier interest. This situation is of local
murders, and the appearance of the corpse of a stranger, who had not
been a tramp.

*Philadelphia Public Ledger*, Feb. 4, 1892—murder near Johnstown, Pa.—a
man and his wife, named Kring, had been butchered, and their bodies had
been burned. Then, in the woods, near Johnstown, the corpse of a
stranger was found. The body was well-dressed, but could not be
identified. Another body was found—"well-dressed man, who bore no means
of identification."

There is a view by which it can be shown, or more or less demonstrated,
that there never has been a coincidence. That is, in anything like a
final sense. By a coincidence is meant a false appearance,

<span id="page_850">p. 850</span>

or suggestion, of relations among circumstances. But anybody who accepts
that there is an underlying oneness of all things, accepts that there
are no utter absences of relations among circumstances—

Or that there are no coincidences, in the sense that there are no real
discords in either colors or musical notes—

That any two colors, or sounds, can be harmonized, by intermediately
relating them to other colors, or sounds.

And I'd not say that my question, as to what the disappearance of one
Ambrose could have to do with the disappearance of another Ambrose, is
so senseless. The idea of causing Ambrose Small to disappear may have
had origin in somebody's mind, by suggestion from the disappearance of
Ambrose Bierce. If in no terms of physical abduction can the
disappearance of Ambrose Small be explained, I'll not say that that has
any meaning, until the physicists intelligibly define what they mean by
physical terms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3](wild03.md)
