[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild24) 
[Next](wild26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 25

<span class="smallcaps">If</span> I can bridge a gap—

Then that, in a moment of religious excitation, an inhabitant of
Remiremont, focusing upon a point in the sky, transferred a pictorial
representation from his mind to hailstones—

The turning, off Coventry Street—streets in Japan, Kiel, Berlin, New
York City—other places—and that wounds, as imagined by haters of people,
have appeared upon the bodies of people—

Or the story of the sailor aboard the steamship *Breeshe*, in December,
1931—and that it was during a storm—and that in the mind of somebody
else aboard this vessel a hate pictured this man, as

<span id="page_1010">p. 1010</span>

struck by lightning, and that upon his head appeared a wound, as
pictured.

The gap, or the supposed gap, is the difference, or the supposed,
absolute difference, between the imagined and the physical.

Or, for instance, the disappearance of Ambrose Small, of Toronto—and it
was just about what his secretary, who had embezzled from him, probably
wished for, probably unaware that an inventory would betray him. A
picturization, in the secretary's mind, of his employer, shooting away
to Patagonia, to Franz Josef Land, or to the moon—so far away that he
could never get back—but could the imagined realize? Or why didn't I
keep track, in the newspapers of December, 1919, for mention of the body
of a man, washed up on a beach of Java, scarcely decipherable papers in
the pockets indicating that the man was a Canadian? Are the so-called
asteroids bodies of people who have been witched away into outer space?

Rose Smith—that when she was released from prison, her visualizations
crept up behind her former employer, and killed him? According to some
viewpoints, I might as well try to think of a villain, in a moving
picture, suddenly jumping from the screen, and attacking people in the
audience. I haven't tried that, yet.

Case of Emma Piggott—and the fires in the home of her employers were
just about what the girl, alarmed by the greediness of her thefts, may
have wished for. Also there are data that may mean that, because of
experiences unknown to anybody else, this girl knew that, from a
distance, she could start fires.

There is an appearance of affinity between the Piggott case and the
fires in the house in Bedford. There was a sulphur fire that was
ordinary. It was followed by a series of fires that were, at least
according to impressions in Bedford, extraordinary. In no terms of
physics, nor of chemistry, was an explanation possible; yet
investigators felt that a relationship of some kind did exist. The
relationship may have existed in the mind of Anne Fennimore. After the
sulphur fire had been put out, she may have started fearing fires,
especially in the absence of the only male member of the household. Her
fear may have realized.

Story of the Colwell girl—here, too, fires in a house seem to have
related to a girl's mental state—or that the fires were related to her

<span id="page_1011">p. 1011</span>

desire to move to another house. Having the not uncommon experience of
learning how persuasive are police captains, she "listened to advice,"
and confessed to effects, in terms of ordinary incendiarism, though,
according to reports by firemen and policemen, some of the fires could
not have been produced by flipping lighted matches.

In the case of Jennie Bramwell, there is no knowing what were the
feelings of this girl, who had been "adopted," probably to do hard
farm-work. If she, too, had nascently the fire-inducing power, which
manifested under the influence of desire, or emotion, I think of her, in
the midst of drudgery, wishing destruction upon the property of her
exploiters, and fires following. At any rate, the story of the little
Barnes girl, which quite equals anything from the annals of demonology,
is very suggestive—or the smolder of hate, in the mind of a child, for
an exploiter—and flames leaped upon a woman.

There is a particular in the case of Emma Piggott that makes it
different from the other cases. In the other cases, fires broke out in
the presence of girls. But, according to evidence, Emma Piggott was not
in the house wherein started the fires for which she was accused. Then
this seems to be a case of distance-ignition, or of distance-witchcraft.
I'd not say that invisibly starting a fire, at a distance, by means of
mental rays, is any more mysterious than is the shooting-off of distant
explosives by means of rays called physical, which nobody understands.

I am bringing out:

That, as a "natural force," there is a fire-inducing power;

That, mostly, it appears, independently of wishes, or of the knowledge,
of the subjects, but that sometimes, conformably to wishes, it is used—

That everything that I call witchcraft is only some special
manifestation of transformations, or transportations, that, in various
manifestations, are general throughout "Nature."

The "accidents" on the Dartmoor road—or that somewhere near this road
lived a cripple. That his mind had shaped to his body—or that somewhere
near this road lived somebody who had been injured by a motor car, and
lay on his bed, or sat in his invalid's chair, and radiated against the
nearby road a hate for all motorists,

<span id="page_1012">p. 1012</span>

sometimes with a ferocity, or with a directness, that knocked cars to
destruction.

Or Brooklyn, April to, 1893—see back to the supposed series of
coincidences—man after man injured by falling from a high place, or
being struck by a falling object—or that somewhere in Brooklyn was
somebody who had been crippled by a fall, and, brooding over what he
considered a monstrous injustice that had so singled him out, radiated
influences that similarly injured others.

See back to the account of what occurred to French aeroplanes, flying
over German territory. Tracks in the sands of a desert. Occurrences,
about Christmas Day, 1930, in Sing Sing and Dannemora Prisons—or a
prisoner in a punishment-cell—and nothing to do in the dark, except to
concentrate upon vengefulness. I think that sometimes, coming from
dungeons, there are stinks of hates that can be smelled. It was a time
that for almost everybody else was a holiday.

Tracks that stopped, in a desert—or the tracks of a child that stopped,
on a farm, in Brittany—the story of Pauline Picard:

Or the hate of a neighbor for the Picards, and vengeance by teleporting
their offspring—the finding of Pauline in Cherbourg—again her
disappearance—

That this time the body of the child was mutilated and stripped, so that
it could not be identified, and was transported to some lonely place,
where it decomposed—

But a change of purpose, or a vengefulness that required that the
parents should know—transportation to the field, of this body, which
probably could not be identified—transportation of the "neatly folded"
clothes, so that it could be identified.

In the matter of the two bodies on benches in a Harlem park, I have
another datum. I think I have. The dates of June 14 and June 16 are
close together, and Mt. Morris Park and Morningside Park are not far
apart—

Or a man who lived in Harlem, in June, 1931—and that he was a park
bencher—about whom I can say nothing except that his trousers were blue,
and that his hat was gray. Something may have sapped him, pursued him,
driven him into vagrancy—

But that he probably had the sense of localization, as to benches,

<span id="page_1013">p. 1013</span>

that everybody has in so many ways, such as going to the same seat, or
as near as possible to the same seat, upon every visit to a moving
picture theater—that every morning he had sat on a particular bench, in
Mt. Morris Park—

But that, upon the morning of June 14th, because of a whim, suspicion,
or intuitive fear, he went to Morningside Park instead—

That somebody else sat on his particular bench—that there
[occurred](errata.htm#6) something that was an intensification of the
experiences of John Harding and another man, when crossing Fifth Avenue,
at Thirty-third Street—to the man who was sitting on this particular
bench, and to another man upon a nearby bench—

But that, two days later, the trail of the intended victim was picked
up—

*Home News* (Bronx) June 17, 1931—that, in Morningside Park, morning of
the 16th, a policeman noticed a man—blue trousers and gray hat—seemingly
asleep on a bench. The man was dead. "Heart failure."

At a time of intensely bitter revolts by coal miners against their
hardships, there were many coal explosions, but in grates and stoves,
and not in shipments. No finding of dynamite in coal was reported. If in
coal there is storage of radiations from the sun, coal may be absorbent
to other kinds of radiations—or a savagely vengeful miner's hope for
future harm in every lump he handled. If, in the house in Hornsey, there
were not only coal-explosions, but also poltergeist doings, we note that
these phenomena occurred only in the presence of the two boys of the
household—or especially one of these boys. Between the occultism of
adolescence and the occultism of lumps of coal, surcharged with hatreds,
there may have been rapport.

That, somewhere near the town of Saltdean, Sussex, September, 1924,
somebody hated a shepherd, and stopped the life of him, as have been
stopped the motions of motors—and that the place remained surcharged
with malign vibrations that affected somebody else, who came along, in a
sidecar. The wedding party at Bradford—and the gaiety of weddings is
sometimes the bubbling of vitriol—or that, from a witch, or a wizard, so
made by jealousy, mental

<span id="page_1014">p. 1014</span>

fumes played upon this house, and spread to other houses. At the same
time, there are data that make me think that volumes of deadly gases may
be occultly transported. And a young couple, walking along a shore of
the Isle of Man—that, from a state of jealousy, witchery flung them into
the harbor, and that somebody who stepped into the area of this
influence was knocked after them. See back to the story of a room in a
house in Newton, Massachusetts. See other cases of "mass psychology."
See a general clearing up—

If I can bridge the gap between the subjective and the objective,
between what is called the *real* and what is called the *unreal*, or
between the imaginary and the physical.

When, in our philosophy of the hyphen, we think of neither the material
nor the immaterial, but of the material-immaterial, accentuated one way
or the other in all phenomena; when we think of the imaginary, as
deriving from material sustenance, or, instead of transforming
absolutely, only shifting accentuation, we accept that there is
continuity between what is called the real and what is called the
unreal, so that a passage from one state to the other is across no real
gap, or is no absolute jump. If there is no realness that can be finally
set apart from unrealness—in phenomenal being—my term of the
"realization of the imaginary," though a convenience is a misnomer.
Maybe the word *transmediumization*, meaning the passage of phenomena
from one medium of existence to another, is not altogether too awkward,
and is long and important-enough-looking to give me the appearance of
really saying something. I mean the imposition of the imaginary upon the
physical. I mean, not the action of mind upon matter, but the action of
mind-matter upon matter-mind.

Theoretically there is no gap. But very much mine are inductive methods.
We shall have data. Not that I can more than really-unreally mean
anything by that. The interpretations will be mine, but the data will be
for anybody to form his own opinions upon.

Granting that the gap has not been disposed of, inductively, I reduce it
to two questions:

Can one's mind, as I shall call it, affect one's own body, as I shall
call it?

<span id="page_1015">p. 1015</span>

If so, that is *personal witchcraft*, or internal witchcraft.

Can one's mind affect the bodies of other persons and other things
outside?

If so, that is what I shall call *external witchcraft*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26](wild26)
