[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild21.md) 
[Next](wild23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_993">p. 993</span>

### 22

<span class="smallcaps">Belief</span> in God—in Nothing—in Einstein—a
matter of fashion—

Or that college professors are mannequins, who doll up in the latest
proper things to believe, and guide their young customers modishly.

Fashions often revert, but to be popular they modify. It could be that a
re-dressed doctrine of witchcraft will be the proper acceptance. Come
unto me, and maybe I'll make you stylish. It is quite possible to touch
up beliefs that are now considered dowdy, and restore them to
fashionableness. I conceive of nothing, in religion, science, or
philosophy, that is more than the proper thing to wear, for a while.

"Typhoid Mary"—I doubt her germs—or I suspect that she was more
malicious than germy. But nobody else—at least so far as go the
published accounts—which could not be expected to go very far back in
the years 1906-14—thought of ignoring her germs, and of bottling her
"rays." For my own suspicion that this was a case of witchcraft, I
shall, for a while, probably be persecuted, by an amused tolerance, but,
if back in the year 1906, anybody had given his opinion that "Typhoid
Mary" was a witch, he'd have been laughed at outright.

Nobody accused "Typhoid Mary," except properly. According to the
demonology of her era, she was distributing billions of little devils.
Her case is framed with the unrecorded. As to her relations with her
victims, I have nothing upon which to speculate.

The homes of dying men and women have been bombarded with stones of
undetectable origin. Nobody was accused. We have had data of unexplained
explosions, and data of seeming effects of "rays," not physical, upon
motors. To me it is thinkable that a distant enemy could, invisibly,
make an oil stove explode, and kill a woman, and then—if by means other
than any known radioactivity, aeroplanes ever have been picked from the
sky—pick from

<span id="page_994">p. 994</span>

existence other members of her family. The explosion of the oil stove is
simply a bang, such as cartoonists sometimes draw, with a margin of
vacancy.

But there have been cases of persons who were accused of witchcraft.

This statement—like every other statement, issuing from the Supreme
Court of the United States of America, from a nursery, from a meeting of
the Amer. Assoc. Ad. Sci., or from the gossip of imbeciles—means
whatever anybody wants it to mean. One interpretation is that
superstitious people have attributed various misfortunes, which were
probably due to their own ignorance and incompetence, to the malice of
neighbors. At any rate, these cases are sketches of relations with
environment, and so far we have been in a garden of evil, in which
blossomed deaths and destructions, without visible stems, and without
signs of the existence of roots.

*New York Evening World*, Sept. 14, 1928—Michael Drouse, a farmer,
living near Bruce, Wis., who shot and fatally wounded John Wierzba,
forty-four, told Sheriff Dobson that he did it because Wierzba had
bewitched his cows. *New York Times*, Sept. 8, 1929—action by the Rye
(N. Y.) National Bank against Leland Waterbury, of Poundridge, for
recovery of properties, which the bank alleged had been taken from its
client, Howard I. Saires, by "evil eye" methods. "The case has come to
be known as the 'Westchester witchcraft case'." *New York Times*, Oct.
9, 1930—charges of sorcery brought against Henry Dorn, of Janesville,
Wis. "After a member of the State Board of Medical Examiners listened to
the charges of sorcery, he said that he was convinced that they were
unfounded." Dorn's sister had accused him of "casting spells of
sickness" upon members of her household.

So that case was disposed of.

I am not given to fortune-telling. I dislike the idea of
fortune-telling, so called, or termed more pretentiously. But I do think
that anybody could tell the fortune of any member of any State Board of
Medical Examiners, who would say, of any charge of sorcery, that he was
convinced that it was well-founded.

There were other charges against Dorn. They remind one of accusations in
old-time witchcraft trials—

<span id="page_995">p. 995</span>

That Dorn had caused apples to rot on trees, cows to go dry, and hens to
cease laying.

Opponents to the idea of witchcraft are much influenced by their
inability to conceive how anybody could make apples rot; inability to
visualize the process of drying a cow, or entering into the organism of
a hen, and stopping her productions. And science does not tell them how
this could be done. So.

Also they cannot conceive how something makes apples grow, or why they
don't rot on trees; how the milk of a cow is secreted, or why she
shouldn't be dry; how the egg of a hen develops. And science does not
tell them.

It's every man for himself, and save who can—and damnation is in
accepting any messiah's offers of salvation. We're told too much, and
we're told too little. We rely. And for two pins—having had experiences
by which I am pretty well assured that nobody ever has two pins, when
they're called for—I'd finish this book, as a personal philosophy, or
for myself, alone, and then burn it. It's everybody for himself, or he
isn't anybody.

It's every thinker for himself. He can be told of nothing but surfaces.
Theological fundamentalists say, rootily, they think, that all things
have makers—that God made all things. Then what made God? even little
boys ask. Space is curved, and behind space, or space-time, there is
nothing, says Prof. Einstein. Also may he be construed as saying that it
is only relatively to something else that anything can be curved.

Throughout this book there is a permeation that may be interpreted as
helplessness and hopelessness—absence of anything in science more than
approximately to rely on—solaces and reassurances of religion, but any
other religion would do as well—all progresses returning to their points
of origin—philosophies only intellectual dress-making—

But, if it's every man for himself, it is my expression that out of his
illusion that he has a self, he may develop one.

In records of witchcraft trials, often appears the statement that the
accused person was seen, at the time of doings, in a partly visible, or
semi-substantial, state. In June, 1880, at High Easter, Essex, England
(London *Times*, June 24, 1880), there were poltergeist disturbances

<span id="page_996">p. 996</span>

in the home of a family named Brewster. Furniture wandered. A bed
rocked. Brewster saw, or thought he saw, a shadowy shape, which he
recognized as that of his neighbor, Susan Sharpe. He and his son went to
the home of the woman, and dragged her to a pond. They threw her into
the pond, to see whether she would sink or float. But, though once upon
a time, this was the scientific thing to do, fashions in science had
changed. Brewster and his son were arrested, and were bound over to keep
the peace—just as should be any woman, who, during rush hours in the
subway, should appear in a hoop skirt.

A case that was a blend of ancient accusations and modern explanations
was reported in the London *Evening News*, July 14, 1921—that is,
"mysterious illnesses" attributed to the doings of an enemy, but an
attempt to explain materialistically. Residents of a house in Putney
had, in the London South Western Court, accused their neighbor, Frank
Gordon Hatton, of "administering poisonous fumes down their chimney."
Saying that the complainants had failed to prove their case, the
magistrate dismissed the charge.

If anybody could have a sane idea as to what he means by insanity, he
might know what he is thinking about, by bringing in this convenient way
of explaining unconventional human conduct. Whatever insanity is
supposed to be, it cannot so satisfactorily be applied as the
explanation of two persons’ beliefs relatively to one set of
circumstances. According to newspaper accounts of a murder, in July,
1929, Eugene Burgess, and his wife, Pearl, went insane together, upon
the same subject. It was their belief that, when Burgess's mother died,
in the year 1927, she had been "willed to death" by a neighbor, Mrs.
Etta Fairchild. It was their belief that this woman had cast illness
upon their daughter. They killed Mrs. Fairchild. In an account, in the
*New York Sun*, Oct. 16, 1929, Mrs. Burgess is described: "Belying the
comparison to the ignorant peasant women, who have stood for trial for
similar crimes, for hundreds of years, Mrs. Burgess looks like a
prosperous clubwoman."

These are accounts of accusations of witchcraft, by persons, against
other persons, according to their superstitions, or perceptions. Now

<span id="page_997">p. 997</span>

there will be accounts of cases in which there are suggestions of
witchcraft to me, according to my ignorance, or enlightenment.

*Chicago Tribune*, Oct. 14, 1892—marvelous—though not at all
extraordinary—doings in the home of Jerry Meyers, a farmer, living near
Hazelwood, Ohio. Meyers had been absent from his home, driving his wife
to the railroad station. When he returned, he heard a hysterical story
from his niece, Ann Avery, of Middletown, Ohio, who was visiting him.
Soon after he and Mrs. Meyers had left the house stones were thrown at
her, or fell around her. Objects in the house moved toward her. Mr.
Meyers was probably astonished to hear this, but what he wanted was his
dinner. The girl went to the barn to gather eggs. On her way back,
stones fell around her. Whether Meyers got his dinner, or not, he got a
gun. Neighbors had heard of the doings. Stationed around the house were
men with shotguns: but stones of unknown origin continued to bombard the
house. Ann Avery fled back to her home in Middletown. Phenomena stopped.

In this case of the girl who was driven from her uncle's home, the
circumstance that I pick out as significant is that assailments by
stones began soon after Mrs. Meyers left the house. It was said that she
had gone to visit friends, in the village of Lockland. Of course
hospitalities often are queer, but there is a good deal of queerness in
the hospitality of somebody who would go visiting somewhere else, while
her husband's niece was visiting in her home.

About the last of November, 1892, in the town of Hamilton, Ontario, a
man was on his way to a railroad station. In a cell, in a prison, in
Fall River, Massachusetts, sat a woman.

Henry G. Trickey was, in Hamilton, on his way to a railroad station. In
the Fall River jail was Lizzie Borden, who was accused of having
murdered her parents.

In August, 1892, Trickey, a reporter of the *Boston Globe*, had written
what was described as a "scandalous article" about Lizzie Borden. The
Globe learned that the story was false, and apologized. Trickey was
indicted.

He went to Canada. This looks as if he had fled from prosecution.

Lizzie Borden sat in her cell. There may have been something more deadly
than an indictment, from which there was no escape

<span id="page_998">p. 998</span>

for Trickey. While boarding a train, at Hamilton, he fell, and was
killed.

In the town of Eastbourne, Sussex, England, in April, 1922, John
Blackman, a well-known labor leader, was committed to prison, under a
maintenance order, for arrears due to his wife. The judge who committed
him died suddenly. When Blackman was released, he still refused to pay
so back he went to prison. The judge who sent him back "died suddenly."
He continued to refuse to pay, and twice again was re-committed to
prison, and each time the judge in his case "died suddenly." See
*Lloyd's Sunday News* (London), Oct. 14, 1923.

Upon Nov. 29, 1931, there was an amateur theatrical performance in the
home of Miss Phoebe Bradshaw, 106 Bedford Street, New York City.
*Villain*—Clarence Hitchcock, 23 Grove Street, New York. *Wronged
husband*—John L. Tilker, 1976 Belmont Avenue, Bronx. Tilker was given a
cap pistol. Also he carried a loaded revolver of his own, for which he
had a permit. When the time came, Tilker, with his own revolver, fired
at Hitchcock, shooting him in the neck. "He was apparently new at
play-acting, and in his excitement fired his own revolver, instead of
the dummy."

Hitchcock lay dying in St. Vincent's Hospital. Soon something occurred
to Tilker. He was taken to the Willard Parker Hospital, suffering from
what was said to be scarlet fever. Hitchcock died, Jan. 17, 1932. See
the *New York Herald Tribune*, Jan. 18, 1932.

*New York Evening Journal*, Feb. 6, 1930—"Two bitter women enemies are
teetering on the verge of death, today, one of them 'doing
satisfactorily,' while the other is weaker, and in a highly critical
condition. Both are sufferers from cancer. They are Mrs. Frances Stevens
Hall and her most hated opponent, in the famed Hall-Mills trial, Jane
Gibson, whose testimony was used in an effort to send Mrs. Hall to the
electric chair."

Upon the 8th of February, Jane Gibson died.

In the Fall of 1922, Mrs. Jane Gibson was a sturdy woman-farmer. It was
her accusation that, upon the night of the murder of Dr. Edward Hall and
Elinor Mills, Sept. 14, 1922, she had seen Mrs. Hall bending over the
bodies. So she testified. She returned to her home, and soon afterward
was stricken. At the re-trial, in November,

<span id="page_999">p. 999</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1926, she repeated
the accusation, though she had to be carried on a cot into the court
room. "Most of her days since that time were spent in the hospital."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23](wild23.md)
