[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild13) 
[Next](wild15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_931">p. 931</span>

### 14

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> story of the "mad bats of Trinidad"
is that the discoverer of them had solved a mystery of many deaths of
human beings and cattle. "Dr. Pawan, a Trinidad scientist, had
discovered that the infection had been caused by mad vampire bats,
affected by rabies, which they transmitted in a new form of insidious
hydrophobia."

But the existence of hydrophobia is so questionable, or of such rare
occurrence, even in dogs, that the story of the "mad bats of Trinidad"
looks like some more of the sensationalism in science that is so
obtrusive today, and compared with which I am, myself, only a little
wild now and then. It is probable that the deaths of human beings and
cattle, in Trinidad, have not been accounted for. Once upon a time the
explanation would have been "witchcraft." Now it's "rabid vampires." The
old hag on her broomstick is of inferior theatrical interest, compared
with the insane blood-sucker.

The germ-theory of diseases is probably like all other theories, ranging
from those of Moses and Newton and Einstein and Brother Voliva down, or
maybe up, or perhaps crosswise, to mine, or anybody else's. Many cases
may be correlated under one explanation, but there must be exceptions.
No pure, or homogeneous, case of any kind is findable: so every case is
variously classifiable. There have been many cases of ailments and
deaths of human beings that have not been satisfactorily explained in
the medical terms that are just now fashionable, but that will probably
be out of style, after a while. Nowadays one is smug with what one takes
for progress, thinking of old-time physicians prescribing dried toads
for ailments. Here's something for the enjoyment of future smugness.
Newspapers of Jan. 14, 1932—important medical discovery—dried pigs’
stomachs, as a cure for anaemia. I now have a theory of what is called
evolution, in terms of fashions—that somewhere, perhaps on high, there
is a Paris—where, once upon a time, were dictated the modes in bugs

<span id="page_932">p. 932</span>

and worms, and then the costumes of birds and mammals; grotesquely
stretching the necks of giraffes, and then quite as unreasonably
reacting with a repentance of hippopotami; passing on to a mental field
of alternating extravagances and puritanisms, sometimes neat and
tasteful, but often elaborate and rococo, with religions, philosophies,
and sciences, imposing upon the fashion-slaves of this earth the latest
thing in theories.

In the *New York Sun*, Jan. 17, 1930, Dr. E. S. Godfrey, of the New York
State Department of Health, told, in an interview, of mysterious deaths
on a vessel. In a period of four years, twenty-seven officers and men
had been stricken by what was called "typhoid fever." Taking his science
from the *Sunday News*papers, which had full-paged the story of "Typhoid
Mary," a scientific detective, with his microscope, boarded this vessel,
and of course soon announced that he had "tracked down" one of the
sailors, as a "typhoid carrier." Such sleuthing has become a modernized
witch-finding. There are, in New York State, today, persecutions that
are in some cases as deadly as the witchcraft-persecutions of the past.
"There are 188 women and 90 men recorded as typhoid-carriers, in New
York State." Why there should be twice as many women as men is plain
enough: the carrier-finders, with "Typhoid Mary" in mind, probably went
looking for women. It may be a matter of difficulty, or it may be
impossible, in times of general unemployment, for somebody in the
grocery or dairy business, to change into some other occupation: but
these 278 "typhoid-carriers," tracked down by medical Sherlock Holmeses,
who had read of "typhoid-carriers," are prohibited from working in
food-trades, and have to report to district health officers once every
three months. But this is for the protection of the rest of us. But that
is what the witch-finders used to say. Chivalry can't die, so long as
there is tyranny: every tyrant has been much given to protecting
somebody or something. It is one of the blessings of our era that we are
tormented by so many abominations, enormities, and pestiferous, smaller
botherations that we can't concentrate upon the germ-scares that the
medical "finders" would spread, if it were not for so much competition.
They did spread, with some success, with their parrot-scare, in the year
1929. Abandoned parrots, in their cages, were found, frozen to death, in
parks

<span id="page_933">p. 933</span>

and doorways. Probably the psittacosis scare, of 1929, did not become
the hysteria of former scares, because lay-alarmists were checked by
their inability to pronounce the name of it.

There must be something the matter with the germ-theory of diseases, or
the nursing and medical professions would not be so overcrowded. There
must be something the matter with the germ-theory of diseases, if there
is something the matter with every theory.

I looked up the case of "Typhoid Mary." With the preconceptions of
everybody who looks up cases, I went looking for something to pick on.
It was impossible for me to fail to find what I wanted to consider a
case of injustice, if ours is an existence of justice-injustice. I of
course found that the case of "Typhoid Mary" as a germ-carrier was not
made out so clearly as the "finders" of today suppose.

In the year 1906, it was noted that in several homes, in New York City,
where Mary had been employed as a cook, there had been illnesses that
were said to be cases of typhoid fever. The matter was investigated,
according to what was supposed to be scientific knowledge, in the year
1906. The germ-theory of diseases was the dominant idea. Not a thought
was given to relations between this woman and her victims. Had there
been quarrels, before illnesses of persons, living in the same house
with her, occurred? What was the disposition of the woman? There are
millions of men and women, with long hours and little pay, who may, in
their states of mind, be more dangerous than germs. There are cooks with
grievances, as well as cooks with germs. But Mary's malices were not
examined. It was "found" that, though immune herself, she was a
distributor of typhoid bacilli. For three years she was "detained" in a
hospital, by the public health officials of New York City.

And then what became of Mary's germs? According to one examination, she
had them. According to another examination, she hadn't them. At the end
of three years, Mary was examined again, and, according to all tests,
she hadn't them. She was released, upon promising to report periodically
to the Board of Health.

Probably because of lively impressions of "detention," Mary did

<span id="page_934">p. 934</span>

not keep her promise. Under various aliases, she obtained work as a
cook.

About five years later, twenty-five persons, in the Sloane Maternity
Hospital, New York City, were stricken with what was said to be typhoid
fever. Two of them died. See the *Outlook*, 109-803. And Mary was doing
the cooking at the hospital. The Public Health officials "detained" her
again, following their conclusion that they said was obvious. I know of
hosts of cases that are obvious one way, and just as apparent some other
way; conclusive, according to one theorist, and positively established,
according to opposing theorists.

She had them, when, to support a theory, she should have them. She
hadn't them, when her own support, as "detained," was becoming
expensive. She had—she hadn't—But it does seem that in some way this
woman was related to the occurrence of illnesses, sometimes fatal.

Of all germ-distributors, the most notorious was Dr. Arthur W. Waite,
who, in the year 1916, was an embarrassment to medical science. In his
bacteriological laboratory, he had billions of germs. Waite planned to
kill his father-in-law, John E. Peck, 435 Riverside Drive, New York
City. He fed the old man germs of diphtheria, but got no results. He
induced Peck to use a nasal spray, in which he had planted colonies of
the germs of tuberculosis. Not a cough. He fed the old man calomel, to
weaken his resistance. He turned loose hordes of germs of typhoid, and
then tried influenza. In desperation, he lost all standing in the annals
of distinctive crimes, and went common, or used arsenic. The
old-fashioned method was a success. One's impression is that, if
anything, diets and inhalations of germs may be healthful.

It is not that I am attacking the germ-theory of diseases as absolute
nonsense. I do not attack this theory as absolute nonsense, because I
conceive of no theory that is more than partly nonsensical. I have some
latitude. Let the conventionalists have their theory that germs cause
diseases, and let their opponents have their theory that diseases cause
germs, or that diseased conditions attract germs. Also there is room for
dozens of other theories. Under the heading "Invalidism," I have noted
43 cases of human beings who were ill, sometimes temporarily, and
sometimes dying, at the time of uncanny—

<span id="page_935">p. 935</span>

though rather common—occurrences in their homes. No conventional theory
fits these cases. But the stories, as collected by me, are only
fragments.

One day, in July, 1890, in the home of Mr. Piddock, in Haferroad,
Clapham, London—see the London *Echo*, July 16, 1890—the daughter of
this household was dying. Volleys of stones, of origin that could not be
found out, were breaking through the glass of the conservatory. It is
probable that not a doctor, in London, in the year 1890—nor in the year
1930—if what is known as a reputable physician—would admit any
possibility of relationship between a dying girl and stones that were
breaking windows.

But why should any doctor, in London, in the year 1890, or any other
year, accept the existence of any relation between a bombardment of a
house and a girl's dying condition? He would be as well-justified in
explaining that there was only coincidence, as were early
paleontologists in so explaining, when they came upon bones of a huge
body, and, some distance away, a relatively small skull—explaining that
the skull only happened to be near the other bones. They had never heard
of dinosaurs. If many times they came upon similar skulls associating
with similar other bones, some of them would at least refuse any longer
to believe in mere coincidence; but the more academic ones, affronted by
a new thought, would continue in their thought-ruts, decrying all
reported instances as yarns, fakery, imposture, nonsense.

The dying girl—showers of stones—

*New York Sun*, Dec. 22, 30, 1883—that, in a closed room in a house in
Jordan, N. Y., in which a man was dying, stones were falling.

In the home of Alexander Urquhart, Aberdeen, Scotland, there was an
invalid boy. Stories of doings in this house were told in London
newspapers, early in January, 1920. The boy was simply set down as "an
invalid boy," and presumably doctors were not mystified by his ailment.
Nobody was recorded as suspecting anything but coincidence between
whatever may have been the matter with him, and phenomena that centered
around him, as he lay in his bed. It was as if he were bombarded by
unseen bombs. Explosive sounds that shook the house occurred over his
bed, and, according

<span id="page_936">p. 936</span>

to reports by policemen, the bed was violently shaken. Policemen
reported that objects, in the boy's room, moved—

London *Daily News*, Jan. 10, 1920—"Aberdeen ghost laid low—prosaic
explanation for strange sounds—nothing but a piece of wood that the wind
had been knocking against a side of the house."

That probably convinced the London readers who preferred something like
the "mice-behind-the-baseboards" conclusion to such stories. But the
*Glasgow Herald*, of the 13th, continued to tell of "thumping sounds
that shook the house and rattled the dishes."

The data are protrusions from burials. The body of a girl—the body of a
crow. Somebody. dying—and hostile demonstrations that cannot
conventionally be explained. But if there were connecting circumstances,
they are now undiscoverable. It is said that there is a science of
comparative anatomy, by which, given any bone of an animal, the whole
skeleton can be reconstructed. So stated, this is one of the tall
stories of science. The "father" of the science of comparative anatomy
never reconstructed anything except conventionally. The paleontologists
have reconstructed crowds of skeletons that are exhibited as evidences
of evolution: but Cuvier not only never reconstructed anything new, but
is now notorious as a savage persecutor of evolutionists. There cannot
be reconstruction, unless there be a model. We may have a comparative
anatomy of our fragmentary circumstances, if we can fit the pieces to a
situation-model. And it may be that we are slowly building that. Of
course anything of the nature of old-fashioned, absolute science is no
dream of mine.

From the *Port of Spain* (Trinidad) *Mirror*, and the *Port of Spain
Gazette*, I take a story of phenomena that began Nov. 12, 1905, in Mrs.
Lorelhei's boarding house, in Queen Street, Port of Spain. The house was
pelted with stones. A malicious neighbor was suspected, but then, inside
the house, there were occurrences that, at least physically, could be
attributed to nobody. Objects were thrown about. Chairs fell over, got
up, and whirled. Out of a basket of potatoes, flew the potatoes. Stones
fell from unseen points of origin, in rooms. A doctor was quoted as
saying that he had seen some of these doings. He had been visiting a
girl, who, in this house, was ill.

In the *Religio-Philosophical Journal*, July 15, 1882, as copied from
the *New York Sun*, there is a boardinghouse story. Mrs. William

<span id="page_937">p. 937</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Swift's
boardinghouse, 52 Willoughby Street, Brooklyn—the occupant of the back
parlor was ill. Raps were heard. Several times appeared a floating,
vaporous body, shaped like a football. Upon the ailing boarder, the
effect of this object was like an electric shock.

In the *Religio-Philosophical Journal*, March 31, 1883, and the *New
York Times*, March 12, 1883, there are accounts of the bewitchment of
the house, 33 Church Street, New Haven, Conn. Tramping sounds—objects
flying about. A woman in this house was ill. While she was preparing
medicine in a cup, the spoon flew away. Sounds like Hey, diddle, diddle!
Then it was as if an occult enemy took a shot at her. An unfindable
bullet made a hole in a glass.

In the *Bristol* (England) *Mercury*, Oct. 12, 1889, and in the
*Northern Daily Telegraph*, Oct. 8, 1889, are accounts of loud sounds of
unknown origin in a house in the village of Hornington, near Salisbury.
Here a child, Lydia Hewlett, aged nine, "was stricken with a mysterious
illness, lying in bed, never speaking, never moving, apparently at
death's door." It was said that this child had incurred the enmity of a
gypsy, whom she had caught stealing vegetables in a neighbor's garden.

One of the cases of "mysterious family maladies," accompanied by
poltergeist disturbances, was reported by the *Guernsey Star*, March 5,
1903. In the home of a resident of the island of Guernsey, Mr. B.
Collinette, several members of the family were taken ill. Things were
flying about.

Early in the year 1893—as told in the *New York World*, Feb. 17, 19,
1896—an elderly man, named Mack, appeared, with his invalid wife, and
his daughter Mary, in the town of Bellport, Long Island, N. Y., and made
of the ground floor of their house a little candy store. The account in
the World is of a starting up of persecutions of this family that were
attributed to hostility of other storekeepers, and to dislike "probably
because of their thrift." Stones were thrown at the house "by street
gamins." Several boys were arrested, but there was no evidence against
them. At the time of one of the bombardments, Mary was on the porch of
the house. A big dog appeared. He ran against her, knocking her down,
injuring her spine so that she was a cripple the rest of her life. All
details of this story are in terms of persecutions by neighbors: in the
terms of the telling, there

<span id="page_938">p. 938</span>

is no suggestion of anything occult. Unidentified persons were throwing
stones.

The terrified girl took to her bed. Stones thumped on the roof above
her, throwing her into spasms of fright. In one of these convulsions,
she died. Missing in this story is anything relating to Mack's
experiences before arriving in Bellport. His daughter was crippled, and
died of fright. He arrived with an invalid wife.

In his biography of the Bishop of Zanzibar (*Frank, Bishop of
Zanzibar*)—I take from a review in the *London Daily Express*, Oct. 27,
1926—Dr. H. Maynard Smith, Canon of Gloucester, tells of poltergeist
persecutions, near the mission station, at Weti. Clods of earth, of
undetectable origin, were bombarding a house in which lived a man and
his wife. Clods fell inside the house. The bishop investigated, and he
was struck by a clod. Inside the house, he saw a mass of mud appear on a
ceiling. The door was open, but this point on the ceiling was in a
position that could not be hit by anyone throwing anything from outside.
There was no open window.

The bishop came ceremoniously the next morning, and solemnly exorcised
the supposed spirit. That these stories indicate the existence of
spirits is what I do not think. But it seems that the bishop made an
impression. The mud-slinging stopped. But then illness came upon the
woman of this house.

Upon the night of Aug. 9, 1920, as told in the *London Daily Mail*, Aug.
19, 1920, a shower of small stones broke the windows in the top floor of
Wellington Villa, Grove-road, South Woodford, London, occupied by Mr. H.
T. Gaskin, an American, the inventor of the Gaskin Life Boat. There were
many showers of stones of undetectable origin. Upon the night of the
13th, policemen took positions in the house, in the street, on roofs,
and in trees. The upper floor of the house was bombarded with stones,
but where they came from could not be found out. Night of the 14th—a
procession. Forty policemen, some of them local, and some of them from
Scotland Yard, marched down Grove-road, and went up on roofs, or climbed
into trees. Volleys of stones arrived, but the forty policemen learned
no more than had the smaller numbers of the preceding investigations.
Nevertheless it seems that they made an impression. Phenomena stopped.

<span id="page_939">p. 939</span>

The patter of stones—and policemen on roofs, and policemen in trees, and
the street packed with sightseers—and this is a spot of excitement—but
it has no environment. I can pick up no trace of relations between
anybody in this house and anybody outside.

In one of the rooms lay an invalid. Mr. Gaskin was suffering from what
was said to be sciatica. In an interview he said that he could not
account for the attack upon him, or upon the house: that, so far as he
knew, he had no enemy.

In some of these cases, I have tried to dig into blankness. I have
shoveled vacancy. I have written to Mr. and Mrs. Gaskin, but have
received no answer. I have looked over the index of the London *Times*,
before and after August, 1920, with the idea of coming upon something,
such as a record of a law case, or some other breeder of enmity, in
which Mr. Gaskin might have been involved, but have come upon nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15](wild15)
