[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild00) 
[Next](wild02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_843">p. 843</span>

# WILD TALENTS

### 1

<span class="smallcaps">You</span> know, I can only surmise about
this—but John Henry Sanders, of 75 Colville Street, Derby, England, was
the proprietor of a fish store, and I think that it was a small
business. His wife helped. When I read of helpful wives, I take it that
that means that husbands haven't large businesses. If Mrs. Sanders went
about, shedding scales in her intercourses, I deduce that theirs wasn't
much of a fish business.

Upon the evening of March 4, 1905, in the Sanders' home, in the bedroom
of their housemaid, there was a fire. Nobody was at home, and the
firemen had to break in. There was no fireplace in the bedroom. Not a
trace of anything by which to explain was found, and the firemen
reported: "Origin unknown." They returned to their station, and were
immediately called back to this house. There was another fire. It was in
another bedroom. Again—"Origin unknown."

The Sanders', in their fish store, were notified, and they hastened
home. Money was missed. Many things were missed. The housemaid, Emma
Piggott, was suspected. In her parents’ home was found a box, from which
the Sanders' took, and identified as theirs, £5, and a loot of such
things as a carving set, sugar tongs, tablecloths, several dozen
handkerchiefs, salt spoons, bottles of scent, curtain hooks, a hair
brush, Turkish towels, gloves, a sponge, two watches, a puff box.

The girl was arrested, and in the Derby Borough Police Court, she was
charged with arson and larceny. She admitted the thefts, but asserted
her innocence of the fires. There was clearly such an appearance of
relation between the thefts and the fires, which, if they had burned
down the house, would have covered the thefts, that both charges were
pressed.

<span id="page_844">p. 844</span>

It is not only that there had been thefts, and then fires: so many
things had been stolen that—unless the home of the Sanders’ was a large
household—some of these things would have been missed—unless all had
been stolen at once. I have no datum for thinking that the Sanders lived
upon any such scale as one in which valuables could have been stolen,
from time to time, unknown to them. The indications were of one wide
grab, and the girl's intention to set the house afire, to cover it.

Emma Piggott's lawyer showed that she had been nowhere near the house,
at the time of the first fire; and that, when the second fire broke out,
she, in the street, this off-evening of hers, returning, had called the
attention of neighbors to smoke coming from a window. The case was too
complicated for a police court, and was put off for the summer assizes.

*Derby Mercury*, July 19—trial of the girl resumed. The prosecution
maintained that the fires could be explained only as of incendiary
origin, and that the girl's motive for setting the house afire was
plain, and that she had plundered so recklessly, because she had planned
a general destruction, by which anything missing would be accounted for.

Again counsel for the defense showed that the girl could not have
started the fires. The charge of arson was dropped. Emma Piggott was
sentenced to six months' hard labor, for the thefts.

Upon Dec. 2, 1919, Ambrose Small, of Toronto, Canada, disappeared. He
was known to have been in his office, in the Toronto Grand Opera House,
of which he was the owner, between five and six o'clock, the evening of
December 2nd. Nobody saw him leave his office. Nobody—at least nobody
whose testimony can be accepted—saw him, this evening, outside the
building. There were stories of a woman in the case. But Ambrose Small
disappeared, and left more than a million dollars behind.

Then John Doughty, Small's secretary, vanished.

Small's safe deposit boxes were opened by Mrs. Small and other trustees
of the estate. In the boxes were securities, valued at $1,125,000. An
inventory was found. According to it, the sum of $105,000 was missing.
There was an investigation, and bonds of the value of $105,000 were
found, hidden in the home of Doughty's sister.

<span id="page_845">p. 845</span>

All over the world, the disappearance of Ambrose Small was advertised,
with offers of reward, in acres of newspaper space. He was in his
office. He vanished.

Doughty, too, was sought. He had not only vanished: he had done all that
he could to be unfindable. But he was traced to a town in Oregon, where
he was living under the name of Cooper. He was taken back to Toronto,
where he was indicted, charged with having stolen the bonds, and with
having abducted Small, to cover the thefts.

It was the contention of the prosecution that Ambrose Small, wealthy, in
good health, and with no known troubles of any importance, had no motive
to vanish, and to leave $1,125,000 behind: but that his secretary, the
embezzler, did have a motive for abducting him. The prosecution did not
charge that Small had been soundlessly and invisibly picked out of his
office, where he was surrounded by assistants. The attempt was to show
that he had left his office, even though nobody had seen him go:
thinkably he could have been abducted, unwitnessed, in a street. A
newsboy testified that he had seen Small, in a nearby street, between 5
and 6 o'clock, evening of December 2nd, but the boy's father
contradicted this story. Another newsboy told that, upon this evening,
after 6 o'clock, Small had bought a newspaper from him: but, under
examination, this boy admitted he was not sure of the date.

It seemed clear that there was relation between the embezzlement and the
disappearance, which, were it not for the inventory, would have covered
the thefts: but the accusation of abduction failed. Doughty was found
guilty of embezzlement, and was sentenced to six years' imprisonment in
the Kingston Penitentiary.

In the *News of the World* (London) June 6, 1926, there is an account of
"strangely intertwined circumstances." In a public place, in the
daytime, a man had died. On the footway, outside the Gaiety Theatre,
London, Henry Arthur Chappell, the manager of the refreshment department
of the Theatre, had been found dead. There was a post-mortem examination
by a well-known pathologist, Prof. Piney. The man's skull was fractured.
Prof. Piney gave his opinion that, if, because of heart failure,
Chappell had fallen backward, the fractured skull might be accounted
for: but he added that,

<span id="page_846">p. 846</span>

though he had found indications of a slight affection of the heart, it
was not such as would be likely to cause fainting.

The indications were that a murder had been committed. The police
inquired into the matter, and learned that not long before there had
been trouble. A girl, Rose Smith, employed at one of the refreshment
counters, had been discharged by Chappell. One night she had placed on
his doorstep a note telling that she intended to kill herself. Several
nights later, she was arrested in Chappell's back garden. She was
dressed in a man's clothes, and had a knife. Also she carried matches
and a bottle of paraffin. Presumably she was bent upon murder and arson,
but she was charged with trespassing, and was sentenced to two months'
hard labor. It was learned that Chappell had died upon the day of this
girl's release from prison.

Rose Smith was arrested. Chappell had no other known enemy. Upon the day
of this girl's release, he had died.

But the accusation failed. A police inspector testified that, at the
time of Chappell's death, Rose Smith had been in the Prisoners' Aid
Home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2](wild02)
