[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild07.md) 
[Next](wild09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_881">p. 881</span>

### 8

<span class="smallcaps">Some</span> time in the year 1867, a fishing
smack sailed from Boston. One of the sailors was a Portuguese, who
called himself "James Brown." Two of the crew were missing, and were
searched for. The captain went into the hold. He held up his lantern,
and saw the body of one of these men, in the clutches of "Brown," who
was sucking blood from it. Near by was the body of the other sailor. It
was bloodless. "Brown" was tried, convicted, and sentenced to be hanged,
but President Johnson commuted the sentence to life imprisonment. In
October, 1892, the vampire was transferred from the Ohio Penitentiary to
the National Asylum, Washington, D. C., and his story was re-told in the
newspapers. See the *Brooklyn Eagle*, Nov. 4, 1892.

*Ottawa Free Press*, Sept. 17, 1910—that, near the town of Galazanna,
Portugal, a child had been found dead, in a field. The corpse was
bloodless. The child had been seen last with a man named Salvarrey. He
was arrested, and confessed that he was a vampire.

See the *New York Sun*, April 14, 1931, for an account of the murders of
nine persons, all but one of them females, which in the year 1929
terrorized the people of Düsseldorf, Germany. The murderer, Peter
Kurten, was caught. At his trial, he made no defense, and described
himself as a vampire.

I have a collection of stories of children, upon whom, at night, small
wounds appeared. Rather to my own wonderment, considering that I am a
theorist, I have not jumped to the conclusion that these stories are
data of vampires, but have thought the explanation of rat bites
satisfactory enough. But, in the *Yorkshire Evening Argus*, March 13,
1924, I came upon a rat story that seems queer. Inquest upon the death
of Martha Senior, aged 68, of New Street, Batley. "On the toes and
fingers were a lot of wounds that rather suggested rat bites." It was
said that these little wounds could

<span id="page_882">p. 882</span>

have had nothing to do with the woman's death, which, according to the
coroner, was from valvular heart disease. The only explanation
acceptable to the coroner was that, before the police took charge of the
body, the woman must have been dead considerable time, during which rats
mutilated the corpse. But Mrs. Elizabeth Lake, a neighbor, testified
that she had found Mrs. Senior lying on the floor, and that Mrs. Senior
had told her that she was dying. This statement meant that the woman had
been attacked by something, before dying. The coroner disposed of it by
saying that the woman must have been dead considerable time, before the
body was found, and that Mrs. Lake was mistaken in thinking that Mrs.
Senior had spoken to her.

The fun of everything, in our existence of comedy-tragedy—and I was
suspicious of the story of terrorized Chinamen, as told by English
reporters, because it was a story of panic that omitted the jokes—mania
without the smile. Every fiendish occurrence that gnashes its
circumstances, and sinks its particulars into a victim, wags a joke. In
June, 1899, there was, in many parts of the U. S. A., much amusement.
Something, in New York City, Washington, and Chicago, was sending people
to hospitals. I don't recommend the beating of a gong to drive away a
hellish thing: but I think that that treatment is as enlightened as is
giving to it a funny name. Hospitals of Ann Arbor, Mich.; Toledo, Ohio;
Rochester, N. Y.; Reading, Pa.—

"The kissing bug," it was called.

The story of the origin of the "kissing bug" scare-joke in that, upon
the 19th of June, 1899, a Washington newspaper man, hearing of an
unusual number of persons, who, at the Emergency Hospital, had applied
for treatment for "bug bites," investigated, learning of "a very
noticeable number of patients," who were suffering with swellings,
mostly upon their lips, "apparently the result of insect bites."
According to Dr. L. O. Howard, writing in *Popular Science Monthly*,
56-31, there were six insects, in the United States, that could inflict
dangerous bites, or punctures, but all of them were of uncommon
occurrence. So Dr. Howard rejected the insect-explanation. In his
opinion there had arisen a senseless scare, like

<span id="page_883">p. 883</span>

those of former times, in southern Europe, when hosts of hysterical
persons imagined that tarantulas had bitten them.

This is "mass psychology" again—or the Taboo-explanation. To the regret
of my contrariness, it is impossible for me utterly to disagree with
anybody. I think with Dr. Howard that the "kissing bug" scare was like
the tarantula scares. But it could be that some of those people of
southern Europe did not merely imagine that something was biting them.
If somebody should like to write a book, but is like millions of persons
who would like to write books, but fortunately don't know just what to
write books about, I suggest a study of scares, with the idea of showing
that they were not altogether hysteria and mass psychology, and that
there may have been something to be scared about.

*New York Herald*, July 9—names and addresses of it persons, who upon
one day (8th of July) had either scared their bodies into producing
swellings, or had been bitten by something that the scientists refused
to believe existed. And people who were bitten captured insects.
*Entomological News*, September, 1899—some of these insects, which were
sent to the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, were house
flies, bees, beetles, and even a butterfly. There are wings of vampires
that lull with scientific articles. See Taboo, as represented by Dr. E.
Murray-Aaron, writing in the *Scientific American*, July 22,
1899—nothing but sensation-mongering from Richmond, Va., to Augusta, Me.

There was a sensational horse, in Cincinnati. His jaw swelled. Would a
child, aged. four, be too young for "mass psychology"? I suppose not. I
am not denying that there was much mass psychology in this. Cedar Falls,
Iowa—a four-year-old child bitten. Trenton, N. J.—Helen Lersch, two
years old, bitten—died. Bay Shore, L. I.—a child, aged two, bitten.

Later, I shall give instances of sizeable wounds that have appeared upon
people: but, in this chapter, I am considering tiny punctures that may
not have been either rat bites or insect stings. An account, in the
*Chicago Tribune*, July 11, 1899, is suggestive of traditional vampire
stories. A woman had been bitten. "The marks of two small incisors could
be seen."

I don't know whether I am of a cruel and bloodthirsty disposition,

<span id="page_884">p. 884</span>

or not. Most likely I am, but not more so than any other historian. Or,
conforming to the conditions of our existence, I am
amiable-bloodthirsty. In my desire for vampires, which is not in the
least a queer desire, inasmuch as I have a theory that there are
vampires, I was not satisfied with the "kissing bug": what I wanted was
an account of hospital cases, not in the summer time. The
insect-explanation, even though it was not upheld by Taboo, is too much
at home, in the summer time. I needed an account, not in the summer
time, to fill out my collection of data. Any collector will understand
how pleased I was to come upon—*London Daily Mail*, April 20, 1920—an
account of human suffering. "A number of people in country places have
been bitten by some mysterious creature with a very poisonous fang. It
is rare for any sort of poisonous bite or sting to occur before summer,
and as a rule the culprit is known. This spring doctors have attended
case after case, where the swellings have been sudden and severe, though
there is little sign of the bite, itself." I have record of several
winter time cases. See *La Nature*, (Supplement) Jan. 16, 1897—that,
while filling a stove with coal, in a house in the Rue de la Tour,
Paris, a concierge had felt a stinging sensation upon his arm, which
swelled. He was taken to a hospital, where he died. People in the house
said that they had seen gigantic wasps entering the house by way of
stovepipes.

But the most mysterious of cases of insect bites, or alleged insect
bites, is that of the small wound that led to the death of Lord
Carnarvon, if be accepted that his death, and the deaths of fourteen
other persons, were in any especial way related to the opening, or the
violation, of the tomb of Tut-Ankh-Amen. Lord Carnarvon was stung by
what was supposed to be an insect. What was said to be blood poisoning
set in. What was said to be septic pneumonia followed.

The stories of the "kissing bug" differ from vampire stories, in that
victims were painfully wounded. But there was an occurrence in Upper
Broadway, New York City, May 7, 1909, that may be more in agreement. It
seems possible that a woman could, in a street crowd, viciously jab
several persons with a hat pin, without being detected: but it does seem
unlikely that she could enjoy

<span id="page_885">p. 885</span>

such a stroll, jabbing at least five men and a woman, before being
interfered with. A Broadway policeman learned that upon somebody a small
wound, as if made by a hat pin, had appeared. Four other men and a woman
joined the crowd and showed that they had been similarly wounded. The
policeman arrested, as the cause of the excitement, a woman, who told
that her name was Mary Maloney, and gave a false address.

Perhaps she had no address. She may have been guilty, but perhaps she
was shabby. If somebody must be arrested, it is wise to pick out one who
does not look very self-defensive. "Plead guilty and you'll get off with
a light sentence." It is dangerous to be anywhere near any scene of
crime, considering the way detectives pick up "suspects," even an hour
or so later, obviously arguing that when somebody commits a crime, he
hangs around to be suspected.

I have never been jabbed with a hat pin, but I have sat on pointed
things, and my responses were so energetic that I suspect that at least
six persons were not jabbed with a hat pin, before the jabber was
caught. See data to come, that indicate that people may be—by some means
at present not understood—wounded, and not know it until later. Also
that a woman was accused makes me doubt that the marauder was caught.
Women don't do such things. I have a long list of *Jacks*, ranging from
the rippers and stranglers to the egg throwers and the ink squirters:
but Mary Maloney is the only alleged *Jill* in my collection. Women
don't do such things. They have their own deviltries.

Upon Dec. 4, 1913, Mrs. Wesley Graff, who sat in a box, in the Lyric
Theatre, New York City, felt something scratching her hand. She felt a
pain like the sting of a wasp, and, staggering from her chair, fainted,
first accusing a young man near her. The manager of the theater held the
young man, and called the police. Policemen searched, and found, on the
floor, a common darning needle. It was their theory that the young man
was a white slaver, who by means of a hypodermic injection, had sought
to render a victim insensible, probably having waiting outside, a cab,
to which he, explaining that he was her companion, would carry her.
There were marks upon Mrs. Graff's arm, but it seems that they were not
made by a darning needle.

<span id="page_886">p. 886</span>

With the idea that the needle might be tipped with a drug, the police
sent it to a chemist. To my astonishment, I record that he reported that
he had found neither drug, nor poison, on it. A strange circumstance is
that, at this place, where a woman was wounded somewhat as if by a
darning needle, was found this darning needle, which was suggestive of a
commonplace explanation.

Then arose the story that a gang of white slavers was operating in the
city. But in the newspapers were published interviews with physicians,
who stated that they knew of no drug by which women could be affected so
as to make them easily abductable, because the pain of an injection
would give minutes of warning, before a victim could be rendered
helpless. But it may be that something, or somebody, was abroad,
mysteriously wounding women. In the *Brooklyn Eagle*, December 6, it was
said that, in a period of two weeks, the Committee of Fourteen, of New
York City, had heard a dozen complaints of mysterious, minor attacks
upon women, and had investigated, but had been unable to learn anything
definite in any case.

See back to the story of the Chicago woman, and "marks of two small
incisors." Upon Mrs. Graff's arm were two little punctures. December
29—girl named Marian Brindle said that something had stung her. Upon her
arm were two little punctures.

It may be that, in the period of the scare in New York City, the first
occurrence of which was in November, 1913, a vampire was abroad. It
could be that we pick up the trail more than a year before this time. In
October, 1912, Miss Jean Milne, aged 67, was living alone in her home,
in West Ferry, Dundee, Scotland. London *Times*, Nov. 5, 1912—the
finding of her body. The woman had been beaten, presumably with a poker,
which was found, according to the account in the Times: but it was said
that, though she had been struck on the head, her skull was not
fractured: so her death was not altogether accounted for. There was more
of this story, in the London *Weekly Dispatch*, Nov. 24, 1912. Upon this
body were found perforations, as if having been made by a fork.

Late at night, Feb. 2, 1913, the body of a woman was found on the tracks
of the London Underground Railway, near the Kensington High-street
station. The body had been run over, and the head

<span id="page_887">p. 887</span>

had been cut off. The body was identified as that of Miss Maud Frances
Davies, who, alone, had been traveling around the world, and, earlier in
the day, had, upon a ship train, arrived in London. She had friends and
relatives in South Kensington, and presumably she was on her way to
visit them. But the explanation at the inquest (London *Times*, Feb. 6,
1913) was that she had probably committed suicide by placing her neck
upon a rail.

"Dr. Townsend said that over the heart he found a number of small,
punctured wounds, over a dozen of which had penetrated the muscles; and
one had entered the ventricle cavity of the heart. These punctures had
been caused in life, with a sharp instrument, such as a hat pin. They
were not enough to cause death, but had been made a few hours
previously."

Upon December 29th, of this year, 1913, a woman, known as "Scotch
Dolly," was found dead in her room, 18 Etham Street, S. E., London. A
man, who had lived with her, was arrested, but was released, because he
was able to show that, before the time of her death, he had left the
woman. Her face was bruised, but she had seldom been sober, and the man,
Williams, before leaving her, had struck her. The verdict was that she
had died of heart failure, "from shock."

Upon one of this woman's legs was found a series of 38 little, double
wounds. They were not explained. "The Coroner: 'Have you ever had a
similar case, yourself?' Dr. Spilsbury: 'No: not exactly like this.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9](wild09.md)
