[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild04.md) 
[Next](wild06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5

"<span class="smallcaps">Good</span> morning!" said the dog. He
disappeared in a thin, greenish vapor.

I have this record, upon newspaper authority.

It can't be said—and therefore will be said—that I have a marvelous
credulity for newspaper yarns.

But I am so obviously offering everything in this book, as fiction.

<span id="page_863">p. 863</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> That is, if there
is fiction. But this book is fiction in the sense that *Pickwick
Papers*, and *The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes*, and *Uncle Tom's
Cabin;* Newton's *Principia*, Darwin's *Origin of Species*, Genesis,
*Gulliver's Travels*, and mathematical theorems, and every history of
the United States, and all other histories, are fictions. A library-myth
that irritates me most is the classification of books under "fiction"
and "non-fiction."

And yet there is something about the yarns that were told by Dickens
that sets them apart, as it were, from the yarns that were told by
Euclid. There is much in Dickens' grotesqueries that has the
correspondence with experience that is called "truth," whereas such
Euclidian characters as "mathematical points" are the vacancies that
might be expected from a mind that had had scarcely any experience. That
dog-story is axiomatic. It must be taken on faith. And, even though with
effects that sometimes are not much admired, I ask questions.

It was told in the *New York World*, July 29, 1908—many petty robberies,
in the neighborhood of Lincoln Avenue, Pittsburgh—detectives detailed to
catch the thief. Early in the morning of July 26th, a big, black dog
sauntered past them. "Good morning!" said the dog. He disappeared in a
thin, greenish vapor.

There will be readers who will want to know what I mean by turning down
this story, while accepting so many others in this book.

It is because I never write about marvels. The wonderful, or the
never-before-heard-of, I leave to whimsical, or radical, fellows. All
books written by me are of quite ordinary occurrences.

If, say sometime in the year 1847, a New Orleans newspaper told of a
cat, who said: "Well, is it warm enough for you?" and instantly
disappeared sulphurously, as should everybody who says that; and, if I
had a clipping, dated sometime in the year 1930, telling of a mouse, who
squeaked: "I was along this way, and thought I'd drop in," and vanished
along a trail of purple sparklets; and something similar from the *St.
Helena Guardian*, Aug. 17, 1905; and something like that from the
*Madras Mail*, year 1879—I'd consider the story of the polite dog no
marvel, and I'd admit him to our fold.

<span id="page_864">p. 864</span>

But it is not that I take numerous repetitions, as a standard for
admission—

The fellow who found the pearl in the oyster stew—the old fiddle that
turned out to be a Stradivarius—the ring that was lost in a lake, and
then what was found when a fish was caught—

But these often repeated yarns are conventional yarns.

And almost all liars are conventionalists.

The one quality that the lower animals have not in common with human
beings is creative imagination. Neither a man, nor a dog, nor an oyster
ever has had any. Of course there is another view, by which is seen that
there is in everything a touch of creativeness. I cannot say that truth
is stranger than fiction, because I have never had acquaintance with
either. Though I have classed myself with some noted fictionists, I have
to accept that the absolute fictionist never has existed. There is a
fictional coloration to everybody's account of an "actual occurrence,"
and there is at least the lurk somewhere of what is called the "actual"
in everybody's yarn. There is the hyphenated state of truth-fiction. Out
of dozens of reported pearls in stews, most likely there have been
instances; most likely once upon a time an old fiddle did turn out to be
a Stradivarius; and it could be that once upon a time somebody did get a
ring back fishwise.

But when I come upon the unconventional repeating, in times and places
far apart, I feel—even though I have no absolute standards to judge
by—that I am outside the field of ordinary liars.

Even in the matter of the talking dog, I think that the writer probably
had something to base upon. Perhaps he had heard of talking dogs. It is
not that I think it impossible that detectives could meet a dog, who
would say: "Good morning!" That's no marvel. It is "Good morning!" and
disappearing in the thin, greenish vapor that I am making such a time
about. In the *New York Herald Tribune*, Feb. 21, 1928, there was an
account of a French bulldog, owned by Mrs. Mabel Robinson, of Bangor,
Maine. He could distinctly say: "Hello!" Mrs. J. Stuart Tompkins, tot
West 85th Street, New York, read of this animal, and called up the
*Herald Tribune*, telling of her dog, a Great Dane, who was at least
equally accomplished.

<span id="page_865">p. 865</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A reporter went to
interview the dog, and handed him a piece of candy. "Thank you!" said
the dog.

In the city of Northampton, England—see *Lloyd's Weekly News* (London),
March 2, 1912—a detective chased a burglar, who had entered a hardware
store. The burglar got away. The detective went back, and got into the
store. There were objects hanging on hooks, overhead. "By coincidence,"
just as the detective passed under one of them, it fell. It was a
scythe-blade. It cut off his ear. Now I am upon familiar ground; there
are suggestions in this story that correlate with suggestions in other
stories.

"A bank in Blackpool was robbed, in broad daylight, on Saturday, in
mysterious circumstances"—so says the *London Daily Telegraph*, Aug. 7,
1926. It was one of the largest establishments in town—the Blackpool
branch of the Midland Bank. At noon, Saturday, while the doors were
closing, an official of the Corporation Tramways Department went into
the building, with a bag, which contained £800, in Treasury notes. In
the presence of about twenty-five customers, he placed the bag upon a
counter. Then the doorman unlocked the front door for him to go out, and
then return with another amount of money, in silver, from a motor van.
The bag had vanished from the counter. It was a large, leather bag.
Nobody could, without making himself conspicuous, try to conceal it.
Nobody wearing a maternity cloak was reported.

In the afternoon, in a side street, near the bank, the bag was found,
and was taken to a police station. But the lock on it was peculiar and
complicated, and the police could not open it. An official of the
Tramways Department was sent for. When the Tramways man arrived with the
key, no money was found in the bag. If a bag can vanish from a bank,
without passing the doorman, I record no marvel in telling of money that
vanished from a bag, though maybe the bag had not been opened.

Well, then, there's nothing marvelous about it, if from a locked drawer
of Mrs. Bradley's bureau, money disappeared. *New York Times*, Feb. 28,
1874—Mrs. Lydia Bradley, of Peoria, Ill., "mysteriously robbed." There
were other occurrences; and they, too, were anything but marvelous.
Pictures came down from the walls, and furniture sauntered about the
place. Stoves slung their lids at people.

<span id="page_866">p. 866</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such doings have
often been reported from houses, in the throes of poltergeist
disturbances. There are many records of pictures that couldn't be kept
hanging on walls. Chairs and tables have been known to form in orderly
fashion, three or four abreast, and parade. In Mrs. Bradley's home, the
doings were in the presence of the housemaid, Margaret Corvell. So the
girl was suspected, and one time, in the midst of pranks by things that
are ordinarily so staid and settled, somebody held her hands. While her
hands were held, a loud crash was heard. A piano, which up to that
moment had been behaving itself properly, joined in. But the girl was
accused. She confessed to everything, including the stealing of the
money, except whatever had occurred when her hands were held. There are
dozens of poltergeist cases, in which the girl—oftenest a young
housemaid—has confessed to all particulars, except things that occurred
while she was held, tied, or being knocked about. Ignoring these
omissions, accounts by investigators end with the satisfactory
explanation that the girl had confessed.

In the *Home News* (Bronx, N. Y.), Sept. 25, 1927, is a story of
"ghost-like depredations." In the town of Barberton, Ohio, lived an
uncatchable thief. I call attention to an element often of openness,
often of defiance, that will appear in many of our stories. It is as if
there are criminals, and sometimes mischievous fellows, who can do
unaccountable things and delight in mystifying their victims, confident
that they cannot be caught. For ten years the uncatchable thief of
Barberton had been operating, periodically. In some periods, as if to
show off his talents, he returned to the same house half a dozen times.

In January, 1925, the police of London were in the state of mind of the
rest of us, when we try to solve crossword puzzles that have been filled
in with alleged Scotch dialect, obsolete terms, and names of improbable
South American rodents. Somebody was playing a game, unfairly making it
difficult. The things that he did were what a crossword author would
call "vars." He was called the "cat burglar." Since his time, many minor
fellows have been so named. The newspapers stressed what they called
this criminal's uncanny ability to enter houses, but I think that the
stress should have been upon his knowledge of just where to go, after
entering houses,

<span id="page_867">p. 867</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Whether he had the
property of invisibility or not, residents of Mayfair reported losses of
money and jewelry that could not be more mystifying if an invisible
being had come in through doors or windows without having to open them,
and had strolled through rooms, sizing up the lay of things. He was
called the "cat burglar," because there was no conventional way of
accounting for his entrances, except by thinking that he had climbed up
the sides of houses—always knowing just what room to climb to—climbing
with a skill that no cat has ever had. Sometimes it was said that marks
were seen on drain pipes and on window sills. Just so long as the police
can say something, that is accepted as next best to doing something. Of
course, in this respect, I'd not pick out any one profession.

The "cat burglar" piled up jewelry that would satisfy anybody's dream of
expensive junk, and then he vanished, maybe not in a thin, greenish
vapor, but anyway in an atmosphere of the unfair mystification of
crosswords that have been made difficult with "vars" and "obs." Perhaps
marks were found on drain pipes and on window sills. But only logicians
think that anything has any exclusive meaning. If I had the power of
invisibly entering houses, but preferred to turn off suspicions, I'd
make marks on drain pipes and window sills. Everything that ever has
meant anything has just as truly meant something else. Otherwise
experts, called to testify, at trials, would not be the fantastic
exhibits that they so often are.

*New York Evening Post*, March 14, 1928—people in a block of houses, in
the Third District of Vienna, terrorized. They were "haunted by a
mysterious person," who entered houses, and stole small objects, never
taking money, doing these things just to show what he could do. Then,
from dusk to dawn, the police formed in a cordon around this block, and
at approaches to it stationed police dogs. The disappearances of small
objects, of little value, continued. There were stories of this "uncanny
burglar or maniac" having been seen, "running lizardwise along moonlit
roofs." My own notion is that nothing was seen running along roofs.
There was such excitement that the "highest authorities" of Vienna
University offered their mentalities for the help of the baffled
policemen and their dogs. I wish I could record an intellectual contest
between college professors

<span id="page_868">p. 868</span>

and dogs; there might be some glee for my malices. There are probably
many college professors, who at times read of strange crimes, and
sympathize with civilization, because they had not taken to detective
work. However, nothing more was said of the professors who offered to
help the cops and the dogs. But there was a challenge here, and I am
sorry to note that it was not accepted. It would have been a crowning
show-off, if this perhaps occult sportsman had entered the homes of some
of these "highest authorities," and had stolen from them whatever it is
by which "highest authorities" maintain their authority, or had robbed
them of their pants. But he did not rise to this opportunity. After we
have more data, it will be my expression that probably he could not
practice outside this one block of houses. However, he got into a house
in which lived a policeman, and he went to the policeman's bedroom. He
touched nothing else, but stole the policeman's revolver.

Upon the afternoon of June 18, 1907, occurred one of the most
sensational, insolent, contemptible, or magnificent thefts in the annals
of crime, as viewed by most Englishmen; or a crime not without a little
interest to Americans. On a table, on the lawn back of the grandstand,
at Ascot, the Ascot Cup was upon exhibition, 13 inches high, and 6
inches in diameter; 20-carat gold; weight 68 ounces. The cup was guarded
by a policeman and by a representative of the makers. The story is told,
in the London *Times*, June 19th. Presumably all around was a crowd,
kept at a distance by the policeman, though, according to the standards
of the *Times*, in the year 1907, it was not dignified to go into
details much. From what I know of the religion of the Turf, in England,
I assume that there was a crowd of devotees, looking worshipfully at
this ikon.

It wasn't there.

About this time, there were a place and a time and a treasure that were
worthy the attention of, or that were a challenge to, any magician. The
place was Dublin Castle. Outside, day and night, a policeman and a
soldier were on duty. Within a distance of fifty yards were the
headquarters of the Dublin metropolitan police; of the Royal Irish
Constabulary; the Dublin detective force; the military garrison. It was
at the time of the Irish International Exhibition, at Dublin. Upon the
10th of July, King Edward and Queen Alexandra

<span id="page_869">p. 869</span>

were to arrive to visit the Exhibition. In a safe in the strong room of
the Castle had been kept the jewels that were worn by the Lord
Lieutenant, upon State occasions. They were a barbaric pile of
bracelets, rings, and other insignia, of a value of $250,000.

And of course. They had disappeared about the time of the disappearance
of the Ascot Cup: sometime between June firth and July 6th.

All investigations came to nothing. For about twenty-four years nothing
new came out. Then, according to a dispatch from London to the *New York
Times*, Sept. 6, 1931, there was a report of attempted negotiations with
the Dublin authorities, or an offer by which, "under certain
conditions," the jewels would be returned. If this rumor were authentic,
the remarkable part is that the various jeweled objects had not been
broken up, but for twenty-four years had been kept intact. This is the
look of the stunt.

But what I am worrying about is the big dog who said "Good morning!" and
disappeared in a thin, greenish vapor. I am not satisfied with my
explanation of why I rejected him. Considering some of my acceptances,
it seems so illogical to turn down the dog who said "Good
morning!"—except that only to the purist, or the scholar, can there be
either the logical or the illogical. We have to get along with the
logical-illogical, in our existence of the hyphen. Everything that is
said to be logical is somewhere out of agreement with something, and
everything that is said to be illogical is somewhere in agreement with
something.

I need not worry about the big dog who said "Good morning!" If,
considering some of my acceptances, I inconsistently turn him down, I am
consistent with something else, and that is the need in every mind to
turn down something—the need in every mind that believes, or accepts
anything, to consider something else silly, preposterous, false, evil,
immoral, terrible—taboo. It is not necessary that we should all agree in
being revolted, shocked, or contemptuous. Some of us take Jehovah, and
some of us take Allah, to despise, or to be amused with. To give it
limits within which to seem to be, and to give it contrasts by which to
seem to be, every mind must practice exclusions.

I draw my line at the dog who said "Good morning!" and disappeared

<span id="page_870">p. 870</span>

in a thin, greenish vapor. He is a symbol of the false and arbitrary and
unreasonable and inconsistent—though of course also the reasonable and
consistent—limit, which everybody must somewhere set, in order to
pretend to be.

You can't fool me with that dog-story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6](wild06.md)
