[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild10) 
[Next](wild12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11

<span class="smallcaps">Damn</span> the particle, but there is salvation
for the aggregate. A gust of wind is wild and free, but there are
handcuffs on the storm.

During the World War, no course of a single bullet could have been
predicted absolutely, but any competent mathematician could have written
the equations of the conflict as a whole.

This is the attempt by the theologians of science to admit the
Uncertainty Principle, and to cancel it. Similarly reason the scientists
of theology:

The single records of the Bible may not be altogether accurate, but the
good, old book, as a whole, is Immortal Truth.

Says Dr. C. G. Darwin, in *New Conceptions of Matter:*

"We cannot say exactly what will happen to a single electron, but

<span id="page_908">p. 908</span>

we can confidently estimate the probabilities. If an experiment is
carried out, with a thousand electrons, what was a probability for one,
becomes nearly a certainty. Physical theory confidently predicts that
the millions of millions of electrons in our bodies will behave even
more regularly, and that to find a case of noticeable departure from the
average, we should have to wait for a time quite fantastically longer
than the estimated age of the universe."

This reasoning is based upon the scientific delusion that there are
final bodies, or wholes.

Arthur B. Mitchell, of 472 McAllister Avenue, Utica, N. Y., goes out for
the evening. It can't be said exactly what will happen to a single cell
of Mr. Mitchell's composition, but every wink of an eye, or scratch of
an ear, of this body, as a whole, can be foretold.

But now we have a change of view, as to this body that had been regarded
as a whole. Now Mr. Mitchell is regarded as one of many units in this
community known as Utica. Now the admission is that Mr. Mitchell's
conduct may be slightly irregular, but the contention is that the
politics of Utica, as a whole, is never a surprise.

But surprising things, in Utica, are reported. Well, Utica is only one
of the many communities that make up the State of New York. But the
State of New York—

My own expression is that ours is an intermediate existence, poised, or
fluctuating back and forth between two unrealizable extremes that may be
called *positiveness* and *negativeness;* a hyphenated state of
goodness-badness, coldness-heat, equilibrium-inequilibrium,
certainty-uncertainty. I conceive of our existence as an organism in
which positivizing and negativizing manifestations, or conflicts, are
metabolic. Certainty, or regularity, exists to a high degree, in the
movements of the planets, but not absolutely, because of small,
un-formulable digressions: and negativeness exists to a high degree, in
the freaks of a cyclone, though not absolutely, because a still more
frenzied state of eccentricity can always be thought of.

My expression is that there are things, beings, and events that conform
strikingly to regularized generalizations, but that also there are
outrageous, silly, fiendish, bizarre, idiotic, monstrous things, beings,
and events that illustrate just as strikingly universal imbecility,
crime, or unformulability, or fantasy.

<span id="page_909">p. 909</span>

In the London newspapers, last of March, 1908, was told a story, which,
when starting off, was called "what the coroner for South Northumberland
described as the most [extraordinary](errata.htm#3) case that he had
ever investigated." The story was of a woman, at Whitley Bay, near
Blyth, England, who, according to her statement, had found her sister,
burned to death on an unscorched bed. This was the equivalence of the
old stories of "spontaneous combustion of human bodies." It was said
that the coroner was at first puzzled by this story; but that he learned
that the woman who told it had been intoxicated, and soon compelled her
to admit that she had found her sister, suffering from burns, in another
part of the house, and had carried her to her bedroom.

But, in my experience with Taboo, I have so many notes upon coroners,
who have seen to it that testimony was what it should be; and so many
records of fires that, according to all that is supposed to be known of
chemical affinity, should not have been, that, between what should and
what shouldn't, I am so confused that all that I can say about a story
of a woman who burned to death on an unscorched bed is that it is
possible-impossible.

Looking over data, I note a case that has no bearing on the story of the
burning woman on the unscorched bed, but that is a story of strange
fires, or of fires that would be strange, if stories of similar fires
were not so common. It is a case that interests me, because it aligns
with the stories of Emma Piggott and John Doughty. There was an
occurrence, and it was followed by something else that seems related:
but, in terms of common knowledge, it cannot be maintained that between
the first occurrence and the following occurrences there was
relationship. Most of the story was told in the London *Times*, Aug. 21,
1856: but, whenever it is possible for me to do so, I go to local
newspapers for what I call data. I take from various issues of the
*Bedford Times* and the *Bedford Mercury*.

Upon the 12th of August, 1856, a resident of Bedford, named Moulton, was
absent from home. He was upon a business trip to Ireland. At home were
Mrs. Moulton and the housemaid, Anne Fennimore. To fumigate the house,
the girl burned sulphur, in an earthenware jar, on the floor. The
burning sulphur ran out on the floor, and set the house afire. This fire
was put out.

<span id="page_910">p. 910</span>

About an hour later, a mattress was found burning, in another room. But
the fire from the sulphur had not extended beyond one room, and this
mattress was in another part of the house. Smoke was seen, coming from a
chest. Later, smoke was seen coming from a closet, and in it linen was
found burning. Other isolated fires broke out. Moulton was sent for, and
returned, upon the evening of the 16th. He took off damp clothes, and
threw them on the floor. Next morning these clothes were found afire.
Then came a succession of about forty fires, in curtains, in closets,
and in bureau drawers. Neighbors and policemen came in, and were soon
fearful for their safety. Not only objects around them flamed: so flamed
their handkerchiefs.

There were so many witnesses, and so much talk in the town, that there
was an investigation. Considering that nobody was harmed, it seems queer
to read that the investigation was a coroner's inquest: but the coroner
was the official who took up the investigation. Witnesses told of such
occurrences as picking up a pillow and setting it down—pillow flaming.
There was an attempt to explain, in commonplace terms: but nothing that
could suggest arson was found, and Moulton had insured neither the house
nor the furniture. The outstanding puzzlement was that an ordinary fire
seemed to be in some way related to the fires that followed it, but in
no way that could be defined. The verdict of the jury was that the fire
from the burning sulphur was accidental, but that there was no evidence
to show what had caused the succeeding fires.

This story attracted attention in London. After the first account, in
the *Times*, there was considerable correspondence. At the inquest, two
physicians had given their opinion that the sulphur fire must have been
the cause of the other fires—or that inflammable, sulphurous fumes had
probably spread throughout Moulton's house. But the jury had refused to
accept this explanation, because of testimony that chairs and sofas that
had been carried out into the yard, had flamed. The fires were in a
period of five days, and it is probable that in that length of time any
permeation by fumes would have been detected. In the discussion in the
*Times* it was pointed out that sulphurous fumes are oxides and are not
inflammable.

However, I come to another fire, and maybe I'll explain this one.

<span id="page_911">p. 911</span>

It was upon the night of Jan. 21, 1909. Upon this night, a small-town
woman exasperated a New York hotel clerk. Perhaps I explain her unusual
behavior by thinking that, having come from a small town, she started
picturing the dangers of the big city, and let her imaginings become an
obsession. The woman was Mrs. Mary Wells Jennings, of Brewster, N. Y.
Place—the Greek Hotel, 30 E. 42nd Street. See the *Brooklyn Eagle*, Jan.
22, 1909. Mrs. Jennings asked the night clerk to change her room, saying
that she feared fire. The clerk assigned her to another room. Not long
afterward—wouldn't he let her have another room? So another room. Again
she annoyed the clerk. Room changed again. A few hours later, in an
unoccupied room, where, during alterations, paints were stored, a fire
broke out.

*St. Louis Globe-Democrat*, Dec. 16, 1889.—"In some mysterious way, a
fire started in the mahogany desk in the center of the office of the
Secretary of War, at Washington, D. C. Several official papers were
destroyed, but it was said that they were of no especial value, and
could be replaced. Secretary Proctor cannot understand how the fire
originated, as he does not smoke, and keeps no matches about his desk."

It may be that there have been other cases, in which, "in some
mysterious way" have been destroyed papers that were of no especial
value, and could be replaced. Upon Sept. 16, 1920, London newspapers
told of three fires that had broken out simultaneously in different
departments of the Government Office, in Tothill Street, Westminster,
London. It was not said that papers of no especial value had been
destroyed, but it was said that these simultaneous fires had not been
explained. London *Sunday Express*, May 2, 1920—"Upon the night of April
28, fire of mysterious origin broke out at the War Office,
Constantinople, where the archives are stored. The iron doors were
locked, and it was impossible to gain entrance to the building until
afternoon. Many important documents were destroyed."

The body of a girl—and the body of a crow—and a newspaper
correspondent's vague feeling of an unknown relationship—A woman who was
away from home

Upon the night of April 6, 1919—see the *Dartford* (Kent)

<span id="page_912">p. 912</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Chronicle*, April
7—Mr. J. Temple Thurston was alone in his home, Hawley Manor, near
Dartford. His wife was abroad. Particulars of the absence of his wife,
or of anything leading to the absence of his wife, are missing.
Something had broken up this home. The servants had been dismissed.
Thurston was alone.

At 2:40 o'clock, morning of April 7th, the firemen were called to Hawley
Manor. Outside Thurston's room, the house was blazing: but in his room
there was no fire. Thurston was dead. His body was scorched: but upon
his clothes there was no trace of fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12](wild12)
