[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild03.md) 
[Next](wild05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4

<span class="smallcaps">Not</span> a bottle of catsup can fall from a
tenement-house fire-escape, in Harlem, without being noted—not only by
the indignant people downstairs, but—even though
infinitesimally—universally—maybe—

Affecting the price of pajamas, in Jersey City: the temper of somebody's
mother-in-law, in Greenland; the demand, in China, for rhinoceros horns
for the cure of rheumatism—maybe—

Because all things are inter-related—continuous—of an underlying
oneness—

So then the underlying logic of the boy—who was guilty of much, but was
at least innocent of ever having heard of a syllogism—who pasted a peach
label on a can of string beans.

All things are so inter-related that, though the difference between a
fruit and what is commonly called a vegetable seems obvious,

<span id="page_858">p. 858</span>

there is no defining either. A tomato, for instance, represents the
merging-point. Which is it—fruit or vegetable?

So then the underlying logic of the scientist—who is guilty of much, but
also is very innocent—who, having started somewhere with his explanation
of "mass psychology," keeps right on, sticking on that explanation.
Inasmuch as there is always a view somewhere, in defense of anything
conceivable, he must be at least minutely reasonable. If "mass
psychology" applies definitely to one occurrence, it must, even though
almost imperceptibly, apply to all occurrences. Phenomena of a man alone
on a desert island can be explained in terms of "mass
psychology"—inasmuch as the mind of no man is a unit, but is a community
of mental states that influence one another.

Inter-relations of all things—and I can feel something like the hand of
Emma Piggott reaching out to the hand, as it were, of the asphyxiated
woman on the mountainside. John Doughty and bodies on benches in a
Harlem park—as oxygen has affinity for hydrogen. Rose Smith—Ambrose
Small—the body of a shepherd named Funnell—

Upon the morning of April 10, 1893, after several men had been taken to
a Brooklyn hospital, somebody's attention was attracted to something
queer. Several accidents, in quick succession, in different parts of the
city would not be considered strange, but a similarity was noted. See
the *Brooklyn Eagle*, April 10, 1893.

Then there was a hustle of ambulances, and much ringing of gongs—

Alex. Burgman, Geo. Sychers, Lawrence Beck, George Barton, Patrick
Gibbons, James Meehan, George Bedell, Michael Brown, John Trowbridge,
Timothy Hennessy, Philip Oldwell, and an unknown man—

In the course of a few hours, these men were injured, in the streets of
Brooklyn, almost all of them by falling from high places, or by being
struck by objects that fell from high places.

Again it is one of my questions that are so foolish, and that may not be
so senseless—what could the fall of a man from a roof, in one part of
Brooklyn, have to do with a rap on the sconce, by a flower pot, of
another man, in another part of Brooklyn?

In the town of Colchester, England—as told in *Lloyd's Daily* 

<span id="page_859">p. 859</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *News* (London)
April 30, 1911—a soldier, garrisoned at Colchester, was, upon the
evening of April 24th, struck senseless. He was so seriously injured
that he was taken to the Garrison Hospital. Here he could give no
account of what had befallen him. The next night, to this hospital, was
taken another seriously injured soldier, who had been "struck senseless
by an unseen assailant." Four nights later, a third soldier was taken to
this hospital, suffering from the effects of a blow, about which he
could tell nothing.

I have come upon a case of the "mass psychology" of lace curtains. About
the last of March, 1892—see the *Brooklyn Eagle*, April 19, 1892—people
who had been away from home, in Chicago, returned to find that during
their absence there had been an orgy of curtains. Lace curtains were
lying about, in lumps and distortions. It was a melancholy prostration
of virtues: things so flimsy and frail, yet so upright, so long as they
are supported. Bureau drawers had been ransacked for jewelry, and
jewelry had been found. But nothing had been stolen. Strewn about were
fragments of rings and watches that had been savagely smashed.

There are, in this account, several touches of the ghost story. There
are many records of similar wanton, or furious, destructions in houses
where poltergeist disturbances were occurring. Also there was mystery,
because the police could not find out how this house had been entered.

Then came news of another house, which, while the dwellers were away,
had been "mysteriously entered." Lace curtains, in rags, were lying
about, and so were remains of dresses that had been slashed. Jewelry and
other ornaments had been smashed. Nothing had been stolen.

So far as the police could learn, the occupants of these houses had no
common enemy. A rage against lace curtains is hard to explain, but the
hatred of somebody, whose windows were bare, against all finery and
ornaments, is easily understandable. Soon after rages had swept through
these two houses, other houses were entered, with no sign of how the
vandal got in, and lace curtains were pulled down, and there was much
destruction of finery and ornaments, and nothing was stolen.

*New York Times*, Jan. 26, 1873—that, in England, during the

<span id="page_860">p. 860</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pytchley hunt,
Gen. Mayow fell dead from his saddle, and that about the same time, in
Gloucestershire, the daughter of the Bishop of Gloucestershire, while
hunting, was seriously injured; and that, upon the same day, in the
north of England, a Miss Cavendish, while hunting, was killed. Not long
afterward, a clergyman was killed, while hunting, in Lincolnshire. About
the same time, two hunters, near Sanders’ Gorse, were thrown, and were
seriously injured.

In one of my incurable, scientific moments, I suggest that when diverse
units, of, however, one character in common, are similarly affected, the
incident force is related to the common character. But there is no
suggestion that any visible hater of fox-hunters was traveling in
England, pulling people from saddles, and tripping horses. But that
there always has been intense feeling, in England, against fox-hunters
is apparent to anyone who conceives of himself as a farmer—and his
fences broken, and his crops trampled by an invasion of red coats—and a
wild desire to make a Bunker Hill of it.

In the *New York Evening World*, Dec. 26, 1930, it was said that Warden
Lewis E. Lawes, of Sing Sing Prison, had been ill. The Warden recovered,
and, upon Christmas morning, left his room. He was told that a friend of
his, Maurice Conway, who had come to visit him, had been found dead in
bed. Upon Christmas Eve, Keeper John Hyland had been operated upon, "for
appendicitis," and was in a serious condition in Ossining Hospital. In
the same hospital was Keeper John Wescott, who also had been stricken
"with appendicitis." Keeper Henry Barrett was in this hospital, waiting
to be operated upon "for hernia."

Probably the most hated man in the New York State Prison Service was
Asael J. Granger, Head Keeper of Clinton Prison, at Dannemora. He had
effectively quelled the prison riot of July 22, 1929. Upon this
Christmas Day, of 1930, in the Champlain Valley Hospital, Plattsburg, N.
Y., Granger was operated upon "for appendicitis." Two days later he
died. About this time, Harry M. Kaiser, the Warden of Clinton Prison,
was suffering from what was said to be "high blood pressure." He died,
three months later (*New York Herald Tribune*, March 24, 1931).

The London newspapers of March, 1926, told of fires that had

<span id="page_861">p. 861</span>

simultaneously broken out in several parts of Closes Hall, the residence
of Captain B. Heaton, near Clitheroe, Lancashire. The fires were in the
woodwork under the roof, and were believed to have been caused by sparks
from the kitchen stove. These fires were in places that were
inaccessible to any ordinary incendiary: to get to them, the firemen had
to chop holes in the roof. Nothing was said of previous fires here.
Maybe it is strange that sparks from a kitchen stove should
simultaneously ignite remote parts of a house, distances apart.

A fire in somebody's house did not much interest me: but then I read of
a succession of similars. In three months, there had been ten other
mansion fires. "Scotland Yard recently made arrangements for all details
of mansion fires to be sent to them, in order that the circumstances
might be collated, and the probable cause of the outbreaks discovered."

April 2, 1926—Ashley Moor, a mansion near Leominster, destroyed by fire.

Somebody, or something, was burning mansions. How it was done was the
mystery. There was a scare, and probably these houses were more than
ordinarily guarded: but so well-protected are they, ordinarily, that
some extraordinary means of entrance is suggested. In no report was it
said that there was any evidence of how an incendiary got into a house.
No theft was reported. For months, every now and then there was a
mansion fire. Presumably the detectives of Scotland Yard were busily
collating.

The London newspapers, of November 6th, told of the thirtieth mansion
fire in about ten months.

There were flaming mansions, and there were flaming utterances, in
England.

Sometimes I am a collector of data, and only a collector, and am likely
to be gross and miserly, piling up notes, pleased with merely
numerically adding to my stores. Other times I have joys, when
unexpectedly coming upon an outrageous story that may not be altogether
a lie, or upon a macabre little thing that may make some reviewer of my
more or less good works mad. But always there is present a feeling of
unexplained relations of events that I

<span id="page_862">p. 862</span>

note; and it is this far-away, haunting, or often taunting, awareness,
or suspicion, that keeps me piling on

Or, in a feeling of relatability of seemingly most incongruous
occurrences that nevertheless may be correlated into the service of one
general theme, I am like a primitive farmer, who conceives that a zebra
and a cow may be hitched together to draw his plow

But isn't there something common about zebras and cows?

An ostrich and a hyena.

Then the concept of a pageantry—the ransack of the jungles for creatures
of the widest unlikeness to draw his plow—and former wild clatters of
hoofs and patters of paws are the tramp of a song—here come the animals,
two by two

Or John Doughty, three abreast with the dead men of a Harlem park,
pulling on my theme—followed by the forty-five schoolgirls of Derby—and
the fish dealer's housemaid, with her arms full of sponges and Turkish
towels—followed by burning beds, most suggestively associated with her,
but in no way that any conventional thinker can explain

Or the mansion fires in England, in the year 1926—and, in a minor
hitch-up, I feel the relatability of two scenes:

In Hyde Park, London, an orator shouts: "What we want is no king and no
law! How we'll get it will be, not with ballots, but with bullets!"

Far away in Gloucestershire, a house that dates back to Elizabethan
times unaccountably bursts into flames.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5](wild05.md)
