[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild25) 
[Next](wild27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 26

<span class="smallcaps">Hates</span> and malices—murderous radiations
from human minds—

Or the flashes and roars of a thunderstorm—

And there has been the equivalence of picking strokes of lightning out
of the sky, and harnessing them to a job.

A house afire—or somebody boils an egg.

Devastation or convenience—

Or what of it, if I bridge a gap?

I take it that the story of Marjory Quirk is only an extreme instance of
cases of internal, or personal, witchcraft that, today, are commonly
accepted. *London Daily Express*, Oct. 3, 1911—inquest upon the body of
Marjory Quirk, daughter of the Bishop of Sheffield. The girl had been
ill of melancholia. In a suicidal impulse she drank, from a cup, what
she believed to be paraffin. She was violently sick. She died. "There
had been no paraffin in the cup. There was no trace of it in her mouth
or throat."

*New York Herald Tribune*, Jan. 30, 1932—Boston, Jan. 29—"Nearly half a
hundred students and physicians living in Vanderbilt Hall of the Harvard
Medical School have experienced mild cases of what apparently was
paratyphoid, it was learned today. The first thirty of the group fell
ill two weeks ago, following a fraternity dinner, at which Dr. George H.
Bigelow, state health commissioner, discussed 'food poisoning.' A few
days later twenty more men reported themselves ill. The food was
prepared at the hall.

"Today state health officers started an examination of kitchen help in
the belief that one of the employees may be a typhoid carrier. College
authorities said they did not believe the food itself was at

<span id="page_1016">p. 1016</span>

fault, but were inclined to think the subject of Dr. Bigelow's address
may have influenced some of the diners to diagnose mere gastronomic
disturbances more seriously. All of the students have recovered."

To say that fifty young men had gastronomic disturbances is to say much
against conditions of health in the Harvard Medical School. To say that
the subject of illness may have induced illness is to say that there was
personal, or internal, witchcraft, usually called auto-suggestion. See
back to "Typhoid Mary" and other probable victims of carrier-finders. To
say that there may have been a carrier among the kitchen help is to
attribute to him, and is to say that it was only by coincidence that
illnesses occurred after a talk upon illnesses. It's a hell of a way,
anyway, to have dinner with a lot of young men, and talk to them about
food-poisoning. Hereafter Dr. Bigelow may have to buy his own dinners.
If he tells shark-stories, while bathing, he'll do lonesome swimming.

Physiologists deny that fright can turn one's hair white. They argue
that they cannot conceive how a fright could withdraw the pigmentation
from hairs: so they conclude that all alleged records of this phenomenon
are yarns. Say it's a black-haired person. The physiologists, except
very sketchily, cannot tell us how that hair became black, in the first
place. Somewhere, all the opposition to the data of this book is because
the data are not in agreement with something that is not known.

There have been many alleged instances. See the indexes of *Notes and
Queries*, series 6, 7, 10. I used to argue that Queen Marie Antoinette's
deprivation of cosmetics, in prison, probably accounted for her case.
Now that my notions have shifted, that cynicism has lost its force to
me. Mostly the instances of hair turning white, because of fright, are
antiques, and can't be investigated now. But see the *New York Times*,
Feb. 8, 1932:

Story of the sinking of a fishing schooner, by the Belgian steamship,
*Jean Jadot*—twenty-one members of the crew drowned—six of them saved,
among them Arthur Burke, aged 52.

"Arthur Burke's hair was streaked with gray before the collision, but
was quite gray when Burke landed yesterday, at Pier 2, Erie Basin."

<span id="page_1017">p. 1017</span>

It may be that there have been thousands, or hundreds of thousands, of
cases in which human beings have died in violent convulsions that were
the products of beliefs—and that, also, merciful, but expensive, science
has saved a multitude of lives, with a serum that has induced contrary
beliefs—just as that serum, if injected into the veins of somebody,
suffering under the oppressive pronouncement that twice two are four,
could be his salvation by inducing a belief that twice two are purple,
if he should want so to be affected—

Or what has become of hydrophobia?

In the *New York Telegram*, Nov. 26, 1929, was published a letter from
Gustave Stryker, quoting Dr. Mathew Woods, of Philadelphia, a member of
the Philadelphia County Medical Society. Dr. Woods had better look out,
unless he's aiming at cutting down expenses, such as dues to societies.
Said Dr. Woods:

“We have observed with regret numerous sensational stories, concerning
alleged mad dogs and the terrible results to human beings bitten by
them, which are published from time to time in the newspapers.

“Such accounts frighten people into various disorders, and cause brutal
treatment of animals suspected of madness, and yet there is on record a
great mass of testimony from physicians asserting the great rarity of
hydrophobia even in the dog, while many medical men of wide experience
are of the opinion that if it develops in human beings at all it is only
upon extremely rare occasions, and that the condition of hysterical
excitement in man, described by newspapers as 'hydrophobia,' is merely a
series of symptoms due usually to the dread of the disease, such a dread
being caused by realistic newspapers and other reports, acting upon the
imaginations of persons scratched or bitten by animals suspected of
rabies.

“At the Philadelphia dog pound where on an average more than 6,000
vagrant dogs are taken annually, and where the catchers and keepers are
frequently bitten while handling them, not one case of hydrophobia has
occurred during its entire history of twenty-five years, in which time,
about 150,000 have been handled.”

My own attention was first attracted, long ago, when I noticed, going
over files of newspapers, the frequency of reported cases of

<span id="page_1018">p. 1018</span>

hydrophobia, a generation or so ago, and the fewness of such reports in
the newspapers of later times. Dogs are muzzled, now—in streets, in
houses they're not. Vaccines, or powdered toads, caught at midnight, in
graveyards, would probably cure many cases, but would not reduce the
number of cases in dogs, if there ever have been cases of hydrophobia in
dogs.

In the *New York Times*, July 4,:931, was published a report by M.
Roéland, of the Municipal Council of Paris:

"It will be noticed that rabies has almost entirely disappeared,
although the number of dogs has increased. From 166,917 dogs in Paris,
in 1924, the number had risen, in 1929, to 230,674. In spite of this
marked increase, only ten cases of rabies in animals were observed.
There were no cases of rabies in man."

Sometimes it is my notion that there never has been a case of
hydrophobia, as anything but an instance of personal witchcraft: but
there are so many data for thinking that a disease in general is very
'much like an individual case of the disease, in that it runs its course
and then disappears—quite independently of treatment, whether by the
poisoned teat of a cow, or the dried sore of a mummy—that I suspect that
once upon a time there was, to some degree, hydrophobia. When I was a
boy, pitted faces were common. What has become of smallpox? Where are
yellow fever and cholera? I'm not supposed to answer my own questions,
am I? But serums, say the doctors. But there are enormous areas in the
Americas and Europe, where vaccines have never penetrated. But they did
it, say the doctors.

Eclipses occur, and savages are frightened. The medicine men wave
wands—the sun is cured—they did it.

The story of diseases reads like human history—the rise and fall of
Black Death—and the appearance and rule of Smallpox—the Tubercular
Empire—and the United Afflictions of Yellow Fever and Cholera. Some of
them passed away before serums were thought of, and in times when
sanitation was unpopular. Several hundred years ago there was a lepers’
house in every good-sized city in England. A hundred years ago there had
not been much of what is called improvement in medicine and sanitation,
but leprosy had virtually disappeared, in England. Possibly the origin
of leprosy

<span id="page_1019">p. 1019</span>

in England was in personal witchcraft—or that if the Bible had never
devastated England, nobody there would have had the idea of leprosy—that
when wicked doubts arose, the nasty suspicions of people made them
clean.

So it may be that once upon a time there was hydrophobia: but the
indications are that most of the cases that are reported in these times
are sorceries wrought by the minds of victims upon their bodies.

A case, the details of which suggest that occasionally a dog may be
rabid, but that his bites are dangerous only to a most imaginatively
excited victim, is told of, in the *New York Herald Tribune*, Nov. 16,
1931. Ten men were bitten by a dog. "The dog was killed, and was found
to have the rabies." The men were sailors aboard the United States
destroyer, *J. D. Edwards*, at Cheefoo, China. One of these sailors died
of hydrophobia. The nine others showed no sign of the disease.

In such a matter as a fright turning hair gray, it is probable that
conventional scientists mechanically, unintelligently, or with little
consciousness of the whyness of their opposition, deny the occurrences,
as unquestioning obediences to Taboo. My own concatenation of thoughts
is—that, if one's mental state can affect the color of one's hair, a
mental state may in other ways affect one's body—and then that one's
mental state may affect the bodies of others—and this is the path to
witchcraft. It is not so much that conventional scientists disregard, or
deny, what they cannot explain—if, in anything like a final sense,
nothing ever has been, or can be, explained. It is that they disregard
or deny, to clip concatenations that would lead them from concealed
ignorance into obvious bewilderment.

Every science is a mutilated octopus. If its tentacles were not clipped
to stumps, it would feel its way into disturbing contacts. To a
believer, the effect of the contemplation of a science is of being in
the presence of the good, the true, and the beautiful. But what he is
awed by is Mutilation. To our crippled intellects, only the maimed is
what we call understandable, because the unclipped ramifies away into
all other things. According to my aesthetics, what is meant by the
beautiful is symmetrical deformation. By Justice

<span id="page_1020">p. 1020</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —in phenomenal
being—I mean the appearance of balance, by which a reaction is made to
look equal and opposite to an action—so arbitrarily wrought by the clip
and disregard of all ramifications of the action—expressing in the
supposed condign punishment of a man, regardless of effects upon other
persons. This is the arbitrary basis of the mechanical theory of
existence—the idea that an action can be picked out of a maze of
interrelationships, as if it were a thing in itself. Some wisdom of mine
is that if a man is dying of starvation he cannot commit a crime. He is
good. The god of all idealists is *Malnutrition*. If all crimes are
expressions of energy, it is unjust to pick on men for their crimes. A
higher jurisprudence would indict their breakfasts. A good cook is
responsible for more evil than ever the Demon Rum has been: and, if we'd
all sit down and starve to death, at last would be realized Utopia.

My expression is that, if illnesses, physical contortions, and deaths
can be imposed by the imaginations of persons upon their own bodies, we
may develop the subject-matter of a preceding chapter, with more
striking data—

Or the phenomenon of the stigmata—

Which, considered sacred by pietists, is aligned by me with hydrophobia.

This phenomenon is as profoundly damned, in the views of all properly
trained thinkers, as are crucifixes, sacraments, and priestly vestments.
As to its occurrence, I can quote dozens of churchmen, of the "highest
authority," but not one scientist, except a few Catholic scientists.

Over and over and over—science and its system—and theology and its
system—and the fights between interpretations by both—and my thought
that the freeing of data from the coercions of both, may, or may not, be
of value. Once upon a time the religionists denied, or disregarded much
that the scientists announced. They have given in so disastrously, or
have been licked so to a frazzle, that, in my general impression of
controversies that end up in compromises, this is defeat too nearly
complete to be lasting. I conceive of a return-movement—open to
freethinkers and atheists—in which many of the data of
religionists—scrubbed clean of holiness—will be accepted.

As to the records of stigmatics, I omit the best-known, and most

<span id="page_1021">p. 1021</span>

convincingly reported, of all the cases, the case of the French girl,
Louise Lateau, because much has been published upon her phenomena, and
because accounts are easily available.

In the newspapers of July, 1922—I take from the *London Daily Express*,
July 10th—was reported the case of Mary Reilly, aged 20, in the Home of
the Sisters of the Good Shepherd, Peekskill, N. Y. It was said that
intermittently, upon her side, appeared a manifestation in the form of a
cross of blood. Mostly the appearances are of the "five wounds of
Christ," or six, including marks on the forehead. For an account of the
case of Rose Ferron, see the *New York Herald Tribune*, March 25, 1928.
According to this story, Rose Ferron, aged 25, of 86 Asylum Street,
Woonsocket, R. I., had, since March 17, 1916, been a stigmatic, wounds
appearing upon her hands, feet, and forehead. The hysterical condition
of this girl—in both the common and the medical meaning of the term—is
indicated by the circumstance that for three years she had been strapped
to her bed, with only her right arm free.

At this time of writing, I have, for four years, been keeping track of
the case of Theresa Neumann, the stigmatic girl of Konnersreuth,
Germany: and, up to this time, there has been no exposure of imposture.
See the *New York Times*, April 8, 1928—roads leading to her home jammed
with automobiles, carriages, motorcycles, vans, and pilgrims on foot.
Considering the facilities—or the facilities, if nothing goes wrong—of
modern travel, it is probable that no other miracle has been so
multitudinously witnessed. A girl in bed—and all day long, the tramp of
thousands past her. Whether admission was charged, I do not know. The
story of this girl agrees with the stories of other stigmatics: flows of
blood, from quick-healing wounds, and phenomena on Fridays. It was said
that medical men had become interested, and had "demanded" Theresa's
removal to a clinic, where she could be subjected to a prolonged
examination, but that the Church authorities had objected. This is about
what would be expected of Church authorities: and that the medical men,
unable to have their own way, then disregarded the case is something
else that is about what would be expected.

My expression is that, upon stigmatic girls have appeared wounds,
similar to the alleged wounds of a historical, and therefore doubtful,

<span id="page_1022">p. 1022</span>

character, because this melodrama is most strikingly stimulative to the
imagination—but that an atheistic girl—if there could be anything for an
atheistic girl to be equally imaginatively hysterical about—might
reproduce other representations upon her body. In the *Month*, 134-249,
is an account of Marie-Julie Jahenny, of the village of La Fraudais
(Loire-Inférieure), France, who, upon March 21, 1873, became a
stigmatic. Upon her body appeared the "five wounds." Then, upon her
breast appeared the picture of a flower. It is said that for twenty
years this picture of a flower remained visible. According to the story,
it was in the mind of the girl before it appeared upon her body, because
she predicted that it would appear. One has notions of the possible use
of indelible ink, or of tattooing. That is very good. One should have
notions.

If a girl drinks a liquid that would harm nobody else, and dies, can a
man inflict upon himself injuries that would kill anybody else, and be
unharmed?

There is a kind of stigmatism that differs from the foregoing cases, in
that weapons are used to bring on effects: but the wounds are similar to
the wounds of stigmatic girls, or simply are not wounds, in an ordinary,
physical sense. There is an account, in the *Sphinx*, March, 1893, of a
fakir, Soliman Ben Aissa, who was exhibiting in Germany; who stabbed
daggers into his cheeks and tongue, and into his abdomen, harmlessly,
and with quick-healing wounds.

Such magicians are of rare occurrence, anyway in the United States and
Europe: but the minor ones who eat glass and swallow nails are not
uncommon.

But, if in Germany, or anywhere else, in countries that are said to be
Christian, any man ever did savagely stab himself in the abdomen, and be
unhurt, and repeat his performances, how is it that the phenomenon is
not well-known and generally accepted?

The question is like another:

If, in the Theological Era, a man went around blaspheming, during
thunderstorms, and was unhurt, though churches were struck by lightning,
how long would he remain well-known?

In March, 1920, a band of Arab dervishes exhibited in the London' music
halls. In the London *Daily News*, March 12, 1920, are

<span id="page_1023">p. 1023</span>

reproduced photographs of these magicians, showing them with skewers
that they had thrust through their flesh, painlessly and bloodlessly.

Taboo. The censor stopped the show.

For an account of phenomena, or alleged phenomena, of the Silesian
cobbler, Paul Diebel, who exhibited in Berlin, in December, 1927, see
the *New York Times*, Dec. 18, 1927. "Blood flows from his eyes, and
open wounds appear on his chest, after he has concentrated mentally for
six minutes, it is declared. He drives daggers through his arms and
legs, and even permits himself to be nailed to a cross, without any
suffering, it is said. His manager asserts that he can remain thus for
ten hours. His self-inflicted wounds, it is declared, bleed or not, as
he wishes, and a few minutes after the knife or nails are withdrawn all
evidence of incisions vanishes."

The only thing that can be said against this story is that it is
unbelievable.

*New York Herald Tribune*, Feb. 6, 1928—that, in Vienna, the police had
interfered with Diebel, and had forbidden him to perform. It was
explained that this was because he would not give them a free
exhibition, to prove the genuineness of his exhibitions. "In Munich,
recently, he remained nailed to a cross several hours, smoking
cigarettes and joking with his audience."

After April 8, 1928—see the *New York Times* of this date—I lose track
of Paul Diebel. The story ends with an explanation. Nothing is said of
the alleged crucifixions. The explanation is a retreat to statements
that are supposed to be understandable in commonplace terms. I do not
think that they are so understandable. "Diebel has disclosed his secret
to the public, saying that shortly before his appearance, he scratched
his flesh with his fingernails, or a sharp instrument, being careful not
to cut it. On the stage by contracting his muscles, those formerly
invisible lines assumed blood-red hue and often bled."

I have heard of other persons, who have "disclosed" trade secrets.

Upon March 2, 1931, a man lay, most publicly, upon a bed of nails. See
the *New York Herald Tribune*, March 3, 1931. In Union Square, New York
City, an unoriental magician, named Brawman,

<span id="page_1024">p. 1024</span>

from the unmystical region of Pelham Bay, in the Bronx, gave an
exhibition that was staged by the magazine, *Science and Invention*.
This fakir from the Bronx lay upon a bed of 1,200 nails. In response to
his invitation, ten men walked on his body, pressing the points of the
nails into his back. He stood up, showing deep, red marks made by the
nails. These marks soon faded away.

I have thought of leaf insects as pictorial representations wrought in
the bodies of insects, by their imaginations, or by the imaginative
qualities of the substances of their bodies—back in plastic times, when
insects were probably not so set in their ways as they now are. The
conventional explanation of protective colorations and formations has,
as to some of these insects, considerable reasonableness. But there is
one of these creatures—the Tasmanian leaf insect—that represents an
artistry that so transcends utility that I considered the specimen that
I saw, in the American Museum of Natural History, misplaced: it should
have been in the Metropolitan Museum of Art. This leaf insect has
reproduced the appearance of a leaf down to such tiny details as
serrated edges. The deception of enemies, or survival-value, has had
nothing thinkable to do with some of the making of this remarkable
likeness, because such minute particulars as serrations would be
invisible to any bird, unless so close that the undisguisable
insect-characteristics would be apparent.

I now have the case of what I consider a stigmatic bird. It is most
unprotectively marked. Upon its breast it bears betrayal—or it is so
conspicuously marked that one doubts that there is much for the theory
of protective coloration to base upon, if conspicuously marked forms of
life survive everywhere, and if many of them cannot be explained away,
as Darwin explained away some of them, in terms of warnings.

It is a story of the sensitiveness of pigeons. I have told of the
pigeons with whom I was acquainted. One day a boy shot one, and the body
lay where the others saw it. They were so nervous that they flew,
hearing trifling sounds that, before, they'd not have noticed. They were
so suspicious that they kept away from the window sills. For a month
they remembered.

<span id="page_1025">p. 1025</span>

The bleeding-heart pigeon of the Philippines—the spot of red on its
breast—or that its breast remembered—

Or once upon a time—back in plastic times when the forms and plumages of
birds were not so fixed, or established, as they now are—an ancestral
pigeon and her mate. The swoop of a hawk—a wound on his breast—and that
sentiment in her plumage was so sympathetically moved that it
stigmatized her, or reproduced on offsprings, and is to this day the
recorded impression of an ancient little tragedy.

A simple red spot on the breast of a bird would not be conceived of, by
me, as having any such significance. It is not a simple, red spot, only
vaguely suggestive of a wound, on the breast of the bleeding-heart
pigeon of the Philippines. The bordering red feathers are stiff, as if
clotted. They have the appearance of coagulation.

Conceiving of the transmission of a pictorial representation, by
heredity, is conceiving of external stigmatism, but of internal origin.
If I could think that a human being's intense mental state, at the sight
of a wound, had marked a pigeon, that would be more of a span over our
gap. But I have noted an observation for thinking that the sight of a
dead and mutilated pigeon may intensely affect the imaginations of other
pigeons. If anybody thinks that birds have not imagination, let him tell
me with what a parrot of mine foresees what I am going to do to him,
when I catch him up to some of his mischief, such as gouging furniture.
The body of a dead and mutilated companion prints on the minds of other
pigeons: but I have not a datum for thinking that the skeleton, or any
part of the skeleton, of a pigeon, would be of any meaning to other
pigeons. I have never heard of anything that indicates that in the mind
of any other living thing is the mystic awe that human beings, or most
human beings, have for bones—

Or a moth sat on a skull—

And that so it rested, with no more concern than it would feel upon a
stone. That a human being came suddenly upon the skull, and that, from
him, a gush of mystic fright marked the moth—The Death's Head Moth.

On the back of the thorax of this insect is a representation of a human
skull that is as faithful a likeness as ever any pirate drew.

<span id="page_1026">p. 1026</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In Borneo and many
other places, there is not much abhorrence for a human skull: but the
death's head moth is a native of England.

Or the death's heads that appeared upon windowpanes, at Boulley—except
that perhaps there were no such occurrences at Boulley. Suppose most of
what I call data may be yarns. But the numbers of them—except, what does
that mean? Oh, nothing, except that some of our opponents, if out in a
storm long enough, might have it dawn on them that it was raining.

If I could say of any pictorial representation that has appeared on the
wall of a church that it was probably not an interpretation of chance
arrangements of lights and shades, but was a transference from
somebody's mind, then from a case like this, of the pretty, the
artistic, or of what would be thought of by some persons as the
spiritual, and a subject to be treated reverently, would flow into
probability a flood of everything that is bizarre, malicious, depraved,
and terrifying in witchcraft—and of course jostles of suggestions of
uses.

In this subject I have had much experience. Long ago, I experimented. I
covered sheets of paper with scrawls, to see what I could visualize out
of them; tacked a sheet of wrapping paper to a ceiling, and smudged it
with a candle flame; made what I called a "visualizing curtain," which
was a white window shade, covered with scrawls and smudges; went on into
three dimensions, with boards veneered with clay. It was long ago—about
1907. I visualized much, but the thought never occurred to me that I
marked anything. It was my theory that, with a visualizing device, I
could make imaginary characters perform for me more vividly than in my
mind, and that I could write a novel about their doings. Out of this
idea I developed nothing, anyway at the time. I have had much experience
with visualizations that were, according to my beliefs, at the time,
only my own imaginings, and I have had not one experience—so recognized
by me—of ever having imaginatively marked anything. Not that I mean
anything by anything.

There is one of these appearances that many readers of this book may
investigate. Upon Feb. 23, 1932, New York newspapers

<span id="page_1027">p. 1027</span>

reported a clearly discernible figure of Christ in the variegations of
the sepia-toned marble of the sanctuary wall of St. Bartholomew's
Church, Park Avenue and Fiftieth Street, New York City.

In the *New York Times*, Feb. 24, 1932, the rector of the church, the
Rev. Dr. Robert Norwood, is quoted:

"One day, at the conclusion of my talk, I happened to glance at the
sanctuary wall and was amazed to see this lovely figure of Christ in the
marble. I had never noticed it before. As it seemed to me to be an
actual expression on the face of the marble of what I was preaching,
'His Glorious Body,' I consider it a curious and beautiful happening. I
have a weird theory that the force of thought, a dominant thought, may
be strong enough to be somehow transferred to stone in its receptive
state."

In 1920, a censor stopped a show: but, in 1930, the *Ladies’ Home
Journal* published William Seabrook's story—clipping sent to me by Mr.
Charles McDaniel, East Liberty P.O., Pittsburgh, Pa. There was a
performance in the village of Doa, in the Ben-Hounien territory of the
French West African Colony.

It is a story of sorceries practiced by magicians, not upon their own
bodies, but upon the bodies of others.

“There were the two living children close to me. I touched them with my
hands. And there equally close were the two men with their swords. The
swords were iron, three-dimensional, metal, cold and hard. And this is
what I now *saw* with my eyes, but you will understand why I am
reluctant to tell of it, and that I do not know what *seeing* means:

“Each man, holding his sword stiffly upward with his left hand, tossed a
child high in the air with his right, then caught it full upon the
point, impaling it like a butterfly on a pin. No blood flowed, but the
two children were there, held aloft, pierced through and through,
impaled upon the swords.

“The crowd screamed now, falling to its knees. Many veiled their eyes
with their hands, and others fell prostrate. Through the crowd the
jugglers marched, each bearing a child aloft, impaled upon his sword,
and disappeared into the witch doctor's inclosure.”

Later Seabrook saw the children, and touched them, and had the

<span id="page_1028">p. 1028</span>

impression that he would have, looking at a dynamo, or at a storm at
sea, at something falling from a table, or at a baby crawling—that he
was in the presence of the unknown,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27](wild27)
