[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070012)  [Next](2070014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—The Time and Arrangement of S.
Cyril’s Lectures.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p2"></span>§ 1.  *The Year*.  The incidental notes
of time in the Catechetical Lectures are sufficient to determine with
considerable probability the exact year in which they were delivered.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p3"></span>In Cat. xiv. 14, Cyril speaks in the
Plural of the Emperors then reigning (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p3.1"></span>οἱ νῦν βασιλεῖς</span>) as having completed
the building (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p3.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p3.3"></span>ξειργάσαντο</span>) and embellishment of the
great Church of the Resurrection.  This can only apply to the sons of
Constantine, Constans and Constantius, and as Constans died early in
350, the Lectures must have been delivered before that year.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p4"></span>In Cat. xv. § 6, Cyril asks, “Is there at
this time war between Persians and Romans, or no?”  The time thus
indicated was apparently that of the campaign which ended in the
disastrous defeat of Constantius at Singara, 348, the battle being soon
followed by a suspension of hostilities <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) .

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p6"></span>The Benedictine Editor tries to find
another proof of the date of the Lectures in Cyril’s description of the
state of the Church in Cat. xv. §7:  “If thou hear that Bishops advance
against Bishops, and clergy against clergy, and laity against laity,
even unto blood, be not troubled.”  Touttée refers this account to the
fierce dissensions which followed the Synod of Sardica, where Athanasius
and Marcellus were declared innocent and received into communion, while
the Encyclical of the dissentient Bishops, who had withdrawn to
Philippopolis, condemned them both.  But it is now ascertained that the
Synod of Sardica was held not in 347, as Touttée supposed, but in
344 <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) :  and Cyril’s description
may unhappily be applied to <span id="page_lii">p. lii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.ix-Page_lii"></span>the state of the Church at almost any
time from the Council of Tyre, by which Athanasius had been deposed in
335, until long after any date which can possibly be assigned to Cyril’s
Lectures.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p8"></span>There is a much more definite note of
time in Cat. vi. § 20, where speaking of Manes Cyril says:  “The
delusion began full seventy years ago.”  If we may assume that the
outbreak of this heresy is to be dated from the famous disputation
between Archelaus and Manes in 277 <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) , it follows that Cyril must have made
this statement in 347 or 348.  And further, if Dr. Routh <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) is correct in fixing the date of the
Disputation between July and December 277, the Lent in which the
Lectures were delivered must have been, as Touttée decides, that of 348,
not of 347, as Tillemont had supposed.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p11"></span>§ 2.  *The days*.  It is expressly
stated by Sozomen <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) that “the
interval called Quadragesima” was made to consist of six weeks in
Palestine, “whereas it comprised seven weeks in Constantinople and the
neighbouring provinces.”

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p13"></span>It is certain the Catechetical Lectures
i.–xviii. were all delivered in these six weeks, being preceded by the
Procatechesis, which was addressed to the candidates before the whole
congregation at the public Service on Sunday (§ 4).  In the same context
Cyril says, “Thou hast forty days for repentance,” and again in Cat i. §
5, “Hast thou not forty days to be free for thine own soul’s sake?”  It
thus appears probable that the first of the eighteen (Catechetical
Lectures was delivered on the Monday of the first week of the Fast, the
forty days being completed on the night preceding the Great Sabbath,
that is to say, the night of Good Friday, when the fast was brought to
an end at a late hour.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p14"></span>With regard to the date of Cat. iv.,
which contains a brief preliminary statement of all the articles of the
Creed, we may obtain some evidence from an incident recorded in a letter
of Jerome <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) to Pammachius.  John,
who had then succeeded Cyril as Bishop of Jerusalem, had on a certain
occasion discoursed on the Creed and all the doctrines of the Church in
the presence of Epiphanius and the whole congregation.  Jerome, being
ignorant of the peculiar custom of the Church of Jerusalem, rebukes the
supposed presumption of the Bishop, “that a man deficient in eloquence
should in one discourse in Church discuss all the doctrines concerning
the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Crucifixion, the descent into hell,
the nature of angels, the state of departed souls, the Resurrection of
Christ, and of ourselves, and other subjects.”  The rebuke calls out a
statement from John:  “The custom among us is that for forty days we
publicly deliver the doctrine of the Holy and Adorable Trinity to those
who are to be baptized.”  This being the custom at Jerusalem in Cyril’s
time, we may conjecture that Cat. iv., which corresponds closely to the
description of John’s discourse, was delivered, like that, on a Sunday
before the whole congregation:  and this is in fact suggested by Cyril’s
own words in § 3:  “Let those here present, whose habit of mind is
mature, and who *have their senses already exercised to discern good and
evil*, endure patiently to listen to things fitted rather for
children.”  That this could not have been later than the Sunday
following that on which the Procatechesis was delivered, is shewn by the
mention in the same section of “the long interval of the days of all
this holy Quadragesima,” an expression which could not well have been
used later than the second Sunday in Lent.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p16"></span>In Cat. iv. § 32, Cyril speaks of having
discoursed on Baptism “the day before yesterday,” that is, on the
Friday.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p17"></span>In Cat. v. we have first a discourse on
the nature of faith, and then towards the end, between § 12 and § 13,
the actual words of the Creed are for the first time recited by Cyril to
the candidates alone.  In the next four Lectures there are no marks of
time, except that <span id="page_liii">p. liii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.ix-Page_liii"></span>vi., vii., viii., were delivered on
successive days, as is proved by the word “yesterday”(<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.ix-p17.1"></span>τῇ χθὲς ἡμέρᾳ</span>) in
vii. § 1, and viii. § 1.  It thus appears probable that the five
Lectures, v.–ix., belong to the five days, Monday to Friday inclusive,
of the second or third week.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p18"></span>In Cat. x. § 14 Cyril reminds his
hearers that he had preached on the words *after the order of
Melchizedek* at the public Service on the Lord’s day.  As he does not
here employ his usual phrase “yesterday,” we may infer that Cat. x. was
delivered not earlier than the Tuesday following the 4th Sunday in Lent,
the Epistle for that Sunday in the Eastern Church being [Heb. vi.
13-20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iii.ix-p18.1"></span>, which ends with the words on which Cyril
had preached.  The next two Lectures followed Cat. x. immediately on
successive days, Wednesday and Thursday, the word “yesterday” recurring
in xi. § 1, and xii. § 4.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p19"></span>Cat. xiii., which is occupied with the
Crucifixion and Burial, seems to have followed them immediately on the
Friday:  it certainly came a few days only before Cat. xiv. § 1.  For
speaking there of the preceding Lecture, Cyril says, “I know the sorrow
of Christ’s friends in these past days; because, as our discourse
stopped short at the Death and the Burial, and did not tell the good
tidings of the Resurrection, your mind was in suspense to hear what you
were longing for.”  Now we know that Cat. xiv. was delivered on the
Monday after Passion Sunday:  for the Epistle for that 5th Sunday in
Lent was [Heb. vi. 11-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iii.ix-p19.1"></span>, referring to the Ascension <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) :  and in § 24 Cyril says, “The grace
of God so ordered it, that thou heardest most fully concerning it, so
far as our weakness allowed, yesterday on the Lord’s day, since by the
providence of divine grace the course of the Readings (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.ix-p20.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.ix-p20.2"></span>ναγνωσμάτων</span>) in
Church included the account of our Saviour’s going up into the heavens.”

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p21"></span>In Cat. xv. there is no note of time to
determine on what day it was spoken; but in § 33 Cyril speaks as if his
course of teaching was to be interrupted for a little while:  “If the
grace of God should permit us, the remaining Articles also of the Faith
shall be in good time (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p21.1"></span>κατὰ καιρόν</span>) declared to you.”  We
may therefore assign Cat. xv. to the early part of Passion week, and the
three remaining Catechetical Lectures to the week before Easter.  This
arrangement seems to be confirmed by Cat. xvii. 34, where Cyril speaks
of the two Lectures on the Holy Spirit, xvi. and xvii., as “these
present Lectures,” distinguishing them from “our previous discourses.” 
In the same section he refers to “the fewness of the days,” and in § 20
speaks of “the holy festival of the Passover” as being close at hand. 
We may therefore probably assign xvi. and xvii. to two consecutive days
in the earlier part of the week before Easter.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p22"></span>Cat. xviii. contains many indications
from which we may conclude with certainty that it was delivered either
on the night of Good Friday, or in the early hours of the morning of the
“Great Sabbath.”  Thus in § 17 he speaks of “the weariness caused by the
prolongation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p22.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p22.2"></span>περθέσεως</span>) of the fast of the
Preparation (Friday), and the watching.”  In § 21 he calls upon the
Candidates to recite the Creed, which he had dictated to them, and which
they would be required to repeat more publicly immediately before their
Baptism, as we learn from § 32:  “Concerning the holy Apostolic Faith
which has been delivered to you to profess (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p22.3"></span>εἰς ἐπαγγελίαν</span>), we have spoken
through the grace of the Lord as many Lectures as was possible in these
past days of Lent.…But now the holy day of the Passover is at hand, and
ye, beloved in Christ, are to be enlightened *by the washing of
regeneration*.  Ye shall therefore again be taught what is requisite if
God so will; with how great devotion and order you must enter in when
summoned, for what purpose each of the holy mysteries of Baptism is
performed, and with what reverence and order you must go from Baptism to
the holy altar of God, and enjoy its spiritual and heavenly mysteries.” 
The additional instructions here promised were to be given on the same
day as the last Lecture, Cat. xviii, that is on Easter Eve immediately
before Baptism.  For it was forbidden to reveal the mysteries of
Baptism, Chrism, and the <span id="page_liv">p. liv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.ix-Page_liv"></span>Holy Eucharist to the uninitiated, and
yet it was necessary that the Candidates should not come wholly
unprepared to perform what would be required of them.  The full
explanation of the various ceremonies and of the doctrines implied in
them was reserved for the Mystagogic Lectures, which were to be
delivered on Easter Monday and the four following days, after the public
Service, not in the great Basilica, but in the Holy Sepulchre itself.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p23"></span>§ 3.  *Arrangement*.  The Lectures of S.
Cyril have a peculiar value as being the first and only complete example
of the course of instruction given in the early centuries to Candidates
seeking admission to the full privileges of the Christian Church.  “The
Great Catechetical Oration” of Gregory of Nyssa is addressed not to the
learner but to the teacher, in accordance with the opening statement of
the Prologue, that “The presiding ministers of *the mystery of
godliness* have need of a system in their instructions, in order that
the Church may be replenished by the accession of such as should be
saved, through the teaching of the word of Faith being brought home to
the hearing of unbelievers.”  As an instruction to the Catechist how he
should refute the opponents of Christianity, it is an apologetic work
rather than a Catechism.  S. Augustine’s treatise *De catechizandis
rudibus* is also addressed to the teacher, being an answer to
Deogratias, a Deacon of Carthage, who on being appointed Catechist had
written to Augustine for advice as to the best method of discharging the
office.  S. Augustine’s Sermons *De traditione Symboli*, and *De
redditione Symboli*, are not a connected series, but single addresses to
Catechumens consisting of brief comments on a few chief articles of the
Creed.  Cyril’s Lectures thus remain unique in character.

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p24"></span>After the Procatechesis, which is simply
an introductory exhortation to the newly admitted Candidates, he devotes
three Lectures to the need of a sincere purpose of mind, the efficacy of
repentance, and the general nature and importance of Baptism.  The
fourth Lecture gives “a short summary of necessary doctrines,” stating
with admirable clearness and brevity ten chief points of the Faith, and
the arguments on each point, which are to be developed in the remaining
Catechetical Lectures v.–xviii.  He thus traverses the whole ground of
Theology as expressed in the Creed of Jerusalem, of which the exact
language is given in the titles of the successive Lectures.  These
instructions to the ‘Illuminandi’ (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p24.1"></span>φωτιζομένων</span>) were followed on
Easter-day by the administration of Baptism, Chrism, and Holy
Communion:  and on the following days of Easter-week the ceremonies and
doctrines proper to each of these Sacraments were explained in the five
Lectures on the Mysteries (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.ix-p24.2"></span>Μυσταγωγίαι</span>) to the newly-baptized
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.ix-p24.3"></span>πρὸς τοὺς
Νεοφωτίστους</span>).  These Mystagogic Lectures thus form a most
important record of the Sacramental Rites and Doctrines of the Eastern
Church in the fourth Century, the most critical period of Ecclesiastical
History.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_323"></span>[li:324](2070013.htm#fr_323) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p5"></span> See Gibbon, c. xviii. vol. ii. p. 370.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[li:325](2070013.htm#fr_324) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p7"></span> *Dict. Chr. Biogr*. “Athanasius,” p.
190, note; Hefele, *Councils*, §§ 58, 66, 67.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[lii:326](2070013.htm#fr_325) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p9"></span> Cat. vi. § 27.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[lii:327](2070013.htm#fr_326) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p10"></span> *Rell. Sac*. v. p. 12.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[lii:328](2070013.htm#fr_327) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p12"></span> *Hist. Eccles*. vii. c. 19.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[lii:329](2070013.htm#fr_328) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p15"></span> *Ep*. 61 (al. 38).  Cf. Ben. Ed.
*Praeloq. ad* Cat. iv. pp. 49, 50.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[liii:330](2070013.htm#fr_329) <span
id="ii.iii.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.ix-p20"></span> *Dict. Chr. Antiq*. “Lectionary,” p.
958 b.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Creed of Jerusalem:  Doctrine of the Holy Trinity.](2070014)
