[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070113)  [Next](2070115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>Ep. LXXVI.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p2"></span>(Basil the Great died Jan. 1, <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 379.  Gregory
of Nazianzus was prevented by very serious illness from attending his
funeral, and therefore wrote as follows to Gregory of Nyssa.)

<span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p3"></span>This, then, was also reserved for my sad
life, to hear of the death of Basil, and the departure <span
id="page_461">p. 461</span> <span id="iv.iv.ii.v-Page_461"></span>of
that holy soul, which has gone from us that it may be with the Lord, for
which he had been preparing himself all his life.  And among all the
other losses I have had to endure this is the greatest, that by reason
of the bodily sickness from which I am still suffering and in great
danger, I cannot kiss that holy dust, or be with you to enjoy the
consolations of a just philosophy, and to comfort our common friends. 
But to see the desolation of the Church, shorn of such a glory, and
bereft of such a crown, is what no one, at least no one of any feeling,
can bear to let his eyes look upon, or his ear hearken to.  But you, I
think, though you have many friends and will receive many words of
condolence, yet will not derive comfort so much from any as from
yourself and your memory of him; for you two were a pattern to all of
philosophy, a kind of spiritual standard, both of discipline in
prosperity, and of endurance in adversity; for philosophy bears
prosperity with moderation and adversity with dignity.  This is what I
have to say to Your Excellency.  But for myself who write so, what time
or what words shall comfort me, except your company and conversation,
which our blessed one has left me in place of all, that seeing his
character in you as in a bright and shining mirror, I may think myself
to possess him also!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXXI](2070115)
