[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070032)  [Next](2070034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p1"></span> <span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="ii.xxi-Page_124"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Lecture XVII.</span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>Continuation of the Discourse on the Holy
Ghost.</span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p3.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xxi-p3.2"></span>[1 Corinthians xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p3.3"></span></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p4"></span>For to one is given by the Spirit the word
of wisdom, &c.

<span id="ii.xxi-p5"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xxi-p5.1"></span>In</span> the preceding Lecture, according to
our ability we set before you, our beloved hearers <span
id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094) , some small portion of the
testimonies concerning the Holy Ghost; and on the present occasion, we
will, if it be God’s pleasure, proceed to treat, as far as may be, of
those which remain out of the New Testament:  and as then to keep within
due limit of your attention we restrained our eagerness (for there is no
satiety in discoursing concerning the Holy Ghost), so now again we must
say but a small part of what remains.  For now, as well as then, we
candidly own that our weakness is overwhelmed by the multitude of things
written.  Neither to-day will we use the subtleties of men, for that is
unprofitable; but merely call to mind what comes from the divine
Scriptures; for this is the safest course, according to the blessed
Apostle Paul, who says, *Which things also we speak, not in words which
man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual* <span
id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095) .  Thus we act like travellers or
voyagers, who having one goal to a very long journey, though hastening
on with eagerness, yet by reason of human weakness are wont to touch in
their way at divers cities or harbours.

<span id="ii.xxi-p8"></span>2.  Therefore though our discourses
concerning the Holy Ghost are divided, yet He Himself is undivided,
being one and the same.  For as in speaking concerning the Father, at
one time we taught how He is the one only Cause <span
id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096) ; and at another, how He is called
Father <span id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097) , or Almighty <span
id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098) ; and at another, how He is the
Creator <span id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099) of the universe; and
yet the division of the Lectures made no division of the Faith, in that
He, the Object of devotion, both was and is One;—and again, as in
discoursing concerning the Only-begotten Son of God we taught at one
time concerning His Godhead <span id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100) ,
and at another concerning His Manhood <span
id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101) , dividing into many discourses the
doctrines concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, yet preaching undivided
faith towards Him;—so now also though the Lectures concerning the Holy
Spirit are divided, yet we preach faith undivided towards Him.  For it
is one and the Self-same Spirit who *divides* His gifts *to every man
severally as He will* <span id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102) ,
Himself the while remaining undivided.  For the Comforter is not
different from the Holy Ghost, but one and the self-same, called by
various names; who lives and subsists, and speaks, and works; and of all
rational natures made by God through Christ, both of Angels and of men,
He is the Sanctifier <span id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p17"></span>3.  But lest any from lack of learning,
should suppose from the different titles of the Holy Ghost that these
are divers spirits, and not one and the self-same, which alone there is,
therefore the Catholic Church guarding thee beforehand hath delivered to
thee in the profession of the faith, that thou “<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xxi-p17.1"></span>believe in one Holy Ghost the Comforter, who
spake by the Prophets</span>;” that thou mightest know, that though His
names be many, the Holy Spirit is but one;—of which names, we will now
rehearse to you a few out of many.

<span id="ii.xxi-p18"></span>4.  He is called the Spirit, according to
the Scripture just now read, *For to one is given by the Spirit the word
of wisdom* <span id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) .  He is called
the Spirit of Truth, as the Saviour says, *When He, the Spirit of Truth,
is come* <span id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105) .  He is called also
the Comforter, as He said, *For if I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you* <span id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) .   <span
id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span id="ii.xxi-Page_125"></span>But that
He is one and the same, though called by different titles, is shewn
plainly from the following.  For that the Holy Spirit and the Comforter
are the same, is declared in those words, *But the Comforter, which is
the Holy Ghost* <span id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107) ; and that
the Comforter is the same as the Spirit of Truth, is declared, when it
is said, *And I will give you another Comforter, that He may abide with
you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth* <span
id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108) ; and again, *But when the
Comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the
Spirit of Truth* <span id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) .  And He is
called the Spirit of God, according as it is written, *And I saw the
Spirit of God descending* <span id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110) ;
and again, *For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God* <span id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111) .  He is called
also the Spirit of the Father, as the Saviour says, *For it is not ye
that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you* <span
id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112) ; and again Paul saith, *For this
cause I bow my knees unto the Father*, and the rest;…*that He would
grant you to be strengthened by His Spirit* <span
id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113) .  He is also called the Spirit of
the Lord, according to that which Peter spake, *Why is it that ye have
agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord* <span
id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) ?  He is called also the Spirit of
God and Christ, as Paul writes, *But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you.  But if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His* <span
id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) .  He is called also the Spirit of
the Son of God, as it is said, *And because ye are sons, God hath sent
forth the Spirit of His Son* <span id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116)
.  He is called also the Spirit of Christ, as it is written, *Searching
what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did
signify* <span id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117) ; and again,
*Through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ* <span id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p34"></span>5.  Thou wilt find many other titles of the
Holy Ghost besides.  Thus He is called the Spirit of Holiness, as it is
written, *According to the Spirit of Holiness* <span
id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119) .  He is also called the Spirit of
adoption, as Paul saith, *For ye received not the spirit of bondage
again unto fear, but ye received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father* <span id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120) .  He is also
called the Spirit of revelation, as it is written, *May give you the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him* <span
id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121) .  He is also called the Spirit of
promise, as the same Paul says, *In whom ye also after that ye believed,
were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise* <span
id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) .  He is also called the Spirit of
grace, as when he says again, *And hath done despite to the Spirit of
grace* <span id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123) .  And by many other
such-like titles is He named.  And thou heardest plainly in the
foregoing Lecture, that in the Psalms He is called at one time *the good
Spirit* <span id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124) , and at another the
*princely Spirit* <span id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125) ; and in
Esaias He was styled *the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, of
counsel, and might, of knowledge, and of godliness, and of the fear of
God* <span id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126) .  By all which
Scriptures both those before and those now alleged, it is established,
that though the titles of the Holy Ghost be different, He is one and the
same; living and subsisting, and always present together with the Father
and the Son <span id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127) ; not uttered or
breathed from the mouth and lips of the Father or the Son, nor dispersed
into the air, but having a real substance <span
id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) , Himself speaking, and working,
and dispensing, and sanctifying; even as the Economy of salvation which
is to usward from the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, is
inseparable and harmonious and one, as we have also said before.  For I
wish you to keep in mind those things which were lately spoken, and to
know clearly that there is not one Spirit in the Law and the Prophets,
and another in the Gospels and Apostles; but that it is One and the
Self-same Holy Spirit, which both in the Old and in the New Testament,
spoke the divine Scriptures <span id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p46"></span>6.  This is the Holy Ghost, who came upon
the Holy Virgin Mary; for since He who was conceived was Christ the
Only-begotten, the *power of the Highest overshadowed her*, and the
*Holy Ghost came upon her* <span id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130) ,
and sanctified her, that she might be able to receive Him, *by whom all
things were made* <span id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) .  But I
have no need of many words to teach thee that generation was without
defilement or taint, for thou hast learned it.  It is Gabriel who says
to her, I am the herald of what shall be done, but have no part in the
work.  Though an Archangel, I know my place; and though I joyfully bid
thee All hail, yet how thou shalt bring forth, is not of any grace of
mine.  *The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that Holy Thing which
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God* <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p50"></span>7.  This Holy Spirit wrought in Elisabeth;
for He recognises not virgins only, but matrons also, so that their
marriage be lawful.  *And* <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="ii.xxi-Page_126"></span>*Elisabeth was filled with the Holy
Ghost* <span id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133) , and prophesied; and
that noble hand-maiden says of her own Lord, *And whence is this to me,
that the Mother of my Lord should come to me* <span
id="fr_2134"></span>[2135](#fn_2134) ?  For Elisabeth counted herself
blessed.  Filled with this Holy Spirit, Zacharias also, the father of
John, prophesied <span id="fr_2135"></span>[2136](#fn_2135) , telling
how many good things the Only-begotten should procure, and that John
should be His harbinger <span id="fr_2136"></span>[2137](#fn_2136)
through baptism.  By this Holy Ghost also it was revealed to just
Symeon, *that he should not see death, till he had seen the Lord’s
Christ* <span id="fr_2137"></span>[2138](#fn_2137) ; and he received Him
in his arms, and bore clear testimony in the Temple concerning Him.

<span id="ii.xxi-p56"></span>8.  And John also, who had been filled with
the Holy Ghost from his mother’s womb <span
id="fr_2138"></span>[2139](#fn_2138) , was for this cause sanctified,
that he might baptize the Lord; not giving the Spirit himself, but
preaching glad tidings of Him who gives the Spirit.  For he says, *I
indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but He that cometh after
me*, and the rest; *He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with
fire* <span id="fr_2139"></span>[2140](#fn_2139) .  But wherefore with
fire?  Because the descent of the Holy Ghost was in fiery tongues;
concerning which the Lord says joyfully, *I am come to send fire on the
earth; and what will I, if it be already kindled* <span
id="fr_2140"></span>[2141](#fn_2140) ?

<span id="ii.xxi-p60"></span>9.  This Holy Ghost came down when the Lord
was baptized, that the dignity of Him who was baptized might not be
hidden; as John says, *But He which sent me to baptize with water, the
same said unto me, Upon whomsoever thou shalt see the Spirit descending
and remaining upon Him, the same is He which baptizeth with the Holy
Ghost* <span id="fr_2141"></span>[2142](#fn_2141) .  But see what saith
the Gospel; *the heavens were opened*; they were opened because of the
dignity of Him who descended; for, *lo*, he says, *the heavens were
opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and lighting
upon Him* <span id="fr_2142"></span>[2143](#fn_2142) :  that is, with
voluntary motion in His descent.  For it was fit, as some have
interpreted, that the primacy and first-fruits <span
id="fr_2143"></span>[2144](#fn_2143) of the Holy Spirit promised to the
baptized should be conferred upon the manhood of the Saviour, who is the
giver of such grace.  But perhaps He came down in the form of a dove, as
some say, to exhibit a figure of that dove who is pure and innocent and
undefiled, and also helps the prayers for the children she has begotten,
and for forgiveness of sins <span id="fr_2144"></span>[2145](#fn_2144) ;
even as it was emblematically foretold that Christ should be thus
manifested in the appearance of His eyes; for in the Canticles she cries
concerning the Bridegroom, and says, *Thine eyes are as doves by the
rivers of water* <span id="fr_2145"></span>[2146](#fn_2145) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p66"></span>10.  Of this dove, the dove of Noe,
according to some, was in part a figure <span
id="fr_2146"></span>[2147](#fn_2146) .  For as in his time by means of
wood and of water there came salvation to themselves, and the beginning
of a new generation, and the dove returned to him towards evening with
an olive branch; thus, say they, the Holy Ghost also descended upon the
true Noe, the Author of the second birth, who draws together into one
the wills of all nations, of whom the various dispositions of the
animals in the ark were a figure:—Him at whose coming the spiritual
wolves feed with the lambs, in whose Church the calf, and the lion, and
the ox, feed in the same pasture, as we behold to this day the rulers of
the world guided and taught by Churchmen.  The spiritual dove therefore,
as some interpret, came down at the season of His baptism, that He might
shew that it is He who by the wood of the Cross saves them who believe,
He who at eventide should grant salvation through His death.

<span id="ii.xxi-p68"></span>11.  And these things perhaps should be
otherwise explained; but now again we must hear the words of the Saviour
Himself concerning the Holy Ghost.  For He says, *Except a man be born
of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God* <span id="fr_2147"></span>[2148](#fn_2147) .  And that this grace
is from the Father, He thus states, *How much more shall your heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him* <span
id="fr_2148"></span>[2149](#fn_2148) .  And that we ought to worship God
in the Spirit, He shews thus, *But the hour cometh and now is, when the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in truth; for
the Father also seeketh such to worship Him.  God is a Spirit; and they
that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth* <span
id="fr_2149"></span>[2150](#fn_2149) .  And again, *But if I by the*
<span id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span
id="ii.xxi-Page_127"></span>*Spirit of God cast out devils* <span
id="fr_2150"></span>[2151](#fn_2150) ; and immediately afterwards,
*Therefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven.  And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it
shall be forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak a word against the Holy
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in
the world to come* <span id="fr_2151"></span>[2152](#fn_2151) .  And
again He says, *And I will pray the Father, and He shall give you
another Comforter, that He may be with you for ever, the Spirit of
Truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth Him not, neither
knoweth Him; but ye know Him, for He abideth with you, and shall be in
you* <span id="fr_2152"></span>[2153](#fn_2152) .  And again He says,
*These things have I spoken unto you being yet present with you.  But
the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in My
name, He shall teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all
things that I said unto you* <span id="fr_2153"></span>[2154](#fn_2153)
.  And again He says, *But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send
unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth
from the Father, He shall testify of Me* <span
id="fr_2154"></span>[2155](#fn_2154) .  And again the Saviour says, *For
if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you* <span
id="fr_2155"></span>[2156](#fn_2155) …..*And when He is come, He will
convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment* <span
id="fr_2156"></span>[2157](#fn_2156) ; and afterwards again, *I have yet
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.  Howbeit, when
He the Spirit of Truth is come, He will declare unto you all the truth;
for He shall not speak from Himself; but whatsoever He shall hear that
shall He speak, and He shall announce unto you the things to come.  He
shall glorify Me, for He shall take of Mine, and shall announce it unto
you.  All things that the Father hath are mine; therefore said I, That
He shall take of Mine, and shall announce it unto you* <span
id="fr_2157"></span>[2158](#fn_2157) .  I have read to thee now the
utterances of the Only-begotten Himself, that thou mayest not give heed
to men’s words.

<span id="ii.xxi-p80"></span>12.  The fellowship of this Holy Spirit He
bestowed on the Apostles; for it is written, *And when He had said this,
He breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: 
whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose
soever sins ye retain, they are retained* <span
id="fr_2158"></span>[2159](#fn_2158) .  This was the second time He
breathed on man (His first breath <span
id="fr_2159"></span>[2160](#fn_2159) having been stifled through wilful
sins); that the Scripture might be fulfilled, *He went up breathing upon
thy face, and delivering thee from affliction* <span
id="fr_2160"></span>[2161](#fn_2160) .  But whence went He up?  From
Hades; for thus the Gospel relates, that then after His resurrection He
breathed on them.  But though He bestowed His grace then, He was to
lavish it yet more bountifully; and He says to them, “I am ready to give
it even now, but the vessel cannot yet hold it; for a while therefore
receive ye as much grace as ye can bear; and look forward for yet more;
*but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be clothed with power
from on high* <span id="fr_2161"></span>[2162](#fn_2161) .  *Receive* it
in part now; then, ye shall wear it in its fulness.  For he who
receives, often possesses the gift but in part; but he who is clothed,
is completely enfolded by his robe.  “Fear not,” He says, “the weapons
and darts of the devil; for ye shall bear with you the power of the Holy
Ghost.”  But remember what was lately said, that the Holy Ghost is not
divided, but only the grace which is given by Him.

<span id="ii.xxi-p85"></span>13.  Jesus therefore went up into heaven,
and fulfilled the promise.  For He said to them, *I will pray the
Father, and He shall give you another Comforter* <span
id="fr_2162"></span>[2163](#fn_2162) .  So they were sitting, looking
for the coming of the Holy Ghost; *and when the day of Pentecost was
fully come*, here, in this city of Jerusalem,—(for this honour also
belongs to us <span id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163) ; and we speak
not of the good things which have happened among others, but of those
which have been vouchsafed among ourselves,)—on the day of Pentecost, I
say, they were sitting, and the Comforter came down from heaven, the
Guardian and Sanctifier of the Church, the Ruler of souls, the Pilot of
the tempest-tossed, who leads the wanderers to the light, and presides
over the combatants, and crowns the victors.

<span id="ii.xxi-p88"></span>14.  But He came down to clothe the
Apostles with power, and to baptize them; for the Lord says, *ye shall
be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence* <span
id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164) .  This grace was not in part, but
His power was in full perfection; for as he who plunges into the waters
and is baptized is encompassed on all sides by the waters, so were they
also baptized completely by the Holy Ghost.  The water however flows
round the outside only, but the Spirit baptizes also the soul within,
and that completely.  And wherefore wonderest thou?  Take an example
from matter; poor indeed and common, yet useful for the simpler sort. 
If the fire passing in through the mass of the iron makes the whole of
it <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span
id="ii.xxi-Page_128"></span>fire, so that what was cold becomes burning
and what was black is made bright,—if fire which is a body thus
penetrates and works without hindrance in iron which is also a body, why
wonder that the Holy Ghost enters into the very inmost recesses of the
soul?

<span id="ii.xxi-p90"></span>15.  And lest men should be ignorant of the
greatness of the mighty gift coming down to them, there sounded as it
were a heavenly trumpet, For *suddenly there came from heaven a sound as
of the rushing of a mighty wind* <span
id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165) , signifying the presence of Him
who was to grant power unto men to seize with violence the kingdom of
God; that both their eyes might see the fiery tongues, and their ears
hear the sound.  *And it filled all the house where they were sitting*;
for the house became the vessel of the spiritual water; as the disciples
sat within, the whole house was filled.  Thus they were entirely
baptized according to the promise, and invested soul and body with a
divine garment of salvation.  *And there appeared unto them cloven
tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them; and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost*.  They partook of fire, not of burning but
of saving fire; of fire which consumes the thorns of sins, but gives
lustre to the soul.  This is now coming upon you also, and that to strip
away and consume your sins which are like thorns, and to brighten yet
more that precious possession of your souls, and to give you grace; for
He gave it then to the Apostles.  And He sat upon them in the form of
fiery tongues, that they might crown themselves with new and spiritual
diadems by fiery tongues upon their heads.  A fiery sword barred of old
the gates of Paradise; a fiery tongue which brought salvation restored
the gift.

<span id="ii.xxi-p92"></span>16.  *And they began to speak with other
tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance* <span
id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166) .  The Galilean Peter or Andrew
spoke Persian or Median.  John and the rest of the Apostles spoke every
tongue to those of Gentile extraction; for not in our time have
multitudes of strangers first begun to assemble here from all quarters,
but they have done so since that time.  What teacher can be found so
great as to teach men all at once things which they have not learned? 
So many years are they in learning by grammar and other arts to speak
only Greek well; nor yet do all speak this equally well; the Rhetorician
perhaps succeeds in speaking well, and the Grammarian sometimes not
well, and the skilful Grammarian is ignorant of the subjects of
philosophy.  But the Holy Spirit taught them many languages at once,
languages which in all their life they never knew.  This is in truth
vast wisdom, this is power divine.  What a contrast of their long
ignorance in time past to their sudden, complete and varied and
unaccustomed exercise of these languages!

<span id="ii.xxi-p94"></span>17.  The multitude of the hearers was
confounded;—it was a second confusion, in the room of that first evil
one at Babylon.  For in that confusion of tongues there was division of
purpose, because their thought was at enmity with God; but here minds
were restored and united, because the object of interest was godly.  The
means of falling were the means of recovery.  Wherefore they marvelled,
saying <span id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167) , *How hear we them
speaking*?  No marvel if ye be ignorant; for even Nicodemus was ignorant
of the coming of the Spirit, and to him it was said, *The Spirit
breatheth where it listeth, and thou hearest the voice thereof, but
canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth* <span
id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168) ; but if, even though I hear His
voice, I know not whence he cometh, how can I explain, what He is
Himself in substance?

<span id="ii.xxi-p97"></span>18.  *But others mocking said, They are
full of new wine* <span id="fr_2169"></span>[2170](#fn_2169) , and they
spoke truly though in mockery.  For in truth the wine was new, even the
grace of the New Testament; but this new wine was from a spiritual Vine,
which had oftentimes ere this borne fruit in Prophets, and had budded in
the New Testament.  For as in things sensible, the vine ever remains the
same, but bears new fruits in its seasons, so also the self-same Spirit
continuing what He is, as He had often wrought in Prophets, now
manifested a new and marvellous work.  For though His grace had come
before to the Fathers also, yet here it came exuberantly; for formerly
men only partook of the Holy Ghost, but now they were baptized
completely.

<span id="ii.xxi-p99"></span>19.  But Peter who had the Holy Ghost, and
who knew what he possessed, says, “*Men of Israel*, ye who preach Joel,
but know not the things which are written, *these men are not drunken as
ye suppose* <span id="fr_2170"></span>[2171](#fn_2170) .  Drunken they
are, not however as ye suppose, but according to that which is written,
*They shall be drunken with the fatness of thy house; and thou shalt
make them drink of the torrents of thy pleasure* <span
id="fr_2171"></span>[2172](#fn_2171) .  They are drunken, with a sober
drunkenness, deadly to sin and life-giving to the heart, a drunkenness
contrary to that of the body; for this last causes forgetfulness even of
what was known, but that bestows the knowledge even of what was not
known.  They are drunken, for they have drunk the wine of the spiritual
vine, which says, *I am the vine and ye* <span id="page_129">p.
129</span> <span id="ii.xxi-Page_129"></span>*are the branches* <span
id="fr_2172"></span>[2173](#fn_2172) .  But if ye are not persuaded by
me, understand what I tell you from the very time of the day; for *it is
the third hour of the day* <span id="fr_2173"></span>[2174](#fn_2173) . 
For He who, as Mark relates, was crucified at the third hour, now at the
third hour sent down His grace.  For His grace is not other than the
Spirit’s grace, but He who was then crucified, who also gave the
promise, made good that which He promised.  And if ye would receive a
testimony also, *Listen*, he says:  “*But this is that which was spoken
by the prophet Joel; And it shall come to pass after this, saith God, I
will pour forth of My Spirit* <span id="fr_2174"></span>[2175](#fn_2174)
—(and this word, *I will pour forth*, implied a rich gift; *for God
giveth not the Spirit by measure, for the Father loveth the Son, and
hath given all things into His hand* <span
id="fr_2175"></span>[2176](#fn_2175) ; and He has given Him the power
also of bestowing the grace of the All-holy Spirit on whomsoever He
will);—*I will pour forth of My Spirit unto all flesh, and your sons and
your daughters shall prophesy*; and afterwards, *Yea, and on My servants
and on My handmaidens I will pour out in those days of My Spirit, and
they shall prophesy* <span id="fr_2176"></span>[2177](#fn_2176) .”  The
Holy Ghost is no respecter of persons; for He seeks not dignities, but
piety of soul.  Let neither the rich be puffed up, nor the poor
dejected, but only let each prepare himself for reception of the
Heavenly gift.

<span id="ii.xxi-p107"></span>20.  We have said much to-day, and
perchance you are weary of listening; yet more still remains.  And in
truth for the doctrine of the Holy Ghost there were need of a third
lecture; and of many besides.  But we must have your indulgence on both
points.  For as the Holy Festival of Easter is now at hand we have this
day lengthened our discourse and yet we had not room to bring before you
all the testimonies from the New Testament which we ought.  For many
passages are still to come from the Acts of the Apostles in which the
grace of the Holy Ghost wrought mightily in Peter and in all the
Apostles together; many also from the Catholic Epistles, and the
fourteen Epistles of Paul; out of all which we will now endeavour to
gather a few, like flowers from a large meadow, merely by way of
remembrance.

<span id="ii.xxi-p108"></span>21.  For in the power of the Holy Ghost,
by the will of Father and Son, Peter stood with the Eleven, and lifting
up his voice, (according to the text, *Lift up thy voice with strength,
thou that bringest good tidings to Jerusalem* <span
id="fr_2177"></span>[2178](#fn_2177) ), captured in the spiritual net of
his words, *about three thousand souls*.  So great was the grace which
wrought in all the Apostles together, that, out of the Jews, those
crucifiers of Christ, this great number believed, and were baptized in
the Name of Christ, and *continued steadfastly in the Apostles’ doctrine
and in the prayers* <span id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178) .  And
again in the same power of the Holy Ghost, *Peter and John went up into
the Temple at the hour of prayer, which was the ninth hour* <span
id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179) , and in the Name of Jesus healed
the man at the Beautiful gate, who had been lame from his mother’s womb
for forty years; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken, *Then
shall the lame man leap as an hart* <span
id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180) .  And thus, as they captured in
the spiritual net of their doctrine five thousand believers at once, so
they confuted the misguided rulers of the people and chief priests, and
that, not through their own wisdom, for *they were unlearned and
ignorant men* <span id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181) , but through
the mighty power of the Holy Ghost; for it is written, *Then Peter
filled with the Holy Ghost said to them* <span
id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182) .  So great also was the grace of
the Holy Ghost, which wrought by means of the Twelve Apostles in them
who believed, that *they were of one heart and of one soul* <span
id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183) , and their enjoyment of their
goods was common, the possessors piously offering the prices of their
possessions, and no one among them wanting aught; while Ananias and
Sapphira, who attempted to lie to the Holy Ghost, underwent their
befitting punishment.

<span id="ii.xxi-p116"></span>22.  *And by the hands of the Apostles
were many signs and wonders wrought among the people* <span
id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184) .  And so great was the spiritual
grace shed around the Apostles, that gentle as they were, they were the
objects of dread; for *of the rest durst no man join himself to them;
but the people magnified them; and multitudes were added of those who
believed on the Lord, both of men and women*; and the streets were
filled with the sick on their beds and couches, *that as Peter passed
by, at least his shadow might overshadow some of them*.  And *the
multitude also of the cities round about came* unto this holy Jerusalem,
*bringing sick folk, and them that were vexed with unclean spirits, and
they were healed every one* in this power of the Holy Ghost <span
id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p119"></span>23.  Again, after the Twelve Apostles had
been cast into prison by the chief priests for preaching Christ, and had
been marvellously delivered from it at night by an Angel, and were
brought before them in the judgment hall from the Temple, they
fearlessly rebuked them in their discourse to them concerning Christ,
and added this, that *God hath also given His Holy Spirit to them that
obey Him* <span id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186) .  And <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span id="ii.xxi-Page_130"></span>when they
had been scourged, they went their way rejoicing, and ceased not to
*teach and preach Jesus as the Christ* <span
id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p122"></span>24.  And it was not in the Twelve Apostles
only that the grace of the Holy Spirit wrought, but also in the
first-born children of this once barren Church, I mean the seven
Deacons; for these also were chosen, as it is written, being *full of
the Holy Ghost and of wisdom* <span id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188)
.  Of whom Stephen, rightly so named <span
id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189) , the first fruits of the Martyrs,
a man *full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, wrought great wonders and
miracles among the people*, and vanquished those who disputed with him;
*for they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which he
spake* <span id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190) .  But when he was
maliciously accused and brought to the judgment hall, he was radiant
with angelic brightness; for *all they who sat in the council, looking
steadfastly on him, saw his face, as it had been the face of an
Angel* <span id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191) .  And having by his
wise defence confuted the Jews, those *stiffnecked men, uncircumcised in
heart and ears, ever resisting the Holy Ghost* <span
id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192) , he beheld *the heavens opened*,
and saw *the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God*.  He saw Him,
not by his own power, but, as the Divine Scripture says, *being full of
the Holy Ghost, he looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory
of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God* <span
id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p129"></span>25.  In this power of the Holy Ghost,
Philip also in the Name of Christ at one time in the city of Samaria
drove away the unclean spirits, *crying out with a loud voice*; and
healed the palsied and the lame, and brought to Christ great multitudes
of them that believe.  To whom Peter and John came down, and with
prayer, and the laying on of hands, imparted the fellowship of the Holy
Ghost, from which Simon Magus alone was declared an alien, and that
justly.  And at another time Philip was called by the Angel of the Lord
in the way, for the sake of that most godly Ethiopian, the Eunuch, and
heard distinctly the Spirit Himself saying, *Go near, and join thyself
to this chariot* <span id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194) .  He
instructed the Eunuch, and baptized him, and so having sent into
Ethiopia a herald of Christ, according as it is written, *Ethiopia shall
soon stretch out her hand unto God* <span
id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195) , he was caught away by the Angel,
and preached the Gospel in the cities in succession.

<span id="ii.xxi-p132"></span>26.  With this Holy Spirit Paul also had
been filled after his calling by our Lord Jesus Christ.  Let godly
Ananias come as a witness to what we say, he who in Damascus said to
him, *The Lord, even Jesus who appeared to thee in the way which thou
camest, hath sent me, that thou mayest receive thy sight, and be filled
with the Holy Ghost* <span id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196) .  And
straightway the Spirit’s mighty working changed the blindness of Paul’s
eyes into newness of sight; and having vouchsafed His seal unto his
soul, made him *a chosen vessel* to *bear the Name* of the Lord who had
appeared to him, *before kings and the children of Israel*, and rendered
the former persecutor an ambassador and good servant,—one, who *from
Jerusalem, and even unto Illyricum, fully preached the Gospel* <span
id="fr_2197"></span>[2198](#fn_2197) , and instructed even imperial
Rome, and carried the earnestness of his preaching as far as Spain,
undergoing conflicts innumerable, and performing signs and wonders.  Of
him for the present enough.

<span id="ii.xxi-p135"></span>27.  In the power of the same Holy Spirit
Peter also, the chief of the Apostles and the bearer of the keys <span
id="fr_2198"></span>[2199](#fn_2198) of the kingdom of heaven, healed
Æneas the paralytic in the Name of Christ at Lydda, which is now
Diospolis, and at Joppa raised from the dead Tabitha rich in good
works.  And being on the housetop in a trance, he saw heaven opened, and
by means of the vessel let down as it were a sheet full of beasts of
every shape and sort, he learnt plainly to call no man common or
unclean, though he should be of the Greeks <span
id="fr_2199"></span>[2200](#fn_2199) .  And when he was sent for by
Cornelius, he heard clearly the Holy Ghost Himself saying, *Behold, men
seek thee; but arise and get thee down, and go with them, nothing
doubting; for I have sent them* <span
id="fr_2200"></span>[2201](#fn_2200) .  And that it might be plainly
shewn that those of the Gentiles also who believe are made partakers of
the grace of the Holy Ghost, when Peter was come to Cesarea, and was
teaching the things concerning Christ, the Scripture says concerning
Cornelius and them who were with him; *While Peter yet spake these
words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word; so that
they of the circumcision also which came with Peter were astonished, and
when they understood it said that on the Gentiles also was poured out
the gift of the Holy Ghost* <span id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p140"></span>28.  And in Antioch also, a most renowned
city of Syria, when the preaching of Christ took effect, Barnabas was
sent hence as far as Antioch to help on the good work, being a *good
man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith* <span
id="fr_2202"></span>[2203](#fn_2202) ; who seeing a great harvest of
believers in Christ, brought Paul from Tarsus to Antioch, as his
fellow-combatant.  And when crowds had been instructed by them and
assembled in the Church, *it came to pass that the disciples were called
Christians first in Antioch* <span id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203)
; the Holy Ghost, methinks, bestowing on the believers that new Name,
which had been promised be<span id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span
id="ii.xxi-Page_131"></span>fore by the Lord.  And the grace of the
Spirit being shed forth by God more abundantly in Antioch, there were
there prophets and teachers of whom Agabus was one <span
id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204) .  And *as they ministered to the
Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate Me Barnabas and Saul for
the work whereunto I have called them*.  And after hands had been laid
on them, *they were sent forth by the Holy Ghost* <span
id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205) .  Now it is manifest, that the
Spirit which speaks and sends, is a living Spirit, subsisting, and
operating, as we have said.

<span id="ii.xxi-p145"></span>29.  This Holy Spirit, who in unison with
Father and Son has established the New Covenant in the Church Catholic,
has set us free from the burdens of the law grievous to be borne,—those
I mean, concerning things common and unclean, and meats, and sabbaths,
and new moons, and circumcision, and sprinklings, and sacrifices; which
were given for a season, and *had a shadow of the good things to
come* <span id="fr_2206"></span>[2207](#fn_2206) , but which, when the
truth had come, were rightly withdrawn.  For when Paul and Barnabas were
sent to the Apostles, because of the question moved at Antioch by them
who said that it was necessary to be circumcised and to keep the customs
of Moses, the Apostles who were here at Jerusalem by a written
injunction set free the whole world from all the legal and typical
observances; yet they attributed not to themselves the full authority in
so great a matter, but send an injunction in writing, and acknowledge
this:  *For it hath seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay
upon you no greater burden than these necessary things; that ye abstain
from things sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from things
strangled, and from fornication* <span
id="fr_2207"></span>[2208](#fn_2207) ; shewing evidently by what they
wrote, that though the writing was by the hands of human Apostles, yet
the decree is universal from the Holy Ghost:  which decree Paul and
Barnabas took and confirmed unto all the world.

<span id="ii.xxi-p148"></span>30.  And now, having proceeded thus far in
my discourse, I ask indulgence from your love <span
id="fr_2208"></span>[2209](#fn_2208) , or rather from the Spirit who
dwelt in Paul, if I should not be able to rehearse everything, by reason
of my own weakness, and your weariness who listen.  For when shall I in
terms worthy of Himself declare the marvellous deeds wrought by the
operation of the Holy Ghost in the Name of Christ?  Those wrought in
Cyprus upon Elymas the sorcerer, and in Lystra at the healing of the
cripple, and in Cilicia and Phrygia and Galatia and Mysia and Macedonia?
or those at Philippi (the preaching, I mean, and the driving out of the
spirit of divination in the Name of Christ; and the salvation by baptism
of the jailer with his whole house at night after the earthquake); or
the events at Thessalonica; and the address at Areopagus in the midst of
the Athenians; or the instructions at Corinth, and in all Achaia?  How
shall I worthily recount the mighty deeds which were wrought at Ephesus
through Paul, by the Holy Ghost <span
id="fr_2209"></span>[2210](#fn_2209) ?  Whom they of that City knew not
before, but came to know Him by the doctrine of Paul; and when Paul had
laid his hands on them, and the Holy Ghost had come upon them, *they
spake with tongues, and prophesied*.  And so great spiritual grace was
upon him, that not only his touch wrought cures, but even the
*handkerchiefs and napkins* <span id="fr_2210"></span>[2211](#fn_2210) ,
brought from his body, healed diseases, and scared away the evil
spirits; and at last *they also who practised curious arts brought their
books together, and burned them before all men* <span
id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p153"></span>31.  I pass by the work wrought at Troas
on Eutychus, who *being borne down by his sleep fell down from the third
loft, and was taken up dead*; yet was saved alive by Paul <span
id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212) .  I also pass by the prophecies
addressed to the Elders of Ephesus whom he called to him in Miletus, to
whom he openly said, *That the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city,
saying* <span id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213) —and the rest; for by
saying, *in every city*, Paul made manifest that the marvellous works
done by him in each city, were from the operative power of the Holy
Ghost, by the will of God, and in the Name of Christ who spoke in him. 
By the power of this Holy Ghost, the same Paul was hastening to this
holy city Jerusalem, and this, though Agabus by the Spirit foretold what
should befall him; and yet he spoke to the people with confidence,
declaring the things concerning Christ.  And when brought to Cesarea,
and set amid tribunals of justice, at one time before Felix, and at
another before Festus the governor and King Agrippa, Paul obtained of
the Holy Ghost grace so great, and triumphant in wisdom, that at last
Agrippa himself the king of the Jews said, *Almost thou persuadest me to
be a Christian* <span id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214) .  This Holy
Spirit granted to Paul, when he was in the island of Melita also, to
receive no harm when bitten by the viper, and to effect divers cures on
the diseased.  This Holy Spirit guided him, the persecutor of old, as a
herald of Christ, even as far as imperial Rome, and there he persuaded
many of the Jews to believe in Christ, and to them who gainsaid he said
plainly, *Well spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet, saying unto
your fathers, and the rest* <span id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p158"></span><span id="page_132">p. 132</span> <span
id="ii.xxi-Page_132"></span>32.  And that Paul was full of the Holy
Ghost, and all his fellow Apostles, and they who after them believed in
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, hear from himself as he writes plainly in
his Epistles; *And my speech*, he says, *and my preaching was not in
persuasive words of man’s wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and
of power* <span id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216) .  And again, *But
He who sealed us for this very purpose is God, who gave us the earnest
of the Spirit* <span id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217) .  And again,
*He that raised up Jesus from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by His Spirit which dwelleth in you* <span
id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218) .  And again, writing to Timothy,
*That good thing which was committed to thee guard through the Holy
Ghost which was given to us* <span id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219)
.

<span id="ii.xxi-p163"></span>33.  And that the Holy Ghost subsists, and
lives, and speaks, and foretells, I have often said in what goes before,
and Paul writes it plainly to Timothy:  *Now the Spirit speaketh
expressly, that in later times some shall depart from the faith* <span
id="fr_2220"></span>[2221](#fn_2220) ,—which we see in the divisions not
only of former times but also of our own; so motley and diversified are
the errors of the heretics.  And again the same Paul says, *Which in
other generations was not made known unto the sons of men, as it hath
now been revealed unto His Holy Apostles and Prophets in the
Spirit* <span id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221) .  And again,
*Wherefore, as saith the Holy Ghost* <span
id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222) ; and again, *The Holy Ghost also
witnesseth to us* <span id="fr_2223"></span>[2224](#fn_2223) .  And
again he calls unto the soldiers of righteousness, saying, *And take the
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God, with all prayer and supplication* <span
id="fr_2224"></span>[2225](#fn_2224) .  And again, *Be not drunk with
wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to
yourselves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs* <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2226](#fn_2225) .  And again, *The grace of the
Lord Jesus, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be
with you all* <span id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p171"></span>34.  By all these proofs, and by more
which have been passed over, is the personal, and sanctifying, and
effectual power of the Holy Ghost established for those who can
understand; for the time would fail me in my discourse if I wished to
quote what yet remains concerning the Holy Ghost from the fourteen
Epistles of Paul, wherein he has taught with such variety, completeness,
and reverence.  And to the power of the Holy Ghost Himself it must
belong, to grant to us forgiveness for what we have omitted because the
days are few, and upon you the hearers to impress more perfectly the
knowledge of what yet remains; while from the frequent reading of the
sacred Scriptures those of you who are diligent come to understand these
things, and by this time, both from these present Lectures, and from
what has before been told you, hold more steadfastly the Faith in “<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xxi-p171.1"></span>One God the Father Almighty;
and in our Lord Jesus Christ, His Only-Begotten Son; and in the Holy
Ghost the Comforter</span>.”  Though the word itself and title of Spirit
is applied to Them in common in the sacred Scriptures,—for it is said of
the Father, *God is a Spirit* <span id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227)
, as it is written in the Gospel according to John; and of the Son, *A
Spirit before our face, Christ the Lord* <span
id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228) , as Jeremias the prophet says; and
of the Holy Ghost, *the Comforter, the Holy Ghost* <span
id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229) , as was said;—yet the arrangement
of articles in the Faith, if religiously understood, disproves the error
of Sabellius also <span id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230) .  Return
we therefore in our discourse to the point which now presses and is
profitable to you.

<span id="ii.xxi-p176"></span>35.  Beware lest ever like Simon thou come
to the dispensers of Baptism in hypocrisy, thy heart the while not
seeking the truth.  It is ours to protest, but it is thine to secure
thyself.  If *thou standest in faith* <span
id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231) , blessed art thou; if thou hast
fallen in unbelief, from this day forward cast away thine unbelief, and
receive full assurance.  For, at the season of baptism, when thou art
come before the Bishops, or Presbyters, or Deacons <span
id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232) ,—(for its grace is everywhere, in
villages and in cities, on them of low as on them of high degree, on
bondsmen and on freemen, for this grace is not of men, but the gift is
from God through men,)—approach the Minister of Baptism, but
approaching, think not of the face of him thou seest, but remember this
Holy Ghost of whom we are now speaking.  For He is present in readiness
to seal thy soul, and He shall give thee that Seal at which evil spirits
tremble, a heavenly and sacred seal, as also it is written, *In whom
also ye believed, and were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise* <span
id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233) .

<span id="ii.xxi-p180"></span>36.  Yet He tries the soul. He casts not
His pearls before swine; if thou play the hypocrite, though men baptize
thee now, the Holy Spirit will not baptize thee <span
id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234) .  But if thou approach with faith,
though men minister in what is seen, the Holy Ghost bestows that which
is unseen.  Thou art coming to a great trial, <span id="page_133">p.
133</span> <span id="ii.xxi-Page_133"></span>to a great muster <span
id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235) , in that one hour, which if thou
throw away, thy disaster is irretrievable; but if thou be counted worthy
of the grace, thy soul will be enlightened, thou wilt receive a power
which thou hadst not, thou wilt receive weapons terrible to the evil
spirits; and if thou cast not away thine arms, but keep the Seal upon
thy soul, no evil spirit will approach thee; for he will be cowed; for
verily by the Spirit of God are the evil spirits cast out.

<span id="ii.xxi-p183"></span>37.  If thou believe, thou shalt not only
receive remission of sins, but also do things which pass man’s
power <span id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236) .  And mayest thou be
worthy of the gift of prophecy also!  For thou shalt receive grace
according to the measure of thy capacity and not of my words; for I may
possibly speak of but small things, yet thou mayest receive greater;
since faith is a large affair <span id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237)
.  All thy life long will thy guardian the Comforter abide with thee; He
will care for thee, as for his own soldier; for thy goings out, and thy
comings in, and thy plotting foes.  And He will give thee gifts of grace
of every kind, if thou grieve Him not by sin; for it is written, *And
grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye were sealed unto the day
of redemption* <span id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238) .  What then,
beloved, is it to preserve grace?  Be ye ready to receive grace, and
when ye have received it, cast it not away.

<span id="ii.xxi-p187"></span>38.  And may the very God of All, who
spake by the Holy Ghost through the prophets, who sent Him forth upon
the Apostles on the day of Pentecost in this place, Himself send Him
forth at this time also upon you; and by Him keep us also, imparting His
benefit in common to us all, that we may ever render up the fruits of
the Holy Ghost, *love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance* <span id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239)
, in Christ Jesus our Lord:—By whom and with whom, together with the
Holy Ghost, be glory to the Father, both now, and ever, and for ever and
ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[124:2095](2070033.htm#fr_2094) <span
id="ii.xxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p6.1"></span>ταῖς τῆς ὑμετέρας ἀγάπης ἀκοαῖς</span>.  Compare
§ 30, below:  <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p6.2"></span>συγγώμην
αἰτῶ παρὰ τῆς ὑμετέρας ἀγάπης</span>.  Ignat. *Philadelph*. c. iv. (Long
recension):  <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p6.3"></span>θαρρῶν
γράφω τῇ ἀξιοθέῳ ἀγάπη ὑμῶν</span>.  “Caritas” is constantly used in the
same manner.

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[124:2096](2070033.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="ii.xxi-p6.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p7"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[124:2097](2070033.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="ii.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p9"></span> Cat. vi.

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[124:2098](2070033.htm#fr_2097) <span
id="ii.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p10"></span> Ib. vii.

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[124:2099](2070033.htm#fr_2098) <span
id="ii.xxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p11"></span> Ib. viii.

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[124:2100](2070033.htm#fr_2099) <span
id="ii.xxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p12"></span> Ib. ix.

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[124:2101](2070033.htm#fr_2100) <span
id="ii.xxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p13"></span> Cat. x. xi.

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[124:2102](2070033.htm#fr_2101) <span
id="ii.xxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p14"></span> Ib. xii. xv.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[124:2103](2070033.htm#fr_2102) <span
id="ii.xxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p15"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[124:2104](2070033.htm#fr_2103) <span
id="ii.xxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p16"></span> Compare Basil. *de Sp. Sancto*, c. 38: 
“By the Father’s will the ministering spirits subsist, and by the
operation of the Son they are brought into existence, and by the
presence of the Holy Ghost are perfected:  and the perfection of Angels
is sanctification and continuance therein.”

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[124:2105](2070033.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="ii.xxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[124:2106](2070033.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="ii.xxi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p20"></span> [John xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[124:2107](2070033.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="ii.xxi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p21"></span> [John
16.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[125:2108](2070033.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="ii.xxi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p22"></span> [John xiv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span id="ii.xxi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[125:2109](2070033.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="ii.xxi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p23"></span> [John
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span id="ii.xxi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[125:2110](2070033.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="ii.xxi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p24"></span> [John
15.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span id="ii.xxi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[125:2111](2070033.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="ii.xxi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p25"></span> [John i.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032)<span id="ii.xxi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[125:2112](2070033.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="ii.xxi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p26"></span> [Rom. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[125:2113](2070033.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="ii.xxi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p27"></span> [Matt. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020)<span id="ii.xxi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[125:2114](2070033.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="ii.xxi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p28"></span> [Eph. iii.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[125:2115](2070033.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="ii.xxi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p29"></span> [Acts v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#009)<span id="ii.xxi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[125:2116](2070033.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="ii.xxi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p30"></span> [Rom. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span id="ii.xxi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[125:2117](2070033.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="ii.xxi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p31"></span> [Gal. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[125:2118](2070033.htm#fr_2117) <span
id="ii.xxi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p32"></span> [1 Pet. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[125:2119](2070033.htm#fr_2118) <span
id="ii.xxi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p33"></span> [Phil. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[125:2120](2070033.htm#fr_2119) <span
id="ii.xxi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p35"></span> [Rom. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[125:2121](2070033.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="ii.xxi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p36"></span> [Rom.
8.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="ii.xxi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[125:2122](2070033.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="ii.xxi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p37"></span> [Eph. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017)<span id="ii.xxi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[125:2123](2070033.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="ii.xxi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p38"></span> [Eph.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[125:2124](2070033.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="ii.xxi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p39"></span> [Heb. x.
29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)<span id="ii.xxi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[125:2125](2070033.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="ii.xxi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p40"></span> Cat. xvi. 28; [Ps. cxliii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[125:2126](2070033.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="ii.xxi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p41.1"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p41.2"></span>γεμονικῷ</span>, Sept. [Ps. li.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)<span id="ii.xxi-p41.3"></span>: 
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xxi-p41.4"></span>R.V.</span> *Uphold me
with a free spirit*.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[125:2127](2070033.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="ii.xxi-p41.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p42"></span> [Is. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="ii.xxi-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[125:2128](2070033.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="ii.xxi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p43"></span> Origen, in the Catena on St. [John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p43.1"></span>: 
“This also shews that the Spirit is a Being (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p43.2"></span>οὐσίαν</span>):  for He is not, as some
suppose, an energy of God, having according to them no individuality of
subsistence.  And the Apostle also, after enumerating the gifts of the
Spirit, immediately added, *But all these worketh the one and the same
Spirit, dividing to each one severally as He will.*  Now if He willeth
and worketh and divideth, He is surely an energizing Being, but not an
energy” (Suicer, *Thesaurus*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p43.3"></span>Πνευμα</span>).

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[125:2129](2070033.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="ii.xxi-p43.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p44.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p44.2"></span>νυπόστατον</span>.  Cf. Cat. xi. 10; xvi. 13,
note 5.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[125:2130](2070033.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="ii.xxi-p44.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p45"></span> Cat. iv. 16; xvi. 4.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[125:2131](2070033.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="ii.xxi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p47"></span> [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="ii.xxi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[125:2132](2070033.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="ii.xxi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p48"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.xxi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[125:2133](2070033.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="ii.xxi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p49"></span> [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="ii.xxi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[126:2134](2070033.htm#fr_2133) <span
id="ii.xxi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p51"></span> [Luke i.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041)<span id="ii.xxi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2134"></span>[126:2135](2070033.htm#fr_2134) <span
id="ii.xxi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p52"></span> [Luke
1.43](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#043)<span id="ii.xxi-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2135"></span>[126:2136](2070033.htm#fr_2135) <span
id="ii.xxi-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p53"></span>[Luke
1.67](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#067)<span id="ii.xxi-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2136"></span>[126:2137](2070033.htm#fr_2136) <span
id="ii.xxi-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p54"></span> [Luke
1.76](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076)<span id="ii.xxi-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2137"></span>[126:2138](2070033.htm#fr_2137) <span
id="ii.xxi-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p55"></span> [Luke ii.
26-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#026)<span id="ii.xxi-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2138"></span>[126:2139](2070033.htm#fr_2138) <span
id="ii.xxi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p57"></span> Cat. iii. 6.

<span id="fn_2139"></span>[126:2140](2070033.htm#fr_2139) <span
id="ii.xxi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p58"></span> [Matt. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxi-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2140"></span>[126:2141](2070033.htm#fr_2140) <span
id="ii.xxi-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p59"></span> [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span id="ii.xxi-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2141"></span>[126:2142](2070033.htm#fr_2141) <span
id="ii.xxi-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p61"></span> [John i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span id="ii.xxi-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2142"></span>[126:2143](2070033.htm#fr_2142) <span
id="ii.xxi-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p62"></span> [Matt. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)<span id="ii.xxi-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2143"></span>[126:2144](2070033.htm#fr_2143) <span
id="ii.xxi-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p63.1"></span>τὰς ἀπαρχὰς καὶ τὰ πρωτεῖα</span>.  The order
is inverted in the translation.  Cf. Hermas, *Sim*. viii. 7 <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p63.2"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p63.3"></span>χοντες ζῆλόν τινα ἐν
ἀλλήλοις περὶ πρωτείων</span>.

<span id="fn_2144"></span>[126:2145](2070033.htm#fr_2144) <span
id="ii.xxi-p63.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p64"></span> The Benedictine Editor adds the two last
words <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p64.1"></span>τύπον
παραδηλοῦν</span> from <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xxi-p64.2"></span>mss.</span> Roe. Casaub. as necessary to the
construction, and adds the following note.  “The text thus emended is
capable of two senses.  The first, that the Holy Spirit came down in the
form of a dove, a pure and harmless bird, to shew that He is Himself as
it were a mystic dove in His simplicity and love of children, for whose
new birth and remission of sins at Baptism He unites His prayers with
Christ’s, as Cyril teaches in Cat. xvi. 20:  and that Christ was for the
like cause mystically foreshown in Canticles as having eyes like a
dove’s.  The other sense is, that the Spirit descended in the form of a
dove on Christ’s Humanity in order to shew this to be as it were a dove
in innocence, holiness, love of children, and concurrence with the Holy
Spirit in their regeneration.…Either sense is admissible, and maintained
by many of the Fathers:  but I prefer the former.”  This interpretation
is confirmed by Tertullian (*de Baptismo*, c. viii.), who says that the
Holy Spirit glided down on the Lord “in the shape of a dove” in order
that the nature of the Holy Spirit might be declared by means of a
creature of simplicity and innocence.”

<span id="fn_2145"></span>[126:2146](2070033.htm#fr_2145) <span
id="ii.xxi-p64.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p65"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#012)<span id="ii.xxi-p65.1"></span>. 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p65.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p65.3"></span>πὶ πληρώματα ὑδάτων</span>
(Sept.).  The usual meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p65.4"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p65.5"></span>φθαλμοφανῶς</span> is “manifestly to the eyes,”
[Esther viii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xxi-p65.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_2146"></span>[126:2147](2070033.htm#fr_2146) <span
id="ii.xxi-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p67"></span> Tertullian, *ibid.*  “Just as after the
waters of the deluge, by which the old iniquity was purged—after the
baptism, so to say, of the world—a dove was the herald which announced
to the earth the assuagement of celestial wrath,.…so to our flesh, as it
emerges from the font after its old sins, flies the dove of the Holy
Spirit, bringing us the peace of God, sent out from heaven where the
Church is, the typified ark.”  Compare also Hippolytus, *The Holy
Theophany*, §§ 8, 9, a treatise with which Cyril has much in common.

<span id="fn_2147"></span>[126:2148](2070033.htm#fr_2147) <span
id="ii.xxi-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p69"></span> [John iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)<span id="ii.xxi-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2148"></span>[126:2149](2070033.htm#fr_2148) <span
id="ii.xxi-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p70"></span> [Luke xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxi-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2149"></span>[126:2150](2070033.htm#fr_2149) <span
id="ii.xxi-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p71"></span> [John iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#023)<span id="ii.xxi-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2150"></span>[127:2151](2070033.htm#fr_2150) <span
id="ii.xxi-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p72"></span> [Matt. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span id="ii.xxi-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2151"></span>[127:2152](2070033.htm#fr_2151) <span
id="ii.xxi-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p73"></span> [Matt.
12.31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031)<span id="ii.xxi-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2152"></span>[127:2153](2070033.htm#fr_2152) <span
id="ii.xxi-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p74"></span> [John xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="ii.xxi-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2153"></span>[127:2154](2070033.htm#fr_2153) <span
id="ii.xxi-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p75"></span> [John
14.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025)<span id="ii.xxi-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2154"></span>[127:2155](2070033.htm#fr_2154) <span
id="ii.xxi-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p76"></span> [John
15.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span id="ii.xxi-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2155"></span>[127:2156](2070033.htm#fr_2155) <span
id="ii.xxi-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p77"></span> [John
16.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxi-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2156"></span>[127:2157](2070033.htm#fr_2156) <span
id="ii.xxi-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p78"></span> [John
16.8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2157"></span>[127:2158](2070033.htm#fr_2157) <span
id="ii.xxi-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p79"></span> [John
16.12-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xxi-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2158"></span>[127:2159](2070033.htm#fr_2158) <span
id="ii.xxi-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p81"></span> [John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span id="ii.xxi-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2159"></span>[127:2160](2070033.htm#fr_2159) <span
id="ii.xxi-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p82"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxi-p82.1"></span>: 
*and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.*  Compare Cat. xiv.
10.

<span id="fn_2160"></span>[127:2161](2070033.htm#fr_2160) <span
id="ii.xxi-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p83"></span> [Nahum ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxi-p83.1"></span>.  The
Septuagint, followed by Cyril, differs widely from the Hebrew:  (<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xxi-p83.2"></span>R.V.</span>) *He that dasheth
in pieces is come up before thy face.*

<span id="fn_2161"></span>[127:2162](2070033.htm#fr_2161) <span
id="ii.xxi-p83.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p84"></span> [Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span id="ii.xxi-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2162"></span>[127:2163](2070033.htm#fr_2162) <span
id="ii.xxi-p85.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p86"></span> [John xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="ii.xxi-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[127:2164](2070033.htm#fr_2163) <span
id="ii.xxi-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p87"></span> Cat. iii. 7; xvi. 5.  Bp. Pearson
(*Lectiones in Acta Apost*. I. § 18):  “Rightly said Cyril, Bishop of
Jerusalem, ‘All prerogatives are with us.’  And the Emperor Justin
called her ‘Mother of the Christian name.’  Jerome also (*Ep*. 17, 3),
said:  ‘The whole mystery of our Faith is native of that province and
city.‘”

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[127:2165](2070033.htm#fr_2164) <span
id="ii.xxi-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p89"></span> [Acts i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#005)<span id="ii.xxi-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[128:2166](2070033.htm#fr_2165) <span
id="ii.xxi-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p91"></span> [Acts ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002)<span id="ii.xxi-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[128:2167](2070033.htm#fr_2166) <span
id="ii.xxi-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p93"></span>[Acts
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxi-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[128:2168](2070033.htm#fr_2167) <span
id="ii.xxi-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p95"></span> [Acts ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[128:2169](2070033.htm#fr_2168) <span
id="ii.xxi-p95.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p96"></span> [John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p96.1"></span>: 
(R.V.) *The wind bloweth*:  (Marg.) Or, *The Spirit breatheth*.  It is
impossible to preserve the double meaning in English.

<span id="fn_2169"></span>[128:2170](2070033.htm#fr_2169) <span
id="ii.xxi-p97.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p98"></span> [Acts ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxi-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2170"></span>[128:2171](2070033.htm#fr_2170) <span
id="ii.xxi-p99.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p100"></span>[Acts
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015)<span id="ii.xxi-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2171"></span>[128:2172](2070033.htm#fr_2171) <span
id="ii.xxi-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p101"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2172"></span>[129:2173](2070033.htm#fr_2172) <span
id="ii.xxi-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p102"></span> [John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="ii.xxi-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[129:2174](2070033.htm#fr_2173) <span
id="ii.xxi-p102.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p103"></span> [Acts
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015)<span id="ii.xxi-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[129:2175](2070033.htm#fr_2174) <span
id="ii.xxi-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p104"></span> [Joel ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="ii.xxi-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2175"></span>[129:2176](2070033.htm#fr_2175) <span
id="ii.xxi-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p105"></span> [John
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)<span id="ii.xxi-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2176"></span>[129:2177](2070033.htm#fr_2176) <span
id="ii.xxi-p105.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p106"></span> [Joel ii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#029)<span id="ii.xxi-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2177"></span>[129:2178](2070033.htm#fr_2177) <span
id="ii.xxi-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p109"></span> [Is. xl.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)<span id="ii.xxi-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[129:2179](2070033.htm#fr_2178) <span
id="ii.xxi-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p110"></span> [Acts ii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042)<span id="ii.xxi-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[129:2180](2070033.htm#fr_2179) <span
id="ii.xxi-p110.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p111"></span> [Acts
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxi-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[129:2181](2070033.htm#fr_2180) <span
id="ii.xxi-p111.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p112"></span> [Is. xxxv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxi-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[129:2182](2070033.htm#fr_2181) <span
id="ii.xxi-p112.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p113"></span> [Acts iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxi-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[129:2183](2070033.htm#fr_2182) <span
id="ii.xxi-p113.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p114"></span> [Acts
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[129:2184](2070033.htm#fr_2183) <span
id="ii.xxi-p114.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p115"></span> [Acts
4.32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="ii.xxi-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[129:2185](2070033.htm#fr_2184) <span
id="ii.xxi-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p117"></span> [Acts v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#012)<span id="ii.xxi-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[129:2186](2070033.htm#fr_2185) <span
id="ii.xxi-p117.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p118"></span> [Acts
5.13-16](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xxi-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[129:2187](2070033.htm#fr_2186) <span
id="ii.xxi-p119.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p120"></span> [Acts
5.32](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#032)<span id="ii.xxi-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[130:2188](2070033.htm#fr_2187) <span
id="ii.xxi-p120.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p121"></span> [Acts v.
42](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#042)<span id="ii.xxi-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[130:2189](2070033.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="ii.xxi-p122.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p123"></span> [Acts
6.3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003)<span id="ii.xxi-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[130:2190](2070033.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="ii.xxi-p123.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p124"></span> [Acts
6.8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxi-p124.1"></span>. 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p124.2"></span>Στέφανος</span>, “a
crown.”

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[130:2191](2070033.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="ii.xxi-p124.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p125"></span> [Acts
6.10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxi-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[130:2192](2070033.htm#fr_2191) <span
id="ii.xxi-p125.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p126"></span> [Acts
6.15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015)<span id="ii.xxi-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[130:2193](2070033.htm#fr_2192) <span
id="ii.xxi-p126.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p127"></span> [Acts
7.51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)<span id="ii.xxi-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[130:2194](2070033.htm#fr_2193) <span
id="ii.xxi-p127.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p128"></span> [Acts
7.55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055)<span id="ii.xxi-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[130:2195](2070033.htm#fr_2194) <span
id="ii.xxi-p129.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p130"></span> [Acts
8.5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005)<span id="ii.xxi-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[130:2196](2070033.htm#fr_2195) <span
id="ii.xxi-p130.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p131"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031)<span id="ii.xxi-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[130:2197](2070033.htm#fr_2196) <span
id="ii.xxi-p132.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p133"></span> [Acts ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017)<span id="ii.xxi-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2197"></span>[130:2198](2070033.htm#fr_2197) <span
id="ii.xxi-p133.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p134"></span> [Rom. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxi-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2198"></span>[130:2199](2070033.htm#fr_2198) <span
id="ii.xxi-p135.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p136"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p136.1"></span>κλειδοῦχος</span>.  Cf. [Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxi-p136.2"></span>;
Cat. ii. 19; xi. 3.

<span id="fn_2199"></span>[130:2200](2070033.htm#fr_2199) <span
id="ii.xxi-p136.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p137"></span> [Acts x.
11-16](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxi-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2200"></span>[130:2201](2070033.htm#fr_2200) <span
id="ii.xxi-p137.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p138"></span> [Acts
10.19](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxi-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[130:2202](2070033.htm#fr_2201) <span
id="ii.xxi-p138.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p139"></span> [Acts
10.44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044)<span id="ii.xxi-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2202"></span>[130:2203](2070033.htm#fr_2202) <span
id="ii.xxi-p140.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p141"></span> [Acts
11.24](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#024)<span id="ii.xxi-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[130:2204](2070033.htm#fr_2203) <span
id="ii.xxi-p141.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p142"></span> [Acts
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026), [Isa.
65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015)<span id="ii.xxi-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[131:2205](2070033.htm#fr_2204) <span
id="ii.xxi-p142.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p143"></span> [Acts xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028)<span id="ii.xxi-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[131:2206](2070033.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="ii.xxi-p143.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p144"></span> [Acts
13.2-4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xxi-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2206"></span>[131:2207](2070033.htm#fr_2206) <span
id="ii.xxi-p145.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p146"></span> [Heb. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxi-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2207"></span>[131:2208](2070033.htm#fr_2207) <span
id="ii.xxi-p146.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p147"></span> [Acts
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029)<span id="ii.xxi-p147.1"></span>. 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p147.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p147.3"></span>πιστολή</span> means a
*message* or *injunction* whether verbal or written.

<span id="fn_2208"></span>[131:2209](2070033.htm#fr_2208) <span
id="ii.xxi-p148.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p149"></span> See note 1 on § 1, above.

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[131:2210](2070033.htm#fr_2209) <span
id="ii.xxi-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p150"></span> [Acts xix.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxi-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[131:2211](2070033.htm#fr_2210) <span
id="ii.xxi-p150.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p151"></span> [Acts
19.12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012)<span id="ii.xxi-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[131:2212](2070033.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="ii.xxi-p151.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p152"></span> [Acts
19.19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxi-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[131:2213](2070033.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="ii.xxi-p153.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p154"></span> [Acts
20.9-12](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#009)<span
id="ii.xxi-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[131:2214](2070033.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="ii.xxi-p154.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p155"></span> [Acts
20.23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023)<span id="ii.xxi-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[131:2215](2070033.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="ii.xxi-p155.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p156"></span> [Acts
26.28](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#028)<span
id="ii.xxi-p156.1"></span>.  Cyril evidently understood <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p156.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p156.3"></span>ν ὀλίγῳ</span> to mean
“*almost*” (<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xxi-p156.4"></span>A.V.</span>):  but the more correct rendering
is, “In brief thou wouldest persuade me to become a Christian.”

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[131:2216](2070033.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="ii.xxi-p156.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p157"></span> [Acts
28.25](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025)<span id="ii.xxi-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[132:2217](2070033.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="ii.xxi-p158.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p159"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxi-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[132:2218](2070033.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="ii.xxi-p159.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p160"></span> [2 Cor. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022)<span id="ii.xxi-p160.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[132:2219](2070033.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="ii.xxi-p160.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p161"></span> [Rom. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span id="ii.xxi-p161.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[132:2220](2070033.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="ii.xxi-p161.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p162"></span> [2 Tim. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxi-p162.1"></span>: 
(R.V.) *by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us*.

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[132:2221](2070033.htm#fr_2220) <span
id="ii.xxi-p163.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p164"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxi-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[132:2222](2070033.htm#fr_2221) <span
id="ii.xxi-p164.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p165"></span> [Eph. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005)<span id="ii.xxi-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[132:2223](2070033.htm#fr_2222) <span
id="ii.xxi-p165.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p166"></span> [Heb. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxi-p166.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[132:2224](2070033.htm#fr_2223) <span
id="ii.xxi-p166.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p167"></span> [Heb.
10.15](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#015)<span id="ii.xxi-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[132:2225](2070033.htm#fr_2224) <span
id="ii.xxi-p167.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p168"></span> [Eph. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span id="ii.xxi-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[132:2226](2070033.htm#fr_2225) <span
id="ii.xxi-p168.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p169"></span> [Eph.
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxi-p169.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[132:2227](2070033.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="ii.xxi-p169.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p170"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxi-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[132:2228](2070033.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="ii.xxi-p171.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p172"></span> [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="ii.xxi-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[132:2229](2070033.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="ii.xxi-p172.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p173"></span> [Lam. iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span id="ii.xxi-p173.1"></span>. 
*The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord*:  referring to
the captive king.

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[132:2230](2070033.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="ii.xxi-p173.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p174"></span> [John xiv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025)<span id="ii.xxi-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[132:2231](2070033.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="ii.xxi-p174.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p175"></span> The distinct mention in the Creed of
three Persons excludes the error of Sabellius in confusing them.  Cf.
Cat. iv. 8; xvi. 14.

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[132:2232](2070033.htm#fr_2231) <span
id="ii.xxi-p176.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p177"></span> [Rom. xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span id="ii.xxi-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[132:2233](2070033.htm#fr_2232) <span
id="ii.xxi-p177.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p178"></span> Cf. Bingham, *Antiquities*, II. xx. 9. 
“When Cyril directs his Catechumens how they should behave themselves at
the time of Baptism, when they came either before a bishop, or
presbyter, or deacon, in city or village,—this may be presumed a fair
intimation that then deacons were ordinarily allowed to minister Baptism
in country places.”  See further ‘Of the power granted anciently to
deacons to baptize,’ Bingham, *Lay Baptism*, I. i. 5.

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[132:2234](2070033.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="ii.xxi-p178.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p179"></span> [Eph. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxi-p179.1"></span>. 
Cf. Cat. i. 2, 3.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[132:2235](2070033.htm#fr_2234) <span
id="ii.xxi-p180.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p181"></span> Cf. Procat. § 4:  “The water will
receive, but the Spirit will not accept thee.”

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[133:2236](2070033.htm#fr_2235) <span
id="ii.xxi-p181.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p182"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p182.1"></span>στρατολογία</span>.  Cf. Cat. iii. 3, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xxi-p182.2"></span>μέλλετε
στρατολογεῖσθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[133:2237](2070033.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="ii.xxi-p183.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p184"></span> The same twofold grace is ascribed to
Baptism in Cat. xiii. 23:  “Thou receivest now remission of thy sins,
and the gifts of the King’s spiritual bounty.”

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[133:2238](2070033.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="ii.xxi-p184.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p185"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p185.1"></span>πραγματεία</span>.  Cf. [2 Tim.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004), [Luke
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xxi-p185.2"></span>:  *Trade* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xxi-p185.3"></span>πραγματεύεοθε</span>) *till I come*.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[133:2239](2070033.htm#fr_2238) <span
id="ii.xxi-p185.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p186"></span> [Eph. iv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030)<span id="ii.xxi-p186.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[133:2240](2070033.htm#fr_2239) <span
id="ii.xxi-p187.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p188"></span> [Gal.
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#023)<span id="ii.xxi-p188.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Words, And in One Holy Catholic Church, and in the
Resurrection of the Flesh, and the Life Everlasting.](2070034)
