[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070099)  [Next](2070101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Ep. LVIII.  To Basil.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p2"></span>(An attack had been made in Gregory’s
presence on the orthodoxy of Basil in respect of the Deity of God the
Holy Ghost; and in this letter he gives his friend an account of the way
in which he had defended him.  Unfortunately Basil was not pleased with
the letter, taking it as intended to convey reproach under the guise of
friendly sympathy.)

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p3"></span>From the first I have taken you, and I
take you still, for my guide of life and my teacher of the faith, and
for every thing honourable that can be said; and if any one else praises
your merits, he is altogether with me, or even behind me, so far am I
surpassed by your piety, and so thoroughly am I yours.  And no wonder;
for the longer the intimacy the greater the experience; and where the
experience is more abundant the testimony is more perfect.  And if I get
any profit in life it is from your friendship and company.  This is my
disposition in regard to these matters, and I hope always will <span
id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span id="iv.iii.xxi-Page_455"></span>be. 
What I now write I write unwillingly, but still I write it.  Do not be
angry with me, or I shall be very angry myself, if you do not give me
credit for both saying and writing it out of goodwill to you.

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p4"></span>Many people have condemned us as not
firm in our faith; those, I mean, who think and think rightly that we
thoroughly agree.  Some openly charge us with heresy, others with
cowardice; with heresy, those who believe that our language is not
sound; with cowardice, they who blame our reserve.  I need not report
what other people say; I will tell you what has recently happened.

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p5"></span>There was a party here at which a great
many distinguished friends of ours were present, and amongst them was a
man who wore the name and dress which betoken piety (i.e. a Monk).  They
had not yet begun to drink, but were talking about us, as often happens
at such parties, and made us rather than anything else the subject of
their conversation.  They admired everything connected with you, and
they brought me in as professing the same philosophy; and they spoke of
our friendship, and of Athens, and of our conformity of views and
feelings on all points.  Our Philosopher was annoyed by this.  “What is
this, gentlemen?” he said, with a very mighty shout, “what liars and
flatterers you are.  You may praise these men for other reasons if you
like, and I will not contradict you; but I cannot concede to you the
most important point, their orthodoxy.  Basil and Gregory are falsely
praised; the former, because his words are a betrayal of the faith, the
latter, because his toleration aids the treason.”

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p6"></span>What is this, said I, O vain man and new
Dathan and Abiram in folly?  Where do you come from to lay down the law
for us?  How do you set yourself up as a judge of such great matters? 
“I have just come,” he replied, “from the festival of the Martyr
Eupsychius <span id="fr_4738"></span>[4739](#fn_4738) , (and so it
really was), and there I heard the great Basil speak most beautifully
and perfectly upon the Godhead of the Father and the Son, as hardly
anyone else could speak; but he slurred over the Spirit.”  And he added
a sort of illustration from rivers, which pass by rocks and hollow out
sand.  “As for you my good sir,” he said, looking at me, “you do now
express yourself openly on the Godhead of the Spirit,” and he referred
to some remarks of mine in speaking of God at a largely attended Synod,
as having added in respect of the Spirit that expression which has made
a noise, (how long shall we hide the candle under the bushel?) “but the
other man hints obscurely, and as it were, merely suggests the doctrine,
but does not openly speak out the truth; flooding people’s ears with
more policy than piety, and hiding his duplicity by the power of his
eloquence.”

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p8"></span>“It is,” I said, “because I (living as I
do in a corner, and unknown to most men who do not know what I say, and
hardly that I speak at all) can philosophize without danger; but his
word is of greater weight, because he is better known, both on his own
account and on that of his Church.  And everything that he says is
public, and the war around him is great, as the heretics try to snatch
every naked word from Basil’s lips, to get him expelled from the Church;
because he is almost the only spark of truth left and the vital force,
all else around having been destroyed; so that evil may be rooted in the
city, and may spread over the whole world as from a centre in that
Church.  Surely then it is better to use some reserve in the truth, and
ourselves to give way a little to circumstances as to a cloud, rather
than by the openness of the proclamation to risk its destruction.  For
no harm will come to us if we recognize the Spirit as God from other
phrases which lead to this conclusion (for the truth consists not so
much in sound as in sense), but a very great injury would be done to the
Church if the truth were driven away in the person of one man.”  The
company present would not receive my economy, as out of date and mocking
them; but they shouted me down as practising it rather from cowardice
than for reason.  It would be much better, they said, to protect our own
people by the truth, than by your so-called Economy to weaken them while
failing to win over the others.  It would be a long business and perhaps
unnecessary to tell you all the details of what I said, and of what I
heard, and how vexed I was with the opponents, perhaps immoderately and
contrary to my own usual temper.  But, in fine, I sent them away in the
same fashion.  But do you O divine and sacred head, instruct me how far
I ought to go in setting forth the Deity of the Spirit; and what words I
ought to use, and how far to use reserve; that I may be furnished
against opponents.  For if I, who more than any one else know both you
and your opinions, and have often both given and received assurance on
this point, still need to be taught the truth of this matter, I shall be
of all men the most ignorant and miserable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4738"></span>[455:4739](2070100.htm#fr_4738) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p7"></span> He suffered under the Emperor Hadrian. 
The Festival was Sept. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LIX](2070101)
