[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070017)  [Next](2070019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_8"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>Lecture II.</span>

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vi-p2.1"></span>On Repentance and Remission of Sins, and
Concerning the Adversary.</span>

<span id="ii.vi-p3"></span><span id="ii.vi-p3.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.vi-p3.2"></span>[Ezekiel xviii.
20-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span
id="ii.vi-p3.3"></span></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p4"></span>The righteousness of the righteous shall be
upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.  But if
the wicked will turn from all his sins, &c.

<span id="ii.vi-p5"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi-p5.1"></span>A fearful</span> thing is sin, and the sorest
disease of the soul is transgression, secretly cutting its sinews, and
becoming also the cause of eternal fire; an evil of a man’s own
choosing, an offspring of the will. <span
id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491)   For that we sin of our own free will
the Prophet says plainly in a certain place:  *Yet I planted thee a
fruitful vine, wholly true:  how art thou turned to bitterness, (and
become) the strange vine* <span id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) ?  The
planting was good, the fruit coming from the will is evil; and therefore
the planter is blameless, but the vine shall be burnt with fire since it
was planted for good, and bore fruit unto evil of its own will.  *For
God*, according to the Preacher, *made man upright, and they have
themselves sought out many inventions* <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) .  *For we are His workmanship*, says
the Apostle, *created unto good works, which God afore prepared, that we
should walk in them* <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494) .  So then
the Creator, being good, created for good works; but the creature turned
of its own free will to wickedness.  Sin then is, as we have said, a
fearful evil, but not incurable; fearful for him who clings to it, but
easy of cure for him who by repentance puts it from him.  For suppose
that a man is holding fire in his hand; as long as he holds fast the
live coal he is sure to be burned, but should he put away the coal, he
would have cast away the flame also with it.  If however any one thinks
that he is not being burned when sinning, to him the Scripture saith,
*Shall a man wrap up fire in his bosom, and not burn his clothes* <span
id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) ?  For sin burns the sinews of the
soul, \[and breaks the spiritual bones of the mind, and darkens the
light of the heart <span id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) \].

<span id="ii.vi-p12"></span>2.  But some one will say, What can sin be? 
Is it a living thing?  Is it an angel?  Is it a demon?  What is this
which works within us?  It is not an enemy, O man, that assails thee
from without, but an evil shoot growing up out of thyself.  *Look right
on with thine eyes* <span id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) , and there
is no lust.  \[Keep thine own, and <span
id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) \] seize not the things of others, and
robbery has ceased <span id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499) .  Remember
the Judgment, and neither fornication, nor adultery, nor murder, nor any
transgression of the law shall prevail with thee.  But whenever thou
forgettest God, forthwith thou beginnest to devise wickedness and to
commit iniquity.

<span id="ii.vi-p16"></span>3.  Yet thou art not the sole author of the
evil, but there is also another most wicked prompter, the devil.  He
indeed suggests, but does not get the mastery by force over those who do
not consent.  Therefore saith the Preacher, *If the spirit of him that
hath power rise up against thee, quit not thy place* <span
id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) .  Shut thy door, and put him far from
thee, and he shall not hurt thee.  But if thou indifferently admit the
thought of lust, it strikes root in thee by its suggestions, and
enthrals thy mind, and drags thee down into a pit of evils.

<span id="ii.vi-p18"></span>But perhaps thou sayest, I am a believer,
and lust does not gain the ascendant over me, even if I think upon it
frequently.  Knowest thou not that a root breaks even a rock by long
persistence?  Admit not the seed, since it will rend thy faith asunder: 
tear out the evil by the root before it blossom, lest from being
careless at the beginning thou have afterwards to seek for axes and
fire.  When thine eyes begin to be diseased, get them cured in good
time, lest thou become blind, and then have to seek the physician.

<span id="ii.vi-p19"></span>4.  The devil then is the first author of
sin, and the father of the wicked:  and this is the Lord’s saying, not
mine, *that the devil sinneth* <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_9"></span>*from the beginning* <span
id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) :  none sinned before him.  But he
sinned, not as having received necessarily from nature the propensity to
sin, since then the cause of sin is traced back again to Him that made
him so; but having been created good, he has of his own free will become
a devil, and received that name from his action.  For being an
Archangel <span id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) he was afterwards
called a devil from his slandering:  from being a good servant of God he
has become rightly named Satan; for “Satan” is interpreted *the
adversary* <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) .  And this is not my
teaching, but that of the inspired prophet Ezekiel:  for he takes up a
lamentation over him and says, *Thou wast a seal of likeness, and a
crown of beauty; in the Paradise of God wast thou born* <span
id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) :  and soon after, *Thou wast born
blameless in thy days, from the day in which thou wast created, until
thine iniquities were found in thee.*  Very rightly hath he said, *were
found in thee*; for they were not brought in from without, but thou
didst thyself beget the evil.  The cause also he mentions forthwith: 
*Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty:  for the multitude of
thy sins wast thou wounded, and I did cast thee to the ground*.  In
agreement with this the Lord says again in the Gospels:  *I beheld Satan
as lightning fall from heaven* <span id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505)
.  Thou seest the harmony of the Old Testament with the New.  He when
cast out drew many away with him.  It is he that puts lusts into them
that listen to him:  from him come adultery, fornication, and every kind
of evil.  Through him our forefather Adam was cast out for disobedience,
and exchanged a Paradise bringing forth wondrous fruits of its own
accord for the ground which bringeth forth thorns.

<span id="ii.vi-p25"></span>5.  What then? some one will say.  We have
been beguiled and are lost.  Is there then no salvation left?  We have
fallen:  Is it not possible to rise again?  We have been blinded:  May
we not recover our sight?  We have become crippled:  Can we never walk
upright?  In a word, we are dead:  May we not rise again?  He that woke
Lazarus who was four days dead and already stank, shall He not, O man,
much more easily raise thee who art alive?  He who shed His precious
blood for us, shall Himself deliver us from sin.  Let us not despair of
ourselves, brethren; let us not abandon ourselves to a hopeless
condition.  For it is a fearful thing not to believe in a hope of
repentance.  For he that looks not for salvation spares not to add evil
to evil:  but to him that hopes for cure, it is henceforth easy to be
careful over himself.  The robber who looks not for pardon grows
desperate; but, if he hopes for forgiveness, often comes to repentance. 
What then, does the serpent cast its slough <span
id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) , and shall not we cast off our sin? 
Thorny ground also, if cultivated well, is turned into fruitful; and is
salvation to us irrecoverable?  Nay rather, our nature admits of
salvation, but the will also is required.

<span id="ii.vi-p27"></span>6.  God is loving to man, and loving in no
small measure.  For say not, I have committed fornication and adultery: 
I have done dreadful things, and not once only, but often:  will He
forgive?  Will He grant pardon?  Hear what the Psalmist says:  *How
great is the multitude of Thy goodness, O Lord* <span
id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) !  Thine accumulated offences surpass
not the multitude of God’s mercies:  thy wounds surpass not the great
Physician’s skill.  Only give thyself up in faith:  tell the Physician
thine ailment:  say thou also, like David:  *I said, I will confess me
my sin unto the Lord:*  and the same shall be done in thy case, which he
says forthwith:  *And thou forgavest the wickedness of my heart* <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) .

<span id="ii.vi-p30"></span>7.  Wouldest thou see the loving-kindness of
God, O thou that art lately come to the catechising?  Wouldest thou see
the loving-kindness of God, and the abundance of His long-suffering? 
Hear about Adam.  Adam, God’s first-formed man, transgressed:  could He
not at once have brought death upon him?  But see what the Lord does, in
His great love towards man.  He casts him out from Paradise, for because
of sin he was unworthy to live there; but He *puts him to dwell over
against Paradise* <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) :  that seeing
whence he had fallen, and from what and into what a state he was brought
down, he might afterwards be saved by repentance.  Cain the first-born
man became his brother’s murderer, the inventor of evils, the first
author of murders, and the first envious man.  Yet after slaying his
brother to what is he condemned?  *Groaning and trembling shalt thou be
upon the earth* <span id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510) .  How great the
offence, the sentence how light!

<span id="ii.vi-p33"></span>8.  Even this then was truly loving-kindness
in God, but little as yet in comparison with what follows.  For consider
what happened in the days of Noe.  The giants sinned, and <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="ii.vi-Page_10"></span>much
wickedness was then spread over the earth, and because of this the flood
was to come upon them:  and in the five hundredth year God utters His
threatening; but in the six hundredth He brought the flood upon the
earth.  Seest thou the breadth of God’s loving-kindness extending to a
hundred years?  Could He not have done immediately what He did then
after the hundred years?  But He extended (the time) on purpose,
granting a respite for repentance.  Seest thou God’s goodness?  And if
the men of that time had repented, they would not have missed the
loving-kindness of God.

<span id="ii.vi-p34"></span>9.  Come with me now to the other class,
those who were saved by repentance.  But perhaps even among women some
one will say, I have committed fornication, and adultery, I have defiled
my body by excesses of all kinds:  is there salvation for me?  Turn
thine eyes, O woman, upon Rahab, and look thou also for salvation; for
if she who had been openly and publicly a harlot was saved by
repentance, is not she who on some one occasion before receiving grace
committed fornication to be saved by repentance and fasting?  For
inquire how she was saved:  this only she said:  *For your God is God in
heaven and upon earth* <span id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) .  *Your
God;* for her own she did not dare to say, because of her wanton life. 
And if you wish to receive Scriptural testimony of her having been
saved, you have it written in the Psalms:  *I will make mention of Rahab
and Babylon among them that know me <span
id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512)* .  O the greatness of God’s
loving-kindness, making mention even of harlots in the Scriptures:  nay,
not simply *I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon*, but with the
addition, *among them that know me*.  There is then in the case both of
men and of women alike the salvation which is ushered in by repentance.

<span id="ii.vi-p37"></span>10.  Nay more, if a whole people sin, this
surpasses not the loving-kindness of God.  The people made a calf, yet
God ceased not from His loving-kindness.  Men denied God, but God denied
not Himself <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) .  *These be thy
gods, O Israel* <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) , they said: 
yet again, as He was wont, the God of Israel became their Saviour.  And
not only the people sinned, but also Aaron the High Priest.  For it is
Moses that says:  *And the anger of the Lord came upon Aaron:  and I
prayed for him*, saith he, *and God forgave him* <span
id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) .  What then, did Moses praying for a
High Priest that sinned prevail with God, and shall not Jesus, His
Only-begotten, prevail with God when He prays for us?  And if He did not
hinder Aaron, because of his offence, from entering upon the High
Priesthood, will He hinder thee, who art come out from the Gentiles,
from entering into salvation?  Only, O man, repent thou also in like
manner, and grace is not forbidden thee.  Render thy way of life
henceforth unblameable; for God is truly loving unto man, nor can all
time <span id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) worthily tell out His
loving kindness; nay, not if all the tongues of men unite together will
they be able even so to declare any considerable part of His
loving-kindness.  For we tell some part of what is written concerning
His loving-kindness to men, but how much He forgave the Angels we know
not:  for them also He forgives, since One alone is without sin, even
Jesus who purgeth our sins.  And of them we have said enough.

<span id="ii.vi-p42"></span>11.  But if concerning us men thou wilt have
other examples also set before thee <span
id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) , come on to the blessed David, and
take him for an example of repentance.  Great as he was, he fell:  after
his sleep, walking in the eventide on the housetop, he cast a careless
look, and felt a human passion.  His sin was completed, but there died
not with it his candour concerning the confession of his fault.  Nathan
the Prophet came, a swift accuser, and a healer of the wound.  *The Lord
is wroth*, he says, *and thou hast sinned* <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) .  So spake the subject to the
reigning king.  But David the king <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) was not indignant, for he regarded not
the speaker, but God who had sent him.  He was not puffed up <span
id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) by the array of soldiers standing
round:  for he had seen in thought the angel-host of the Lord, and he
trembled *as seeing Him who is invisible* <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) ; and to the messenger, or rather by
him in answer to God who sent him, he said, *I have sinned against the
Lord* <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) .  Seest thou the humility
of the king?  Seest thou his confession?  For had he been convicted by
any one?  Were many privy to the matter?  The deed was quickly done, and
straightway the Prophet appeared as accuser, and the offender confesses
the fault.  And because he candidly confessed, he received a most speedy
cure.  For Nathan the Prophet who had uttered the threat, said
immediately, *The Lord also hath put away thy sin*.  Thou seest the
swift relenting of a merciful God.  He says, however, *Thou hast greatly
provoked the enemies of the* <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_11"></span>*Lord*.  Though thou hadst many enemies
because of thy righteousness, thy self-control protected thee; but now
that thou hast surrendered thy strongest armour, thine enemies are risen
up, and stand ready against thee.

<span id="ii.vi-p49"></span>12.  Thus then did the Prophet comfort him,
but the blessed David, for all he heard it said, *The <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.vi-p49.1"></span>Lord</span> hath put away thy
sin*, did not cease from repentance, king though he was, but put on
sackcloth instead of purple, and instead of a golden throne, he sat, a
king, in ashes on the ground; nay, not only sat in ashes, but also had
ashes for his food, even as he saith himself, *I have eaten ashes as it
were bread* <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) .  His lustful eye
he wasted away with tears saying, *Every night will I wash my couch, and
water my bed with my tears* <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) . 
When his officers besought him to eat bread he would not listen.  He
prolonged his fast unto seven whole days.  If a king thus made
confession oughtest not thou, a private person, to confess?  Again,
after Absalom’s insurrection, though there were many roads for him to
escape, he chose to flee by the Mount of Olives, in thought, as it were,
invoking the Redeemer who was to go up thence into the heavens <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) .  And when Shimei cursed him
bitterly, he said, *Let him alone*, for he knew that “to him that
forgiveth it shall be forgiven <span id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526)
.”

<span id="ii.vi-p54"></span>13.  Thou seest that it is good to make
confession.  Thou seest that there is salvation for them that repent. 
Solomon also fell but what saith he?  *Afterwards I repented* <span
id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527) .  Ahab, too, the King of Samaria,
became a most wicked idolater, an outrageous man, the murderer of the
Prophets <span id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) , a stranger to
godliness, a coveter of other men’s fields and vineyards.  Yet when by
Jezebel’s means he had slain Naboth, and the Prophet Elias came and
merely threatened him, he rent his garments, and put on sackcloth.  And
what saith the merciful God to Elias?  *Hast than seen how Ahab is
pricked in the heart before Me* <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529)
? as if almost He would persuade the fiery zeal of the Prophet to
condescend to the penitent.  For He saith, *I will not bring the evil in
his days*.  And though after this forgiveness he was sure not to depart
from his wickedness, nevertheless the forgiving God forgave him, not as
being ignorant of the future, but as granting a forgiveness
corresponding to his present season of repentance.  For it is the part
of a righteous judge to give sentence according to each case that has
occurred.

<span id="ii.vi-p58"></span>14.  Again, Jeroboam was standing at the
altar sacrificing to the idols:  his hand became withered, because he
commanded the Prophet who reproved him to be seized:  but having by
experience learned the power of the man before him, he says, *Entreat
the face of the Lord thy God* <span id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530) ;
and because of this saying his hand was restored again.  If the Prophet
healed Jeroboam, is Christ not able to heal and deliver thee from thy
sins?  Manasses also was utterly wicked, who sawed Isaiah asunder <span
id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531) , and was defiled with all kinds of
idolatries, and *filled Jerusalem with innocent blood* <span
id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532) ; but having been led captive to
Babylon he used his experience of misfortune for a healing course of
repentance:  for the Scripture saith that Manasses *humbled himself
before the Lord, and prayed, and the Lord heard him, and brought him
back to his kingdom*.  If He who sawed the Prophet asunder was saved by
repentance, shall not thou then, having done no such great wickedness,
be saved?

<span id="ii.vi-p62"></span>15.  Take heed lest without reason thou
mistrust the power of repentance.  Wouldst thou know what power
repentance has?  Wouldst thou know the strong weapon of salvation, and
learn what the force of confession is?  Hezekiah by means of confession
routed a hundred and fourscore and five thousand of his enemies.  A
great thing verily was this, but still small in comparison with what
remains to be told:  the same king by repentance obtained the recall of
a divine sentence which had already gone forth.  For when he had fallen
sick, Esaias said to him, *Set thine house in order; for thou shalt die,
and not live* <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533) .  What
expectation remained, what hope of recovery, when the Prophet said, *for
thou shalt die*?  Yet Hezekiah did not desist from repentance; but
remembering what is written, *When thou shalt turn and lament, then
shalt thou be saved* <span id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) , he turned
to the wall, and from his bed lifting his mind to heaven (for thickness
of walls is no hindrance to prayers sent up with devotion), he said,
“Remember me, O Lord, for it is sufficient for my healing that Thou
remember me.  Thou art not subject to times, but art Thyself the giver
of the law of life.  For our life depends not on a <span id="page_12">p.
12</span> <span id="ii.vi-Page_12"></span>nativity, nor on a conjunction
of stars, as some idly talk; but both of life and its duration.  Then
art Thyself the Lawgiver according to Thy Will.”  And he, who could not
hope to live because of the prophetic sentence, had fifteen years added
to his life, and for the sign the sun ran backward in his course.  Well
then, for Ezekias’ sake the sun turned back but for Christ the sun was
eclipsed, not retracing his steps, but suffering eclipse <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) , and therefore shewing the difference
between them, I mean between Ezekias and Jesus.  The former prevailed to
the cancelling of God’s decree, and cannot Jesus grant remission of
sins?  Turn and bewail thyself, shut thy door, and pray to be forgiven,
pray that He may remove from thee the burning flames.  For confession
has power to quench even fire, power to tame even lions <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) .

<span id="ii.vi-p67"></span>16.  But if thou disbelieve, consider what
befel Ananias and his companions.  What streams did they pour out <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) ?  How many vessels <span
id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) of water could quench the flame that
rose up forty-nine cubits high <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539)
?  Nay, but where the flame mounted up a little <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540) too high, faith was there poured out
as a river, and there spake they the spell against all ills <span
id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541) :  *Righteous art Thou, O Lord, in all
the things that Thou hast done to us:  for we have sinned, and
transgressed Thy law* <span id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542) .  And
their repentance quelled the flames <span
id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) .  If thou believest not that
repentance is able to quench the fire of hell, learn it from what
happened in regard to Ananias <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) . 
But some keen hearer will say, Those men God rescued justly in that
case:  because they refused to commit idolatry, God gave them that
power.  And since this thought has occurred, I come next to a different
example of penitence <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) .

<span id="ii.vi-p77"></span>17.  What thinkest thou of Nabuchodonosor? 
Hast thou not heard out of the Scriptures that he was bloodthirsty,
fierce <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) , lion-like in
disposition?  Hast thou not heard that he brought out the bones of the
kings from their graves into the light <span
id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) ?  Hast thou not heard <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548) that he carried the people away
captive?  Hast thou not heard that he put out the eyes of the king,
after he had already seen his children slain <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) ?  Hast thou not heard that he brake
in pieces <span id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550) the Cherubim?  I do
not mean the invisible <span id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551)
beings;—away with such a thought, O man <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552) ,—but the sculptured images, and the
mercy-seat, in the midst of which God spake with His voice <span
id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553) .  The veil of the Sanctuary <span
id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554) he trampled under foot:  the altar of
incense he took and carried away to an idol-temple <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) :  all the offerings he took away: 
the Temple he burned from the foundations <span
id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) .  How great punishments did he
deserve, for slaying kings, for setting fire to the Sanctuary, for
taking the people captive, for setting the sacred vessels in the house
of idols?  Did he not deserve ten thousand deaths?

<span id="ii.vi-p89"></span>18.  Thou hast seen the greatness of his
evil deeds:  come now to God’s loving-kindness.  He was turned into a
wild beast <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) , he abode in the
wilderness, he was scourged, that he might be saved.  He had claws as a
lion <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) ; for he was a ravager of
the Sanctuary.  He had a lion’s mane:  for he was a ravening and a
roaring lion.  He ate grass like an ox:  for a brute beast he was, not
knowing Him who had given him the kingdom.  His body was wet from the
dew; because after seeing the fire quenched by the dew he believed
not <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) .  And what happened <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560) ?  *After this*, saith he, *I,
Nabuchodonosor, lifted up* <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="ii.vi-Page_13"></span>*mine eyes unto heaven, and I blessed the Most
High, and to Him that liveth for ever I gave praise and glory* <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) .  When, therefore, he recognised the
Most High <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) , and sent up these
words of thankfulness to God, and repented himself for what he had done,
and recognised his own weakness, then God gave back to him the honour of
the kingdom.

<span id="ii.vi-p96"></span>19.  What then <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) ?  When Nabuchodonosor, after having
done such deeds, had made confession, did God give him pardon and the
kingdom, and when thou repentest shall He not give thee the remission of
sins, and the kingdom of heaven, if thou live a worthy life?  The <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.vi-p97.1"></span>Lord</span> is loving unto man,
and swift to pardon, but slow to punish.  Let no man therefore despair
of his own salvation.  Peter, the chiefest and foremost of the Apostles,
denied the Lord thrice before a little maid:  but he repented himself,
and wept bitterly.  Now weeping shews the repentance of the heart:  and
therefore he not only received forgiveness for his denial, but also held
his Apostolic dignity unforfeited.

<span id="ii.vi-p98"></span>20.  Having therefore, brethren, many
examples of those who have sinned and repented and been saved, do ye
also heartily make confession unto the Lord, that ye may both receive
the forgiveness of your former sins, and be counted worthy of the
heavenly gift, and inherit the heavenly kingdom with all the saints in
Christ Jesus; to Whom is the glory for ever and ever.  Amen <span
id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_491"></span>[8:492](2070018.htm#fr_491) <span
id="ii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p6"></span> For references to Cyril’s doctrine of
Free-will, see Index, “Soul.”

<span id="fn_492"></span>[8:493](2070018.htm#fr_492) <span
id="ii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p7"></span> [Jer. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)<span id="ii.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[8:494](2070018.htm#fr_493) <span
id="ii.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p8"></span> [Eccles. vii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#029)<span id="ii.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[8:495](2070018.htm#fr_494) <span
id="ii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p9"></span> [Eph. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="ii.vi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[8:496](2070018.htm#fr_495) <span
id="ii.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p10"></span> [Prov. vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#027)<span id="ii.vi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[8:497](2070018.htm#fr_496) <span
id="ii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p11"></span> Milles and the Benedictine Editor omit
these clauses, but the more recent editions of Reischl and Alexandrides
insert them on the authority of Munich, Jerusalem, and other good <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.vi-p11.1"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_497"></span>[8:498](2070018.htm#fr_497) <span
id="ii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p13"></span> [Prov. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#025)<span id="ii.vi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[8:499](2070018.htm#fr_498) <span
id="ii.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p14"></span> Omitted by recent editors with the best
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.vi-p14.1"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_499"></span>[8:500](2070018.htm#fr_499) <span
id="ii.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p15"></span> Gr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vi-p15.1"></span>κεκοίμηται</span> “has fallen asleep.”

<span id="fn_500"></span>[8:501](2070018.htm#fr_500) <span
id="ii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p17"></span> [Eccles. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004)<span id="ii.vi-p17.1"></span>. 
Compare [Eph. iv. 27](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#027)<span
id="ii.vi-p17.2"></span>:  “Neither give place to the devil.”

<span id="fn_501"></span>[9:502](2070018.htm#fr_501) <span
id="ii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p20"></span> [1 John
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008), [John
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="ii.vi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[9:503](2070018.htm#fr_502) <span
id="ii.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p21"></span> On Cyril’s doctrine of the Angels, see
Index, “Angels.”

<span id="fn_503"></span>[9:504](2070018.htm#fr_503) <span
id="ii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p22"></span> [1 Kings v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#004)<span id="ii.vi-p22.1"></span>, &c.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[9:505](2070018.htm#fr_504) <span
id="ii.vi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p23"></span> [Ezek. xxviii.
12-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#012)<span id="ii.vi-p23.1"></span>,
an obscure passage, addressed to the Prince of Tyre, and meaning that he
was “the perfect pattern” of earthly glory, set in a condition like that
of Adam in Paradise, and, seemingly, blameless as Adam before his fall. 
Cyril seems to regard the Prince of Tyre as an embodiment of Satan,
because he was deified as the object of national worship:  [Ezek.
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#002)<span id="ii.vi-p23.2"></span>,
“Thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God.”

<span id="fn_505"></span>[9:506](2070018.htm#fr_505) <span
id="ii.vi-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p24"></span> [Luke x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018)<span id="ii.vi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[9:507](2070018.htm#fr_506) <span
id="ii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p26"></span> Literally, “its old age” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi-p26.1"></span>τὸ γῆρας</span>).  Compare
iii. 7, and Dict. Chr. Biogr., *Macarius*, p. 770 a.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[9:508](2070018.htm#fr_507) <span
id="ii.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p28"></span> [Ps. xxxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)<span id="ii.vi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[9:509](2070018.htm#fr_508) <span
id="ii.vi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p29"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)<span id="ii.vi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[9:510](2070018.htm#fr_509) <span
id="ii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p31"></span> This is the reading of the Septuagint
instead of—“He placed at the east of the garden of Eden.”

<span id="fn_510"></span>[9:511](2070018.htm#fr_510) <span
id="ii.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p32"></span> [Gen. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012)<span id="ii.vi-p32.1"></span>:  “A
fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be upon the earth.”

<span id="fn_511"></span>[10:512](2070018.htm#fr_511) <span
id="ii.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p35"></span> [Josh. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#011)<span id="ii.vi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[10:513](2070018.htm#fr_512) <span
id="ii.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p36"></span> [Ps. lxxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004)<span id="ii.vi-p36.1"></span>. 
“Rahab” is there a poetical name of Egypt, and the passage has nothing
to do with Rahab the harlot.  The Benedictine Editor rightly disregards
S. Jerome’s suggestion, that Rahab is, like Egypt, a type of the Gentile
Church.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[10:514](2070018.htm#fr_513) <span
id="ii.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p38"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)<span id="ii.vi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[10:515](2070018.htm#fr_514) <span
id="ii.vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p39"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004)<span id="ii.vi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[10:516](2070018.htm#fr_515) <span
id="ii.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p40"></span> [Deut. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#020)<span id="ii.vi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[10:517](2070018.htm#fr_516) <span
id="ii.vi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p41"></span> For “all time,” the reading of the best
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.vi-p41.1"></span>mss.</span>, the
Benedictine text has “all mankind.”

<span id="fn_517"></span>[10:518](2070018.htm#fr_517) <span
id="ii.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p43"></span> The Benedictine has, “But if thou wilt I
will set before thee other examples also of our state?  Come on to the
blessed David.”

<span id="fn_518"></span>[10:519](2070018.htm#fr_518) <span
id="ii.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p44"></span> [2 Sam.
xii](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#000)<span id="ii.vi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[10:520](2070018.htm#fr_519) <span
id="ii.vi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p45"></span> Bened. “The king, the wearer of the
purple.”

<span id="fn_520"></span>[10:521](2070018.htm#fr_520) <span
id="ii.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p46"></span> Bened. “blinded.”

<span id="fn_521"></span>[10:522](2070018.htm#fr_521) <span
id="ii.vi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p47"></span> [Heb. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#027)<span id="ii.vi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[10:523](2070018.htm#fr_522) <span
id="ii.vi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p48"></span> [2 Sam. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)<span id="ii.vi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[11:524](2070018.htm#fr_523) <span
id="ii.vi-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p50"></span> [Ps. cii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)<span id="ii.vi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[11:525](2070018.htm#fr_524) <span
id="ii.vi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p51"></span> [Psa.
7.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007)<span id="ii.vi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[11:526](2070018.htm#fr_525) <span
id="ii.vi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p52"></span> [2 Sam.
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011)<span id="ii.vi-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[11:527](2070018.htm#fr_526) <span
id="ii.vi-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p53"></span> Resch. (*Agrapha*, p. 137) quotes various
forms of this saying from early writers, and regards it as a fragment of
an extracanonical Gospel.  But see Lightfoot, *Clem. Rom*. c. xiii.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[11:528](2070018.htm#fr_527) <span
id="ii.vi-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p55"></span> [Prov. xxiv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#032)<span id="ii.vi-p55.1"></span>,
Sept.  Heb. “Set my heart.”  The passage has no reference to
repentance:  it means, “I considered the field of the slothful.” 
Hilary, [Ps. lii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vi-p55.2"></span>; Ambrose, *Apolog*. 1, *Prophetæ David*, c.
iii. and other Fathers affirm the repentance of Solomon.  Augustine (*c.
Faustum*, Lib. xxii. c. 88) maintains that Scripture says nothing of his
repentance or forgiveness.  See Dante, *Paradiso, Canto* x. 109.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[11:529](2070018.htm#fr_528) <span
id="ii.vi-p55.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p56"></span> [1 Kings xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004)<span id="ii.vi-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[11:530](2070018.htm#fr_529) <span
id="ii.vi-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p57"></span> [1 Kings
21.29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029)<span id="ii.vi-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[11:531](2070018.htm#fr_530) <span
id="ii.vi-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p59"></span> [1 Kings xiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#006)<span id="ii.vi-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[11:532](2070018.htm#fr_531) <span
id="ii.vi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p60"></span> Justin Martyr, *Dialogue with Trypho*, §
120 charges the Jews with having cut out a passage referring to the
death of Isaiah.  Theophylact commenting on [Heb. xi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037)<span id="ii.vi-p60.1"></span>,
says:  “They were sawn asunder, as Isaiah by Manasses:  and they say
that he was sawn with a wooden saw, that his punishment might be the
more painful to him from being prolonged.”  Jerome on [Is. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)<span id="ii.vi-p60.2"></span>, says
that he was slain because of his calling the Jews “princes of Sodom and
people of Gomorra,” and because he said, “I saw the Lord sitting upon a
throne, high and lifted up.”

<span id="fn_532"></span>[11:533](2070018.htm#fr_532) <span
id="ii.vi-p60.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p61"></span> [2 Chr.
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#013)<span id="ii.vi-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[11:534](2070018.htm#fr_533) <span
id="ii.vi-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p63"></span> [2 Kings xx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)<span id="ii.vi-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[11:535](2070018.htm#fr_534) <span
id="ii.vi-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p64"></span> [Is. xxx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015)<span id="ii.vi-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[12:536](2070018.htm#fr_535) <span
id="ii.vi-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p65"></span> [Isaiah xxxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#008)<span id="ii.vi-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[12:537](2070018.htm#fr_536) <span
id="ii.vi-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p66"></span> From this point the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi-p66.1"></span>mss.</span> differ so widely that the
Benedictine Editor gives two complete recensions of the whole Lecture. 
The Codd. Coislin, Ottob. 2, and Grodec, with the editions of Prevot and
Milles, forming as it were one family of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi-p66.2"></span>mss.</span>, constitute the received text.  On
the other hand the older Munich Codex, with Codd. Roe and Casaubon,
exhibit a recension of the Lecture differing from the editions.  Reischl
wishing to retain the received text unaltered, though preferring the
other in particular passages, intended to append the other recension
complete, but having left his work half finished, failed to do so.  The
chief variations are given in the following notes.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[12:538](2070018.htm#fr_537) <span
id="ii.vi-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p68"></span> Roe and Casaubon (R.C.) add:  “into the
furnace of fire.”

<span id="fn_538"></span>[12:539](2070018.htm#fr_538) <span
id="ii.vi-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p69"></span> R.C. “What measure.”

<span id="fn_539"></span>[12:540](2070018.htm#fr_539) <span
id="ii.vi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p70"></span> <span id="ii.vi-p70.1"></span>Song of the
Three Children, v. 24.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[12:541](2070018.htm#fr_540) <span
id="ii.vi-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p71"></span> R.C. “Much.”

<span id="fn_541"></span>[12:542](2070018.htm#fr_541) <span
id="ii.vi-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p72"></span> R.C. “A great stream of repentance was
poured forth, when they said, For Thou art righteous,” &c.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[12:543](2070018.htm#fr_542) <span
id="ii.vi-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p73"></span> <span id="ii.vi-p73.1"></span>Song of the
Three Children, v. 4.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[12:544](2070018.htm#fr_543) <span
id="ii.vi-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p74"></span> R.C. “Did then repentance quench the flames
of the furnace, and dost thou disbelieve that it is able also to quench
the fire of hell?”

<span id="fn_544"></span>[12:545](2070018.htm#fr_544) <span
id="ii.vi-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p75"></span> The Gospel only says, “There was darkness
over all the land.”  An eclipse of the sun was impossible at the time of
the Paschal full moon.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[12:546](2070018.htm#fr_545) <span
id="ii.vi-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p76"></span> R.C. “That the narrative is not appropriate
to those who are here present.  For it was because Ananias and his
companions refused to worship the idol, that God gave them that
marvellous power.  Adapting myself, therefore, to such a hearer, and
looking to the profusion of instances, I come next to a different
example of repentance.”

<span id="fn_546"></span>[12:547](2070018.htm#fr_546) <span
id="ii.vi-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p78"></span> R.C. “most impious, and most fierce in
temper.”

<span id="fn_547"></span>[12:548](2070018.htm#fr_547) <span
id="ii.vi-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p79"></span> [Jer.
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#001), [Bar.
2:25](../../../bib/apo/bar002.htm#025)<span id="ii.vi-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[12:549](2070018.htm#fr_548) <span
id="ii.vi-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p80"></span> “Knowest thou not…”

<span id="fn_549"></span>[12:550](2070018.htm#fr_549) <span
id="ii.vi-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p81"></span> [2 Kings xxv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#007)<span id="ii.vi-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[12:551](2070018.htm#fr_550) <span
id="ii.vi-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p82"></span> R.C. “carried off.”

<span id="fn_551"></span>[12:552](2070018.htm#fr_551) <span
id="ii.vi-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p83"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vi-p83.1"></span>νοητά</span>.  R.C. add “and heavenly.”

<span id="fn_552"></span>[12:553](2070018.htm#fr_552) <span
id="ii.vi-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p84"></span> Omitted by R.C.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[12:554](2070018.htm#fr_553) <span
id="ii.vi-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p85"></span> R.C. “But those which had been constructed
in the Temple, which were over the mercy-seat of the Ark.”  Besides the
two Cherubim of solid gold which Moses placed on the two ends of the
Mercy-seat ([Ex. xxxvii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#007)<span
id="ii.vi-p85.1"></span> ff.), Solomon set “within the oracle” two
Cherubim of olive wood overlaid with gold, ten feet high with
outstretched wings overshadowing the Ark ([1 Kings
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#023), [1 Kings
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#007)<span id="ii.vi-p85.2"></span>). 
All these were either carried off or destroyed, when Nebuchadnezzar took
away “all the treasures of the house of the Lord” and “cut in pieces all
the vessels of gold which Solomon, King of Israel, had made in the
Temple of the Lord” ([2 Kings xxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#013)<span id="ii.vi-p85.3"></span>; [1
Esd. 1:54](../../../bib/apo/es1001.htm#054), [2 Esd.
10:22](../../../bib/apo/es2010.htm#022)<span id="ii.vi-p85.4"></span>). 
The Benedictine editor is concerned because Cyril has paid no attention
to the strange fiction in [2 Maccabees ii.
4](../../../bib/apo/ma2002.htm#004)<span id="ii.vi-p85.5"></span> that
Jeremy the Prophet “commanded the Tabernacle and the Ark to go with him”
to Mount Horeb, and there hid them, with the Altar of Incense, in a
hollow cave, to remain “unknown until the time that God gathers His
people again together.”

<span id="fn_554"></span>[12:555](2070018.htm#fr_554) <span
id="ii.vi-p85.6"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p86"></span> The Greek word rendered “Sanctuary” is
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi-p86.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi-p86.2"></span>ἁγιωσύνη</span>, literally
“the holiness.”

<span id="fn_555"></span>[12:556](2070018.htm#fr_555) <span
id="ii.vi-p86.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p87"></span> [2 Chron. xxxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007)<span id="ii.vi-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[12:557](2070018.htm#fr_556) <span
id="ii.vi-p87.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p88"></span> R.C. “The veil of the Sanctuary he tore
down, he overturned the altar, and took all the vessels and carried them
away to an idol temple.  The Temple itself he burned.”

<span id="fn_557"></span>[12:558](2070018.htm#fr_557) <span
id="ii.vi-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p90"></span> R.C. Afterwards he was turned into a wild
beast:  “he who was like a wild beast and most cruel in disposition; but
he was turned into a wild beast, not that he might perish, but that by
repentance he might be saved.”

<span id="fn_558"></span>[12:559](2070018.htm#fr_558) <span
id="ii.vi-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p91"></span> R.C. “of birds.”  See [Dan. iv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#033)<span id="ii.vi-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[12:560](2070018.htm#fr_559) <span
id="ii.vi-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p92"></span> R.C. “after the midst of the furnace had
become to Ananias and his companions as the tinkling breath of rain, he
saw and believed not.”

<span id="fn_560"></span>[12:561](2070018.htm#fr_560) <span
id="ii.vi-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p93"></span> R.C. “But afterwards he came to his senses
and repented, as he says himself.”

<span id="fn_561"></span>[13:562](2070018.htm#fr_561) <span
id="ii.vi-p93.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p94"></span> [Dan. iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)<span id="ii.vi-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[13:563](2070018.htm#fr_562) <span
id="ii.vi-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p95"></span> R.C. “And after he had been scourged many
years, he gave praise to Him that liveth for ever, and acknowledged Him
that had given him the kingdom, and recognised the King of kings.  And
though he had often sinned in deeds, on making confession only in words,
he received the benefit of God’s unspeakable loving kindness.  He who
was of all men most wicked, by the Divine judgment and loving-kindness
of God who chastised him, crowned himself again with the royal diadem,
and recovered his imperial throne.”

<span id="fn_563"></span>[13:564](2070018.htm#fr_563) <span
id="ii.vi-p96.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p97"></span> R.C. “If then there is present among you
any from among the Heathen who has ever spoken evil against Christians,
or in times of persecution plotted against the Holy Churches, let him
take Nabuchodonsor as an example of salvation:  let him confess in like
manner, that he may also find the like forgiveness.  If any has been
defiled by lust and passions, let him take up the repentance of the
blessed David:  if any has denied like Peter, let him die like him for
the sake of the Lord Jesus.  For He who to his tears begrudged not the
Apostleship, will not refuse thee the gospel mysteries.  And for women
let Rahab be a pattern unto salvation, and for men the manifold examples
mentioned of the men of old times.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[13:565](2070018.htm#fr_564) <span
id="ii.vi-p98.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p99"></span> R.C. “And be ye all of good hope, having
regard to the lovingkindness of God; not that we may fall back into the
same sins, but that having had the benefit of redemption, and lived in a
manner worthy of His grace, we may be able to blot out the handwriting
that is against us by good works; in the power of the Only-begotten, the
Son of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be glory to the Father,
with the Holy Ghost, both now and ever, and unto all the ages of
eternity.  Amen.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Baptism.](2070019)
