[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070054)  [Next](2070056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Introduction to the “Theological”
Orations.</span>

<span id="iii.xii-p2"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xii-p2.1"></span>It</span> has been said with truth,” says the
writer of the Article on Gregory of Nazianzus in the Dictionary of
Christian Biography, “that these discourses would lose their chief charm
in a translation.…Critics have rivalled each other in the praises they
have heaped upon them, but no praise is so high as that of the many
Theologians who have found in them their own best thoughts.  A Critic
who cannot be accused of partiality towards Gregory has given in a few
words perhaps the truest estimate of them:  ‘A solidity of thought, the
concentration of all that is spread through the writings of Hilary,
Basil, and Athanasius, a flow of softened eloquence which does not halt
or lose itself for a moment, an argument nervous without dryness on the
one hand, and without useless ornament on the other, give these five
Discourses a place to themselves among the monuments of this fine
Genius, who was not always in the same degree free from grandiloquence
and affectation.  In a few pages, and in a few hours, Gregory has summed
up and closed the controversy of a whole Century.’” <span
id="fr_3376"></span>[3377](#fn_3376)   They were preached in the Church
called Anastasia, <span id="fr_3377"></span>[3378](#fn_3377) at
Constantinople, between 379 and 381, and have gained for their author
the title of The Theologian, which he shares with S. John the Evangelist
alone.  It should perhaps, however, be noted that the word is not here
used in the wide and general sense in which we employ it, but in a
narrower and more specific way, denoting emphatically the Defender of
the Deity of the Logos.  His principal opponents were the followers of
Eunomius and Macedonius, and it is almost entirely against them that
these Orations on Theology, or the Godhead of the Word and the Holy
Ghost, are directed.  The chief object of the Preacher in these and most
other of his public utterances, is to maintain the Nicene Faith of the
Trinity or Trinity of God; that is, the Doctrine that while there is but
One Substance or Essence <span id="fr_3378"></span>[3379](#fn_3378) in
the Godhead, and by consequence God is in the most <span
id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span id="iii.xii-Page_281"></span>absolute
sense One, yet God is not Unipersonal, but within this Undivided Unity
there are three Self-determining Subjects or Persons, distinguished from
one another by special characteristics (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii-p6.3"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii-p6.4"></span>διότητες</span>) or personal properties—Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost.  With this object he entered into conflict with the
heretics named above, who denied either the Consubstantiality of the Son
with the Father, or the perfect Godhead and Personality of the Holy
Ghost.

<span id="iii.xii-p7"></span>Eunomius, whom Ullmann calls one of the
most interesting heretics of the Fourth Century, was by birth a
Cappadocian, and slightly older than Gregory.  As a young man he was a
pupil and amanuensis of Aëtius, by whom the Arian heresy was developed
to its extreme results.  The disciple never shrank from drawing the
furthest logical conclusions from his master’s premises, or from stating
them with a frankness, which to those who regarded the premises
themselves from which he reasoned as horrible blasphemies, seemed
nothing less than diabolical in its impiety.  So precisely did he
complete and formulate his teacher’s heretical tenets, that the Anomœan
Arians were ever afterwards called Eunomians, rather than Aëtians.  They
asserted the absolute *Unlikeness* of the Being of the Father and of the
Son.  Starting with the conception of God as Absolute Being, of Whom no
Generation can be predicated, Unbegotten and incapable of Begetting,
they went on to say that an Eternal Generation is inconceivable, and
that the Generation of the Son of God must have had a beginning.  Of
course, therefore, the Arian conclusion followed, namely, that there was
a time when the Son did not exist (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii-p7.1"></span>ἦ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii-p7.2"></span>ν ποτὲ ὅτε οῦκ ἦν</span>), and His Essence is
altogether unlike that of the Unbegotten Father.  Equality of essence
and Similarity of essence, are alike untenable, from the mere fact that
the one Essence is Unbegotten, and the other is Begotten.  The Son, they
said, is the First Creation of the Divine Energy, and is the Instrument
by whom God created the world, and in this sense, as the Organ of
creative power, may be said to be the Express Image and Likeness of the
Energy of the Father. <span id="fr_3379"></span>[3380](#fn_3379)

<span id="iii.xii-p9"></span>As they viewed the Holy Ghost as sharing
the Divine Nature in an even remoter degree, as being only the noblest
production of the Only-begotten Son, Eunomius was the first person
heretically to discontinue the practice of threefold immersion in Holy
Baptism.  He also corrupted the Form of that Sacrament, by setting aside
the use of the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and baptizing
people “in the name of the Creator, and into the death of Christ.” 
Therefore the Council of Constantinople ordered that converts from
Eunomianism should be *baptized*, although those from other forms of
Arianism were admitted into the Catholic Church by simple imposition of
hands.  Through the influence of the followers of Aëtius, Eunomius
became, in 360, Bishop of Cyzicus in Mysia, but he does not appear to
have occupied the See very long.  At any rate when Gregory came, in 379,
to Constantinople, he was living in retirement near Chalcedon.  All
parties concur in representing him as a consummate Dialectician, but the
Orthodox declared that he had turned Theology into a mere Technology. 
Readiness of Dialectic was the great characteristic of his Sect, and it
was they who introduced into the Capital that bad spirit of theological
disputatiousness which Gregory deplores in the first of these famous
Orations.  He also differed entirely from Gregory, not merely in the
conclusions at which he arrived, but in the method by which he reached
them; following the system of Aristotle, rather than of Plato, and using
an exclusively intellectual method, while Gregory treated Religion as
belonging to the entire man.  The point at issue between them, besides
this of the Interior relations of the Three Blessed Persons within the
Godhead, was mainly the question as to the complete comprehensibility of
the Divine Nature, which the Eunomians maintained, and Gregory denied. 
The latter argued that, while we have a sure conviction that God is, we
have not a full understanding of What He is.  He would not, however,
exclude us from *all* knowledge of God’s Nature, only he limits our
capacity to so much as God has been pleased to reveal to us of Himself. 
“In my opinion,” he says (Or. xxiv. 4), “it is impossible to express
God, and yet more impossible to conceive Him—seeing that the thick
covering of the flesh is an obstacle to the understanding of the
truth.”  Similarly in the Fourth of these Orations (Or. xxx. 17) he
says, “The Deity cannot be expressed in words.  And this is proved to
us, not only by arguments, but by the wisest and most ancient of the
Hebrews, so far as they have given us reason for conjecture.  For they
appropriated certain characters to the honour of the Deity, <span
id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span id="iii.xii-Page_282"></span>and would
not even allow the name of anything inferior to God to be written with
the same letters as that of God, because to their mind it was improper
that the Deity should even to that extent admit any of His creatures to
a share with Himself.  How then could they have admitted that the
indivisible and separate Nature can be explained by divisible words?”

<span id="iii.xii-p10"></span>In the mind of Gregory, the Orthodox
doctrine of the Blessed Trinity is the fundamental dogma of
Christianity, in contrast with all other religions, and with all
heretical systems.  “Remember your confession,” he says to his hearers
in an Oration against the Arians; “Into what were you baptized?  The
Father?  Good, but still Jewish.  The Son?  Good; no longer Jewish, but
not yet perfect.  The Holy Ghost?  Very good; this is perfect.  Was it
then simply into these, or was there some one common Name of these? 
Yes, there was, and it is God.”  And in the same oration he calls
Arianism a new Judaism, because it ascribes full Deity only to the
Father; and he speaks of One Nature in Three Individualities,
intelligent, perfect, self-existent, distinct numerically, but one in
Godhead.  “In created things,” says Ullmann, “the several individuals
are embraced in a common conception, though in themselves only connected
together in thought, while in fact they are not one.  Manhood is only an
intellectual conception; in fact there exist only Men.  But in the
Godhead the Three Persons are not only in conception, but in fact, One;
and this Unity is not only a relative but an absolute Unity, because the
Divine Being is perfect in all Three Persons, and in all in a perfect
equality.  In this sense therefore Gregory and all orthodox Trinitarians
maintain the Unity of God.  But within this Unity there is a true
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a Trinity of Persons in a Unity of
Nature.”  We worship, he says (Or. xxxiii. 16), the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, One Nature in Three Individualities.  So that, as he says
elsewhere (Or. in laud. Athanasii, xxi. 10), the Trinity is a true
Trinity; not a numbering of unlike things, but a binding together of
equals.  Each of the Persons is God in the fullest sense.  The Son and
the Holy Ghost have their Source of Being in the Father, but in such
sense that They are fully consubstantial with Him, and that neither of
Them differs from Him in any particular of Essence.  The points of
difference lie in the Personal Attributes; the Father Unoriginate, and
Source of Deity; the Son deriving His Being eternally from the Father,
and Himself the Source of all created existence; the Holy Ghost
proceeding eternally from God, and sent into the world.

<span id="iii.xii-p11"></span>In the first of these five discourses the
Preacher sets himself to clear the ground for the fitting presentation
of his great theme.  He endeavours to lay down the principles on which
Theologians should proceed in such discussions, and very earnestly
deprecates the habit of promiscuous argument in all sorts of places,
upon all sorts of occasions, and before all sorts of hearers, of the
deepest and most sacred truths and mysteries of the Faith.  They only
should be allowed to engage in such conversation who are fitted for it
by the practice of Christian virtue.  For others there are many other
subjects upon which they can exercise their dialectical attainments,
without doing or incurring any injury.

<span id="iii.xii-p12"></span>In the second oration Gregory lays down
the position referred to above, that it is impossible for even the most
exalted human reason fully to grasp the Nature of God, though His
Existence is patent to all.  We can only, he says, predicate negatives
concerning Him.  He gives three reasons for this incapacity.  First to
enhance our estimation of this knowledge, when attained hereafter;
secondly to save us from the danger of falling through pride, like
Lucifer, if we attained it prematurely; and thirdly, to support and
sustain us in the trials and conflicts of this life, by the certainty
that its attainment hereafter will be the reward of faithful service in
them.  The cause of our present inability is the body with which our
soul is united, the grossness of whose present condition hinders us from
rising to the complete apprehension of the invisible and immaterial. 
God, out of compassion for our weakness, has been pleased to designate
Himself in Holy Scripture by various names taken from material objects,
or from moral virtues; but these are only stepping-stones to the truth,
and have indeed been sometimes perverted, and made a basis for
polytheism.  It is, however, only natural that the Divine Essence should
be shrouded in Mystery, for the same is the case with the created
essences also.

<span id="iii.xii-p13"></span>In the Third and Fourth he deals with the
question of the Son.  His position may be summed up as follows:  The Son
is absolutely of One Substance with the Father, and shares with Him all
the Attributes of Godhead.  Yet He is a distinct Person, marked off by
the fact that He is begotten of the Father.  But we must be careful not
to allow this term “Begotten” to suggest to us any analogy <span
id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span id="iii.xii-Page_283"></span>with
created things.  It is wholly independent of time and space and sense.

<span id="iii.xii-p14"></span>This position he had to defend against
many assailants, and especially against the Eunomians.  These heretics
maintained that the use of this term necessarily implied a beginning of
the Essence of the Son, and they asked the orthodox to tell them when
that beginning took place.  Gregory replies that the Generation of God
the Son is beyond all time; pointing out that Paternity is an Essential
attribute of God the Father, and therefore is as eternal as His Essence,
so that there never was a time when He was not the Father, and
consequently never a time when the Generation of the Son began.  He
admits that there is a sense in which it is possible to say that the Son
and the Spirit are not unoriginate, but then you must be careful not to
use the word Origin in the sense of Beginning, but in that of Cause. 
They derive Their Being eternally from the Father, and all Three Persons
are coeternal together.  In respect of cause They are not unoriginate,
but the cause is not necessarily prior in time to its effect, just as
the Sun is not prior to its own light.  In respect of *time*, then, They
may be said to be unoriginate, for the Sources of time cannot be subject
to time.  “If the Father has not ceased to beget, His Generation is an
imperfect one; and if He has ceased, He must have begun, for an end
implies a beginning.”  “Not so,” says Gregory, “unless you are prepared
to admit that what has no end has necessarily no beginning; and in that
case what will you say about the Angels, or the human soul?  These will
have no end; had either of them therefore no beginning?”  By a similar
process of *Reductio ad absurdum* he dissipates all the quibbles of
Eunomian sophistry, and lays down the orthodox Faith of the Church. 
Then in the remainder of the Third and Fourth Orations he goes on to
examine the Scriptural testimony adduced by his opponents, and to shew
by a similar catena on the other side that the overwhelming
preponderance of the authority of the Bible is clearly against them.  In
connection with this point he lays down the canon that in the
interpretation of Scripture in regard to our Lord, all expressions
savouring of humility or weakness are to be referred to that pure
Humanity which He assumed for our sake; while all that speaks of Majesty
and Power belongs to His Godhead.

<span id="iii.xii-p15"></span>In the Fifth he deals with the doctrine of
the Holy Ghost.  The heresy of Arius was at first directly concerned
only with the Person of our Lord, though not without a side-glance at
that also of the Holy Ghost.  The Council of Nicæa had confined itself
to the first question, and its Creed ended with, “We believe in the Holy
Ghost.”  This, it was afterwards argued, was enough to proclaim His
Divinity, and so Gregory argues in this Oration, “If He be only a
creature, how do we believe on Him, how are we made perfect in Him, for
the first of these belongs to Deity, the second may be said of anything”
(c. vi.).  The reason, however, that the Great Synod made no express
definition on the point seems to have been that the controversy had not
yet been carried so far in direct terms (cf. S. Basil, Epp. lxxviii.
ccclxxxvii.).  But fifty years later the growth of the heresy rendered a
definition of the Church’s faith on this point needful; and in 363, on
his return from his fourth period of exile, S. Athanasius held a
provincial Synod at Alexandria, in whose Synodical Letter to the Emperor
Jovian the Godhead of the Holy Ghost is maintained in terms which, as
Canon Bright says, partly anticipate the language of the Creed of
Constantinople (Dict. Biog. Art. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xii-p15.1"></span>Athanasius</span>).  The new development of
the heresy had begun to appear at Constantinople as well as in Thrace
and Asia Minor.  Macedonius, a Semi-Arian, had been elected Bishop of
Constantinople in 341, and in spite of violent opposition, which he met
by still more violent measures, had maintained his position till 360,
when he was deposed and driven out by the Anomœan Arians.  He then in
his retirement became the leader of the Semi-Arian party.  Accepting the
statement that the Son was Like in Essence to the Father, he would not
concede even this to the Holy Ghost, but declared Him to be a mere
creature (Thdt. Hist. [Eccl. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#006)<span id="iii.xii-p15.2"></span>),
and the servant or minister of the Son; applying to Him terms which
without error could only be used of the Angels (Sozomen. H. E. iv. 27). 
His followers were known as Macedonians, or sometimes Marathonians, from
a certain Marathonius, formerly a Paymaster of the Prætorian Guards, who
had become a Deacon of Constantinople, and, having done much in the way
of founding and maintaining Monastic Houses and Houses of Charity in the
City, was consecrated by Macedonius as Bishop of Nicomedia.  They were
also known as Pneumatomachi, from the nature of their Heresy.  A
controversy had now begun to arise as to the precise position which the
true faith was to assign to the Holy Spirit.  There were those who left
it doubtful whether He had indeed a separate Personality, or whether He
were not rather a <span id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span
id="iii.xii-Page_284"></span>mere Influence or Activity of the Father
and the Son.  Gregory tells us how, when he came to the Metropolis, he
found the wildest confusion prevalent.  Some, he says, conceived of the
Holy Ghost as a mere Energy of God, others thought Him a Creature,
others believed Him to be God; while many out of an alleged reverence
for Holy Scripture, hesitated to give Him the Name of God.  To this last
class belonged, according to Socrates (H. E. ii. 45), Eustathius, who
had been ejected from the Bishopric of Sebasteia in Pontus.  He refused
to admit that the Holy Spirit is God, while yet He did not dare to
affirm that He is a mere creature.  When Gregory proceeded to preach the
Deity of the Spirit, he was accused of introducing a strange and
unscriptural god, because, as he acknowledges, the letter of the Bible
is not so clear on the doctrine of the Spirit as it is on that of the
Son.  But he points out that it is possible to be superstitious in one’s
reverence for the letter of the Bible, and that such superstition leads
directly to heresy.  He explains the reticence of the New Testament on
this point by shewing (in this Oration, cc. 26, 27) how God’s
Self-Revelation to man has always been a gradual one; how the Old
Testament revealed the Father clearly, with obscure hints about the Son;
and the New Testament manifested the Son, but only hinted at the Godhead
of the Spirit; but now, he says, the Spirit dwells among us, and allows
us to recognize Him more clearly.  For it would not have been advisable,
as long as the Godhead of the Father was not acknowledged, to proclaim
that of the Son; and while the Deity of the Son was not yet accepted, to
add another burden in that of the Holy Spirit.  Recognizing thus a
Divine economy in the Self-Revelations of God, he was not averse to
using a similar caution in his own dealings with weak or ill-instructed
minds. <span id="fr_3380"></span>[3381](#fn_3380)   But yet when real
necessity arose, he could speak out with perfect plainness on this
subject; and he even incurred danger to life and limb from the violence
of the opposing party.  He met their opposition by the clearest
statements of the Catholic Dogma.  “Is the Spirit God?” he asks. 
“Yes.”  “But is He consubstantial?”  “Yes, if He is God.”  (Orat. xxxi.
10.)  He appeals both to the Bible, and to the experience of the
Christian life.  If the Spirit is not to be adored, how can He deify me
in Baptism?  From the Spirit comes our new Birth; from the new Birth our
new Life; and from the new Life our knowledge of the Dignity of Him from
Whom it is derived (Ibid. C. 29).  He is, however, milder in his
treatment of these heretics than of the strict Arians, both, as he says,
because they approached more nearly to the Orthodox belief on the
subject of the Son, and because their conspicuous piety of life shewed
that their error was not altogether wilful.  In this Oration he shows
that though the Name of God may not actually be given in the New
Testament to the Holy Ghost, yet all the attributes of God are ascribed
to Him, and that therefore the use of the Name is a matter of legitimate
inference.  He carries on the argument in the Oration on Pentecost (No.
XLI.  See the Introduction to that Oration in the present Volume).

<span id="iii.xii-p17"></span>With regard to the doctrine of the
Procession, Gregory gives us no clear information.  He is silent as to
the Procession from the Son.  It is enough for him that the Spirit is
not Begotten but Proceeding (in SS. Lumina, c. 12), and that Procession
is His distinctive Property, which involves at once His Personality and
His Essential Deity.

<span id="iii.xii-p18"></span>At length in 381 the work of local Synods
and episcopal conferences was completed and clinched by the Ruling of a
Second Ecumenical Council.  It is true that the Council which Theodosius
summoned to meet at Constantinople could scarcely have regarded itself
as possessing Ecumenical authority; whilst in the West it certainly was
not regarded in this light before the Sixth Century.  Nevertheless the
honours of Ecumenicity were ultimately awarded to it by the whole
Church, because it completes the series of Great Councils by which the
Doctrine of the Deity of the Holy Spirit was affirmed; and in fact it
expressed the final judgment of the Catholic Church upon the Macedonian
controversy.  Its first Canon anathematises the Semiarians or
Pneumatomachi by name as well as the Eunomians or Anomœan Arians (cf.
Dict. Biog. Art. Gregory of Nazianzus, by Dr. H. B. Swete).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3376"></span>[280:3377](2070055.htm#fr_3376) <span
id="iii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p3"></span> De Broglie, “L’Eglise et l’Empire,” v.
385.—“Ce sont autant de modèles dans l’art délicat d’imprimer la forme
oratoire aux développements philosophiques.  Une pensée substantielle,
formée de tous les sucs répandus dans les écrits d’Hilaire, de Basile et
d’Athanase; un courant d’éloquence tempérée qui ne se ralentit, ni ne
s’égare en aucun moment; une argumentation nerveuse sans sècheresse,
mais sans vaine parure d’ornements, font à ces cinq discours une place à
part parmi les monuments de ce beau génie, auquel l’emphase et
l’affectation ne furent pas toujours aussi étrangers.  En quelques
pages, et en quelques heures, Grégoire avait résumé et clos la
controverse de tout un siècle.”

<span id="fn_3377"></span>[280:3378](2070055.htm#fr_3377) <span
id="iii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p4"></span> See Prolegomena p. 171.

<span id="fn_3378"></span>[280:3379](2070055.htm#fr_3378) <span
id="iii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p5"></span> “There is but one divine Essence or
Substance; Father, Son, and Spirit, are one in essence, or
consubstantial.  They are in one another, inseparable, and cannot be
conceived without each other.  In this point the Nicene doctrine is
thoroughly monotheistic, or monarchian, in distinction from tritheism,
which is but a new form of the polytheism of the pagans.

<span id="iii.xii-p6"></span>“The terms Essence (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii-p6.1"></span>οὐσία</span>) and Nature
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii-p6.2"></span>φύσις</span>), in
the philosophical sense, denote not an individual, a personality, but
the Genus or Species; not Unum in Numero, but Ens Unum in Multis.  All
men are of the same substance, partake of the same human nature; though
as persons and individuals they are very different.  The term
Homo-ousion, in its strict grammatical sense, differs from Mono-ousion
or Touto-ousion, as well as from Hetero-ousion, and signifies not
numerical identity, but equality of essence or community of nature among
several beings.  It is clearly thus used in the Chalcedonian Symbol,
where it is said that Christ is ‘consubstantial (Homo-ousios) with the
Father as touching the Godhead, and consubstantial with us (and yet
individually distinct from us) as touching the Manhood.’  But in the
Divine Trinity consubstantiality denotes not only sameness of kind, but
at the same time Numerical unity; not merely the Unum in Specie, but
also the Unum in Numero.  The three Persons are related to the Divine
Substance not as three individuals to their species, as Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, or Peter, John, and Paul, to human nature; they are only one
God.  The divine Substance is absolutely indivisible by reason of its
simplicity, and absolutely inextensible and untransferable by reason of
its infinity; whereas a corporeal substance can be divided, and the
human nature can be multiplied by generation.  Three Divine substances
would limit and exclude each other, and therefore could not be infinite
or absolute.  The whole fulness of the one undivided Essence of God,
with all its attributes, is in all the Persons of the Trinity, though in
each in His own way; in the Father as Original Principle, in the Son by
eternal Generation, in the Spirit by eternal Procession.  The Church
teaches not One Divine Essence *and* Three Persons, but One Essence *In*
Three Persons.  Father, Son, and Spirit cannot be conceived as Three
separate individuals, but are in one another, and form a solidaric
Unity.”  (Schaff, History of the Church, Nic. & Post-Nic. Period, Div.
ii. p. 672.)

<span id="fn_3379"></span>[281:3380](2070055.htm#fr_3379) <span
id="iii.xii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p8"></span> Two terms borrowed from Holy Scripture
([Heb. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.xii-p8.1"></span>).  But observe, borrowed with a difference—not
“the Image of His Substance,” which they would not admit, but of His
“Energy,” which is a very different conception.

<span id="fn_3380"></span>[284:3381](2070055.htm#fr_3380) <span
id="iii.xii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p16"></span> In his Fifty-third Epistle, addressed to
S. Basil, there is an amusing instance of his defence of this tolerant
disposition, which S. Basil also displayed in dealing with minds of this
class.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oration XXVII](2070056)
