[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070029)  [Next](2070031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span
id="ii.xviii-Page_94"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Lecture XIV.</span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.xviii-p2.1"></span>On the Words, And Rose Again from the Dead on
the Third Day, and Ascended into the Heavens, and Sat on the Right Hand
of the Father.</span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p3.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p3.2"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xviii-p3.3"></span></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p4"></span>*Now I make known unto you, brethren, the
gospel which I preached unto you*….*that He hath been raised on the
third day according to the Scriptures, &c.*

<span id="ii.xviii-p5"></span>*Rejoice, O Jerusalem, and keep high
festival, all ye that love Jesus;* for He is risen.  Rejoice, all ye
that mourned before <span id="fr_1654"></span>[1655](#fn_1654) , when ye
heard of the daring and wicked deeds of the Jews:  for He who was
spitefully entreated of them in this place is risen again.  And as the
discourse concerning the Cross was a sorrowful one, so let the good
tidings of the Resurrection bring joy to the hearers.  Let mourning be
turned into gladness, and lamentation to joy:  and let our mouth be
filled with joy and gladness, because of Him, who after His
resurrection, said Rejoice <span id="fr_1655"></span>[1656](#fn_1655) . 
For I know the sorrow of Christ’s friends in these past days; because,
as our discourse stopped short at the Death and the Burial, and did not
tell the good tidings of the Resurrection, your mind was in suspense, to
hear what you were longing for.

<span id="ii.xviii-p8"></span>Now, therefore, the Dead is risen, He who
was *free among the dead* <span id="fr_1656"></span>[1657](#fn_1656) ,
and the deliverer of the dead.  He who in dishonour wore patiently the
crown of thorns, even He arose, and crowned Himself with the diadem of
His victory over death.

<span id="ii.xviii-p10"></span>2.  As then we set forth the testimonies
concerning His Cross, so come let us now verify the proofs of His
Resurrection also:  since the Apostle before us <span
id="fr_1657"></span>[1658](#fn_1657) affirms, *He was buried, and has
been raised on the third day according to the Scriptures.*  As an
Apostle, therefore, has sent us back to the testimonies of the
Scriptures, it is good that we should get full knowledge of the hope of
our salvation; and that we should learn first whether the divine
Scriptures tell us the season of His resurrection, whether it comes in
summer or in autumn, or after winter; and from what kind of place the
Saviour has risen, and what has been announced in the admirable Prophets
as the name of the place of the Resurrection, and whether the women, who
sought and found Him not, afterwards rejoice at finding Him; in order
that when the Gospels are read, the narratives of these holy Scriptures
may not be thought fables nor rhapsodies.

<span id="ii.xviii-p12"></span>3.  That the Saviour then was buried, ye
have heard distinctly in the preceding discourse, as Isaiah saith, His
burial shall be in peace <span id="fr_1658"></span>[1659](#fn_1658) : 
for in His burial He made peace between heaven and earth, bringing
sinners unto God:  and, *that the righteous is taken out of the way of
unrighteousness* <span id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659) :  and, *His
burial shall be in peace*:  and, *I will give the wicked for His
burial* <span id="fr_1660"></span>[1661](#fn_1660) .  There is also the
prophecy of Jacob saying in the Scriptures, *He lay down and couched as
a lion, and as a lion’s whelp*:  who shall rouse Him up <span
id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661) ?  And the similar passage in
Numbers, He couched, He lay down as a lion, and as a lion’s whelp <span
id="fr_1662"></span>[1663](#fn_1662) .  The Psalm also ye have often
heard, which says, *And Thou hast brought me down into the dust of
death* <span id="fr_1663"></span>[1664](#fn_1663) .  Moreover we took
note of the spot, when we quoted the words, *Look unto the rock, which
ye have hewn* <span id="fr_1664"></span>[1665](#fn_1664) .  But now let
the testimonies concerning His resurrection itself go with us on our
way.

<span id="ii.xviii-p20"></span>4.  First, then, in the 11th Psalm He
says, *For the misery of the poor, and the sighing of the needy, now
will I arise, saith the Lord* <span id="fr_1665"></span>[1666](#fn_1665)
.  But this passage still remains doubtful with some:  for He often
rises up also in anger <span id="fr_1666"></span>[1667](#fn_1666) , to
take vengeance upon His enemies.

<span id="ii.xviii-p23"></span>Come then to the 15th Psalm, which says
distinctly:  *Preserve Me, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p23.1"></span>O Lord</span>, for in Thee* <span
id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span id="ii.xviii-Page_95"></span>*have I put
my trust* <span id="fr_1667"></span>[1668](#fn_1667) :  and after this,
*their assemblies of blood will I not join, nor make mention of their
names between my lips* <span id="fr_1668"></span>[1669](#fn_1668) ;
since they have refused me, and chosen Cæsar as their king <span
id="fr_1669"></span>[1670](#fn_1669) :  and also the next words, *I
foresaw the* <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p26.2"></span>Lord</span> *alway before Me, because He is
at My right hand, that I may not be moved* <span
id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670) :  and soon after *Yea and even
until night my reins chastened me* <span
id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671) .  And after this He says most
plainly, *For Thou wilt not leave My soul in hell* <span
id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672) *; neither wilt Thou suffer Thine
Holy One to see corruption*.  He said not, neither wilt Thou suffer
Thine Holy One to see death, since then He would not have died; but
*corruption*, saith He, I see not, and shall not abide in death.  *Thou
hast made known to Me the ways of life* <span
id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673) .  Behold here is plainly preached
a life after death.  Come also to the 29th Psalm, *I will extol Thee, O*
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p30.2"></span>Lord</span>*, for Thou
hast lifted Me up, and hast not made My foes to rejoice over Me* <span
id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674) .  What is it that took place? 
Wert thou rescued from enemies, or wert thou released when about to be
smitten?  He says himself most plainly, *O <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p31.2"></span>Lord</span>, Thou hast brought up My soul
from hell* <span id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675) .  There he says,
Thou wilt not leave, prophetically:  and here he speaks of that which is
to take place as having taken place, *Thou hast brought up.  Thou hast
saved Me from them that go down into the pit* <span
id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676) .  At what time shall the event
occur?  *Weeping shall continue for the evening, and joy cometh in the
morning* <span id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677) :  for in the
evening was the sorrow of the disciplines, and in the morning the joy of
the resurrection.

<span id="ii.xviii-p35"></span>5.  But wouldst thou know the place
also?  Again He saith in Canticles, *I went down into the garden of
nuts* <span id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678) ; for it was a garden
where He was crucified <span id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679) .  For
though it has now been most highly adorned with royal gifts, yet
formerly it was a garden, and the signs and the remnants of this
remain.  *A garden enclosed, a fountain sealed* <span
id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680) , by the Jews who said, *We
remember that that deceiver said while He was yet alive, After three
days, I will rise:  command, therefore, that the sepulchre be made sure;
and further on, So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the
stone with the guard* <span id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681) .  And
aiming well at these, one saith, *and in rest Thou shalt judge
them* <span id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682) .  But who is the
fountain that is sealed, or who is interpreted as being a *well-spring
of living water* <span id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683) ?  It is the
Saviour Himself, concerning whom it is written, *For with Thee is the
fountain of life* <span id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684) .

<span id="ii.xviii-p43"></span>6.  But what says Zephaniah in the person
of Christ to the disciples?  *Prepare thyself, be rising at the dawn: 
all their gleaning is destroyed* <span
id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685) :  the gleaning, that is, of the
Jews, with whom there is not a cluster, nay not even a gleaning of
salvation left; for their vine is cut down.  See how He says to the
disciples, *Prepare thyself, rise up at dawn*:  at dawn expect the
Resurrection.

<span id="ii.xviii-p45"></span>And farther on in the same context of
Scripture He says, *Therefore wait thou for Me, saith the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p45.1"></span>Lord,</span> until the day
of My Resurrection at the Testimony* <span
id="fr_1686"></span>[1687](#fn_1686) .  Thou seest that the Prophet
foresaw the place also of the Resurrection, which was to be surnamed
“the Testimony.”  For what is the reason that this spot of Golgotha and
of the Resurrection is not called, like the rest of the Churches, a
Church, but a Testimony?  Why, perhaps, it was because of the Prophet,
who had said, *until the day of My Resurrection at the Testimony*.

<span id="ii.xviii-p47"></span>7.  And who then is this, and what is the
sign of Him that rises?  In the words of the Prophet that follow in the
same context, He says plainly, *For then will I turn to the peoples a
language* <span id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687) :  since, after the
Resurrection, when the Holy Ghost was sent forth the gift of tongues was
granted, *that they might serve the Lord under one yoke* <span
id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688) .  And what other token is set
forth in the same Prophet, that they should serve the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p49.2"></span>Lord</span> *under one
yoke?*  *From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia they shall bring me
offerings* <span id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689) .  Thou knowest
what is written in the Acts, when the Ethiopian eunuch came from beyond
the rivers of Ethiopia <span id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690) . 
When therefore the Scriptures tell both the time and the peculiarity of
the place, when they tell also the signs which followed the
Resurrection, have thou henceforward a firm faith in the Resurrection,
and let no one stir thee from confessing *Christ risen from the*
dead <span id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691) .

<span id="ii.xviii-p53"></span>8.  Now take also another testimony in
the <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span
id="ii.xviii-Page_96"></span>87th Psalm, where Christ speaks in the
Prophets, (for He who then spoke came afterwards among us):  *O <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p53.1"></span>Lord</span>, God of My
salvation, I have cried day and night before Thee,* and a little,
farther on, *I became as it were a man without help, free among the
dead* <span id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692) .  He said not, I
became a man without help; but, *as it were a man without help. * For
indeed He was crucified not from weakness, but willingly and His Death
was not from involuntary weakness.  *I was counted with them that go
down into the pit* <span id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693) .  And
what is the token?  *Thou hast put away Mine acquaintance far from
Me* <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694) (for the disciples have
fled).  *Wilt Thou shew wonders to the dead* <span
id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695) ?  Then a little while afterwards:
 *And unto Thee have I cried, O* <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p57.2"></span>Lord</span>*; and in the morning shall my
prayer come before Thee* <span id="fr_1696"></span>[1697](#fn_1696) . 
Seest thou how they shew the exact point of the Hour, and of the Passion
and of the Resurrection?

<span id="ii.xviii-p59"></span>9.  And whence hath the Saviour risen? 
He says in the Song of Songs:  *Rise up, come, My neighbour* <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1698](#fn_1697) :  and in what follows, *in a cave
of the rock* <span id="fr_1698"></span>[1699](#fn_1698) !  A cave of the
rock He called the cave which was erewhile before the door of the
Saviour’s sepulchre, and had been hewn out of the rock itself, as is
wont to be done here in front of the sepulchres.  For now it is not to
be seen, since the outer cave was cut away at that time for the sake of
the present adornment.  For before the decoration of the sepulchre by
the royal munificence, there was a cave in the front of the rock <span
id="fr_1699"></span>[1700](#fn_1699) .  But where is the rock that had
in it the cave?  Does it lie near the middle of the city, or near the
walls and the outskirts?  And whether is it within the ancient walls, or
within the outer walls which were built afterwards?  He says then in the
Canticles:  *in a cave of the rock, close to the outer wall* <span
id="fr_1700"></span>[1701](#fn_1700) .

<span id="ii.xviii-p64"></span>10.  At what season does the Saviour
rise?  Is it the season of summer, or some other?  In the same Canticles
immediately before the words quoted He says, The winter is past, the
rain is past and gone <span id="fr_1701"></span>[1702](#fn_1701) ; the
flowers appear on the earth; the time of the pruning is come <span
id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702) .  Is not then the earth full of
flowers now, and are they not pruning the vines?  Thou seest how he said
also that the winter is now past.  For when this month Xanthicus <span
id="fr_1703"></span>[1704](#fn_1703) is come, it is already spring.  And
this is the season, the first month with the Hebrews, in which occurs
the festival of the Passover, the typical formerly, but now the true. 
This is the season of the creation of the world:  for then God said, Let
the earth bring forth herbage of grass, yielding seed after his kind and
after his likeness <span id="fr_1704"></span>[1705](#fn_1704) .  And
now, as thou seest, already every herb is yielding seed.  And as at that
time God made the sun and moon and gave them courses of equal day (and
night), so also a few days since was the season of the equinox.

<span id="ii.xviii-p71"></span>At that time God said, let us make man
after our image and after our likeness <span
id="fr_1705"></span>[1706](#fn_1705) .  And the image he received, but
the likeness through his disobedience he obscured.  At the same season
then in which he lost this the restoration also took place.  At the same
season as the created man through disobedience was cast out of Paradise,
he who believed was through obedience brought in.  Our Salvation then
took place at the same season as the Fall:  when the flowers appeared,
and the pruning was come.

<span id="ii.xviii-p73"></span>11.  A garden was the place of His
Burial, and a vine that which was planted there:  and He hath said, *I
am the vine* <span id="fr_1706"></span>[1707](#fn_1706) !  He was
planted therefore in the earth in order that the curse which came
because of Adam might be rooted out.  The earth was condemned to thorns
and thistles:  the true Vine sprang up out of the earth, that the saying
might be fulfilled, *Truth sprang up out of the earth, and
righteousness* <span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span
id="ii.xviii-Page_97"></span>*looked down from heaven* <span
id="fr_1707"></span>[1708](#fn_1707) .  And what will He that is buried
in the garden say?  *I have gathered My myrrh with My spices*:  and
again, *Myrrh and aloes, with all chief spices* <span
id="fr_1708"></span>[1709](#fn_1708) .  Now these are the symbols of the
burying; and in the Gospels it is said, *The women came unto the
sepulchre bringing the spices which they had prepared* <span
id="fr_1709"></span>[1710](#fn_1709) *:  Nicodemus also bringing a
mixture of myrrh and aloes* <span id="fr_1710"></span>[1711](#fn_1710)
.  And farther on it is written, *I did eat My bread with My
honey* <span id="fr_1711"></span>[1712](#fn_1711) :  the bitter before
the Passion, and the sweet after the Resurrection.  Then after He had
risen He entered through closed doors:  but they believed not that it
was He:  for *they supposed that they beheld a spirit* <span
id="fr_1712"></span>[1713](#fn_1712) .  But He said, *Handle Me and
see*.  Put your fingers into the print of the nails, as Thomas
required.  *And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, He
said unto them, Have ye here anything to eat?  And they gave Him a piece
of a broiled fish and honeycomb* <span
id="fr_1713"></span>[1714](#fn_1713) .  Seest thou how that is
fulfilled, *I did eat My bread with My honey*.

<span id="ii.xviii-p82"></span>12.  But before He entered through the
closed doors, the Bridegroom and Suitor <span
id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714) of souls was sought by those noble
and brave women.  They came, those blessed ones, to the sepulchre, and
sought Him Who had been raised, and the tears were still dropping from
their eyes, when they ought rather to have been dancing with joy for Him
that had risen.  Mary came seeking Him, according to the Gospel, and
found Him not:  and presently she heard from the Angels, and afterwards
saw the Christ.  Are then these things also written?  He says in the
Song of Songs, *On my bed I sought Him whom my soul loved*.  At what
season?  *By night on my bed I sought Him Whom my soul loved:  Mary*, it
says, *came while it was yet dark.  On my bed I sought Him by night, I
sought Him, and I found Him not* <span
id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715) .  And in the Gospels Mary says,
*They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid
Him* <span id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716) .  But the Angels being
then present cure their want of knowledge; for they said, *Why seek ye
the living among the dead* <span id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717) ? 
He not only rose, but had also the dead with Him when He rose <span
id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718) .  But she knew not, and in her
person the Song of Songs said to the Angels, *Saw ye Him Whom my soul*
loved?  It was but a little that I passed from them (that is, from the
two Angels), *until I found Him Whom my soul loved.  I held Him, and
would not let Him go* <span id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719) .

<span id="ii.xviii-p89"></span>13.  For after the vision of the Angels,
Jesus came as His own Herald; and the Gospel says, *And behold Jesus met
them, saying, All hail! and they came and took hold of His feet* <span
id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720) .  They took hold of Him, that it
might be fulfilled, *I will hold Him, and will not let Him go*.  Though
the woman was weak in body, her spirit was manful.  *Many waters quench
not love, neither do rivers drown it* <span
id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721) ; He was dead whom they sought, yet
was not the hope of the Resurrection quenched.  And the Angel says to
them again, *Fear not ye*; I say not to the soldiers, *fear not*, but to
you <span id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722) ; as for them, let them
be afraid, that, taught by experience, they may bear witness and say,
*Truly this was the Son of God* <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) ; but you ought not to be afraid,
*for perfect love casteth out fear* <span
id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724) .  *Go, tell His disciples that He
is risen* <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725) ; and the rest. 
And they depart with joy, yet full of fear; is this also written? yes,
the second Psalm, which relates the Passion of Christ, says, *Serve the
Lord with fear, and rejoice unto Him with trembling* <span
id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726) ;—*rejoice*, because of the risen
Lord; but *with trembling*, because of the earthquake, and the Angel who
appeared as lightning.

<span id="ii.xviii-p97"></span>14.  Though, therefore, Chief Priests and
Pharisees through Pilate’s means sealed the tomb; yet the women beheld
Him who was risen.  And Esaias knowing the feebleness of the Chief
Priests, and the women’s strength of faith, says, *Ye women, who come
from beholding, come hither* <span id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727)
*; for the people hath no understanding*;—the Chief Priests want
understanding, while women are eye-witnesses.  And when the soldiers
came into the city to them, and told them all that had come to pass,
they said to them, *Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole Him
away while we slept* <span id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728) ?  Well
therefore did Esaias foretell this also, as in their persons, *But tell
us, and relate to us another deceit* <span
id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729) .  He who rose again, is up, and
for a gift of money they persuade the soldiers; but they persuade not
the kings of our time.  The soldiers then surrendered the truth for
silver; but the kings of this day have, in their piety, built this holy
Church of the Resurrection of God our Saviour, inlaid with silver and
wrought with gold, in which we are assembled <span
id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730) ; and embellished it with the
treasures of silver and gold and precious stones.  *And if this come to
the governor’s ears*, they say, *we will persuade him* <span
id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) .  Yea, though ye persuade the
soldiers, yet ye will not persuade the world; for why, as Peter’s guards
were condemned when he escaped out of the prison, were not <span
id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="ii.xviii-Page_98"></span>they also
who watched Jesus Christ condemned?  Upon the former, sentence was
pronounced by Herod, for they were ignorant and had nothing to say for
themselves; while the latter, who had seen the truth, and concealed it
for money, were protected by the Chief Priests.  Nevertheless, though
but a few of the Jews were persuaded at the time, the world became
obedient.  They who hid the truth were themselves hidden; but they who
received it were made manifest by the power of the Saviour, who not only
rose from the dead, but also raised the dead with Himself.  And in the
person of these the Prophet Osee says plainly, *After two days will He
revive us, and in the third day we shall rise again, and shall live in
His sight* <span id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732) .

<span id="ii.xviii-p104"></span>15.  But since the disobedient Jews will
not be persuaded by the Divine Scriptures, but forgetting all that is
written gainsay the Resurrection of Jesus, it were good to answer them
thus:  On what ground, while you say that Eliseus and Elias raised the
dead, do you gainsay the Resurrection of our Saviour?  Is it that we
have no living witnesses now out of that generation to what we say? 
Well, do you also bring forward witnesses of the history of that time. 
But that is written;—so is this also written:  why then do ye receive
the one, and reject the other?  They were Hebrews who wrote that
history; so were all the Apostles Hebrews:  why then do ye disbelieve
the Jews <span id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) ?  Matthew who wrote
the Gospel wrote it in the Hebrew tongue <span
id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734) ; and Paul the preacher was a
Hebrew of the Hebrews; and the twelve Apostles were all of Hebrew race: 
then fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem were appointed in succession from
among the Hebrews <span id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735) .  What
then is your reason for allowing your own accounts, and rejecting ours,
though these also are written by Hebrews from among yourselves.

<span id="ii.xviii-p108"></span>16.  But it is impossible, some one will
say, that the dead should rise; and yet Eliseus twice raised the
dead,—when he was alive, and also when dead.  Do we then believe, that
when Eliseus was dead, a dead man who was cast upon him and touched him,
arose and is Christ not risen?  But in that case, the dead man who
touched Eliseus, arose, yet he who raised him continued nevertheless
dead:  but in this case both the Dead of whom we speak Himself arose,
and many dead were raised without having even touched Him.  For *many
bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and they came out of the graves
after His Resurrection, and went into the Holy City* <span
id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736) , (evidently this city, in which we
now are <span id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737) ,) *and appeared unto
many*.  Eliseus then raised a dead man, but he conquered not the world;
Elias raised a dead man, but devils are not driven away in the name of
Elias.  We are not speaking evil of the Prophets, but we are celebrating
their Master more highly; for we do not exalt our own wonders by
disparaging theirs; for theirs also are ours; but by what happened among
them, we win credence for our own.

<span id="ii.xviii-p111"></span>17.  But again they say, “A corpse then
lately dead was raised by the living; but shew us that one three days
dead can possibly arise, and that a man should be buried, and rise after
three days.”  If we seek for Scripture testimony in proof of such facts,
the Lord Jesus Christ Himself supplies it in the Gospels, saying, *For
as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale’s belly; so shall
the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth* <span id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738) .  And when we examine
the story of Jonas, great is the force <span
id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739) of the resemblance.  Jesus was sent
to preach repentance; Jonas also was sent:  but whereas the one fled,
not knowing what should come to pass; the other came willingly, to give
repentance unto salvation.  Jonas was asleep in the ship, and snoring
amidst the stormy sea; while Jesus also slept, the sea, according to
God’s providence <span id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740) , began to
rise, to shew in the sequel the might of Him who slept.  To the one they
said, *Why art thou snoring?  Arise, call upon thy God, that God may
save us* <span id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741) ; but in the other
case they say unto the Master, *Lord, save us* <span
id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742) .  Then they said, *Call upon thy
God*; here they say, *save Thou*.  But the one says, *Take me, and cast
me into the sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you* <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743) ; the other, Himself *rebuked the
winds and the sea, and there was a great calm* <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744) .  The one was cast into a whale’s
belly:  but the other of His own accord went down thither, where the
invisible whale of death is.  And He went down of His own accord, that
death <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="ii.xviii-Page_99"></span>might cast up those whom he had devoured,
according to that which is written, *I will ransom them from the power
of the grave; and from the hand of death I will redeem them* <span
id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745) .

<span id="ii.xviii-p120"></span>18.  At this point of our discourse, let
us consider whether is harder, for a man after having been buried to
rise again from the earth, or for a man in the belly of a whale, having
come into the great heat of a living creature, to escape corruption. 
For what man knows not, that the heat of the belly is so great, that
even bones which have been swallowed moulder away?  How then did Jonas,
who was three days and three nights in the whale’s belly, escape
corruption?  And, seeing that the nature of all men is such that we
cannot live without breathing, as we do, in air, how did he live without
a breath of this air for three days?  But the Jews make answer and say,
The power of God descended with Jonas when he was tossed about in hell. 
Does then the Lord grant life to His own servant, by sending His power
with him, and can He not grant it to Himself as well?  If that is
credible, this is credible also; if this is incredible, that also is
incredible.  For to me both are alike worthy of credence.  I believe
that Jonas was preserved, for *all things are possible with God* <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) ; I believe that Christ also was
raised from the dead; for I have many testimonies of this, both from the
Divine Scriptures, and from the operative power even at this day <span
id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747) of Him who arose,—who descended
into hell alone, but ascended thence with a great company; for He went
down to death, *and many bodies of the saints which slept arose* <span
id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) through Him.

<span id="ii.xviii-p124"></span>19.  Death was struck with dismay on
beholding a new visitant descend into Hades, not bound by the chains of
that place.  Wherefore, O porters of Hades, were ye scared at sight of
Him?  What was the unwonted fear that possessed you?  Death fled, and
his flight betrayed his cowardice.  The holy prophets ran unto Him, and
Moses the Lawgiver, and Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; David also, and
Samuel, and Esaias, and John the Baptist, who bore witness when he
asked, *Art Thou He that should come, or look we for another* <span
id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749) ?  All the Just were ransomed, whom
death had swallowed; for it behoved the King whom they had proclaimed,
to become the redeemer of His noble heralds.  Then each of the Just
said, *O death, where is thy victory?  O grave, where is thy
sting* <span id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750) ?  For the Conqueror
hath redeemed us.

<span id="ii.xviii-p127"></span>20.  Of this our Saviour the Prophet
Jonas formed the type, when he prayed out of the belly of the whale, and
said, *I cried in my affliction*, and so on; *out of the belly of
hell* <span id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751) , and yet he was in the
whale; but though in the whale, he says that he is in Hades; for he was
a type of Christ, who was to descend into Hades.  And after a few words,
he says, in the person of Christ, prophesying most clearly, *My head
went down to the chasms of the mountains* <span
id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752) ; and yet he was in the belly of
the whale.  What mountains then encompass thee?  I know, he says, that I
am a type of Him, who is to be laid in the Sepulchre hewn out of the
rock.  And though he was in the sea, Jonas says, *I went down to the
earth*, since he was a type of Christ, who went down into the heart of
the earth.  And foreseeing the deeds of the Jews who persuaded the
soldiers to lie, and told them, *Say that they stole Him away*, he says,
*By regarding lying vanities they forsook their own mercy* <span
id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753) .  For He who had mercy on them
came, and was crucified, and rose again, giving His own precious blood
both for Jews and Gentiles; yet say they, *Say that they stole Him
away*, having regard to *lying vanities* <span
id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754) .  But concerning His Resurrection,
Esaias also says, *He who brought up from the earth the great Shepherd
of the sheep* <span id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755) ; he added the
word, *great*, lest He should be thought on a level with the shepherds
who had gone before Him.

<span id="ii.xviii-p134"></span>21.  Since then we have the prophecies,
let faith abide with us.  Let them fall who fall through unbelief, since
they so will; but thou hast taken thy stand on the rock of the faith in
the Resurrection.  Let no heretic ever persuade thee to speak evil of
the Resurrection.  For to this day the Manichees say, that, the
resurrection of the Saviour was phantom-wise, and not real, not heeding
Paul who says, *Who was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh*; and again, *By the resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord from
the dead* <span id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756) .  And again he
aims at them, and speaks thus, *Say not in* <span id="page_100">p.
100</span> <span id="ii.xviii-Page_100"></span>*thine heart, who shall
ascend into heaven; or who shall descend into the deep? that is, to
bring up Christ from the dead* <span
id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757) ; and in like manner warning as he
has elsewhere written again, *Remember Jesus Christ raised from the
dead* <span id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) ; and again, *And if
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith also
vain.  Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we
testified of God that He raised up Christ, whom He raised not up* <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) .  But in what follows he says,
*But now is Christ risen from the dead, the first fruits of them that
are asleep* <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760) ;*—And He was
seen of Cephas, then of the twelve*; (for if thou believe not the one
witness, thou hast twelve witnesses;) *then He was seen of above five
hundred brethren at once* <span id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761) ;
(if they disbelieve the twelve, let them admit the five hundred;) *after
that He was seen of James* <span id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762) ,
His own brother, and first Bishop of this diocese.  Seeing then that
such a Bishop originally <span id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) saw
Christ Jesus when risen, do not thou, his disciple, disbelieve him.  But
thou sayest that His brother James was a partial witness; *afterwards He
was seen also of me* <span id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764) Paul,
His enemy; and what testimony is doubted, when an enemy proclaims it? 
“I, *who was before a persecutor* <span
id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765) , now preach the glad tidings of
the Resurrection.”

<span id="ii.xviii-p145"></span>22.  Many witnesses there are of the
Saviour’s resurrection.—The night, and the light of the full moon; (for
that night was the sixteenth <span id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766)
;) the rock of the sepulchre which received Him; the stone also shall
rise up against the face of the Jews, for it saw the Lord; even the
stone which was then rolled away <span
id="fr_1767"></span>[1768](#fn_1767) , itself bears witness to the
Resurrection, lying there to this day.  Angels of God who were present
testified of the Resurrection of the Only-begotten:  Peter and John, and
Thomas, and all the rest of the Apostles; some of whom ran to the
sepulchre, and saw the burial-clothes, in which He was wrapped before,
lying there after the Resurrection; and others handled His hands and His
feet, and beheld the prints of the nails; and all enjoyed together that
Breath of the Saviour, and were counted worthy to forgive sins in the
power of the Holy Ghost.  Women too were witnesses, who took hold of His
feet, and who beheld the mighty earthquake, and the radiance of the
Angel who stood by:  the linen clothes also which were wrapped about
Him, and which He left when He rose;—the soldiers, and the money given
to them; the spot itself also, yet to be seen;—and this house of the
holy Church, which out of the loving affection to Christ of the Emperor
Constantine of blessed memory, was both built and beautified as thou
seest.

<span id="ii.xviii-p148"></span>23.  A witness to the resurrection of
Jesus is Tabitha also, who was in His name raised from the dead <span
id="fr_1768"></span>[1769](#fn_1768) ; for how shall we disbelieve that
Christ is risen, when even His Name raised the dead?  The sea also bears
witness to the resurrection of Jesus, as thou hast heard before <span
id="fr_1769"></span>[1770](#fn_1769) .  The drought of fishes also
testifies, and the fire of coals there, and the fish laid thereon. 
Peter also bears witness, who had erst denied Him thrice, and who then
thrice confessed Him; and was commanded to feed His spiritual <span
id="fr_1770"></span>[1771](#fn_1770) sheep.  To this day stands Mount
Olivet, still to the eyes of the faithful all but displaying Him Who
ascended on a cloud, and the heavenly gate of His ascension.  For from
heaven He descended to Bethlehem, but to heaven He ascended from the
Mount of Olives <span id="fr_1771"></span>[1772](#fn_1771) ; at the
former place beginning His conflicts among men, but in the latter,
crowned after them.  Thou hast therefore many witnesses; thou hast this
very place of the Resurrection; thou hast also the place of the
Ascension towards the east; thou hast also for witnesses the Angels
which there bore testimony; and the cloud on which He went up, and the
disciples who came down from that place.

<span id="ii.xviii-p153"></span>24.  The course of instruction in the
Faith would lead me to speak of the Ascension also; but the grace of God
so ordered <span id="fr_1772"></span>[1773](#fn_1772) it, that thou
heardest most fully concerning it, as far as our weakness allowed,
yesterday, on the <span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="ii.xviii-Page_101"></span>Lord’s day; since, by the providence of
divine grace, the course of the Lessons <span
id="fr_1773"></span>[1774](#fn_1773) in Church included the account of
our Saviour’s going up into the heavens <span
id="fr_1774"></span>[1775](#fn_1774) ; and what was then said was spoken
principally for the sake of all, and for the assembled body of the
faithful, yet especially for thy sake <span
id="fr_1775"></span>[1776](#fn_1775) .  But the question is, didst thou
attend to what was said?  For thou knowest that the words which come
next in the Creed teach thee to believe in Him “Who <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p157.5"></span>rose again the third day,
and ascended into Heaven, and sat down on the right hand of the
Father</span>.”  I suppose then certainly that thou rememberest the
exposition; yet I will now again cursorily put thee in mind of what was
then said.  Remember what is distinctly written in the Psalms, *God is
gone up with a shout* <span id="fr_1776"></span>[1777](#fn_1776) ;
remember that the divine powers also said to one another, *Lift up your
gates, ye Princes* <span id="fr_1777"></span>[1778](#fn_1777) , and the
rest; remember also the Psalm which says, *He ascended on high, He led
captivity captive* <span id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778) ; remember
the Prophet who said, *Who buildeth His ascension unto heaven* <span
id="fr_1779"></span>[1780](#fn_1779) ; and all the other particulars
mentioned yesterday because of the gainsaying of the Jews.

<span id="ii.xviii-p162"></span>25.  For when they speak against the
ascension of the Saviour, as being impossible, remember the account of
the carrying away of Habakkuk:  for if Habakkuk was transported by an
Angel, being carried by the hair of his head <span
id="fr_1780"></span>[1781](#fn_1780) , much rather was the Lord of both
Prophets and Angels, able by His own power to make His ascent into the
Heavens on a cloud from the Mount of Olives.  Wonders like this thou
mayest call to mind, but reserve the preeminence for the Lord, the
Worker of wonders; for the others were borne up, but He bears up all
things.  Remember that Enoch was translated <span
id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781) ; but Jesus ascended:  remember
what was said yesterday concerning Elias, that Elias was taken up in a
chariot of fire <span id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782) ; but that
*the chariots of* Christ *are ten thousand-fold even thousands upon
thousands* <span id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783) :  and that Elias
was taken up, towards the east of Jordan; but that Christ ascended at
the east of the brook Cedron:  and that Elias went *as into
heaven* <span id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784) ; but Jesus, into
heaven:  and that Elias said that a double portion in the Holy Spirit
should be given to his holy disciple; but that Christ granted to His own
disciples so great enjoyment of the grace of the Holy Ghost, as not only
to have It in themselves, but also, by the laying on of their hands, to
impart the fellowship of It to them who believed.

<span id="ii.xviii-p168"></span>26.  And when thou hast thus wrestled
against the Jews,—when thou hast worsted them by parallel instances,
then come further to the pre-eminence of the Saviour’s glory; namely,
that they were the servants, but He the Son of God.  And thus thou wilt
be reminded of His pre-eminence, by the thought that a servant of Christ
was caught up to the third heaven.  For if Elias attained as far as the
first heaven, but Paul as far as the third, the latter, therefore, has
obtained a more honourable dignity.  Be not ashamed of thine Apostles;
they are not inferior to Moses, nor second to the Prophets; but they are
noble among the noble, yea, nobler still.  For Elias truly was taken up
into heaven; but Peter has the keys of the kingdom of heaven, having
received the words, *Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven* <span id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785) .  Elias
was taken up only to heaven; but Paul both into *heaven*, and into
*paradise* <span id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786) (for it behoved
the disciples of Jesus to receive more manifold grace), and *heard
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for man to utter*.  But Paul
came down again from above, not because he was unworthy to abide in the
third heaven, but in order that after having enjoyed things above man’s
reach, and descended in honour, and having preached Christ, and died for
His sake, he might receive also the crown of martyrdom.  But I pass over
the other parts of this argument, of which I spoke yesterday in the
Lord’s-day congregation; for with understanding hearers, a mere reminder
is sufficient for instruction.

<span id="ii.xviii-p171"></span>27.  But remember also what I have often
said <span id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787) concerning the Son’s
sitting at the right <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span
id="ii.xviii-Page_102"></span>hand of the Father; because of the next
sentence in the Creed, which says, “<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p172.6"></span>and ascended into Heaven, and sat down at
the right hand of the Father</span>.”  Let us not curiously pry into
what is properly meant by the throne; for it is incomprehensible:  but
neither let us endure those who falsely say, that it was after His Cross
and Resurrection and Ascension into heaven, that the Son began to sit on
the right hand of the Father.  For the Son gained not His throne by
advancement <span id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788) ; but throughout
His being (and His being is by an eternal generation <span
id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) ) He also sitteth together with the
Father.  And this throne the Prophet Esaias having beheld before the
incarnate coming of the Saviour, says, *I saw the Lord sitting on a
throne, high and lifted up <span id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790)* ,
and the rest.  For the Father *no man hath seen at any time <span
id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791)* , and He who then appeared to the
Prophet was the Son.  The Psalmist also says, *Thy throne is prepared of
old; Thou art from everlasting <span
id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792)* .  Though then the testimonies on
this point are many, yet because of the lateness of the time, we will
content ourselves even with these.

<span id="ii.xviii-p178"></span>28.  But now I must remind you of a few
things out of many which are spoken concerning the Son’s sitting at the
right hand of the Father.  For the hundred and ninth Psalm says plainly,
*The <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p178.1"></span>Lord</span> said
unto my Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy
footstool* <span id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793) .  And the
Saviour, confirming this saying in the Gospels, says that David spoke
not these things of himself, but from the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
saying, *How then doth David in the Spirit call Him Lord, saying, The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand* <span
id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794) ? and the rest.  And in the Acts of
the Apostles, Peter on the day of Pentecost standing with the
Eleven <span id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795) , and discoursing to
the Israelites, has in very words cited this testimony from the hundred
and ninth Psalm.

<span id="ii.xviii-p182"></span>29.  But I must remind you also of a few
other testimonies in like manner concerning the Son’s sitting at the
right hand of the Father.  For in the Gospel according to Matthew it is
written, *Nevertheless, I say unto you, Henceforth ye shall see the Son
of Man sitting on the right hand of power* <span
id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796) , and the rest:  in accordance with
which the Apostle Peter also writes, *By the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, who is on the right hand of God, having gone into heaven* <span
id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797) .  And the Apostle Paul, writing to
the Romans, says, *It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God* <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798) .  And charging the Ephesians, he
thus speaks, *According to the working of His mighty power, which He
wrought in Christ when He raised Him from the dead, and set Him at His
own right hand* <span id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799) ; and the
rest.  And the Colossians he taught thus, *If ye then be risen with
Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is seated at the right hand
of God* <span id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800) .  And in the Epistle
to the Hebrews he says, *When He had made purification of our sins, He
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high* <span
id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801) .  And again, *But unto which of
the Angels hath He said at any time, Sit thou at My right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool* <span
id="fr_1802"></span>[1803](#fn_1802) ?  And again, *But He, when He had
offered one sacrifice for all men, for ever sat down on the right hand
of God; from henceforth expecting till His enemies be made His
footstool* <span id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803) .  And again,
*Looking unto Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith; Who for the
joy that was set before Him endured the Cross, despising shame, and is
set down on the right hand of the throne of God* <span
id="fr_1804"></span>[1805](#fn_1804) .

<span id="ii.xviii-p192"></span>30.  And though there are many other
texts concerning the session of the Only-begotten on the right hand of
God, yet these may suffice us at present; with a repetition of my
remark, that it was not after His coming in the flesh <span
id="fr_1805"></span>[1806](#fn_1805) that He obtained the dignity of
this seat; no, for even before all ages, the Only-begotten Son of God,
our Lord Jesus Christ, ever possesses the throne on the right hand of
the Father.  Now may He Himself, the God of all, who is Father of the
Christ, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who came down, and ascended, and
sitteth together with the Father, watch over your souls; keep unshaken
and unchanged your hope in Him who rose again; raise you together with
Him from your dead sins unto His heavenly gift; count you worthy to be
*caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air* <span
id="fr_1806"></span>[1807](#fn_1806) , in His fitting time; and, until
that time arrive of His glorious second advent, write all your names in
the Book of the living, and having written them, never blot them out
(for the names of many, who fall away, are blotted out); and may He
grant to all of you to believe on Him who rose again, and to look for
Him who is gone up, and is to come again, (to come, but not from the
earth; for be on your guard, O man, because of the deceivers who are to
come;) Who sitteth on high, and is here present together with us,
*beholding the* <span id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span
id="ii.xviii-Page_103"></span>*order of each, and the steadfastness of
his faith* <span id="fr_1807"></span>[1808](#fn_1807) .  For think not
that because He is now absent in the flesh, He is therefore absent also
in the Spirit.  He is here present in the midst of us, listening to what
is said of Him, and beholding thine inward thoughts, and *trying the
reins and hearts* <span id="fr_1808"></span>[1809](#fn_1808) ;—who also
is now ready to present those who are coming to baptism, and all of you,
in the Holy Ghost to the Father, and to say, *Behold, I and the children
whom God hath given Me* <span id="fr_1809"></span>[1810](#fn_1809) :—To
whom be glory for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1654"></span>[94:1655](2070030.htm#fr_1654) <span
id="ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p6"></span> [Is. lxvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#010)<span id="ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1655"></span>[94:1656](2070030.htm#fr_1655) <span
id="ii.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p7"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>,
“All hail.”  The usual greeting, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p7.2"></span>Χαίρετε</span>, “Rejoice.”

<span id="fn_1656"></span>[94:1657](2070030.htm#fr_1656) <span
id="ii.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p9"></span> [Ps. lxxxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005)<span id="ii.xviii-p9.1"></span>: 
*Cast off among the dead* (R.V.); *Cast away* (Margin).

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[94:1658](2070030.htm#fr_1657) <span
id="ii.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p11.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p11.2"></span>παρών</span>. i.e. in the text.  [1 Cor. xv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#004)<span id="ii.xviii-p11.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[94:1659](2070030.htm#fr_1658) <span
id="ii.xviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p13"></span> [Is. lvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002)<span id="ii.xviii-p13.1"></span>: 
*He entereth into peace* (R.V.).

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[94:1660](2070030.htm#fr_1659) <span
id="ii.xviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p14"></span> [Is. lvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p14.1"></span>: 
*that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come* (R.V.).

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[94:1661](2070030.htm#fr_1660) <span
id="ii.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p15"></span> [Is. liii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p15.1"></span>: 
*they made His grave with the wicked* (R.V.).

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[94:1662](2070030.htm#fr_1661) <span
id="ii.xviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p16"></span> [Gen. xlix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[94:1663](2070030.htm#fr_1662) <span
id="ii.xviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p17"></span> [Num. xxiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[94:1664](2070030.htm#fr_1663) <span
id="ii.xviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p18"></span> [Ps. xxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015)<span id="ii.xviii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[94:1665](2070030.htm#fr_1664) <span
id="ii.xviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p19.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p19.2"></span>πεσημειωσάμεθα</span>, “noted for ourselves;”
Middle Voice. [Is. li. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xviii-p19.3"></span>:  quoted in Cat. xiii. 35.

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[94:1666](2070030.htm#fr_1665) <span
id="ii.xviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p21"></span> [Ps. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)<span id="ii.xviii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[94:1667](2070030.htm#fr_1666) <span
id="ii.xviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p22"></span> [Psa.
7.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006)<span id="ii.xviii-p22.1"></span>: 
“Arise, O Lord, in Thine anger.

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[95:1668](2070030.htm#fr_1667) <span
id="ii.xviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p24"></span> [Ps. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[95:1669](2070030.htm#fr_1668) <span
id="ii.xviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p25"></span> [Psa.
16.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xviii-p25.1"></span>:  “their drink-offerings of blood will I not
offer.”  The Psalmist abhors the bloody rites, and the very names of the
false gods.

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[95:1670](2070030.htm#fr_1669) <span
id="ii.xviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p26"></span> [John xix
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)<span id="ii.xviii-p26.1"></span>. 
Cyril applies to the Jews what the Psalmist says concerning those that
hasten after another god.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[95:1671](2070030.htm#fr_1670) <span
id="ii.xviii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p27"></span> [Ps. xvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008)<span id="ii.xviii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[95:1672](2070030.htm#fr_1671) <span
id="ii.xviii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p28"></span> [Psa.
16.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007)<span
id="ii.xviii-p28.1"></span>.  Quoting from memory, Cyril transposes
these sentences.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[95:1673](2070030.htm#fr_1672) <span
id="ii.xviii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p29"></span> [Psa.
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xviii-p29.1"></span>.  R.V. *in Sheol*, Sept. *in Hades*.

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[95:1674](2070030.htm#fr_1673) <span
id="ii.xviii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p30"></span> [Psa.
16.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xviii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[95:1675](2070030.htm#fr_1674) <span
id="ii.xviii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p31"></span> [Psa.
30.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[95:1676](2070030.htm#fr_1675) <span
id="ii.xviii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p32"></span> [Psa.
30.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003)<span
id="ii.xviii-p32.1"></span>.  R.V. *from Sheol*, Sept. *from Hades*.

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[95:1677](2070030.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="ii.xviii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p33"></span> [Psa.
30.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003)<span id="ii.xviii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[95:1678](2070030.htm#fr_1677) <span
id="ii.xviii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p34"></span> [Psa.
30.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span id="ii.xviii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[95:1679](2070030.htm#fr_1678) <span
id="ii.xviii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p36"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011)<span id="ii.xviii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[95:1680](2070030.htm#fr_1679) <span
id="ii.xviii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p37"></span> [John xix.
41](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#041)<span id="ii.xviii-p37.1"></span>. 
See Index, *Golgotha*.

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[95:1681](2070030.htm#fr_1680) <span
id="ii.xviii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p38"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012)<span id="ii.xviii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[95:1682](2070030.htm#fr_1681) <span
id="ii.xviii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p39"></span> [Matt.
27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063),
[65](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#065)<span id="ii.xviii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[95:1683](2070030.htm#fr_1682) <span
id="ii.xviii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p40"></span> [Job vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#018)<span
id="ii.xviii-p40.1"></span>:.…*try him every moment*.  Heb. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p40.2"></span>עגרֶ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p40.3"></span>ֶ</span> “a wink,” as in
[Job xxi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xviii-p40.4"></span>, misinterpreted in both passages by the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p40.5"></span>LXX.</span> as meaning
“rest.”

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[95:1684](2070030.htm#fr_1683) <span
id="ii.xviii-p40.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p41"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015)<span id="ii.xviii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[95:1685](2070030.htm#fr_1684) <span
id="ii.xviii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p42"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[95:1686](2070030.htm#fr_1685) <span
id="ii.xviii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p44"></span> [Zeph. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#007)<span id="ii.xviii-p44.1"></span>: 
*they rose early and corrupted all their doings*.  The passage is wholly
is understood by the Seventy, whom S. Cyril follows.

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[95:1687](2070030.htm#fr_1686) <span
id="ii.xviii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p46"></span> [Zeph. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008)<span id="ii.xviii-p46.1"></span>: 
*until the day that I rise up to the prey*.  For <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p46.2"></span>דעלְ</span>, *to the
prey*, the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p46.3"></span>LXX.</span>
seem to have read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p46.4"></span>דע“לְ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p46.5"></span>ְ</span>, *to the testimony*.  About ten
years before these Lectures were delivered, Eusebius (*Life of
Constantine*, III. c. xxviii.), speaking of the discovery of the Holy
Sepulchre, <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p46.6"></span>a.d.</span>
326, calls it “a testimony to the Resurrection of the Saviour clearer
than any voice could give.”

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[95:1688](2070030.htm#fr_1687) <span
id="ii.xviii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p48"></span> [Zeph. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p48.1"></span>: 
*a pure language*.

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[95:1689](2070030.htm#fr_1688) <span
id="ii.xviii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p49"></span> [Zeph.
3.9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p49.1"></span>
*to serve him with one consent* (Marg. *shoulder*).

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[95:1690](2070030.htm#fr_1689) <span
id="ii.xviii-p49.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p50"></span> [Zeph.
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#010)<span id="ii.xviii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[95:1691](2070030.htm#fr_1690) <span
id="ii.xviii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p51"></span> [Acts viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027)<span id="ii.xviii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[95:1692](2070030.htm#fr_1691) <span
id="ii.xviii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p52"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span id="ii.xviii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[96:1693](2070030.htm#fr_1692) <span
id="ii.xviii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p54"></span> [Ps.
88:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005)<span id="ii.xviii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[96:1694](2070030.htm#fr_1693) <span
id="ii.xviii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p55"></span> [Psa.
88.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004)<span id="ii.xviii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[96:1695](2070030.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="ii.xviii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p56"></span> [Psa.
88.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#008)<span id="ii.xviii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[96:1696](2070030.htm#fr_1695) <span
id="ii.xviii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p57"></span> [Psa.
88.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xviii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[96:1697](2070030.htm#fr_1696) <span
id="ii.xviii-p57.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p58"></span> [Psa.
88.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xviii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[96:1698](2070030.htm#fr_1697) <span
id="ii.xviii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p60"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xviii-p60.1"></span>:  *Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come
away.*

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[96:1699](2070030.htm#fr_1698) <span
id="ii.xviii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p61"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xviii-p61.1"></span>:  *in the clefts of the rock*.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[96:1700](2070030.htm#fr_1699) <span
id="ii.xviii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p62"></span> See Index, *Sepulchre*.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[96:1701](2070030.htm#fr_1700) <span
id="ii.xviii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p63"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xviii-p63.1"></span>:  *in the clefts of the rock, in the secret
places of the stairs.*  The Revised Version reads, *in the covert of the
steep place.*

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[96:1702](2070030.htm#fr_1701) <span
id="ii.xviii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p65"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xviii-p65.1"></span>.  In <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p65.2"></span>παρῆλθεν, ἐπορεύθη ἑαυτῷ</span> the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p65.3"></span>LXX.</span> have imitated
the pleonastic use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p65.4"></span>ןֹ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p65.5"></span>ל</span> after verbs of motion, corresponding
to our idiom “Go away with you,” and to the *Dativus Ethicus* in Greek
and Latin.  See Gesenius *Lexicon* on this use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p65.6"></span>לְ</span>, and Ewald,
*Introductory Grammar*, § 217, l. 2.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[96:1703](2070030.htm#fr_1702) <span
id="ii.xviii-p65.7"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p66"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xviii-p66.1"></span>:  *the singing of birds*.  The Hebrew word
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p66.2"></span>רימִזָ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p66.3"></span>֯</span> means either
“cutting,” as in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p66.4"></span>LXX</span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p66.5"></span>τομῆς</span>, Symmachus <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p66.6"></span>κλαδεύσεως</span> , and
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p66.7"></span>R.V.</span> Marg.
“pruning,” or as in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p66.8"></span>A.V.</span> “singing.”

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[96:1704](2070030.htm#fr_1703) <span
id="ii.xviii-p66.9"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p67"></span> Xanthicus is the name of the sixth month
in the Macedonian Calendar, corresponding nearly to the Jewish Nisan
(Josephus, *Antiq*. II. xiv. 6), and to the latter part of Lent and
Easter.  On the tradition that the Creation took place at this season,
see S. Ambrose, *Hexæmeron*, I. c. 4, § 13.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[96:1705](2070030.htm#fr_1704) <span
id="ii.xviii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p68"></span> [Gen. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)<span id="ii.xviii-p68.1"></span>: 
*grass, the herb yielding seed*.

<span id="ii.xviii-p69"></span>The <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p69.1"></span>LXX.</span> give an irregular construction,

<span id="ii.xviii-p70"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p70.1"></span>Βοτανὴν χόρτου σπεῖρον σπέρμα</span>.

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[96:1706](2070030.htm#fr_1705) <span
id="ii.xviii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p72"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.xviii-p72.1"></span>. 
“The ancient Church very accurately distinguished between <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p72.2"></span>εἰκών</span> (*image*)
and <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p72.3"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p72.4"></span>μοίωσις</span>
(*likeness*), and the Greek Church does the same in its Confession.  The
latter phrase expresses man’s destination, which is not to be regarded
as carried out at the moment of creation.  (Dorner, *System of Christian
Doctrine, E. Tr.* II. p. 78).  The *image* lies in the permanent
capacities of man’s nature ([Gen. 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006),
[1 Cor. 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007), [Jas.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p72.5"></span>),
the *likeness* in their realisation in moral conformity with God (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p72.6"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p72.7"></span>μοήθειαν Θεοῦ</span>,
Ignatius, *Magnes* vi).  “The image of God is a comprehensive thing.…To
this belongs man’s intellective power, his liberty of will, his dominion
over the other creatures flowing from the two former.  These make up the
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p72.8"></span>τὸ οὐσιῶδες</span>,
that part of that divine image which is natural and essential to man,
and consequently can never be wholly blotted out, defaced, or
extinguished, but still remains even in man fallen.  But beside these
the Church of God hath ever acknowledged, in the first man, certain
additional ornaments, and as it were complements of the divine image,
such as immortality, grace, holiness, righteousness, whereby man
approached more nearly to the similitude and likeness of God.  These
were (if I may so speak) the lively colours wherein the grace, the
beauty, and lustre of the divine image principally consisted; these
colours faded, yea, were defaced and blotted out by man’s
transgression.  (Bull, *The State of Man before the Fall*, Vol. ii. p.
114, *Ox*.).  Cf. Iren. (V. vi. § 1; xvi. § 2); Tertullian (*de
Baptismo*, c. 5); Clem. Alex. (*Exhort*. c. 12); Origen (*c. Cels*. IV.
30).

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[96:1707](2070030.htm#fr_1706) <span
id="ii.xviii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p74"></span> [John xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p74.1"></span>. 
The Benedictine Editor has a different punctuation:  “and the vine which
was planted there hath said, *And I am the Vine*.”

<span id="fn_1707"></span>[97:1708](2070030.htm#fr_1707) <span
id="ii.xviii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p75"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011)<span id="ii.xviii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1708"></span>[97:1709](2070030.htm#fr_1708) <span
id="ii.xviii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p76"></span> [Cant.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001), [Cant.
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xviii-p76.1"></span>.  Compare Cat. xiii. 32.

<span id="fn_1709"></span>[97:1710](2070030.htm#fr_1709) <span
id="ii.xviii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p77"></span> [Luke xxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1710"></span>[97:1711](2070030.htm#fr_1710) <span
id="ii.xviii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p78"></span> [John xix.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039)<span id="ii.xviii-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1711"></span>[97:1712](2070030.htm#fr_1711) <span
id="ii.xviii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p79"></span> [Song of Sol.
6.1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p79.1"></span>: 
*my honeycomb with my honey*.

<span id="fn_1712"></span>[97:1713](2070030.htm#fr_1712) <span
id="ii.xviii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p80"></span> [Luke xxiv.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#037)<span id="ii.xviii-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1713"></span>[97:1714](2070030.htm#fr_1713) <span
id="ii.xviii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p81"></span> [Luke
24.41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041)<span
id="ii.xviii-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[97:1715](2070030.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="ii.xviii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p83"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p83.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p83.2"></span>θεραπευτής.</span>  In connexion with
“Bridegroom,” and “Him whom my soul loveth” the meaning “Suitor” is more
appropriate than “Physician.”

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[97:1716](2070030.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="ii.xviii-p83.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p84"></span> [Cant.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001), [John
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[97:1717](2070030.htm#fr_1716) <span
id="ii.xviii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p85"></span> [John xx.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#013)<span id="ii.xviii-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[97:1718](2070030.htm#fr_1717) <span
id="ii.xviii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p86"></span> [Luke xxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#005)<span id="ii.xviii-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[97:1719](2070030.htm#fr_1718) <span
id="ii.xviii-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p87"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)<span id="ii.xviii-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[97:1720](2070030.htm#fr_1719) <span
id="ii.xviii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p88"></span> [Cant.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004)<span id="ii.xviii-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[97:1721](2070030.htm#fr_1720) <span
id="ii.xviii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p90"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[97:1722](2070030.htm#fr_1721) <span
id="ii.xviii-p90.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p91"></span> [Song of Sol.
8.7](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#007)<span id="ii.xviii-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[97:1723](2070030.htm#fr_1722) <span
id="ii.xviii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p92"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#005)<span id="ii.xviii-p92.1"></span>. 
The emphatic <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p92.2"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p92.3"></span>μεῖς</span> is rightly interpreted by Cyril
as distinguishing the women from the frightened sentinels.

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[97:1724](2070030.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="ii.xviii-p92.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p93"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054)<span id="ii.xviii-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[97:1725](2070030.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="ii.xviii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p94"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="ii.xviii-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[97:1726](2070030.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="ii.xviii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p95"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#007)<span id="ii.xviii-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[97:1727](2070030.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="ii.xviii-p95.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p96"></span> [Ps. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)<span id="ii.xviii-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[97:1728](2070030.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="ii.xviii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p98"></span> [Isa. xxvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#011)<span id="ii.xviii-p98.1"></span>: 
*The women shall come, and set them on fire*.

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[97:1729](2070030.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="ii.xviii-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p99"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#013)<span id="ii.xviii-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[97:1730](2070030.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="ii.xviii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p100"></span> [Isa. xxx.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#010)<span id="ii.xviii-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[97:1731](2070030.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="ii.xviii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p101"></span> Cf. Euseb. (*Life of Const*. III. 36.).

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[97:1732](2070030.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="ii.xviii-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p102"></span> Matt. xxxviii. 14<span
id="ii.xviii-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[98:1733](2070030.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="ii.xviii-p102.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p103"></span> [Hos. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002)<span id="ii.xviii-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[98:1734](2070030.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="ii.xviii-p104.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p105"></span> Instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p105.1"></span>τοῖς ᾽Ιουδαίοις</span> the Jerusalem Editor
adopts from Cod. A. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p105.2"></span>τοῖς ἰδίοις</span>, “Your own countrymen,” a
better reading in this place, if it had more support from <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p105.3"></span>mss.</span>  The Latin in
Milles has only “Cur igitur non creditis?”

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[98:1735](2070030.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="ii.xviii-p105.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p106"></span> The statements of Papias, Irenæus,
Origen, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and Jerome, concerning a Hebrew Gospel of
S. Matthew are ably discussed by Dr. Salmon (*Introduction to N.T.*
Lect. X.), who comes to the conclusion that the Canonical Gospel was not
translated from Hebrew (Aramaic), but originally written in Greek.

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[98:1736](2070030.htm#fr_1735) <span
id="ii.xviii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p107"></span> This statement may have been derived
either from Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl.*. IV. c. 5), or from the “written
records” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p107.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p107.2"></span>γγράφων</span>), from which he had learned
that “until the siege of the Jews which took place under Adrian (135
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p107.3"></span>a.d.</span>), there
were fifteen bishops in succession there, all of whom are said to have
been of Hebrew descent.”  See the list of names, and the notes on the
passage in this Series.

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[98:1737](2070030.htm#fr_1736) <span
id="ii.xviii-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p109"></span> [Matt.
27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052),
[53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#053)<span id="ii.xviii-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[98:1738](2070030.htm#fr_1737) <span
id="ii.xviii-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p110"></span> The Archdeacon of Jerusalem, Photius
Alexandrides, observes that “by this parenthetic explanation Cyril
perhaps wished to refute the opinion which some favoured that these
saints which slept and were raised entered into the heavenly
Jerusalem.”  See Euseb. *Dem. Evang*. IV. 12.

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[98:1739](2070030.htm#fr_1738) <span
id="ii.xviii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p112"></span> [Matt. xii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)<span id="ii.xviii-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[98:1740](2070030.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="ii.xviii-p112.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p113"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p113.1"></span>“</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p113.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p113.3"></span>νέργεια</span> \[Forte <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p113.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p113.5"></span>νάργεια</span>,
Edit.\].”  This conjecture of the Benedictine Editor is recommended by
the very appropriate sense “distinctness of the resemblance,” but seems
to have no <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p113.6"></span>ms.</span>
authority.

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[98:1741](2070030.htm#fr_1740) <span
id="ii.xviii-p113.7"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p114"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p114.1"></span>κατ᾽ οἰκονομίαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[98:1742](2070030.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="ii.xviii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p115"></span> [Jonah i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#006)<span id="ii.xviii-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[98:1743](2070030.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="ii.xviii-p115.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p116"></span> [Matt.
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026)<span id="ii.xviii-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[98:1744](2070030.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="ii.xviii-p116.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p117"></span> [Jonah i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#012)<span id="ii.xviii-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[98:1745](2070030.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="ii.xviii-p117.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p118"></span> [Matt.
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026)<span id="ii.xviii-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[99:1746](2070030.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="ii.xviii-p118.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p119"></span> [Hosea xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014)<span id="ii.xviii-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[99:1747](2070030.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="ii.xviii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p121"></span> [Matt. xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#026)<span id="ii.xviii-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[99:1748](2070030.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="ii.xviii-p121.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p122"></span> Cf. Cat. iv. 13; xiii. 3.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[99:1749](2070030.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="ii.xviii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p123"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)<span id="ii.xviii-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[99:1750](2070030.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="ii.xviii-p124.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p125"></span> [Matt.
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003)<span
id="ii.xviii-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[99:1751](2070030.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="ii.xviii-p125.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p126"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)<span id="ii.xviii-p126.1"></span>. 
On the opinion that the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Righteous men were
redeemed by Christ in Hades, compare Irenæus (*Hær*. I. xxvii. § 3; IV.
xxvii. §2), Clem. Alex. (*Stromat*. vi. c. 6), Origen (*In Genes*. Hom.
xv. § 5).

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[99:1752](2070030.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="ii.xviii-p127.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p128"></span> [Jonah ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002)<span id="ii.xviii-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[99:1753](2070030.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="ii.xviii-p128.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p129"></span> [Jonah
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#006)<span
id="ii.xviii-p129.1"></span>:  (R.V.) *I went down to the bottoms of the
mountains:  the earth with her bars closed upon me for ever.*

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[99:1754](2070030.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="ii.xviii-p129.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p130"></span> [Jonah
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008)<span id="ii.xviii-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[99:1755](2070030.htm#fr_1754) <span
id="ii.xviii-p130.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p131"></span> By *lying vanities* are meant in the
original “vain idols.”

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[99:1756](2070030.htm#fr_1755) <span
id="ii.xviii-p131.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p132"></span> [Isa. lxiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#011)<span id="ii.xviii-p132.1"></span>;
(R.V.), *Where is He that brought them up out of the sea with the
shepherds* (Marg. *shepherd*) *of His flock?*  Cyril’s reading, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p132.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p132.3"></span>κ τῆς γῆς</span> instead
of <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p132.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p132.5"></span>κ τῆς θαλάσσης</span> is
found in the Alexandrine <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p132.6"></span>ms.</span> of the Septuagint.  Athanasius
(*Ad Serapion,* [Ep. i. 12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xviii-p132.7"></span>) has the same reading and interpretation as
Cyril.  By “*the shepherds*” are probably meant Moses and Aaron:  cf.
[Ps. lxxvii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020)<span
id="ii.xviii-p132.8"></span>:  *Who leddest Thy people like sheep by the
hand of Moses and Aaron*.

<span id="ii.xviii-p133"></span>[Heb. xiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020)<span id="ii.xviii-p133.1"></span>: 
*Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
that great Shepherd of the sheep,* &c.  The word “great” is added by the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews not by Isaiah.

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[99:1757](2070030.htm#fr_1756) <span
id="ii.xviii-p134.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p135"></span> [Rom.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span id="ii.xviii-p135.1"></span>. 
Cyril in his incomplete quotation of *v*. 4 makes <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p135.2"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p135.3"></span>Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ τοῦ Κ.
ἡμ.</span> depend on <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p135.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p135.5"></span>ναστάσεως</span>.  The right order and
construction is given in R.V. *who was declared to be the Son of
God*.*…by the resurrection of the dead; even Jesus Christ our Lord.*

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[100:1758](2070030.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="ii.xviii-p135.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p136"></span> [Rom.
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#007)<span id="ii.xviii-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[100:1759](2070030.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="ii.xviii-p136.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p137"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span id="ii.xviii-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[100:1760](2070030.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="ii.xviii-p137.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p138"></span> [1 Cor.
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#015)<span id="ii.xviii-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[100:1761](2070030.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="ii.xviii-p138.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p139"></span> [1 Cor.
15.20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)<span
id="ii.xviii-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[100:1762](2070030.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="ii.xviii-p139.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p140"></span> [1 Cor.
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006)<span id="ii.xviii-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[100:1763](2070030.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="ii.xviii-p140.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p141"></span> [1 Cor.
15.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#007)<span
id="ii.xviii-p141.1"></span>.  This appearance of Christ to James is not
mentioned in the Gospels.  Jerome (*Catalog. Script. Eccles.* p. 170 D)
mentions a tradition that James had taken an oath that he would eat no
bread from the hour in which he had drunk the Cup of the Lord, until he
should see Him rising from the dead.  Wherefore the Saviour immediately
after He had risen appeared to James and commanded him to eat.

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[100:1764](2070030.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="ii.xviii-p141.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p142"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p142.1"></span>τοιούτου τοίνυν ἐπισκόπου πρωτοτύπως
ἰδόντος</span> Codd. Roe, Casaub. have <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p142.2"></span>τοῦ τοίνυν πρωτοτύπου ἐπισκόπου
ἰδόντος</span>, which gives the better sense—“since therefore the
primary Bishop saw, &c.”  On the meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p142.3"></span>παροικία</span>, and the extent of a
primitive Diocese, see Bingham. IX. c. 2.

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[100:1765](2070030.htm#fr_1764) <span
id="ii.xviii-p142.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p143"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008)<span id="ii.xviii-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[100:1766](2070030.htm#fr_1765) <span
id="ii.xviii-p143.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p144"></span> [1 Tim. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span id="ii.xviii-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[100:1767](2070030.htm#fr_1766) <span
id="ii.xviii-p145.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p146"></span> If the Crucifixion took place on the
14th of Nisan, the following night would begin the 15th, and the next
night the 16th.

<span id="fn_1767"></span>[100:1768](2070030.htm#fr_1767) <span
id="ii.xviii-p146.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p147"></span> Cf. Cat. xiii. 39.

<span id="fn_1768"></span>[100:1769](2070030.htm#fr_1768) <span
id="ii.xviii-p148.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p149"></span> [Acts ix.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#041)<span id="ii.xviii-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1769"></span>[100:1770](2070030.htm#fr_1769) <span
id="ii.xviii-p149.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p150"></span> See § 17, above.

<span id="fn_1770"></span>[100:1771](2070030.htm#fr_1770) <span
id="ii.xviii-p150.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p151"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p151.1"></span>νοητά</span>.

<span id="fn_1771"></span>[100:1772](2070030.htm#fr_1771) <span
id="ii.xviii-p151.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p152"></span> St. Luke ([Luke
24.50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050)<span
id="ii.xviii-p152.1"></span>) describes the Ascension as taking place at
Bethany, but the tradition, which Cyril follows, had long since fixed
the scene on the summit of the Mount of Olives, a mile nearer to
Jerusalem; and here the Empress Helena had built the Church of the
Ascension (Eusebius, *Life of Constantine*, III. 43; *Demonstr. Evang.*
VI. xviii. 26).  There is nothing in Cyril’s language to warrant the
Benedictine Editor’s suggestion that he alludes to the legend, according
to which the marks of Christ’s feet were indelibly impressed on the spot
from which He ascended.  In the next generation St. Augustine seems to
countenance the miraculous story (*In Joh. Evang*. Tract xlvii.): 
“There are His footsteps, now adored, where last He stood, and whence He
ascended into heaven.”  The supposed trace of one foot is still shewn on
Mount Olivet; “the other having been removed by the Turks is now to be
found in the Chapel of S. Thecla, which is in the Patriarch’s Palace”
(Jerusalem Ed.).  Compare Stanley, *Sinai and Palestine*, c. xiv.;
Dictionary of Bible, *Olives Mount of*.

<span id="fn_1772"></span>[100:1773](2070030.htm#fr_1772) <span
id="ii.xviii-p153.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p154"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p154.1"></span>ᾠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p154.2"></span>κονόμησε</span>.  In this word, as also in
the phrase below, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p154.3"></span>κατ᾽ οἰκονομίαν τῆς Θείας χάριτος</span>,
Cyril refers to the order of reading the Scriptures as part of a
dispensation established by Divine grace.

<span id="fn_1773"></span>[101:1774](2070030.htm#fr_1773) <span
id="ii.xviii-p154.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p155"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p155.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p155.2"></span>ναγνωσμάτων</span> a term including the
portions of Scripture (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p155.3"></span>περικοπαί</span>) appointed for the Epistle
and Gospel as well as the daily lessons from the Old and New Testaments.

<span id="fn_1774"></span>[101:1775](2070030.htm#fr_1774) <span
id="ii.xviii-p155.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p156"></span> The section [Luke xxiv.
36-53](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#036)<span
id="ii.xviii-p156.1"></span>, which in the Eastern Church is the Gospel
for Ascension Day, is also one of the “eleven morning Gospels of the
Resurrection (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p156.2"></span>εὐαγγέλια ἀναστασιμὰ ἑωθινά</span>), which
were read in turn, one every Sunday at Matins.”  *Dictionary of Chr.
Antiq.* “Lectionary.”  This Lecture being delivered on Monday, the
Section in question had been read on the preceding day.

<span id="fn_1775"></span>[101:1776](2070030.htm#fr_1775) <span
id="ii.xviii-p156.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p157"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p157.1"></span>μάλιστα μὲν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p157.2"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p157.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p157.4"></span>ξαιρέτως δέ</span>.

<span id="fn_1776"></span>[101:1777](2070030.htm#fr_1776) <span
id="ii.xviii-p157.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p158"></span> [Ps. xlvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005)<span id="ii.xviii-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1777"></span>[101:1778](2070030.htm#fr_1777) <span
id="ii.xviii-p158.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p159"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007)<span id="ii.xviii-p159.1"></span>: 
*Lift up, O gates, your heads*.  The order of the Hebrew words misled
the Greek Translators.

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[101:1779](2070030.htm#fr_1778) <span
id="ii.xviii-p159.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p160"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)<span id="ii.xviii-p160.1"></span>. 
On the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p160.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p160.3"></span>νέβη</span>, found in a few <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p160.4"></span>mss.</span> of the
Septuagint, see Tischendorf’s note on [Eph. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span id="ii.xviii-p160.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_1779"></span>[101:1780](2070030.htm#fr_1779) <span
id="ii.xviii-p160.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p161"></span> [Amos ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#006)<span id="ii.xviii-p161.1"></span>: 
(R.V.) *It is He that buildeth His chambers in the heaven.*  (A.V.) *His
stories*.  Marg. *ascensions*, or *spheres*.  Sept. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p161.2"></span>τὴν ἀνάβασιν
αὐτοὐ</span>.

<span id="fn_1780"></span>[101:1781](2070030.htm#fr_1780) <span
id="ii.xviii-p162.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p163"></span> [Bel.
33](../../../bib/apo/bel001.htm#033)<span id="ii.xviii-p163.1"></span>: 
Compare [Ezek. viii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003)<span
id="ii.xviii-p163.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[101:1782](2070030.htm#fr_1781) <span
id="ii.xviii-p163.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p164"></span> [Heb. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#005)<span id="ii.xviii-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[101:1783](2070030.htm#fr_1782) <span
id="ii.xviii-p164.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p165"></span> [2 Kings ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)<span id="ii.xviii-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[101:1784](2070030.htm#fr_1783) <span
id="ii.xviii-p165.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p166"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017)<span id="ii.xviii-p166.1"></span>: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p166.2"></span>χιλιάδες
εὐθηνούντων</span>.  The Hebrew means literally “thousands of
repetition,” i.e. many thousands:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p166.3"></span>εὐθηνεῖν</span>, “to abound.”

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[101:1785](2070030.htm#fr_1784) <span
id="ii.xviii-p166.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p167"></span> Sept. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.3"></span>εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν</span>.  In [1 Macc. ii.
58](../../../bib/apo/ma1002.htm#058)<span id="ii.xviii-p167.4"></span>
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p167.5"></span>mss.</span> vary
between <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.6"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.7"></span>ως</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.8"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.9"></span>ς</span>, but the latter (says Fritzsche)
“is an alteration made to agree with [2 Kings ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xviii-p167.10"></span>.  But there the reference is to the
*intended* exaltation of Elijah into heaven, and therefore <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p167.11"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p167.12"></span>ς</span> is rightly
used (Kühner, *Gramm*. § 604, note; Jelf, § 626, Obs. 1), while here the
thing is referred to as an *accomplished historical fact*.”  The
distinction here drawn by Cyril is therefore hypercritical, as is seen
below in § 26, where he writes, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.13"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.14"></span>Η</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p167.15"></span>λίας μὲν γὰρ ἀνελήφθη εἰς οὐρανόν</span>.

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[101:1786](2070030.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="ii.xviii-p168.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p169"></span> [Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="ii.xviii-p169.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[101:1787](2070030.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="ii.xviii-p169.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p170"></span> [2 Cor.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="ii.xviii-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[101:1788](2070030.htm#fr_1787) <span
id="ii.xviii-p171.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p172"></span> See Cat. iv. 7; xi. 17.  The clause,
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p172.1"></span>καὶ καθίσαντα ἐκ
δεξιῶν τοῦ Πατρός</span>, does not occur in the original form of the
Nicene Creed, but is found in the Confession of Faith contained in
*Const. Apost*. c. 41, in the four Eusebian Confessions of Antioch (341,
2 <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xviii-p172.2"></span>a.d.</span>), and
in the Macrostichos (344 <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p172.3"></span>a.d.</span>).  An equivalent clause is found
in the brief Confession of Hippolytus (circ. 220 <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xviii-p172.4"></span>a.d.</span>) *Contra Hæres. Noeti*, c. 1: 
“<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xviii-p172.5"></span>καὶ ὄντα ἐν δεξίᾳ
τοῦ Πατρός</span>,” and in Tertullian, *De Virgin. Veland*. c. 1: 
“Regula quidem Fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis et
irreformabilis,.…sedentem nunc ad dextram Patris:”  *de Præscriptione*,
c 13:  “Regula est autem fidei.…sedisse ad dexteram Patris:”  *adversus
Praxean*, c. 2:  “sedere ad dexteram Patris.”

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[102:1789](2070030.htm#fr_1788) <span
id="ii.xviii-p172.7"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p173"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p173.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p173.2"></span>κ προκοπῆς</span>.  Cf. Cat. x. 5, note 8.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[102:1790](2070030.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="ii.xviii-p173.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p174"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p174.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p174.2"></span>φ᾽ οὗπερ ἔστιν, (ἔστι δὲ ἀεὶ
γεννηθείς</span>).  In both clauses <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p174.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p174.4"></span>στιν</span> is emphatic.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[102:1791](2070030.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="ii.xviii-p174.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p175"></span> [Is. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p175.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[102:1792](2070030.htm#fr_1791) <span
id="ii.xviii-p175.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p176"></span> [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="ii.xviii-p176.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[102:1793](2070030.htm#fr_1792) <span
id="ii.xviii-p176.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p177"></span> [Ps. xciii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#002)<span id="ii.xviii-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[102:1794](2070030.htm#fr_1793) <span
id="ii.xviii-p178.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p179"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p179.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[102:1795](2070030.htm#fr_1794) <span
id="ii.xviii-p179.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p180"></span> [Matt. xxii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043)<span id="ii.xviii-p180.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[102:1796](2070030.htm#fr_1795) <span
id="ii.xviii-p180.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p181"></span> [Acts ii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034)<span id="ii.xviii-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[102:1797](2070030.htm#fr_1796) <span
id="ii.xviii-p182.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p183"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064)<span id="ii.xviii-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[102:1798](2070030.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="ii.xviii-p183.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p184"></span> [1 Pet. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022)<span id="ii.xviii-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[102:1799](2070030.htm#fr_1798) <span
id="ii.xviii-p184.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p185"></span> [Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="ii.xviii-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[102:1800](2070030.htm#fr_1799) <span
id="ii.xviii-p185.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p186"></span> [Eph.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)<span id="ii.xviii-p186.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[102:1801](2070030.htm#fr_1800) <span
id="ii.xviii-p186.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p187"></span> [Col. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span id="ii.xviii-p187.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[102:1802](2070030.htm#fr_1801) <span
id="ii.xviii-p187.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p188"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="ii.xviii-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[102:1803](2070030.htm#fr_1802) <span
id="ii.xviii-p188.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p189"></span> [Heb.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xviii-p189.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[102:1804](2070030.htm#fr_1803) <span
id="ii.xviii-p189.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p190"></span> [Heb.
10.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xviii-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[102:1805](2070030.htm#fr_1804) <span
id="ii.xviii-p190.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p191"></span> [Heb.
12.2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xviii-p191.1"></span>.  On Cyril’s omission of [Mark xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019)<span id="ii.xviii-p191.2"></span>.
see Westcott and Hort.

<span id="fn_1805"></span>[102:1806](2070030.htm#fr_1805) <span
id="ii.xviii-p192.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p193"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xviii-p193.1"></span>τὴν ἔνσαρκον παρουσίαν</span>.  Cf. § 27.

<span id="fn_1806"></span>[102:1807](2070030.htm#fr_1806) <span
id="ii.xviii-p193.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p194"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span id="ii.xviii-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1807"></span>[103:1808](2070030.htm#fr_1807) <span
id="ii.xviii-p194.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p195"></span> [Col. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005)<span id="ii.xviii-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[103:1809](2070030.htm#fr_1808) <span
id="ii.xviii-p195.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p196"></span> [Ps. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009)<span id="ii.xviii-p196.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1809"></span>[103:1810](2070030.htm#fr_1809) <span
id="ii.xviii-p196.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p197"></span> [Isa.
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018), [Heb.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xviii-p197.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Clause, And Shall Come in Glory to Judge the Quick and the
Dead; Of Whose Kingdom There Shall Be No End.](2070031)
