[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070073)  [Next](2070075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.i"></span> <span id="page_437">p. 437</span> <span
id="iv.ii.i-Page_437"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p1"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>A Selection from the Letters of Saint Gregory
Nazianzen, Sometime Archbishop of Constantinople.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iv.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Division I.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p4"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.ii.i-p4.1"></span>Letters on the Apollinarian Controversy.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p5"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv.ii.i-p6"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.ii.i-p6.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.i-p7.1"></span>The</span> circumstances which called forth the
two letters to Cledonius have already been described in the first
section of the General Prolegomena, and it will not be necessary here to
add much to what was there said.  In the letter to Nectarius, his own
successor on the throne of Constantinople, written about <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.ii.i-p7.2"></span>a.d.</span> 383, and sometimes
reckoned as Orat. XLVI., S. Gregory gives extracts from a work of
Apollinarius himself, but without mentioning the title of the book.  In
this treatise the fundamental errors of the heresy (see Proleg. c. 1, p.
172) are laid down.  Apollinarius, according to S. Gregory, declares
that the Son of God was from all eternity clothed with a human body, and
not from the time of His conception only by the Blessed Virgin; but that
this humanity of God is without human mind, the place of which was
supplied by the Godhead of the Only-begotten.  And he goes even further
and ascribes passibility and mortality to the very Godhead of Christ. 
Therefore S. Gregory earnestly protests against any toleration being
granted to these heretics, or even permission to hold their assemblies;
for, he says, toleration or permission would certainly be regarded by
them as a condonation of their doctrinal position, and a condemnation of
that of the Church.  Dr. Ullman, however, thinks that while S. Gregory
was certainly speaking the truth in saying that he had in his hands a
pamphlet by Apollinarius, yet that he, perhaps unconsciously,
exaggerated the heretical character of its contents, pushing its
statements to consequences which Apollinarius would have repudiated. 
The one purpose of the latter was, in Dr. Ullman’s view, to safeguard
the doctrine of the Unity of Christ; and he thought that the orthodox
expression of Two Whole and Perfect Natures tended to a Nestorian
division of the Person of Christ; and so he used language which
certainly seemed to confound the natures, or at any rate to make the
Incarnation imperfect, inasmuch as a Christ in Whom the human mind is
absent, and its place filled up by the Godhead of the Son, cannot be
said to be perfect Man.  But while Epiphanius mentions these
extravagances of the heresy, and does so with a lingering feeling of
regret for the lapse of so good a man whose services in the past had
been of so much value to the Church, yet, in the spirit common to
Ecclesiastical authorities of the time, he would rather ascribe them to
an expansion of Apollinarius’ teaching by his younger disciples who did
not really understand what Apollinarius himself meant.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p8"></span>Olympius, to whom the last of this series
is addressed, was Governor of Cappadocia Secunda in <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.ii.i-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 382.  He was a man
for whom S. Gregory had a very high esteem, and with whom he was upon
terms of close friendship, as will be seen from other letters of Gregory
to him in another division of this Selection.  The occasion of the
present letter was the necessity to appeal to the secular power for aid
to punish a sect of Apollinarians at Nazianzus, who had ventured to take
advantage of S. Gregory’s absence at the Baths of Xanxaris to procure
the consecration of a Bishop of their own way of thinking.  Technically
the See was vacant, but the administration had been committed to Gregory
by the Bishops of the Province, and though he, foreseeing some such
attempt on the part of the heretics, had been very earnest in <span
id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span id="iv.ii.i-Page_438"></span>pressing
upon the Metropolitan and his Comprovincials the necessity of filling
this throne by a canonical election, yet he was by no means prepared to
hand over the authority, with which he had been invested, to an
irregularly elected and uncanonically consecrated heretic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCII](2070075.md)
