[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070043)  [Next](2070045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Division II.—The Writings.</span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p2"></span>I.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>The Orations</span>.—These—forty-five in
number—raise him to equality with the best Orators of antiquity.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p3"></span>a.  *The Five Theological
Orations*.—These won him the title of The Theologian.  They were
delivered in Constantinople, in defence of the Church’s faith in the
Trinity, against Eunomians and Macedonians.  In the First and Second he
treats of the existence, nature, being, and attributes of God, so far as
man’s finite intellect can comprehend them.  In the Third and Fourth the
subject is the Godhead of the Son, which he establishes by exposition of
Scripture, and by refutation of the specious arguments brought forward
by the heretics.  In the Fifth he similarly maintains the Deity, and
Personality of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p4"></span>b.  *The Two Invectives against
Julian*.—These were delivered at Nazianzus after the death of the
Emperor, and present us with a very dark picture of his character.  The
orator dwells upon his attempt to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem, and
its failure, and his overthrow in the campaign against Persia.  From
these facts he demonstrates the power of God’s Justice, and sets forth
the Christian doctrine of the Divine Providence inculcating a lesson of
trust in God.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p5"></span>c.  *Moral Orations*.—(1)  The Apology
for his flight.  As was said above, it is most probable that this
discourse was never actually spoken; if it was, it certainly must have
been considerably enlarged afterwards.  In it Gregory dwells on the
motive of his flight and his return after his forced ordination; he
speaks of his love of retirement, but most of all lays stress upon the
difficulty of the Priestly Office, its heavy responsibilities and grave
dangers, and upon his own sense of unworthiness.  His return, he says,
was prompted by respect for his hearers and by care for his aged
parents; by the fear of losing his father’s blessing; and by the
recollection of what befel the Prophet Jonas on account of his
resistance to the will of God.  The remainder of the Oration is
practically a treatise on the Priesthood, and was made use of by S.
Chrysostom and S. Gregory the Great in their books on the subject.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p6"></span>(2)  The Farewell Oration at
Constantinople, containing an account of his work there.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p7"></span>(3)  On Love of the Poor.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p8"></span>(4)  On the Indissolubility of Marriage,
the only Sermon of S. Gregory on a definite text which has come down to
us.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p9"></span>(5)  Three Orations on Peace.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p10"></span>(6)  One on Moderation in theological
discussion.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p11"></span><span id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_201"></span>d.  *The Festal Orations*.—On Christmas,
Epiphany (on the Baptism of Christ in the river Jordan, followed up next
day by a long one on Holy Baptism), two on Easter (one of these his
first sermon, the other almost if not quite his last).  On Low Sunday,
and on Pentecost.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p12"></span>e.  *Panegyrics on Saints*.—The Maccabee
Brothers and their Mother; S. Cyprian of Carthage (in which there is
evidence of the cultus of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of the practice of
invocation of the Saints); and on S. Athanasius.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p13"></span>f.  *Funeral Orations on Eminent
People*.—On his Father, preached before his Mother and S. Basil.  On
Cæsarius, in presence of his parents, consoling them by the picture of
his brother’s virtue, especially in having withstood Julian’s efforts to
pervert him, and in resigning his post at Court and leaving the
Capital.  On Gorgonia, whom he praises as a model Christian Matron, and
whose wonderful cure before the Altar he relates.  On S. Basil.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p14"></span>g.  *Occasional Orations*, of which we
mention three:  (1)  On a plague of hail.  (2)  On the consecration of
Eulalius of Doara.  (3)  On his own consecration to Sasima.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p15"></span>II.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>The Letters</span>, of which two hundred and
forty-three are extant, are characterised by a clear, concise, and
pleasant style and spirit.  Some of them treat of the theological
questions of the day, as for example the two to Cledonius, and one to
Nectarius his Successor in the See of Constantinople; these deal with
the Apollinarian errors.  Most of them however are letters to private
friends; sometimes of condolence or congratulation, sometimes of
recommendation, sometimes on mere general subjects of interest.  To this
section must be ascribed his Will, which is probably genuine.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p16"></span>III.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>The Poems</span>, five hundred and seven in
number, are in various metres.  While leaving much to be desired, these
verses shew much real poetic feeling, and at times rise to genuine
beauty.  Thirty-eight are dogmatic, on the Trinity, on the works of God
in Creation, on Providence, on Angels and Men, on the Fall, on the
Decalogue, on the Prophets Elias and Elissæus, on the Incarnation, the
Miracles and Parables of our Lord, and the canonical Books of the
Bible.  Forty are Moral; two hundred and six Historical and
Autobiographical; one hundred and twenty-nine are Epitaphs, or rather
funeral Epigrams; ninety-four are Epigrams.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p17"></span>There is also a long Tragedy, called
Christus Patiens which is the first known attempt at a Christian drama;
the parts are sustained by Christ, The Blessed Virgin, S. Joseph, S.
Mary Magdalene, Nicodemus, Pontius Pilate, Theologus, Nuntius, and
others.  The Benedictine Editors however doubt the genuineness of this
Tragedy and *Caillau*, who published the second volume of this Edition
after the troubles of the French Revolution, thinks it is to be ascribed
to another Gregory, Bishop of Antioch in the Sixth Century, and
relegates it to an Appendix.  None of The Theologian’s Odes or Hymns
have, however, found a place in the liturgical poetry of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Literature.](2070045)
