[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070050)  [Next](2070052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Oration XII.</span>

<span id="iii.viii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.viii-p2.1"></span>To His Father, When He Had Entrusted to Him
the Care of the Church of Nazianzus.</span>

<span id="iii.viii-p3"></span>*<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.viii-p3.1"></span>This</span>Oration was delivered <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.viii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 372.  Two years
earlier Valens had divided Cappadocia into two provinces.  Anthimus,
Bishop of Tyana, asserting that the ecclesiastical provinces were
regulated by those of the empire, claimed metropolitical rights over the
churches of Cappadocia Secunda, in opposition to S. Basil, who had
hitherto been metropolitan of the undivided province.  S. Basil, with
the intention of vindicating the permanence of his former rights,
created a new see at Sasima, on the borders of the two provinces, and
with great difficulty prevailed upon S. Gregory to receive consecration
as its first Bishop.  S. Gregory, who had “bent his neck, but not his
will,”* <span id="fr_3026"></span>[3027](#fn_3026.md) *was for a long time
reluctant to enter upon his Episcopal duties, and at last was prevailed
upon by S. Gregory of Nyssa, S. Basil’s brother, to make an attempt to
do so.  When, however, he found that Anthimus was prepared to bar his
entrance by force of arms, he returned home, definitely resigned his
see, and once more betook himself to the life of solitude which he so
dearly loved.  Recalled hence, he consented,* <span
id="fr_3027"></span>[3028](#fn_3027.md) *at his father’s earnest entreaty,
to undertake provisionally the duties of Bishop-coadjutor of Nazianzus: 
and pronounced this short discourse on the occasion of his
installation.*

<span id="iii.viii-p6"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.viii-p6.1"></span>I opened</span> my mouth, and drew in the
Spirit, <span id="fr_3028"></span>[3029](#fn_3028.md) and I give myself and
my all to the Spirit, my action and speech, my inaction and silence,
only let Him hold me and guide me, and move both hand and mind and
tongue whither it is right, and He wills:  and restrain them as it is
right and expedient.  I am an instrument of God, a rational instrument,
an instrument tuned and struck by that skilful artist, the Spirit. 
Yesterday His work in me was silence.  I mused on abstinence from
speech.  Does He strike upon my mind today?  My speech shall be heard,
and I will muse on utterance.  I am neither so talkative, as to desire
to speak, when He is bent on silence; nor so reserved and ignorant as to
set a watch before my lips <span id="fr_3029"></span>[3030](#fn_3029.md)
when it is the time to speak:  but I open and close my door at the will
of that Mind and Word and Spirit, Who is One kindred Deity.

<span id="iii.viii-p9"></span>2.  I will speak then, since I am so
bidden.  And I will speak both to the good shepherd here, and to you,
his holy flock, as I think is best both for me to speak, and for you to
hear to-day.  Why is it that you have begged for one to share your
shepherd’s toil?  For my speech shall begin with you, O dear and
honoured head, worthy of that of Aaron, down which runs that spiritual
and priestly ointment upon his beard and clothing. <span
id="fr_3030"></span>[3031](#fn_3030.md)   Why is it that, while yet able to
stablish and guide many, and actually guiding them in the power of the
Spirit, you support yourself with a staff and prop in your spiritual
works?  Is it because you have heard and know that even with the
illustrious Aaron were anointed Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of
Aaron? <span id="fr_3031"></span>[3032](#fn_3031.md)   For I pass over
Nadab and Abihu, <span id="fr_3032"></span>[3033](#fn_3032.md) lest the
allusion be ill-omened:  and Moses during his lifetime appoints Joshua
in his stead, as lawgiver and general over those who were pressing on to
the land of promise?  The office of Aaron and Hur, supporting the hands
of Moses on the mount where Amalek was warred down <span
id="fr_3033"></span>[3034](#fn_3033.md) by the Cross, <span
id="fr_3034"></span>[3035](#fn_3034.md) prefigured and typified long
before, I feel willing to pass by, as not very suitable or applicable to
us:  for Moses did not choose them to share his work as lawgiver, but as
helpers in his prayer and supports for the weariness of his hands.

<span id="iii.viii-p15"></span>3.  What is it then that ails you?  What
is your weakness?  Is it physical?  I am ready to sustain you, yea I
have sustained, and been sustained, like Jacob of old, by your fatherly
blessings. <span id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035.md)   Is it
spiritual?  Who is stronger, and more fervent, especially now, when the
<span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="iii.viii-Page_246"></span>powers of the flesh are ebbing and fading,
like so many barriers which interfere with, and dim the brilliancy of a
light?  For these powers are wont, for the most part, to wage war upon
and oppose one another, while the body’s health is purchased by the
sickness of the soul, and the soul flourishes and looks upward when
pleasures are stilled and fade away along with the body.  But, wonderful
as your simplicity and nobility have seemed to me before, how is it that
you have no fear, especially in times like these, that your spirit will
be considered a pretext, and that most men will suppose, in spite of our
spiritual professions, that we are undertaking this from carnal
motives.  For most men have made <span
id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036.md) the office to be looked upon as
great and princely, and accompanied with considerable enjoyment, even
though a man have the charge and rule over a more slender flock than
this, and one which affords more troubles than pleasures.  Thus far of
your simplicity, or parental preference, if it be so, which makes you
neither admit yourself, nor readily suspect in others anything
disgraceful; for a mind hardly roused to evil, is slow to suspect evil. 
My second duty is briefly to address this people of yours, or now even
of mine.

<span id="iii.viii-p18"></span>4.  I have been overpowered, my friends
and brethren, for I will now, though I did not at the time, ask for your
aid.  I have been overpowered by the old age of my father, and, to use
moderate terms, the kindliness of my friend.  So, help me, each of you
who can, and stretch out a hand to me who am pressed down and torn
asunder by regret and enthusiasm.  The one suggests flights, mountains
and deserts, and calm of soul and body, and that the mind should retire
into itself, and recall its powers from sensible things, in order to
hold pure communion with God, and be clearly illumined by the flashing
rays of the Spirit, with no admixture or disturbance of the divine light
by anything earthly or clouded, until we come to the source of the
effulgence which we enjoy here, and regret and desire are alike stayed,
when our mirrors <span id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037.md) pass away in
the light of truth.  The other wills that I should come forward, and
bear fruit for the common good, and be helped by helping others; and
publish the Divine light, and bring to God a people for His own
possession, a holy nation, a royal priesthood, <span
id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038.md) and His image cleansed in many
souls.  And this, because, as a park is better than and preferable to a
tree, the whole heaven with its ornaments to a single star, and the body
to a limb, so also, in the sight of God, is the reformation of a whole
church preferable to the progress of a single soul:  and therefore, I
ought not to look only on my own interest, but also on that of
others. <span id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039.md)   For Christ also
likewise, when it was possible for him to abide in His own honour and
deity, not only so far emptied Himself as to take the form of a
slave, <span id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040.md) but also endured the
cross, despising the shame, <span id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041.md)
that he might by His own sufferings destroy sin, and by death slay
death. <span id="fr_3042"></span>[3043](#fn_3042.md)   The former are the
imaginings of desire, the latter the teachings of the Spirit.  And I,
standing midway between the desire and the Spirit, and not knowing to
which of the two I should rather yield, will impart to you what seems to
me the best and safest course, that you may test it with me and take
part in my design.

<span id="iii.viii-p25"></span>5.  It seemed to me to be best and least
dangerous to take a middle course between desire and fear, and to yield
in part to desire, in part to the Spirit:  and that this would be the
case, if I neither altogether evaded the office, and so refused the
grace, which would be dangerous, nor yet assumed a burden beyond my
powers, for it is a heavy one.  The former indeed is suited to the
person of another, the latter to another’s power, or rather to undertake
both would be madness.  But piety and safety would alike advise me to
proportion the office to my power, and as is the case with food, to
accept that which is within my power and refuse what is beyond it, for
health is gained for the body, and tranquillity for the soul, by such a
course of moderation.  Therefore I now consent to share in the cares of
my excellent father, like an eaglet, not quite vainly flying close to a
mighty and high soaring eagle.  But hereafter I will offer my wing to
the Spirit to be borne whither, and as, He wills:  no one shall force or
drag me in any direction, contrary to His counsel.  For sweet it is to
inherit a father’s toils, and this flock is more familiar than a strange
and foreign one; I would even add, more precious in the sight of God,
unless the spell of affection deceives me, and the force of habit robs
me of perception:  nor is there any more useful or safer course than
that willing rulers should rule willing subjects:  since it is our
practice not to lead by force, or by compulsion, but by good will.  For
this would not hold together even another form of government, since that
which is held in by force is wont, when opportunity offers, to strike
for freedom:  but freedom of will more than <span id="page_247">p.
247</span> <span id="iii.viii-Page_247"></span>anything else it is,
which holds together our—I will not call it rule, but—tutorship.  For
the mystery of godliness <span id="fr_3043"></span>[3044](#fn_3043.md)
belongs to those who are willing, not to those who are overpowered.

<span id="iii.viii-p27"></span>6.  This is my speech to you, my good
men, uttered in simplicity and with all good will, and this is the
secret of my mind.  And may the victory rest with that which will be for
the profit of both you and me, under the Spirit’s guidance of our
affairs, (for our discourse comes back again to the same point,) <span
id="fr_3044"></span>[3045](#fn_3044.md) to Whom we have given ourselves,
and the head anointed with the oil of perfection, in the Almighty
Father, and the Only-begotten Son, and the Holy Spirit, Who is God.  For
how long shall we hide <span id="fr_3045"></span>[3046](#fn_3045.md) the
lamp under the bushel, <span id="fr_3046"></span>[3047](#fn_3046.md) and
withhold from others the full knowledge of the Godhead, when it ought to
be now put upon the lampstand and give light to all churches and souls
and to the whole fulness of the world, no longer by means of metaphors,
or intellectual sketches, but by distinct declaration?  And this indeed
is a most perfect setting forth of Theology to those Who have been
deemed worthy of this grace in Christ Jesus Himself, our Lord, to Whom
be glory, honour, and power for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3026"></span>[245:3027](2070051.htm#fr_3026.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p4"></span> Carmina Hist., xi., 487.

<span id="fn_3027"></span>[245:3028](2070051.htm#fr_3027.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p5"></span> Ib., 492–525.

<span id="fn_3028"></span>[245:3029](2070051.htm#fr_3028.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p7"></span> [Ps. cxix.
131](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#131.md)<span id="iii.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3029"></span>[245:3030](2070051.htm#fr_3029.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p8"></span> [Ps. cxli.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.viii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3030"></span>[245:3031](2070051.htm#fr_3030.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p10"></span> [Psa.
133.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3031"></span>[245:3032](2070051.htm#fr_3031.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p11"></span> [Lev. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.viii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3032"></span>[245:3033](2070051.htm#fr_3032.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p12"></span> [Lev.
10.1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.viii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3033"></span>[245:3034](2070051.htm#fr_3033.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p13"></span> [Exod. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.viii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3034"></span>[245:3035](2070051.htm#fr_3034.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p14"></span> *The Cross*.  The stretching out of
Moses’ hands was a type of the outstretched hands of our Lord Jesus, and
His “intercession for the transgressors,” upon the Cross.

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[245:3036](2070051.htm#fr_3035.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p16"></span> [Gen. xxvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.viii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[246:3037](2070051.htm#fr_3036.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p17"></span> *Made*, by the manner in which they have
sought for and exercised it.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[246:3038](2070051.htm#fr_3037.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.viii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[246:3039](2070051.htm#fr_3038.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p20"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.viii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[246:3040](2070051.htm#fr_3039.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p21"></span> [Phil. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.viii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[246:3041](2070051.htm#fr_3040.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p22"></span> [Phil.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.viii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[246:3042](2070051.htm#fr_3041.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p23"></span> [Heb. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.viii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3042"></span>[246:3043](2070051.htm#fr_3042.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p24"></span> [Heb.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.viii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3043"></span>[247:3044](2070051.htm#fr_3043.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p26"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.viii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3044"></span>[247:3045](2070051.htm#fr_3044.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p28"></span> *The same point*, i.e. from which it
started, § 1.

<span id="fn_3045"></span>[247:3046](2070051.htm#fr_3045.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p29"></span> *Hide*, etc.  S. Gregory here alludes to
the “economy” which refrained from distinctly declaring the Divinity of
the Holy Ghost.  Cf. Or. xliii., 68.  This declaration of his was
afterwards commented on by his audience and others, cf. Epist. 58, in
which his mode of teaching is contrasted with that of S. Basil.

<span id="fn_3046"></span>[247:3047](2070051.htm#fr_3046.md) <span
id="iii.viii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p30"></span> S. [Matt. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.viii-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oration XVI](2070052.md)
