[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070016)  [Next](2070018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="ii.v-Page_6"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>FIRST CATECHETICAL LECTURE</span>

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.v-p2.1"></span>of</span>

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.v-p3.1"></span>Our Holy Father Cyril,</span>

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v-p4.1"></span>Archbishop of Jerusalem,</span>

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v-p5.1"></span>To those who are to be Enlightened, delivered
extempore at Jerusalem, as an Introductory Lecture to those who had come
forward for Baptism <span id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) :</span>

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v-p7.1"></span>With a reading from</span> [Isa.
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)<span id="ii.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span>*Wash you, make you clean; put away your
iniquities from your souls, from before mine eyes*, and the rest <span
id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) .

<span id="ii.v-p10"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v-p10.1"></span>Disciples</span> of the New Testament and
partakers of the mysteries of Christ, as yet by calling only, but ere
long by grace also, *make you a new heart and a new spirit* <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) , that there may be gladness among the
inhabitants of heaven:  for *if over one sinner that repenteth there is
joy*, according to the Gospel <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) ,
how much more shall the salvation of so many souls move the inhabitants
of heaven to gladness.  As ye have entered upon a good and most glorious
path, run with reverence the race of godliness.  For the Only-begotten
Son of God is present here most ready to redeem you, saying, *Come unto
Me all that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest* <span
id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) .  Ye that are clothed with the rough
garment <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) of your offences, who
are *holden with the cords of your own sins*, hear the voice of the
Prophet saying, *Wash you, make you clean, put away your iniquities from
before Mine eyes* <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) :  that the
choir of Angels may chant over you, *Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered* <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) .  Ye who have just lighted the
torches of faith <span id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) , guard them
carefully in your hands unquenched; that He, who erewhile on this
all-holy Golgotha opened Paradise to the robber on account of his faith,
may grant to you to sing the bridal song.

<span id="ii.v-p18"></span>2.  If any here is a slave of sin, let him
promptly prepare himself through faith for the new birth into freedom
and adoption; and having put off the miserable bondage of his sins, and
taken on him the most blessed bondage of the Lord, so may he be counted
worthy to inherit the kingdom of heaven.  *Put off*, by confession <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) , *the old man, which waxeth corrupt
after the lusts of deceit*, that ye may *put on the new man, which is
renewed according to knowledge of Him that created him* <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) .  Get you *the earnest of the Holy
Spirit* <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) through faith, that ye
may be able to be received *into the everlasting habitations* <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) .  Come for the mystical Seal, that ye
may be easily recognised by the Master; be ye numbered among the holy
and spiritual flock of Christ, to be set apart on His right hand, and
inherit the life prepared for you.  For they to whom the rough
garment <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) of their sins still
clings are found on the left hand, because they came not to the grace of
God which is given through Christ at the new birth of Baptism:  new
birth I mean not of bodies, but the spiritual new birth of the soul. 
For our bodies are begotten by parents who are seen, but our souls are
begotten anew through faith:  *for the Spirit bloweth where it
listeth* <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) :  and then, if thou be
found worthy, thou mayest hear, *Well done, good and faithful
servant* <span id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) , when thou art found
to have no defilement of hypocrisy in thy conscience.

<span id="ii.v-p26"></span>3.  For if any of those who are present
should think to tempt God’s grace, he deceives himself, and knows not
its power.  Keep thy soul free from hypocrisy, O man, because of Him
*who searcheth hearts and reins* <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473)
.  For as those who are going to make a levy for war examine the ages
and the bodies <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="ii.v-Page_7"></span>of those who are taking service, so also the
Lord in enlisting souls examines their purpose:  and if any has a secret
hypocrisy, He rejects the man as unfit for His true service; but if He
finds one worthy, to him He readily gives His grace.  He gives not holy
things to the dogs <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) ; but where
He discerns the good conscience, there He gives the Seal of salvation,
that wondrous Seal, which devils tremble at, and Angels recognise; that
the one may be driven to flight, and the others may watch around it as
kindred to themselves.  Those therefore who receive this spiritual and
saving Seal, have need also of the disposition akin to it.  For as a
writing-reed or a dart has need of one to use it, so grace also has need
of believing minds.

<span id="ii.v-p29"></span>4.  Thou art receiving not a perishable but a
spiritual shield.  Henceforth thou art planted in the invisible <span
id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) Paradise.  Thou receivest a new name,
which thou hadst not before.  Heretofore thou wast a Catechumen, but now
thou wilt be called a Believer.  Thou art transplanted henceforth among
the spiritual <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) olive-trees, being
grafted from the wild into the good olive-tree <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) , from sins into righteousness, from
pollutions into purity.  Thou art made partaker of the Holy Vine <span
id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) .  Well then, if thou abide in the
Vine, thou growest as a fruitful branch; but if thou abide not, thou
wilt be consumed by the fire.  Let us therefore bear fruit worthily. 
God forbid that in us should be done what befell that barren
fig-tree <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) , that Jesus come not
even now and curse us for our barrenness.  But may all be able to use
that other saying, *But I am like a fruitful olive-tree in the house of
God:  I have trusted in the mercy of God for ever* <span
id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) ,—an olive-tree not to be perceived by
sense, but by the mind <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) , and
full of light.  As then it is His part to plant and to water <span
id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) , so it is thine to bear fruit:  it is
God’s to grant grace, but thine to receive and guard it.  Despise not
the grace because it is freely given, but receive and treasure it
devoutly.

<span id="ii.v-p38"></span>5.  The present is the season of confession: 
confess what thou hast done in word or in deed, by night or by day;
*confess in an acceptable time, and in the day of salvation* <span
id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) receive the heavenly treasure.  Devote
thy time to the Exorcisms:  be assiduous at the Catechisings, and
remember the things that shall be spoken, for they are spoken not for
thine ears only, but that by faith thou mayest seal them up in the
memory.  Blot out from thy mind all earthly <span
id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484) care:  for thou art running for thy
soul.  Thou art utterly forsaking the things of the world:  little are
the things which thou art forsaking, great what the Lord is giving. 
Forsake things present, and put thy trust in things to come.  Hast thou
run so many circles of the years busied in vain about the world, and
hast thou not forty days to be free (for prayer <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) ), for thine own soul’s sake?  *Be
still* <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) , *and know that I am
God*, saith the Scripture.  Excuse thyself from talking many idle
words:  neither backbite, nor lend a willing ear to backbiters; but
rather be prompt to prayer.  Shew in ascetic exercise that thy heart is
nerved <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) .  Cleanse thy vessel,
that thou mayest receive grace more abundantly.  For though remission of
sins is given equally to all, the communion of the Holy Ghost is
bestowed in proportion to each man’s faith.  If thou hast laboured
little, thou receivest little; but if thou hast wrought much, the reward
is great.  Thou art running for thyself, see to thine own interest.

<span id="ii.v-p44"></span>6.  If thou hast aught against any man,
forgive it:  thou comest here to receive forgiveness of sins, and thou
also must forgive him that hath sinned against thee.  Else with what
face wilt thou say to the Lord, Forgive me my many sins, if thou hast
not thyself forgiven thy fellow-servant even his little sins.  Attend
diligently the Church assemblies <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488)
; not only now when diligent attendance is required of thee by the
Clergy, but also after thou hast received the grace.  For if, before
thou hast received it, the practice is good, is it not also good after
the bestowal?  If before thou be grafted in, it is a safe course to be
watered and tended, is it not far better after the planting?  Wrestle
for thine own soul, especially in such days as these.  Nourish thy soul
with sacred readings; for the Lord hath prepared for thee a spiritual
table; therefore say thou also after the Psalmist, *The Lord is my
shepherd, and I shall lack nothing:  in a place of grass, there hath He
made me rest; He hath fed me beside the waters of comfort, He hath
converted my soul* <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) :—that Angels
also may share your joy, and Christ Himself the great High Priest,
having accepted your resolve, may present you all to the Father, saying,
*Behold, I and the children whom God hath given Me* <span
id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) .  May He keep you all well-pleasing
in His sight!  To whom be the glory, and the power unto the endless ages
of eternity.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_457"></span>[6:458](2070017.htm#fr_457) <span
id="ii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span> The title prefixed to this Lecture is given
in full.  In the following Lectures the form will be abbreviated.  See
Index, <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.v-p6.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v-p6.2"></span>νάγνωσις</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v-p6.3"></span>σχεδιασθεῖσα</span>.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[6:459](2070017.htm#fr_458) <span
id="ii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span> [Is. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)<span id="ii.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[6:460](2070017.htm#fr_459) <span
id="ii.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p11"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#031)<span id="ii.v-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[6:461](2070017.htm#fr_460) <span
id="ii.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p12"></span> [Luke xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)<span id="ii.v-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[6:462](2070017.htm#fr_461) <span
id="ii.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p13"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="ii.v-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[6:463](2070017.htm#fr_462) <span
id="ii.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p14"></span> Compare xv. 25.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[6:464](2070017.htm#fr_463) <span
id="ii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p15"></span> [Is. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)<span id="ii.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[6:465](2070017.htm#fr_464) <span
id="ii.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p16"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span id="ii.v-p16.1"></span>.  See
Procat. 15.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[6:466](2070017.htm#fr_465) <span
id="ii.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p17"></span> Procat. 1, note 6.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[6:467](2070017.htm#fr_466) <span
id="ii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p19"></span> See Index, “Confession.”

<span id="fn_467"></span>[6:468](2070017.htm#fr_467) <span
id="ii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p20"></span> [Eph.
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022), [Col.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="ii.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[6:469](2070017.htm#fr_468) <span
id="ii.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p21"></span> [2 Cor. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022)<span id="ii.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[6:470](2070017.htm#fr_469) <span
id="ii.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p22"></span> [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="ii.v-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[6:471](2070017.htm#fr_470) <span
id="ii.v-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p23"></span> Compare xv. 25.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[6:472](2070017.htm#fr_471) <span
id="ii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p24"></span> [John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span id="ii.v-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[6:473](2070017.htm#fr_472) <span
id="ii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p25"></span> [Matt. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span id="ii.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[6:474](2070017.htm#fr_473) <span
id="ii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p27"></span> [Ps. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#010)<span id="ii.v-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[7:475](2070017.htm#fr_474) <span
id="ii.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p28"></span> [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="ii.v-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[7:476](2070017.htm#fr_475) <span
id="ii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p30"></span> Gr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v-p30.1"></span>νοητόν</span>, i.e. the true Paradise, to be seen
by the mind, not by the eye.  [Rev.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#017)<span id="ii.v-p30.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[7:477](2070017.htm#fr_476) <span
id="ii.v-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p31"></span> See preceding note.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[7:478](2070017.htm#fr_477) <span
id="ii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p32"></span> [Rom. xi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)<span id="ii.v-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[7:479](2070017.htm#fr_478) <span
id="ii.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p33"></span> [John
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="ii.v-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[7:480](2070017.htm#fr_479) <span
id="ii.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p34"></span> [Matt. xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019)<span id="ii.v-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[7:481](2070017.htm#fr_480) <span
id="ii.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p35"></span> [Ps. lii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#010)<span id="ii.v-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[7:482](2070017.htm#fr_481) <span
id="ii.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v-p36.1"></span>νοητή</span>, see note 1, above.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[7:483](2070017.htm#fr_482) <span
id="ii.v-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p37"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="ii.v-p37.1"></span>.  When
Paul plants and Apollos waters, it is God Himself who works through His
ministers.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[7:484](2070017.htm#fr_483) <span
id="ii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p39"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="ii.v-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[7:485](2070017.htm#fr_484) <span
id="ii.v-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p40"></span> Literally “human.”

<span id="fn_485"></span>[7:486](2070017.htm#fr_485) <span
id="ii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p41"></span> Some <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v-p41.1"></span>mss.</span> omit <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v-p41.2"></span>τῇ προσευχῇ</span> after <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v-p41.3"></span>σχολάζεις</span>.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[7:487](2070017.htm#fr_486) <span
id="ii.v-p41.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p42"></span> [Ps. xlvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)<span id="ii.v-p42.1"></span>: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.v-p42.2"></span>σχολάσατε</span>. 
Compare Procat. 13.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[7:488](2070017.htm#fr_487) <span
id="ii.v-p42.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p43"></span> Compare Procat. 17:  xviii. 1.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[7:489](2070017.htm#fr_488) <span
id="ii.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p45"></span> See Index, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v-p45.1"></span>σύναξις</span>.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[7:490](2070017.htm#fr_489) <span
id="ii.v-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p46"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)<span id="ii.v-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[7:491](2070017.htm#fr_490) <span
id="ii.v-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p47"></span> [Isa.
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018), [Heb.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013)<span id="ii.v-p47.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Repentance and Remission of Sins, and Concerning the
Adversary.](2070018)
