[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070057)  [Next](2070059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Oration XXIX.</span>

<span id="iii.xv-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xv-p2.1"></span>The Third Theological Oration.</span>

<span id="iii.xv-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xv-p3.1"></span>On the Son.</span>

<span id="iii.xv-p4"></span>I.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xv-p4.1"></span>This</span> then is what might be said to cut
short our opponents’ readiness to argue and their hastiness with its
consequent insecurity in all matters, but above all in those discussions
which relate to God.  But since to rebuke others is a matter of no
difficulty whatever, but a very easy thing, which any one who likes can
do; whereas to substitute one’s own belief for theirs is the part of a
pious and intelligent man; let us, relying on the Holy Ghost, Who among
them is dishonoured, but among us is adored, bring forth to the light
our own conceptions about the Godhead, whatever these may be, like some
noble and timely birth.  Not that I have at other times been silent; for
on this subject alone I am full of youthful strength and daring; but the
fact is that under present circumstances I am even more bold to declare
the truth, that I may not (to use the words of Scripture) by drawing
back fall into the condemnation of being displeasing to God. <span
id="fr_3506"></span>[3507](#fn_3506)   And since every discourse is of a
twofold nature, the one part establishing one’s own, and the other
overthrowing one’s opponents’ position; let us first of all state our
own position, and then try to controvert that of our opponents;—and both
as briefly as possible, so that our arguments may be taken in at a
glance (like those of the elementary treatises which they have devised
to deceive simple or foolish persons), and that our thoughts may not be
scattered by reason of the length of the discourse, like water which is
not contained in a channel, but flows to waste over the open land.

<span id="iii.xv-p6"></span>II.  The three most ancient opinions
concerning God are Anarchia, Polyarchia, and Monarchia.  The first two
are the sport of the children of Hellas, and may they continue to be
so.  For Anarchy is a thing without order; and the Rule of Many is
factious, and thus anarchical, and thus disorderly.  For both these tend
to the same thing, namely disorder; and this to dissolution, for
disorder is the first step to dissolution.

<span id="iii.xv-p7"></span>But Monarchy is that which we hold in
honour.  It is, however, a Monarchy that is not limited to one Person,
for it is possible for Unity if at variance with itself to come into a
condition of plurality; <span id="fr_3507"></span>[3508](#fn_3507) but
one which is made of an equality of Nature and a Union of mind, and an
identity of motion, and a convergence of its elements to unity—a thing
which is impossible to the created nature—so that though numerically
distinct there is no severance of Essence.  Therefore Unity <span
id="fr_3508"></span>[3509](#fn_3508) having from all eternity arrived by
motion at Duality, found its rest in Trinity.  This is what we mean by
Father and Son and Holy Ghost.  The Father is the Begetter and the
Emitter; <span id="fr_3509"></span>[3510](#fn_3509) without passion of
course, and without reference to time, and not in a corporeal manner. 
The Son is the Begotten, and the Holy Ghost the Emission; for I know not
how this could be expressed in terms altogether excluding visible
things.  For we shall not venture to speak of “an overflow of goodness,”
as one of the Greek Philosophers dared to say, as if it were a bowl
overflowing, and this in plain words in his Discourse on the First and
Second Causes. <span id="fr_3510"></span>[3511](#fn_3510)   Let us not
ever look on this Generation as involuntary, like some natural overflow,
hard to be retained, and by no means befitting our conception of Deity. 
Therefore let us confine ourselves within our limits, and speak of the
Unbegotten and the Begotten and That which proceeds from the Father, as
somewhere God the Word Himself saith.

<span id="iii.xv-p12"></span>III.  When did these come into being?  They
are above all “When.”  But, if I am to speak with something more of
boldness,—when the Father did.  And when did the Father come into
being.  There never was a time when He was not.  And the same thing is
true of the Son and the Holy Ghost.  Ask me again, and again I will
answer you, When was the Son <span id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span
id="iii.xv-Page_302"></span>begotten?  When the Father was not
begotten.  And when did the Holy Ghost proceed?  When the Son was, not
proceeding but, begotten—beyond the sphere of time, and above the grasp
of reason; although we cannot set forth that which is above time, if we
avoid as we desire any expression which conveys the idea of time.  For
such expressions as “when” and “before” and “after” and “from the
beginning” are not timeless, however much we may force them; unless
indeed we were to take the Æon, that interval which is coextensive with
the eternal things, and is not divided or measured by any motion, or by
the revolution of the sun, as time is measured.

<span id="iii.xv-p13"></span>How then are They not alike unoriginate, if
They are coeternal?  Because They are from Him, though not after Him. 
For that which is unoriginate is eternal, but that which is eternal is
not necessarily unoriginate, so long as it may be referred to the Father
as its origin.  Therefore in respect of Cause They are not unoriginate;
but it is evident that the Cause is not necessarily prior to its
effects, for the sun is not prior to its light.  And yet They are in
some sense unoriginate, in respect of time, even though you would scare
simple minds with your quibbles, for the Sources of Time are not subject
to time.

<span id="iii.xv-p14"></span>IV.  But how can this generation be
passionless?  In that it is incorporeal.  For if corporeal generation
involves passion, incorporeal generation excludes it.  And I will ask of
you in turn, How is He God if He is created?  For that which is created
is not God.  I refrain from reminding you that here too is passion if we
take the creation in a bodily sense, as time, desire, imagination,
thought, hope, pain, risk, failure, success, all of which and more than
all find a place in the creature, as is evident to every one.  Nay, I
marvel that you do not venture so far as to conceive of marriages and
times of pregnancy, and dangers of miscarriage, as if the Father could
not have begotten at all if He had not begotten thus; or again, that you
did not count up the modes of generation of birds and beasts and fishes,
and bring under some one of them the Divine and Ineffable Generation, or
even eliminate the Son out of your new hypothesis.  And you cannot even
see this, that as His Generation according to the flesh differs from all
others (for where among men do you know of a Virgin Mother?), so does He
differ also in His spiritual Generation; or rather He, Whose Existence
is not the same as ours, differs from us also in His Generation.

<span id="iii.xv-p15"></span>V.  Who then is that Father Who had no
beginning?  One Whose very Existence had no beginning; for one whose
existence had a beginning must also have begun to be a Father.  He did
not then become a Father after He began to be, for His being had no
beginning.  And He is Father in the absolute sense, for He is not also
Son; just as the Son is Son in the absolute sense, because He is not
also Father.  These names do not belong to us in the absolute sense,
because we are both, and not one more than the other; and we are of
both, and not of one only; and so we are divided, and by degrees become
men, and perhaps not even men, and such as we did not desire, leaving
and being left, so that only the relations remain, without the
underlying facts. <span id="fr_3511"></span>[3512](#fn_3511)

<span id="iii.xv-p17"></span>But, the objector says, the very form of
the expression “He begat” and “He was begotten,” brings in the idea of a
beginning of generation.  But what if you do not use this expression,
but say, “He had been begotten from the beginning” so as readily to
evade your far-fetched and time-loving objections?  Will you bring
Scripture against us, as if we were forging something contrary to
Scripture and to the truth?  Why, every one knows that in practice we
very often find tenses interchanged when time is spoken of; and
especially is this the custom of Holy Scripture, not only in respect of
the past tense, and of the present; but even of the future, as for
instance “Why did the heathen rage?” <span
id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512) when they had not yet raged and
“they shall cross over the river on foot,” <span
id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513) where the meaning is they did cross
over.  It would be a long task to reckon up all the expressions of this
kind which students have noticed.

<span id="iii.xv-p20"></span>VI.  So much for this point.  What is their
next objection, how full of contentiousness and impudence?  He, they
say, either voluntarily begat the Son, or else involuntarily.  Next, as
they think, they bind us on both sides with cords; these however are not
strong, but very weak.  For, they say, if it was involuntarily He was
under the sway of some one, and who exercised this sway?  And how is He,
over whom it is exercised, God?  But if voluntarily, the Son is a Son of
Will; how then is He of the Father?—and they thus invent a new sort of
Mother for him,—the Will,—in place of the Father.  There is one good
point which they may allege about this argument of theirs; namely, that
they desert Passion, and take refuge in Will.  For Will is not Passion.

<span id="iii.xv-p21"></span><span id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span
id="iii.xv-Page_303"></span>Secondly, let us look at the strength of
their argument.  And it were best to wrestle with them at first at close
quarters.  You yourself, who so recklessly assert whatever takes your
fancy; were you begotten voluntarily or involuntarily by your father? 
If involuntarily, then he was under some tyrant’s sway (O terrible
violence!) and who was the tyrant?  You will hardly say it was
nature,—for nature is tolerant of chastity.  If it was voluntarily, then
by a few syllables your father is done away with, for you are shewn to
be the son of Will, and not of your father.  But I pass to the relation
between God and the creature, and I put your own question to your own
wisdom.  Did God *create* all things voluntarily or under compulsion? 
If under compulsion, here also is the tyranny, and one who played the
tyrant; if voluntarily, the creatures also are deprived of their God,
and you before the rest, who invent such arguments and tricks of logic. 
For a partition is set up between the Creator and the creatures in the
shape of Will.  And yet I think that the Person who wills is distinct
from the Act of willing; He who begets from the Act of begetting; the
Speaker from the speech, or else we are all very stupid.  On the one
side we have the mover, and on the other that which is, so to speak, the
motion.  Thus the thing willed is not the child of will, for it does not
always result therefrom; nor is that which is begotten the child of
generation, nor that which is heard the child of speech, but of the
Person who willed, or begat, or spoke.  But the things of God are beyond
all this, for with Him perhaps the Will to beget is generation, and
there is no intermediate action (if we may accept this altogether, and
not rather consider generation superior to will).

<span id="iii.xv-p22"></span>VII.  Will you then let me play a little
upon this word Father, for your example encourages me to be so bold? 
The Father is God either willingly or unwillingly; and how will you
escape from your own excessive acuteness?  If willingly, when did He
begin to will?  It could not have been before He began to be, for there
was nothing prior to Him.  Or is one part of Him Will and another the
object of Will?  If so, He is divisible.  So the question arises, as the
result of your argument, whether He Himself is not the Child of Will. 
And if unwillingly, what compelled Him to exist, and how is He God if He
was compelled—and that to nothing less than to be God?  How then was He
begotten, says my opponent.  How was He created, if as you say, He was
created?  For this is a part of the same difficulty.  Perhaps you would
say, By Will and Word.  You have not yet solved the whole difficulty;
for it yet remains for you to shew how Will and Word gained the power of
action.  For man was not created in this way.

<span id="iii.xv-p23"></span>VIII.  How then was He begotten?  This
Generation would have been no great thing, if you could have
comprehended it who have no real knowledge even of your own generation,
or at least who comprehend very little of it, and of that little you are
ashamed to speak; and then do you think you know the whole?  You will
have to undergo much labour before you discover the laws of composition,
formation, manifestation, and the bond whereby soul is united to
body,—mind to soul, and reason to mind; and movement, increase,
assimilation of food, sense, memory, recollection, and all the rest of
the parts of which you are compounded; and which of them belongs to the
soul and body together, and which to each independently of the other,
and which is received from each other.  For those parts whose maturity
comes later, yet received their laws at the time of conception.  Tell me
what these laws are?  And do not even then venture to speculate on the
Generation of God; for that would be unsafe.  For even if you knew all
about your own, yet you do not by any means know about God’s.  And if
you do not understand your own, how can you know about God’s?  For in
proportion as God is harder to trace out than man, so is the heavenly
Generation harder to comprehend than your own.  But if you assert that
because you cannot comprehend it, therefore He cannot have been
begotten, it will be time for you to strike out many existing things
which you cannot comprehend; and first of all God Himself.  For you
cannot say what He is, even if you are very reckless, and excessively
proud of your intelligence.  First, cast away your notions of flow and
divisions and sections, and your conceptions of immaterial as if it were
material birth, and then you may perhaps worthily conceive of the Divine
Generation.  How was He begotten?—I repeat the question in indignation. 
The Begetting of God must be honoured by silence.  It is a great thing
for you to learn that He was begotten.  But the manner of His generation
we will not admit that even Angels can conceive, much less you.  Shall I
tell you how it was?  It was in a manner known to the Father Who begat,
and to the Son Who was begotten.  Anything more than this is hidden by a
cloud, and escapes your dim sight.

<span id="iii.xv-p24"></span>IX.  Well, but the Father begat a Son who
<span id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span
id="iii.xv-Page_304"></span>either was or was not in existence. <span
id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514)   What utter nonsense!  This is a
question which applies to you or me, who on the one hand were in
existence, as for instance Levi in the loins of Abraham; <span
id="fr_3515"></span>[3516](#fn_3515) and on the other hand came into
existence; and so in some sense we are partly of what existed, and
partly of what was nonexistent; whereas the contrary is the case with
the original matter, which was certainly created out of what was
non-existent, notwithstanding that some pretend that it is unbegotten. 
But in this case “to be begotten,” even from the beginning, is
concurrent with “to be.”  On what then will you base this captious
question?  For what is older than that which is from the beginning, if
we may place there the previous existence or non-existence of the Son? 
In either case we destroy its claim to be the Beginning.  Or perhaps you
will say, if we were to ask you whether the Father was of existent or
non-existent substance, that he is twofold, partly pre-existing, partly
existing; or that His case is the same with that of the Son; that is,
that He was created out of non-existing matter, because of your
ridiculous questions and your houses of sand, which cannot stand against
the merest ripple.

<span id="iii.xv-p27"></span>I do not admit either solution, and I
declare that your question contains an absurdity, and not a difficulty
to answer.  If however you think, in accordance with your dialectic
assumptions, that one or other of these alternatives must necessarily be
true in every case, let me ask you one little question:  Is time in
time, or is it not in time?  If it is contained in time, then in what
time, and what is it but that time, and how does it contain it?  But if
it is not contained in time, what is that surpassing wisdom which can
conceive of a time which is timeless?  Now, in regard to this
expression, “I am now telling a lie,” admit one of these alternatives,
either that it is true, or that it is a falsehood, without qualification
(for we cannot admit that it is both).  But this cannot be.  For
necessarily he either is lying, and so is telling the truth, or else he
is telling the truth, and so is lying.  What wonder is it then that, as
in this case contraries are true, so in that case they should both be
untrue, and so your clever puzzle prove mere foolishness?  Solve me one
more riddle.  Were you present at your own generation, and are you now
present to yourself, or is neither the case?  If you were and are
present, who were you, and with whom are you present?  And how did your
single self become thus both subject and object?  But if neither of the
above is the case, how did you get separated from yourself, and what is
the cause of this disjoining?  But, you will say, it is stupid to make a
fuss about the question whether or no a single individual is present to
himself; for the expression is not used of oneself but of others.  Well,
you may be certain that it is even more stupid to discuss the question
whether That which was begotten from the beginning existed before its
generation or not.  For such a question arises only as to matter
divisible by time.

<span id="iii.xv-p28"></span>X.  But they say, The Unbegotten and the
Begotten are not the same; and if this is so, neither is the Son the
same as the Father.  It is clear, without saying so, that this line of
argument manifestly excludes either the Son or the Father from the
Godhead.  For if to be Unbegotten is the Essence of God, to be begotten
is not that Essence; if the opposite is the case, the Unbegotten is
excluded.  What argument can contradict this?  Choose then whichever
blasphemy you prefer, my good inventor of a new theology, if indeed you
are anxious at all costs to embrace a blasphemy.  In the next place, in
what sense do you assert that the Unbegotten and the Begotten are not
the same?  If you mean that the Uncreated and the created are not the
same, I agree with you; for certainly the Unoriginate and the created
are not of the same nature.  But if you say that He That begat and That
which is begotten are not the same, the statement is inaccurate.  For it
is in fact a necessary truth that they are the same.  For the nature of
the relation of Father to Child is this, that the offspring is of the
same nature with the parent.  Or we may argue thus again.  What do you
mean by Unbegotten and Begotten, for if you mean the simple fact of
being unbegotten or begotten, these are not the same; but if you mean
Those to Whom these terms apply, how are They not the same?  For
example, Wisdom and Unwisdom are not the same in themselves, but yet
both are attributes of man, who is the same; and they mark not a
difference of essence, but one external to the essence. <span
id="fr_3516"></span>[3517](#fn_3516)   Are immortality and innocence and
immutability also the essence of God?  If so God has many essences and
not one; or Deity is a compound of these.  For He cannot be all these
without composition, if they be essences.

<span id="iii.xv-p30"></span>XI.  They do not however assert this, for
these qualities are common also to other beings.  <span id="page_305">p.
305</span> <span id="iii.xv-Page_305"></span>But God’s Essence is that
which belongs to God alone, and is proper to Him.  But they, who
consider matter and form to be unbegotten, would not allow that to be
unbegotten is the property of God alone (for we must cast away even
further the darkness of the Manichæans). <span
id="fr_3517"></span>[3518](#fn_3517)   But suppose that it is the
property of God alone.  What of Adam?  Was he not alone the direct
creature of God?  Yes, you will say.  Was he then the only human being? 
By no means.  And why, but because humanity does not consist in direct
creation?  For that which is begotten is also human.  Just so neither is
He Who is Unbegotten alone God, though He alone is Father.  But grant
that He Who is Begotten is God; for He is of God, as you must allow,
even though you cling to your Unbegotten.  Then how do you describe the
Essence of God?  Not by declaring what it is, but by rejecting what it
is not.  For your word signifies that He is not begotten; it does not
present to you what is the real nature or condition of that which has no
generation.  What then *is* the Essence of God?  It is for your
infatuation to define this, since you are so anxious about His
Generation too; but to us it will be a very great thing, if ever, even
in the future, we learn this, when this darkness and dulness is done
away for us, as He has promised Who cannot lie.  This then may be the
thought and hope of those who are purifying themselves with a view to
this.  Thus much we for our part will be bold to say, that if it is a
great thing for the Father to be Unoriginate, it is no less a thing for
the Son to have been Begotten of such a Father.  For not only would He
share the glory of the Unoriginate, since he is of the Unoriginate, but
he has the added glory of His Generation, a thing so great and august in
the eyes of all those who are not altogether grovelling and material in
mind.

<span id="iii.xv-p32"></span>XII.  But, they say, if the Son is the Same
as the Father in respect of Essence, then if the Father is unbegotten,
the Son must be so likewise.  Quite so—if the Essence of God consists in
being unbegotten; and so He would be a strange mixture, begottenly
unbegotten.  If, however, the difference is outside the Essence, how can
you be so certain in speaking of this?  Are you also your father’s
father, so as in no respect to fall short of your father, since you are
the same with him in essence?  Is it not evident that our enquiry into
the Nature of the Essence of God, if we make it, will leave Personality
absolutely unaffected?  But that Unbegotten is not a synonym of God is
proved thus.  If it were so, it would be necessary that since God is a
relative term, Unbegotten should be so likewise; or that since
Unbegotten is an absolute term, so must God be.…God of no one.  For
words which are absolutely identical are similarly applied.  But the
word Unbegotten is not used relatively.  For to what is it relative? 
And of what things is God the God?  Why, of all things.  How then can
God and Unbegotten be identical terms?  And again, since Begotten and
Unbegotten are contradictories, like possession and deprivation, it
would follow that contradictory essences would co-exist, which is
impossible. <span id="fr_3518"></span>[3519](#fn_3518)   Or again, since
possessions are prior to deprivations, and the latter are destructive of
the former, not only must the Essence of the Son be prior to that of the
Father, but it must be destroyed by the Father, on your hypothesis.

<span id="iii.xv-p34"></span>XIII.  What now remains of their invincible
arguments?  Perhaps the last they will take refuge in is this.  If God
has never ceased to beget, the Generation is imperfect; and when will He
cease?  But if He has ceased, then He must have begun.  Thus again these
carnal minds bring forward carnal arguments.  Whether He is eternally
begotten or not, I do not yet say, until I have looked into the
statement, “Before all the hills He begetteth Me,” <span
id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519) more accurately.  But I cannot see
the necessity of their conclusion.  For if, as they say, everything that
is to come to an end had also a beginning, then surely that which has no
end had no beginning.  What then will they decide concerning the soul,
or the Angelic nature?  If it had a beginning, it will also have an end;
and if it has no end, it is evident that according to them it had no
beginning.  But the truth is that it had a beginning, and will never
have an end.  Their assertion, then, that which will have an end had
also a beginning, is untrue.  Our position, however, is, that as in the
case of a horse, or an ox, or a man, the same definition applies to all
the individuals of the same species, and whatever shares the definition
has also a right to the Name; so in the very same way there is One
Essence of God, and One Nature, and One Name; although in accordance
with a distinction in our thoughts we use distinct Names and that
whatever is properly called by this Name really is God; and what He is
in Nature, That He is truly called—if at <span id="page_306">p.
306</span> <span id="iii.xv-Page_306"></span>least we are to hold that
Truth is a matter not of names but of realities.  But our opponents, as
if they were afraid of leaving any stone unturned to subvert the Truth,
acknowledge indeed that the Son is God when they are compelled to do so
by arguments <span id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520) and evidences;
but they only mean that He is God in an ambiguous sense, and that He
only shares the Name.

<span id="iii.xv-p37"></span>XIV.  And when we advance this objection
against them, “What do you mean to say then?  That the Son is not
properly God, just as a picture of an animal is not properly an animal? 
And if not properly God, in what sense is He God at all?”  They reply,
Why should not these terms be ambiguous, and in both cases be used in a
proper sense?  And they will give us such instances as the land-dog and
the dogfish; where the word Dog is ambiguous, and yet in both cases is
properly used, for there is such a species among the ambiguously named,
or any other case in which the same appellative is used for two things
of different nature.  But, my good friend, in this case, when you
include two natures under the same name, you do not assert that either
is better than the other, or that the one is prior and the other
posterior, or that one is in a greater degree and the other in a lesser
that which is predicated of them both, for there is no connecting link
which forces this necessity upon them.  One is not a dog more than the
other, and one less so; either the dogfish more than the land-dog, or
the land-dog than the dogfish.  Why should they be, or on what
principle?  But the community of name is here between things of equal
value, though of different nature.  But in the case of which we are
speaking, you couple the Name of God with adorable Majesty, and make It
surpass every essence and nature (an attribute of God alone), and then
you ascribe this Name to the Father, while you deprive the Son of it,
and make Him subject to the Father, and give Him only a secondary honour
and worship; and even if in words you bestow on Him one which is Equal,
yet in practice you cut off His Deity, and pass malignantly from a use
of the same Name implying an exact equality, to one which connects
things which are not equal.  And so the pictured and the living man are
in your mouth an apter illustration of the relations of Deity than the
dogs which I instanced.  Or else you must concede to both an equal
dignity of nature as well as a common name—even though you introduced
these natures into your argument as different; and thus you destroy the
analogy of your dogs, which you invented as an instance of inequality. 
For what is the force of your instance of ambiguity, if those whom you
distinguish are not equal in honour?  For it was not to prove an
equality but an inequality that you took refuge in your dogs.  How could
anybody be more clearly convicted of fighting both against his own
arguments, and against the Deity?

<span id="iii.xv-p38"></span>XV.  And if, when we admit that in respect
of being the Cause the Father is greater than the Son, they should
assume the premiss that He is the Cause by Nature, and then deduce the
conclusion that He is greater by Nature also, it is difficult to say
whether they mislead most themselves or those with whom they are
arguing.  For it does not absolutely follow that all that is predicated
of a class can also be predicated of all the individuals composing it;
for the different particulars may belong to different individuals.  For
what hinders me, if I assume the same premiss, namely, that the Father
is greater by Nature, and then add this other, Yet not by nature in
every respect greater nor yet Father—from concluding, Therefore the
Greater is not in every respect greater, nor the Father in every respect
Father?  Or, if you prefer it, let us put it in this way:  God is an
Essence:  But an Essence is not in every case God; and draw the
conclusion for yourself—Therefore God is not in every case God.  I think
the fallacy here is the arguing from a conditioned to an unconditioned
use of a term, <span id="fr_3521"></span>[3522](#fn_3521) to use the
technical expression of the logicians.  For while we assign this word
Greater to His Nature viewed as a Cause, they infer it of His Nature
viewed in itself.  It is just as if when we said that such a one was a
dead man they were to infer simply that he was a Man.

<span id="iii.xv-p40"></span>XVI.  How shall we pass over the following
point, which is no less amazing than the rest?  Father, they say, is a
name either of an essence or of an Action, thinking to bind us down on
both sides.  If we say that it is a name of an essence, they will say
that we agree with them that the Son is of another Essence, since there
is but one Essence of God, and this, according to them, is preoccupied
by the Father.  On the other hand, if we say that it is the name of an
Action, we shall be <span id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span
id="iii.xv-Page_307"></span>supposed to acknowledge plainly that the Son
is created and not begotten.  For where there is an Agent there must
also be an Effect.  And they will say they wonder how that which is made
can be identical with That which made it.  I should myself have been
frightened with your distinction, if it had been necessary to accept one
or other of the alternatives, and not rather put both aside, and state a
third and truer one, namely, that Father is not a name either of an
essence or of an action, most clever sirs.  But it is the name of the
Relation in which the Father stands to the Son, and the Son to the
Father.  For as with us these names make known a genuine and intimate
relation, so, in the case before us too, they denote an identity of
nature between Him That is begotten and Him That begets.  But let us
concede to you that Father is a name of essence, it will still bring in
the idea of Son, and will not make it of a different nature, according
to common ideas and the force of these names.  Let it be, if it so
please you, the name of an action; you will not defeat us in this way
either.  The Homoousion would be indeed the result of this action, or
otherwise the conception of an action in this matter would be absurd. 
You see then how, even though you try to fight unfairly, we avoid your
sophistries.  But now, since we have ascertained how invincible you are
in your arguments and sophistries, let us look at your strength in the
Oracles of God, if perchance you may choose to persuade us out of them.

<span id="iii.xv-p41"></span>XVII.  For we have learnt to believe in and
to teach the Deity of the Son from their great and lofty utterances. 
And what utterances are these?  These:  God—The Word—He That Was In The
Beginning and With The Beginning, and The Beginning.  “In the Beginning
was The Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God,” <span
id="fr_3522"></span>[3523](#fn_3522) and “With Thee is the
Beginning,” <span id="fr_3523"></span>[3524](#fn_3523) and “He who
calleth her The Beginning from generations.” <span
id="fr_3524"></span>[3525](#fn_3524)   Then the Son is Only-begotten: 
The only “begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, it says, He
hath declared Him.” <span id="fr_3525"></span>[3526](#fn_3525)   The
Way, the Truth, the Life, the Light.  “I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life;” and “I am the Light of the World.” <span
id="fr_3526"></span>[3527](#fn_3526)   Wisdom and Power, “Christ, the
Wisdom of God, and the Power of God.” <span
id="fr_3527"></span>[3528](#fn_3527)   The Effulgence, the Impress, the
Image, the Seal; “Who being the Effulgence of His glory and the Impress
of His Essence,” <span id="fr_3528"></span>[3529](#fn_3528) and “the
Image of His Goodness,” <span id="fr_3529"></span>[3530](#fn_3529) and
“Him hath God the Father sealed.” <span
id="fr_3530"></span>[3531](#fn_3530)   Lord, King, He That Is, The
Almighty.  “The Lord rained down fire from the Lord;” <span
id="fr_3531"></span>[3532](#fn_3531) and “A sceptre of righteousness is
the sceptre of Thy Kingdom;” <span id="fr_3532"></span>[3533](#fn_3532)
and “Which is and was and is to come, the Almighty” <span
id="fr_3533"></span>[3534](#fn_3533) —all which are clearly spoken of
the Son, with all the other passages of the same force, none of which is
an afterthought, or added later to the Son or the Spirit, any more than
to the Father Himself.  For Their Perfection is not affected by
additions.  There never was a time when He was without the Word, or when
He was not the Father, or when He was not true, or not wise, or not
powerful, or devoid of life, or of splendour, or of goodness.

<span id="iii.xv-p54"></span>But in opposition to all these, do you
reckon up for me the expressions which make for your ignorant arrogance,
such as “My God and your God,” <span
id="fr_3534"></span>[3535](#fn_3534) or greater, or created, or made, or
sanctified; <span id="fr_3535"></span>[3536](#fn_3535) Add, if you like,
Servant <span id="fr_3536"></span>[3537](#fn_3536) and Obedient <span
id="fr_3537"></span>[3538](#fn_3537) and Gave <span
id="fr_3538"></span>[3539](#fn_3538) and Learnt, <span
id="fr_3539"></span>[3540](#fn_3539) and was commanded, <span
id="fr_3540"></span>[3541](#fn_3540) was sent, <span
id="fr_3541"></span>[3542](#fn_3541) can do nothing of Himself, either
say, or judge, or give, or will. <span
id="fr_3542"></span>[3543](#fn_3542)   And further these,—His
ignorance, <span id="fr_3543"></span>[3544](#fn_3543) subjection, <span
id="fr_3544"></span>[3545](#fn_3544) prayer, <span
id="fr_3545"></span>[3546](#fn_3545) asking, <span
id="fr_3546"></span>[3547](#fn_3546) increase, <span
id="fr_3547"></span>[3548](#fn_3547) being made perfect. <span
id="fr_3548"></span>[3549](#fn_3548)   And if you like even more humble
than these; such as speak of His sleeping, <span
id="fr_3549"></span>[3550](#fn_3549) hungering, <span
id="fr_3550"></span>[3551](#fn_3550) being in an agony, <span
id="fr_3551"></span>[3552](#fn_3551) and fearing; <span
id="fr_3552"></span>[3553](#fn_3552) or perhaps you would make even His
Cross and Death a matter of reproach to Him.  His Resurrection and
Ascension I fancy you will leave to me, for in these is found something
to support *our* position.  A good many other things too you might pick
up, if you desire to put together that equivocal and intruded god of
yours, Who to us is True God, and equal to the Father.  For every one of
these points, taken separately, may very easily, if we go through them
one by one, be explained to you in the most reverent sense, and the
stumbling-block of the letter be cleaned away—that is, if your stumbling
at it be honest, and not wilfully malicious.  To give you the
explanation in one sentence.  What is lofty you are to apply to the
Godhead, and to that Nature in Him which is superior to sufferings and
incorporeal; but all that is lowly to the composite condition <span
id="fr_3553"></span>[3554](#fn_3553) of Him who for your <span
id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span id="iii.xv-Page_308"></span>sakes made
Himself of no reputation and was Incarnate—yes, for it is no worse thing
to say, was made Man, and afterwards was also exalted.  The result will
be that you will abandon these carnal and grovelling doctrines, and
learn to be more sublime, and to ascend with His Godhead, and you will
not remain permanently among the things of sight, but will rise up with
Him into the world of thought, and come to know which passages refer to
His Nature, and which to His assumption of Human Nature. <span
id="fr_3554"></span>[3555](#fn_3554)

<span id="iii.xv-p76"></span>XIX.  For He Whom you now treat with
contempt was once above you.  He Who is now Man was once the
Uncompounded.  What He was He continued to be; what He was not He took
to Himself. <span id="fr_3555"></span>[3556](#fn_3555)   In the
beginning He was, uncaused; for what is the Cause of God?  But
afterwards for a cause He was born.  And that cause was that you might
be saved, who insult Him and despise His Godhead, because of this, that
He took upon Him your denser nature, having converse with Flesh by means
of Mind. <span id="fr_3556"></span>[3557](#fn_3556)   While His inferior
Nature, the Humanity, became God, because it was united to God, and
became One Person <span id="fr_3557"></span>[3558](#fn_3557) because the
Higher Nature prevailed in order that I too might be made God so far as
He is made Man. <span id="fr_3558"></span>[3559](#fn_3558)   He was
born—but He had been begotten:  He was born of a woman—but she was a
Virgin.  The first is human, the second Divine.  In His Human nature He
had no Father, but also in His Divine Nature no Mother. <span
id="fr_3559"></span>[3560](#fn_3559)   Both these <span
id="fr_3560"></span>[3561](#fn_3560) belong to Godhead.  He dwelt in the
womb—but He was recognized by the Prophet, <span
id="fr_3561"></span>[3562](#fn_3561) himself still in the womb, leaping
before the Word, for Whose sake He came into being.  He was wrapped in
swaddling clothes <span id="fr_3562"></span>[3563](#fn_3562) —but He
took off the swathing bands of the grave by His rising again.  He was
laid in a manger—but He was glorified by Angels, and proclaimed by a
star, and worshipped by the Magi.  Why are you offended by that which is
presented to your sight, because you will not look at that which is
presented to your mind?  He was driven into exile into Egypt—but He
drove away the Egyptian idols. <span
id="fr_3563"></span>[3564](#fn_3563)   He had no form nor comeliness in
the eyes of the Jews <span id="fr_3564"></span>[3565](#fn_3564) —but to
David He is fairer than the children of men. <span
id="fr_3565"></span>[3566](#fn_3565)   And on the Mountain He was bright
as the lightning, and became more luminous than the sun, <span
id="fr_3566"></span>[3567](#fn_3566) initiating us into the mystery of
the future.

<span id="iii.xv-p89"></span>XX.  He was baptized as Man—but He remitted
sins as God <span id="fr_3567"></span>[3568](#fn_3567) —not because He
needed purificatory rites Himself, but that He might sanctify the
element of water.  He was tempted as Man, but He conquered as God; yea,
He bids us be of good cheer, for He has overcome the world. <span
id="fr_3568"></span>[3569](#fn_3568)   He hungered—but He fed
thousands; <span id="fr_3569"></span>[3570](#fn_3569) yea, He is the
Bread that giveth life, and That is of heaven.  He thirsted—but He
cried, If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink. <span
id="fr_3570"></span>[3571](#fn_3570)   Yea, He promised that foun<span
id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span id="iii.xv-Page_309"></span>tains
should flow from them that believe.  He was wearied, but He is the Rest
of them that are weary and heavy laden. <span
id="fr_3571"></span>[3572](#fn_3571)   He was heavy with sleep, but He
walked lightly over the sea. <span id="fr_3572"></span>[3573](#fn_3572)
  He rebuked the winds, He made Peter light as he began to sink. <span
id="fr_3573"></span>[3574](#fn_3573)   He pays tribute, but it is out of
a fish; <span id="fr_3574"></span>[3575](#fn_3574) yea, He is the King
of those who demanded it. <span id="fr_3575"></span>[3576](#fn_3575)  
He is called a Samaritan and a demoniac; <span
id="fr_3576"></span>[3577](#fn_3576) —but He saves him that came down
from Jerusalem and fell among thieves; <span
id="fr_3577"></span>[3578](#fn_3577) the demons acknowledge Him, and He
drives out demons and sinks in the sea legions of foul spirits, <span
id="fr_3578"></span>[3579](#fn_3578) and sees the Prince of the demons
falling like lightning. <span id="fr_3579"></span>[3580](#fn_3579)   He
is stoned, but is not taken.  He prays, but He hears prayer.  He weeps,
but He causes tears to cease.  He asks where Lazarus was laid, for He
was Man; but He raises Lazarus, for He was God. <span
id="fr_3580"></span>[3581](#fn_3580)   He is sold, and very cheap, for
it is only for thirty pieces of silver; <span
id="fr_3581"></span>[3582](#fn_3581) but He redeems the world, and that
at a great price, for the Price was His own blood. <span
id="fr_3582"></span>[3583](#fn_3582)   As a sheep He is led to the
slaughter, <span id="fr_3583"></span>[3584](#fn_3583) but He is the
Shepherd of Israel, and now of the whole world also.  As a Lamb He is
silent, yet He is the Word, and is proclaimed by the Voice of one crying
in the wilderness. <span id="fr_3584"></span>[3585](#fn_3584)   He is
bruised and wounded, but He healeth every disease and every
infirmity. <span id="fr_3585"></span>[3586](#fn_3585)   He is lifted up
and nailed to the Tree, but by the Tree of Life He restoreth us; yea, He
saveth even the Robber crucified with Him; <span
id="fr_3586"></span>[3587](#fn_3586) yea, He wrapped the visible world
in darkness.  He is given vinegar to drink mingled with gall.  Who?  He
who turned the water into wine <span
id="fr_3587"></span>[3588](#fn_3587) , who is the destroyer of the
bitter taste, who is Sweetness and altogether desire. <span
id="fr_3588"></span>[3589](#fn_3588)   He lays down His life, but He has
power to take it again; <span id="fr_3589"></span>[3590](#fn_3589) and
the veil is rent, for the mysterious doors of Heaven are opened; the
rocks are cleft, the dead arise. <span
id="fr_3590"></span>[3591](#fn_3590)   He dies, but He gives life, and
by His death destroys death.  He is buried, but He rises again; He goes
down into Hell, but He brings up the souls; He ascends to Heaven, and
shall come again to judge the quick and the dead, and to put to the test
such words as yours.  If the one give you a starting point for your
error, let the others put an end to it.

<span id="iii.xv-p114"></span>XXI.  This, then, is our reply to those
who would puzzle us; not given willingly indeed (for light talk and
contradictions of words are not agreeable to the faithful, and one
Adversary is enough for us), but of necessity, for the sake of our
assailants (for medicines exist because of diseases), that they may be
led to see that they are not all-wise nor invincible in those
superfluous arguments which make void the Gospel.  For when we leave off
believing, and protect ourselves by mere strength of argument, and
destroy the claim which the Spirit has upon our faith by questionings,
and then our argument is not strong enough for the importance of the
subject (and this must necessarily be the case, since it is put in
motion by an organ of so little power as is our mind), what is the
result?  The weakness of the argument appears to belong to the mystery,
and thus elegance of language makes void the Cross, as Paul also
thought. <span id="fr_3591"></span>[3592](#fn_3591)   For faith is that
which completes our argument.  But may He who proclaimeth unions and
looseth those that are bound, and who putteth into our minds to solve
the knots of their unnatural dogmas, if it may be, change these men and
make them faithful instead of rhetoricians, Christians instead of that
which they now are called.  This indeed we entreat and beg for Christ’s
sake.  Be ye reconciled to God, <span
id="fr_3592"></span>[3593](#fn_3592) and quench not the Spirit; <span
id="fr_3593"></span>[3594](#fn_3593) or rather, may Christ be reconciled
to you, and may the Spirit enlighten you, though so late.  But if you
are too fond of your quarrel, we at any rate will hold fast to the
Trinity, and by the Trinity may we be saved, remaining pure and without
offence, until the more perfect shewing forth of that which we desire,
in Him, Christ our Lord, to Whom be the glory for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3506"></span>[301:3507](2070058.htm#fr_3506) <span
id="iii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p5"></span> [Heb.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#004), [Heb.
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)<span id="iii.xv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3507"></span>[301:3508](2070058.htm#fr_3507) <span
id="iii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p8"></span> Billius and others here read Authority,
which is not supported by the best <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xv-p8.1"></span>mss.</span>, or by the context.

<span id="fn_3508"></span>[301:3509](2070058.htm#fr_3508) <span
id="iii.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p9"></span> Elias explains this to mean that of old men
knew only One Person in the Godhead:  and until the Incarnation this
knowledge was sufficient; but from that time forward they acknowledged a
Second Person, and through Him a Third also, the Holy Ghost.  But this
explanation falls far short of Gregory’s meaning, which certainly is
that the movement of self-consciousness in God from all Eternity made
the Generation of the Son, and the Procession of the Holy Ghost, a
necessity.  All is objective in God.  cf. Petav. de Deo, II., viii., 16;
also, Greg. Naz., Or. xxiii. 5.

<span id="fn_3509"></span>[301:3510](2070058.htm#fr_3509) <span
id="iii.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p10.1"></span>προβολεὺς-προβολὴ</span> was a term used by the
Gnostics to describe the Emanations by which the distance between the
Finite and the Infinite was according to them bridged over; and on this
account it fell under suspicion, and was rejected by both Arius and
Athanasius.  Tertullian used it with an explanation which is
satisfactory as regards the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p10.2"></span>προβολὴ</span> of the Son; but when he comes to
apply it to the Procession of the Holy Ghost he uses an illustration
which is in almost the very words rejected by Gregory (c. Prax., 7, 8. 
See Swete, p. 56).  Origen did not admit it.  Later when this danger was
past, the word came into use again as the equivalent of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p10.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p10.4"></span>κπόρευσις</span>, at first
with reserve and explanations in the text, but later on as an accepted
term.  See Swete ,“On The Doctrine Of The Holy Spirit,” p. 36.

<span id="fn_3510"></span>[301:3511](2070058.htm#fr_3510) <span
id="iii.xv-p10.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p11"></span> The expression is from Plato.

<span id="fn_3511"></span>[302:3512](2070058.htm#fr_3511) <span
id="iii.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p16"></span> Elias explains this to refer to the fact
that children leave and are left by parents; or else to the death of
either one or the other.

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[302:3513](2070058.htm#fr_3512) <span
id="iii.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p18"></span> [Ps. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)<span id="iii.xv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[302:3514](2070058.htm#fr_3513) <span
id="iii.xv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p19"></span> [Ps. lxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006)<span id="iii.xv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[304:3515](2070058.htm#fr_3514) <span
id="iii.xv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p25"></span> This is the Arian dilemma, “Did the Son
exist before he was begotten?”

<span id="fn_3515"></span>[304:3516](2070058.htm#fr_3515) <span
id="iii.xv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p26"></span> [Heb. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#010)<span id="iii.xv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3516"></span>[304:3517](2070058.htm#fr_3516) <span
id="iii.xv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p29"></span> cf. Petavius De Trin., V. ii., 2.

<span id="fn_3517"></span>[305:3518](2070058.htm#fr_3517) <span
id="iii.xv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p31"></span> The Manichæans, who believed in two
eternal principles of good and evil, light and darkness, held that
darkness too was unbegotten (Elias).

<span id="fn_3518"></span>[305:3519](2070058.htm#fr_3518) <span
id="iii.xv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p33"></span> Because “Son” implies “begotten.”  But (ex
hyp.) “Unbegotten” is synonymous with “God.”

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[305:3520](2070058.htm#fr_3519) <span
id="iii.xv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p35"></span> [Prov. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025)<span id="iii.xv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[306:3521](2070058.htm#fr_3520) <span
id="iii.xv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p36"></span> The Benedictines here translate <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p36.1"></span>λόγῳ</span> by “Scripture,”
on the ground that Reason is not competent to assert the Divinity of the
Word.

<span id="fn_3521"></span>[306:3522](2070058.htm#fr_3521) <span
id="iii.xv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p39"></span> Or as the schoolmen say the fallacy is, A
dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, one of the many forms of
Undistributed Middle Term.  Petavius, however (De Trin.. II., v., 12),
pronounces the argument of this section unsatisfactory.

<span id="fn_3522"></span>[307:3523](2070058.htm#fr_3522) <span
id="iii.xv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p42"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iii.xv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3523"></span>[307:3524](2070058.htm#fr_3523) <span
id="iii.xv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p43"></span> [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="iii.xv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3524"></span>[307:3525](2070058.htm#fr_3524) <span
id="iii.xv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p44"></span> [Isa. xli.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004)<span id="iii.xv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3525"></span>[307:3526](2070058.htm#fr_3525) <span
id="iii.xv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p45"></span> [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="iii.xv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3526"></span>[307:3527](2070058.htm#fr_3526) <span
id="iii.xv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p46"></span> [John
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012), [John
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#005), [John
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iii.xv-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3527"></span>[307:3528](2070058.htm#fr_3527) <span
id="iii.xv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p47"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="iii.xv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3528"></span>[307:3529](2070058.htm#fr_3528) <span
id="iii.xv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p48"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="iii.xv-p48.1"></span> R.V.

<span id="fn_3529"></span>[307:3530](2070058.htm#fr_3529) <span
id="iii.xv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p49"></span> [Wisd. vii.
26](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#026)<span id="iii.xv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3530"></span>[307:3531](2070058.htm#fr_3530) <span
id="iii.xv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p50"></span> [John vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span id="iii.xv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3531"></span>[307:3532](2070058.htm#fr_3531) <span
id="iii.xv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p51"></span> [Gen. xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span id="iii.xv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3532"></span>[307:3533](2070058.htm#fr_3532) <span
id="iii.xv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p52"></span> [Ps. xlv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)<span id="iii.xv-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3533"></span>[307:3534](2070058.htm#fr_3533) <span
id="iii.xv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p53"></span> [Rev. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008)<span id="iii.xv-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3534"></span>[307:3535](2070058.htm#fr_3534) <span
id="iii.xv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p55"></span> [John
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028)<span id="iii.xv-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3535"></span>[307:3536](2070058.htm#fr_3535) <span
id="iii.xv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p56"></span> [Prov.
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022), [John
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036), [Acts
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span id="iii.xv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3536"></span>[307:3537](2070058.htm#fr_3536) <span
id="iii.xv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p57"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iii.xv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3537"></span>[307:3538](2070058.htm#fr_3537) <span
id="iii.xv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p58"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="iii.xv-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3538"></span>[307:3539](2070058.htm#fr_3538) <span
id="iii.xv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p59"></span> [John i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="iii.xv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3539"></span>[307:3540](2070058.htm#fr_3539) <span
id="iii.xv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p60"></span> [Heb. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#008)<span id="iii.xv-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3540"></span>[307:3541](2070058.htm#fr_3540) <span
id="iii.xv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p61"></span> [John
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018), [John
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031)<span id="iii.xv-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3541"></span>[307:3542](2070058.htm#fr_3541) <span
id="iii.xv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p62"></span> [John
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034), [John
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)<span id="iii.xv-p62.1"></span>,
sq.

<span id="fn_3542"></span>[307:3543](2070058.htm#fr_3542) <span
id="iii.xv-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p63"></span> [John
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030)<span id="iii.xv-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3543"></span>[307:3544](2070058.htm#fr_3543) <span
id="iii.xv-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p64"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span id="iii.xv-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3544"></span>[307:3545](2070058.htm#fr_3544) <span
id="iii.xv-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p65"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="iii.xv-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3545"></span>[307:3546](2070058.htm#fr_3545) <span
id="iii.xv-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p66"></span> [Luke vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012)<span id="iii.xv-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3546"></span>[307:3547](2070058.htm#fr_3546) <span
id="iii.xv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p67"></span> [John xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="iii.xv-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3547"></span>[307:3548](2070058.htm#fr_3547) <span
id="iii.xv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p68"></span> [Luke ii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span id="iii.xv-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3548"></span>[307:3549](2070058.htm#fr_3548) <span
id="iii.xv-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p69"></span> [Heb. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009)<span id="iii.xv-p69.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3549"></span>[307:3550](2070058.htm#fr_3549) <span
id="iii.xv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p70"></span> [Matt.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#024), [Mark
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#038)<span id="iii.xv-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3550"></span>[307:3551](2070058.htm#fr_3550) <span
id="iii.xv-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p71"></span> [Matt.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002), [Luke
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#002)<span id="iii.xv-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3551"></span>[307:3552](2070058.htm#fr_3551) <span
id="iii.xv-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p72"></span> [Luke xxii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044)<span id="iii.xv-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3552"></span>[307:3553](2070058.htm#fr_3552) <span
id="iii.xv-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p73"></span> [Heb. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)<span id="iii.xv-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3553"></span>[307:3554](2070058.htm#fr_3553) <span
id="iii.xv-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p74"></span> S. Gregory often speaks of Human Nature as
*our composite being*; and here he means the Sacred Humanity
exclusively; there is no shadow of suspicion of Nestorianism or
Eutychianism attaching to his name.

<span id="fn_3554"></span>[308:3555](2070058.htm#fr_3554) <span
id="iii.xv-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p75"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p75.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span> is used in four principal
senses:  (a) The ministry of the Gospel, cf. [Eph.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#002), [Col.
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025)<span id="iii.xv-p75.2"></span>;
etc., and S. Cyril Hieros., has the expression “Economy of the Mystery”
(Cat. xxv.).  It is also used absolutely by S. Chrysostom and others. 
(b) The Providence of God, as by Epiphanius, Greg. Nyss., and others. 
(c) The Incarnation, as in the text, without any epithet—in which use it
is opposed to <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p75.3"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p75.4"></span>θεότης</span>.  Sometimes however epithets are
added.  (d) The whole Mystery of Redemption, including the Passion.

<span id="fn_3555"></span>[308:3556](2070058.htm#fr_3555) <span
id="iii.xv-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p77"></span> cf. S. Leo, Serm. xxi., De Nativ. Dei, c.
ii.  “Remaining what He was, and putting on what He was not, He united
the true form of a servant to that form in which He was equal to God the
Father, and combined both natures in a union so close that the lower was
not consumed by receiving glory, nor the higher lessened by assuming
lowliness.

<span id="fn_3556"></span>[308:3557](2070058.htm#fr_3556) <span
id="iii.xv-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p78"></span> “Mediante anima,” cf. Orat. xxxviii., 13. 
S. T. Aq., Summa, III., vi.  Jungmann, de Verbo Incarn., c. 68.  Forbes,
On Nicene Creed, p. 188.  Petav. de Incarn, IV., xiii., 2.

<span id="fn_3557"></span>[308:3558](2070058.htm#fr_3557) <span
id="iii.xv-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p79"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p79.1"></span>γενόμενος ἄνθρωπος ὁ κάτω θεός</span>.  The
passage is one of great difficulty.  Elias Cretensis renders the words
as follows:—“Becoming Man, the inferior God, because humanity was” etc.;
but his rendering is rejected as impossible by Petavius (de Incarn.,
IV., ix., 2, 3).  (i.) It is grammatically possible (Madvig, Gk. Syntax,
9 a. rem. 3) for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p79.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p79.3"></span>κάτω</span>, standing as it does, to qualify
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p79.4"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p79.5"></span>νθρωπος</span>.  (ii.) But
the <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p79.6"></span>καὶ
γενόμενος</span><span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p79.7"></span>
…</span><span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p79.8"></span>θεός</span>
may be taken as a nom. absolute, which would have been expressed by a
gen. if <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p79.9"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xv-p79.10"></span>νθρωπος</span> had not
been the same Person as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p79.11"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p79.12"></span>μιλήσας</span>.

<span id="fn_3558"></span>[308:3559](2070058.htm#fr_3558) <span
id="iii.xv-p79.13"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p80"></span> As by the Incarnation He who was God was
made perfect Man, so Man was made perfect God, and each nature retained
its own qualities.  Or it may mean that God Incarnate was made Man in
respect of body, soul, and mind; that is, in all points:  and the
Humanity which He assumed was in all these points Deified; and therefore
they who are His kindred and imitators share to that extent the
Deification (Elias).  In the First Epistle to Cledonius (v. infra) the
Priest, against Apollinarius, which is sometimes reckoned as the 51st
Oration, S. Gregory says, “The Godhead and the Manhood are two natures,
just as soul and body are.  But there are not two Sons or two Gods;
although Paul did thus entangle the outward man and the inward.  And, to
speak succinctly, the Natures which make our Saviour are distinct, for
the Invisible is not the same as the visible, nor the Timeless as that
which is subject to time; but He is not two Persons, God forbid, for
both these are one in the union, God being made Man, and Man being made
God, or however else you may express it.”  And upon this S. Thomas
Aquinas remarks that it is true, if by Man you understand simply Human
Nature, and not a Human Person; in this sense it was brought to pass
that Man was God; or in other words Human Nature was made that of the
Son of God.  (Summa, III., xvi., 7.)

<span id="fn_3559"></span>[308:3560](2070058.htm#fr_3559) <span
id="iii.xv-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p81"></span> “If any does not admit Mary to be the
Mother of God (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xv-p81.1"></span>θεοτόκον</span>), he is separated from God.  If
any say that He passed through the Virgin as through a conduit, and that
He was not formed in her both divinely and humanly (divinely, because
without a human father; humanly, because in accordance with the laws of
gestation), he is in like manner atheistic.  If any assert that the
Humanity was thus formed, and the Deity subsequently added, he is
condemned; for this is not a generation of God, but an evasion of
generation” (S. G. N. ad Cled., [Ep.
i.](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#000)<span id="iii.xv-p81.2"></span>)  S.
Thomas Aquinas explains the fitness of the title thus:  The Blessed
Virgin could be denied to be the Mother of God only if either His
Humanity had been conceived and born before That Man was the Son of
God:—which was the position taken up by Photinus; or else if the
Humanity had not been assumed into the unity of the Person (or
Hypostasis) of the Son of God;—which was the position of Nestorius. 
Both these positions are erroneous.  Therefore to deny that the Blessed
Virgin is the Mother of God is heretical (Summa, III.. xxxv. 4).  In the
text S. Gregory merely means that the Godhead of our Lord was not
derived from His Blessed Mother, just as his Manhood was not derived
from any man; but, as the extract at the beginning of this Note shews,
he would be the last to take up the Nestorian notion, which was
afterwards condemned at the Council of Ephesus.

<span id="fn_3560"></span>[308:3561](2070058.htm#fr_3560) <span
id="iii.xv-p81.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p82"></span> Both These, i.e., the being without
Father, and without Mother is a condition which belongs only to the
Godhead.

<span id="fn_3561"></span>[308:3562](2070058.htm#fr_3561) <span
id="iii.xv-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p83"></span> S. John the Baptist (S. [Luke
i](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#000)<span id="iii.xv-p83.1"></span>.).

<span id="fn_3562"></span>[308:3563](2070058.htm#fr_3562) <span
id="iii.xv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p84"></span> [Luke ii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041)<span id="iii.xv-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3563"></span>[308:3564](2070058.htm#fr_3563) <span
id="iii.xv-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p85"></span> Referring, perhaps, to the tradition that
at the coming of Christ into Egypt all the Idols in the land fell down
and were broken.

<span id="fn_3564"></span>[308:3565](2070058.htm#fr_3564) <span
id="iii.xv-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p86"></span> [Isa. liii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)<span id="iii.xv-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3565"></span>[308:3566](2070058.htm#fr_3565) <span
id="iii.xv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p87"></span> [Ps. xlv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002)<span id="iii.xv-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3566"></span>[308:3567](2070058.htm#fr_3566) <span
id="iii.xv-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p88"></span> [Matt. xvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002)<span id="iii.xv-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3567"></span>[308:3568](2070058.htm#fr_3567) <span
id="iii.xv-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p90"></span> [Matt.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013), [Matt.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006)<span id="iii.xv-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3568"></span>[308:3569](2070058.htm#fr_3568) <span
id="iii.xv-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p91"></span> [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="iii.xv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3569"></span>[308:3570](2070058.htm#fr_3569) <span
id="iii.xv-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p92"></span> [John
6.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#010)<span id="iii.xv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3570"></span>[308:3571](2070058.htm#fr_3570) <span
id="iii.xv-p92.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p93"></span> [John
7.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)<span id="iii.xv-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3571"></span>[309:3572](2070058.htm#fr_3571) <span
id="iii.xv-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p94"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="iii.xv-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3572"></span>[309:3573](2070058.htm#fr_3572) <span
id="iii.xv-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p95"></span> [Matt.
8.24](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#024)<span id="iii.xv-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3573"></span>[309:3574](2070058.htm#fr_3573) <span
id="iii.xv-p95.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p96"></span> [Matt.
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#030)<span id="iii.xv-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3574"></span>[309:3575](2070058.htm#fr_3574) <span
id="iii.xv-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p97"></span> [Matt.
17.24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)<span id="iii.xv-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3575"></span>[309:3576](2070058.htm#fr_3575) <span
id="iii.xv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p98"></span> [John xix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019)<span id="iii.xv-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3576"></span>[309:3577](2070058.htm#fr_3576) <span
id="iii.xv-p98.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p99"></span> [John
8.48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048)<span id="iii.xv-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3577"></span>[309:3578](2070058.htm#fr_3577) <span
id="iii.xv-p99.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p100"></span> [Luke x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span id="iii.xv-p100.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3578"></span>[309:3579](2070058.htm#fr_3578) <span
id="iii.xv-p100.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p101"></span> [Luke viii.
28-33](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#028)<span id="iii.xv-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3579"></span>[309:3580](2070058.htm#fr_3579) <span
id="iii.xv-p101.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p102"></span> [Luke
10.18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018)<span id="iii.xv-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3580"></span>[309:3581](2070058.htm#fr_3580) <span
id="iii.xv-p102.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p103"></span> [John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)<span id="iii.xv-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3581"></span>[309:3582](2070058.htm#fr_3581) <span
id="iii.xv-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p104"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#015)<span id="iii.xv-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3582"></span>[309:3583](2070058.htm#fr_3582) <span
id="iii.xv-p104.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p105"></span> [1 Pet. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019)<span id="iii.xv-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3583"></span>[309:3584](2070058.htm#fr_3583) <span
id="iii.xv-p105.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p106"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iii.xv-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3584"></span>[309:3585](2070058.htm#fr_3584) <span
id="iii.xv-p106.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p107"></span> [John i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#023)<span id="iii.xv-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3585"></span>[309:3586](2070058.htm#fr_3585) <span
id="iii.xv-p107.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p108"></span> [Isa. liii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#023)<span id="iii.xv-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3586"></span>[309:3587](2070058.htm#fr_3586) <span
id="iii.xv-p108.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p109"></span> [Luke xxiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)<span id="iii.xv-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3587"></span>[309:3588](2070058.htm#fr_3587) <span
id="iii.xv-p109.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p110"></span> [John ii.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)<span id="iii.xv-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3588"></span>[309:3589](2070058.htm#fr_3588) <span
id="iii.xv-p110.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p111"></span> [Song of Sol.
5.16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016)<span id="iii.xv-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3589"></span>[309:3590](2070058.htm#fr_3589) <span
id="iii.xv-p111.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p112"></span> [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span id="iii.xv-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3590"></span>[309:3591](2070058.htm#fr_3590) <span
id="iii.xv-p112.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p113"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)<span id="iii.xv-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3591"></span>[309:3592](2070058.htm#fr_3591) <span
id="iii.xv-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p115"></span> [1 Cor. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)<span id="iii.xv-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3592"></span>[309:3593](2070058.htm#fr_3592) <span
id="iii.xv-p115.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p116"></span> [2 Cor. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="iii.xv-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3593"></span>[309:3594](2070058.htm#fr_3593) <span
id="iii.xv-p116.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p117"></span> [1 Thess. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#019)<span id="iii.xv-p117.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning
the Son.](2070059)
