[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070159)  [Next](2070161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.x-p1.1"></span>Ep. CLXIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p2"></span>(George a layman of Paspasus, was sent
by Theodore of Tyana to Saint Gregory that the latter might convince him
of his error and sin in repudiating an oath which he had taken, on the
ground that it was taken in writing and not *viva voce*.  Gregory seems
to have brought him to a better mind, and sent him back to the
Metropolitan with the following letter, requesting that due penance be
imposed upon him, and have its length regulated by his contrition.  This
letter was read to the Second Council of Constantinople in 553, by
Euphrantes, a successor of Theodore in the See of Tyana, and was
accepted by the Fathers, wherefore it is regarded as having almost the
force of a Canon of the Church Universal.)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.x-p3"></span>God grant you to the Churches, both for
our glory, and for the benefit of many, being as you are so circumspect
and cautious in spiritual matters as to make us also more cautious who
are considered to have some advantage over you in years.  Since,
however, you have wished to take us as partners in your spiritual
inquiry (I mean about the oath which George of Paspasus appears to have
sworn), we will declare to Your Reverence what presents itself to our
mind.  Very many people, as it seems to me, delude themselves by
considering oaths which are taken with the sanction of spoken
imprecations to be real oaths, but those which are written and not
verbally uttered, to be mere matter of form, and no oaths at all.  For
how can we suppose that while a written schedule of debts is more
binding than a verbal acknowledgment, yet a written oath is something
other than an oath?  Or to speak concisely, we hold an oath to be the
assurance given to one who asked for and obtained it.  Nor is it
sufficient to say that he suffered violence (for the violence was the
Law by which he bound himself), nor that afterwards he won the cause in
the Law Court—for the very fact that he went to law was a breach of his
oath.  I have persuaded our brother George of this, not to pretend
excuses for his sin, and not to seek out arguments to defend his
transgression, but to recognize the writing as an oath, and to bewail
his sin before God and Your Reverence, even though he formerly deceived
himself and took a different view of it.  This is what we have
personally argued with him; and it is evident that if you will discourse
with him more carefully, you will deepen his contrition, since you are a
great healer of souls, and having treated him according to the Canon for
as long a time as shall seem right, you will afterwards be able to
confer indulgence upon him in the matter of time.  And the measure of
the time must be the measure of his compunction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLXXXIII](2070161)
