[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070119)  [Next](2070121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Ep. XLIV.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>(Eusebius, having in response to the
appeal referred to above, betaken himself to Cæsarea, the Elder Gregory,
though in very feeble health, resolved to attend the Synod in person,
that Basil’s Election might be secured by their joint exertions, Gregory
the Younger sent the following letter by his father to explain to his
friend the reason why he had not come too.  The date is about September
of the year 379.)

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p3"></span>Whence shall I begin your praises, and
by what name shall I give you your right appellation?  The pillar and
ground of the church, or a light in the world, using the very words of
the apostle, or a crown of glory to the remaining portion of
christendom; <span id="fr_4743"></span>[4744](#fn_4743) or a gift of
God, or the bulwark of your country, or the standard of faith, or the
ambassador of truth, or all these at once, and more than all?  And these
excessive praises I will prove by what we shall see.  What rain ever
came so seasonably to a thirsty land, what water flowing out of the rock
to those in the wilderness?  What such Bread of Angels did ever man
eat?  When did Jesus the common Lord ever so seasonably present Himself
to His drowning disciples, and tame the sea, and save the perishing, as
you have shewn yourself to us in our weariness and distress, and in our
immediate danger as it were of shipwreck?  I need not speak of other
points, with what courage and joy you filled the souls of the orthodox,
and how many you delivered from despair.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>But our mother church, Cæsarea I mean,
is now really putting off the garments of her widowhood at the sight of
you, and putting on again her robe of cheerfulness, and will be yet more
resplendent when she receives a pastor <span id="page_463">p. 463</span>
<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-Page_463"></span>worthy of herself and of her
former Bishops and of your hands.  For you yourself see what is the
state of our affairs, and what a miracle your zeal has wrought, and your
toil, and your godly plainness of speech.  Age is renewed, disease is
conquered, <span id="fr_4744"></span>[4745](#fn_4744) they leap who were
in their beds, and the weak are girded with power.  By all this I guess
that our matters too will turn out as we desire.  You have my father,
moreover, representing both himself and me, to put a glorious close to
his whole life and to his venerable age by this present struggle on
behalf of the Church.  And I shall receive him back, I am well assured,
strengthened by your prayers, and with youth renewed, for one must
confidently commit all in faith to them.  But if he should end his life
in this anxiety, it would be no calamity to attain to such an end in
such a cause.  Pardon me, I beg of you, if I give way a little to the
tongues of evil men, and delay a little to come and embrace you, and to
complete in person what I now pass over of the praises due to you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4743"></span>[462:4744](2070120.htm#fr_4743) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p4"></span> Alluding to his work in opposing the
prevalence of Arianism.

<span id="fn_4744"></span>[463:4745](2070120.htm#fr_4744) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p6"></span> Alluding to the effort made by his
father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXIV](2070121)
