[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070176)  [Next](2070178.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.ix.vii-p1.1"></span>Ep. CXL.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.vii-p2"></span>Again I write when I ought to come: 
but I gain confidence to do so from yourself, O Umpire of spiritual
matters (to put the first thing first), and Corrector of the
Commonweal—and both by Divine Providence:  who have also received as the
reward of your piety that your affairs would prosper to your mind, <span
id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span id="iv.iv.ix.vii-Page_479"></span>and
that you alone should find attainable what to every one else is out of
reach.  For wisdom and courage conduct your government, the one
discovering what is to be done, and the other easily carrying out what
has been discovered.  And the greatest of all is the purity of your
hands with which all is directed.  Where is your ill-gotten gold?  There
never was any; it was the first thing you condemned to exile as an
invisible tyrant.  Where is illwill?  It is condemned.  Where is
favour?  Here you do bend somewhat (for I will accuse you a little), but
it is in imitating the Divine Mercy, which at the present time your
soldier Aurelius entreats of you by me.  I call him a foolish fugitive,
because he has placed himself in our hands, and through ours in yours,
sheltering himself under our gray hair and our Priesthood (for which you
have often professed your veneration) as if it were under some Imperial
Image.  See, this sacrificing and unbloodstained hand leads this man to
you; a hand which has written often in your praise, and will I am sure
write yet more, if God continue your term of government—yours, I mean,
and that of your colleague Themis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXLI](2070178.md)
