[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070086)  [Next](2070088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Ep. XVI.  To Eusebius, Bishop of
Cæsarea.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p2"></span>Since I am addressing a man who does
not love falsehood, and who is the keenest man I know at detecting it in
another, however it may be twined in skilful and varied labyrinths; and,
moreover, on my own part I will say it, though against the grain I do
not like artifice, either, both from my natural constitution, and
because God’s Word has formed me so.  There<span id="page_449">p.
449</span> <span id="iv.iii.viii-Page_449"></span>fore I write what
presents itself to my mind; and I beg you to excuse my plain speaking,
or you will wrong the truth by depriving me of my liberty, and forcing
me to restrain within myself the pain of my grief, like some secret and
malignant disease.  I rejoice that I have your respect (for I am a man,
as some one has said before), and that I am summoned to Synods and
spiritual conferences.  But I am troubled at the slight which has been
inflicted on my most Reverend brother Basil, and is still inflicted on
him by Your Reverence; for I chose him as the companion of my life and
words and highest philosophy, and he is so still; and I never had reason
to regret my judgment of him.  It is more temperate to speak thus of
him, that I may not seem to be praising myself in admiring him.  You,
however, I think, by honouring me and dishonouring him, seem to be
acting like a man who should with one hand stroke a man’s head, and with
the other hand strike him on the face; or while tearing up the
foundations of a house should paint the walls and decorate the
exterior.  If then you will listen to me, this is what you will do, and
I claim to be listened to, for this is justice.  If you will pay due
attention to him, he will do the like by you.  And I will follow him as
a shadow does the body, being of little worth and inclined to peace. 
For I am not so mean as to be willing in other respects to philosophize,
and to be of the better part, but to overlook a matter which is the end
of all our teaching, namely love; especially in regard to a Priest, and
one of so high a character, and one whom I know of all my acquaintances
to be the best both in life and doctrine and conduct.  For my pain shall
not obscure the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eusebius, Archbishop of Cæsarea.](2070088.md)
