[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070116)  [Next](2070118.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>Ep. CXCVII.  A Letter of Condolence on
the Death of His Sister Theosebia.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p2"></span>(The writer of the article on Gregory
Nyssen in the Dict. Biogr. supposes her to have been his wife, but
produces no evidence of this beyond the ambiguous expression in this
letter which speaks of her as “the true consort of a priest,” but on the
other hand she is expressly called his Sister in the same letter.  Some
writers have imagined that she was the wife of Gregory Nazianzen
himself, but there is no evidence to show that he was ever married.  The
date of her death is uncertain, but it was probably subsequent to <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381.  It
would seem that the term Consort might have a general application to
those who shared in the <span id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-Page_462"></span>same work, and consequently the
Benedictine Editors regard Theosebia as a Deaconess of the Church of
Nyssa.)

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>I had started in all haste to go to
you, and had got as far as Euphemias, when I was delayed by the festival
which you are celebrating in honour of the Holy Martyrs; partly because
I could not take part in it, owing to my bad health, partly because my
coming at so unsuitable a time might be inconvenient to you.  I had
started partly for the sake of seeing you after so long, and partly that
I might admire your patience and philosophy (for I had heard of it) at
the departure of your holy and blessed sister, as a good and perfect
man, a minister of God, who knows better than any the things both of God
and man; and who regards as a very light thing that which to others
would be most heavy, namely to have lived with such a soul, and to send
her away and store her up in the safe garners, like a shock of the
threshingfloor gathered in due season, <span
id="fr_4741"></span>[4742](#fn_4741.md) to use the words of Holy Scripture;
and that in such time that she, having tasted the joys of life, escaped
its sorrows through the shortness of her life; and before she had to
wear mourning for you, was honoured by you with that fair funeral honour
which is due to such as she.  I too, believe me, long to depart, if not
as you do, which were much to say, yet only less than you.  But what
must we feel in presence of a long prevailing law of God which has now
taken my Theosebia (for I call her mine because she lived a godly life;
for spiritual kindred is better than bodily), Theosebia, the glory of
the church, the adornment of Christ, the helper of our generation, the
hope of woman; Theosebia, the most beautiful and glorious among all the
beauty of the Brethren; Theosebia, truly sacred, truly consort of a
priest, and of equal honour and worthy of the Great Sacraments, <span
id="fr_4742"></span>[4743](#fn_4742.md) Theosebia, whom all future time
shall receive, resting on immortal pillars, that is, on the souls of all
who have known her now, and of all who shall be hereafter.  And do not
wonder that I often invoke her name.  For I rejoice even in the
remembrance of the blessed one.  Let this, a great deal in few words, be
her epitaph from me, and my word of condolence for you, though you
yourself are quite able to console others in this way through your
philosophy in all things.  Our meeting (which I greatly long for) is
prevented by the reason I mentioned.  But we pray with one another as
long as we are in the world, until the common end, to which we are
drawing nigh, overtake us.  Wherefore we must bear all things, since we
shall not for long have either to rejoice or to suffer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4741"></span>[462:4742](2070117.htm#fr_4741.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p4"></span> [Job v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4742"></span>[462:4743](2070117.htm#fr_4742.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.viii-p5"></span> Referring to her office as a
Deaconess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](2070118.md)
