[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070133)  [Next](2070135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>Ep. XIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii-p2"></span>(See the first letter to Sophronius. 
The nature of the trouble here alluded to is unknown.  There are several
letters to various persons in reference to his troubles and
difficulties, many of them coming from his reluctance to undertake the
duties of any public office.  He died at an early age, leaving his
widow, Alypiana, with a large family to bring up in very reduced
circumstances.  Her troubles and the education of her children were
matters of much concern to Gregory, whose frequent letters on the
subject will be found below.)

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii-p3"></span>I approve the statement of Theognis,
who, while not praising the friendship which goes no further than cups
and pleasures, praises that which extends to actions in these words,

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii-p4"></span>Beside a full wine cup a man has many
friends:

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii-p5"></span>But they are fewer when grave troubles
press.

<span id="iv.iv.v.ii-p6"></span>We, however, have not shared winecups
with each other, nor indeed have we often met (though we ought to have
been very careful to do so, both for our own sake, and for the sake of
the friendship which we inherited from our fathers), but we do ask for
the goodwill which shews itself in acts.  A struggle is at hand, and a
very serious struggle.  My son Nicobulus has got into unexpected
troubles, from a quarter from which troubles would least be looked for. 
Therefore I beg you to come and help us as soon as you can, both to take
part in trying the case, and to plead our cause, if you find that a
wrong is being done us.  But if you cannot come, at any rate do not let
yourself be previously retained by the other side, or sell for a small
gain the freedom which we know from everybody’s testimony has always
characterized you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXV](2070135)
