[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070007)  [Next](2070009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—Ceremonies of Baptism and
Chrism.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p2"></span>§ 1.  *Renunciation*.  We have seen that
Cyril’s last Catechetical Lecture was delivered in the early dawn of the
Great Sabbath, Easter Eve.  The additional instructions then
promised <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) concerning the
behaviour of the Candidates were given on the same day, probably in the
evening, when they were all assembled immediately before the
administration of Baptism.  The most important parts of the Baptismal
ceremony are described by Cyril in the first Mystagogic Lecture,
delivered on the Monday of Easter week.  Thus in § 1 he says, Let us now
teach you these things exactly, that ye may know the significance of the
things done to you on that evening of your Baptism.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p4"></span>The first act was the renunciation of the
Devil and all his works.  This, as described by Tertullian, was done
first in the Church “under the hand of the Bishop,” and again
immediately before entering the water <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) .  Cyril speaks of the latter occasion
only.  “First ye entered into the outer chamber of the Baptistery, and
there facing towards the West (as the region of darkness) ye heard the
command to stretch forth your hand, and as in the presence of Satan to
renounce him <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) .”  For the formula
of renunciation in the Apostolical Constitutions, see note 2 on
*Mystag*. i. § 8; it corresponds closely with Cyril’s, except that this
is addressed to Satan as if personally present:  “ I renounce thee,
Satan  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) , and all thy works <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) , and all thy pomp <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) , and all thy worship <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p11"></span>§ 2.  *Profession of Faith*.  After the
renunciation of Satan the Candidate immediately turned to the East and
said, “And I associate myself (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iv-p11.1"></span>συντάσσομαι</span> ) with Christ.”  Cyril
does not give the words, but seems to allude to the custom, when he
speaks of the Candidates “turning from the West to the East, the place
of light <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p13"></span>Then, still facing the East, the
Candidate was bidden to say, “I believe in the Father, and in the Son,
and in the Holy Ghost, and in one Baptism of repentance <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) .”  We have seen that in Cat. xviii.
22, 32, Cyril intimated to his Candidates that they would be required to
profess publicly the Creed which he had delivered to them and which they
had repeated after him.  This public profession of faith (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p14.1"></span>῾</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p14.2"></span>Ομολογία</span>,
“Redditio Symboli”) was in some Churches made on Holy Thursday,
according to Canon 46 of the Synod of Laodicea:  “Those to be baptized
must learn the Creed by heart, and recite it to the Bishop or <span
id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span> <span
id="ii.iii.iv-Page_xxx"></span>Presbyters on the fifth day of the
week.”  But in the *Apostolic Constitutions*, c. xli., Candidate is
required to recite the whole Creed immediately after the Renunciation: 
“And after his renunciation let him in his consociation (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p14.3"></span>συντασσόμενος</span>)
say:  ‘And I associate myself to Christ, and believe and am baptized
into One Unbegotten Being, the Only True God Almighty, the Father of
Christ,.…and into the Lord Jesus Christ.…and I am baptized into the Holy
Ghost,.…into the resurrection of the flesh, and into the remission of
sins, and into the kingdom of heaven, and into the life of the world to
come.’  And after this vow he comes in order to the anointing with oil.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p15"></span>Such appears to have been the custom of
the Eastern Churches in general and of Jerusalem in Cyril’s time,
although he mentions only those articles of the Creed which were
commonly held to be indispensable to a valid profession of Christian
belief.

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p16"></span>Dr. Swainson <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) represents the matter somewhat
differently:  “When we come to the profession of his own personal faith
which was made at Jerusalem by the Candidate for Baptism, we find that
this was far briefer not only than the collection of ‘necessary things’
(Cat. iv.), but also than the Creed of the Church of Jerusalem.”  Then
after quoting the short form in Cyril, *Myst*. i. § 9, “I believe in the
Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and in one Baptism of
repentance,” Dr. Swainson adds:  “The words are clear and definite.  In
these words each answered the question of which we read elsewhere, ‘Did
he believe in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit?’  In this his reply the Candidate ‘confessed’ what Cyril called
‘the saving confession.’”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p18"></span>It is evident that two separate parts of
the Baptismal Service are here confused:  the question to which Dr.
Swainson alludes, and “the saving confession” of which Cyril speaks in
*Mystag*. ii. § 4, belong, as we shall presently see, to a later stage
of the ceremony.

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p19"></span>§ 3.  *First Unction*.  On passing from
the outer to the inner chamber of the Baptistery, the Candidate who had
made his renunciation and profession barefoot and wearing his tunic
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>Χιτών</span>) <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) only, now put off this inner garment
also, as an emblem of putting off the man with his deeds <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) .  A further significance is ascribed
by Cyril to this unclothing of Candidate, as being an imitation both of
Christ, who hung naked <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) on the
Cross, and by His nakedness *put off from Himself the principalities and
the powers*, and “of the first-formed Adam, who was naked in the garden,
and was not ashamed.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p23"></span>“Then, when ye were stripped, ye were
anointed with exorcised oil, from the very hairs your head to your
feet <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) .”  The consecration of the
“exorcised oil” is thus described <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) :  “Now this is blessed by the
chief-priest for the remission of sins, and the first preparation for
Baptism.  For he calls thus upon the Unbegotten God, the Father of
Christ, the King of all sensible and intelligent natures, that He would
sanctify the oil in the name of the Lord Jesus, and impart to it
spiritual grace and efficacious strength, the remission of sins, and the
first preparation for the confession of Baptism, that so the Candidate
for Baptism, when he is anointed may be freed from all ungodliness, and
may become worthy of initiation, according to the command of the
Only-begotten.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p26"></span>Bingham’s observation, that Cyril
describes this first unction as used “between the renunciation and the
confession <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) ” is not quite
accurate:  in fact it came between two confessions, the one made, as we
have seen, immediately after the renunciation in the outer <span
id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span> <span
id="ii.iii.iv-Page_xxxi"></span>chamber, the other at the very time of
immersion.  Chrysostom <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) clearly
distinguishes two Confessions, but places one before Baptism, and the
other after:  “What can be more beautiful than the words by which we
renounce the devil?  Or those by which we associate ourselves with
Christ?  Than that confession which comes before the washing?  Or that
which comes after the washing?”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p29"></span>This first unction is not mentioned by
Tertullian, nor in any genuine work of Justin Martyr, but in the
*Responsiones ad Orthodoxos*, a work which though still early is
regarded as certainly spurious, we find the question put, “Why are we
first anointed with oil, and then, having performed the before-mentioned
symbolic acts in the Laver, are afterwards sealed with the ointment, and
do not regard this as done in opposition to what took place in our
Lord’s case, who was first anointed with ointment and then
suffered <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) ?”  And in the answer
it is stated that “We are anointed with the simple oil that we may be
made Christs (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iv-p30.1"></span>Χριστοί</span>), but with the ointment in
remembrance of our Saviour Christ, who regarded the anointing with
ointment as His burial, and called us to the fellowship of His own
sufferings and glory, typically in the present life but truly in the
life to come.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p31"></span>Cyril attributes to this “exorcised oil”
the same power as to Exorcism itself, “not only to burn and cleanse away
the traces of sin, but also to chase away all the invisible powers of
the evil one <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p33"></span>According to the directions concerning
this first unction in the *Apostolical Constitutions* <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) , the Bishop was first to anoint the
head only, the anointing of the whole body being then completed by the
Deacon or Deaconess.

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p35"></span>§ 4.  *Baptism*.  After this anointing
the Candidates were “led by the hand to the sacred pool of Holy
Baptism <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) .”  This pool (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p36.1"></span>κολυμβήθρα</span>) was
supplied with water raised from the reservoirs, of which, as we shall
see, the Bordeaux Pilgrim speaks in his description of the Basilica.

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p37"></span>As great multitudes both of men and
women were baptized at the special seasons, the Baptisteries were large
buildings outside the Church, such as the Baptistery of the Lateran,
said to have been originally built by Constantine.  The font itself also
was large enough for several persons to be baptized at the same time. 
In some places the men were baptized first, and then the women:  in
others different parts of the Baptistery were assigned to them, and
curtains were hung across the Font itself <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) .

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p39"></span>The consecration of the water is not
mentioned in the Didache or Justin Martyr; but Tertullian thus describes
its effect:  “The waters after invocation of God acquire the sacramental
power of sanctification; for immediately the Spirit comes down from
heaven upon the waters, and rests upon them, sanctifying them from
Himself, and they being thus sanctified imbibe a power of
sanctifying <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p41"></span>In the prayer of consecration given in
the Apostolic Constitutions the Bishop is directed first to offer
adoration and thanksgiving to the Father and Son, and then to call upon
the Father and say:  “Look down from heaven, and sanctify this water,
and give it grace and power, that so he that is to be baptized,
according to the command of Thy Christ, may be crucified with Him, and
may die with Him, and may be buried with Him, and may rise with Him to
the adoption which is in Him, that he may be dead to sin, and live to
righteousness <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p43"></span>Cyril ascribes the like effect to the
consecration of the water, as imparting to it a new power of holiness by
“the invocation of the Holy Ghost, and of Christ, and of the
Father <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p45"></span>While standing in the water the
Candidate made what Cyril calls “the saving con<span id="page_xxxii">p.
xxxii</span> <span id="ii.iii.iv-Page_xxxii"></span>fession <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) .”  The whole Creed having been
already recited (*Redditio Symboli*) in the outer chamber immediately
after the Renunciation, a short form was now employed containing only
the necessary declaration of faith in the Holy Trinity, and in the
Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins.

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p47"></span>§ 5.  *Trine Immersion*.  This short
confession appears to have been ‘made by way of question and answer
thrice repeated.  “Thou wast asked, Dost thou believe in God the Father
Almighty?  Thou saidst, I believe, and dippedst thyself, that is, wast
buried.  Again thou wast asked, Dost thou believe in our Lord Jesus
Christ and in His Cross?  Thou saidst, I believe, and dippedst thyself;
therefore thou wast buried with Christ also:  for he who is buried with
Christ, rises again with Christ.  A third time thou wast asked, Dost
thou believe also in the Holy Ghost?  Thou saidst, I believe, a third
time thou dippedst thyself; that the threefold confession might absolve
the manifold fault of thy former life <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) .”  But Cyril of Alexandria, as quoted
by Bingham <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) , “makes these
answers not only to be a confession of the three Persons of the Trinity,
but a triple confession of Christ; which implies a repetition of the
Creed (the shortened form?) three times over.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p50"></span>In which of these ways the threefold
interrogation (“usitata et legitima verba interrogationis”) was made at
Jerusalem, is not quite certain from Cyril’s words:  “Each was asked,
Dost thou believe in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, and ye made that saving confession, and went down thrice
into the water <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) .”  The
Didaché <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) enjoins baptism simply
into the names of the Three Persons of the Holy Trinity.  Justin
Martyr <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) adds a few words only to
the names “of God the Father and Lord of the universe, and of our
Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit;” and Tertullian <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) observes that “Wherever there are
three, that is, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, there is the
Church, which is a body of three.”  The trine immersion had reference
not only to the Trinity, but was also a symbol of the three days of our
Saviour’s burial <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) .  The use of
the three Holy Names was made more strictly indispensable as heresies
were multiplied:  thus the 49th Apostolic Canon, which, Hefele says,
“must be reckoned among the most ancient Canons of the Church,” orders
that “If any Bishop or Presbyter does not baptize, according to the
Lord’s command, into the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but into
three Beings without beginning, or into three Sons, or three Comforters,
he shall be deprived.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p56"></span>We see here that the power of
administering Baptism was not restricted to the Bishop:  and Cyril
speaks of it as possessed by “Bishops, or Presbyters, or Deacons,”
assigning as the reason the great increase of believers, “for the grace
is everywhere, in villages and in cities, on them of low as on them of
high degree, on bondsmen and on freemen <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p58"></span>Thus the rule of Ignatius <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) , that “it is not lawful either to
baptize or to hold a love-feast apart from the Bishop (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p59.1"></span>χωρὶς τοῦ
ἐπισκόπου</span>),” must be understood to mean “without the authority
and permission of the Bishop.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p60"></span>Of certain minor ceremonies connected
with Baptism, such as the “Kiss of peace,” and the taste of milk and
honey administered to the neophyte <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) , no mention is made by Cyril.

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p62"></span>§ 6.  *Chrism*.  The custom of anointing
the baptized with consecrated ointment is regarded by Cyril as a
sacramental act representing the anointing of Jesus by the Spirit at His
Baptism.  “As the Holy Ghost in substance lighted on Him, like resting
upon like, so, after you had come up from the pool of the sacred waters,
there was given to you an unction the counterpart (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p62.1"></span>τὸ ἀντίτυπον</span>) of
that wherewith He was anointed, and this is the Holy Ghost <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) .”  As “He was anointed with a
spiritual oil of gladness, that is with the Holy Ghost, <span
id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.iv-Page_xxxiii"></span>called oil of gladness, because He is
the author of spiritual gladness, so ye were anointed with ointment, and
made partakers and fellows of the Christ <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) .”  The ceremony was very ancient: 
there is probably a reference to it in the words of Theophilus of
Antioch <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) (*c*. <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p65.1"></span>a.d.</span> 170):  “We are
called Christians, because we are anointed with the oil of God.” 
Tertullian, a little later, after speaking of Baptism, says: 
“Immediately on coming out of the Laver we are thoroughly anointed with
a consecrated unction <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) ;” and
again, “After that, the hand is laid upon us in benediction, invoking
and inviting the Holy Ghost <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) .” 
In another passage <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) he mentions
also the sign of the Cross:  “The flesh is washed, that the soul may be
cleansed; the flesh is anointed that the soul may be consecrated, the
flesh is signed \[with the Cross\] that the soul also may be guarded;
the flesh is overshadowed by imposition of the hand, that the soul also
may be illuminated by the Spirit.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p69"></span>The consecration of the ointment is
compared by Cyril to the consecration of the Eucharist; after the
invocation of the Holy Ghost it is no longer simple or common ointment,
but a gift (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iv-p69.1"></span>Χάρισμα</span>) of Christ, and by the
presence of the Holy Ghost is able to impart of His Divine Nature.  And
this ointment is symbolically applied to thy forehead, and thy other
organs of sense <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p71"></span>The ears, nostrils, and breast were each
to be anointed, and Cyril explains the symbolical meaning in each case
by appropriate passages of Scripture <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) .

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p73"></span>The consecration of the chrism could be
performed by none but the Bishop, and he alone could anoint the
forehead <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) , Presbyters being
allowed to anoint the breast, but only with chrism received from the
Bishop <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) .  The several ceremonies
are thus explained in the *Apostolical Constitutions* <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) :  “This baptism is given into the
death of Jesus:  the water is instead of the burial, and the oil instead
of the Holy Ghost; the seal instead of the Cross; the ointment is the
confirmation of the Confession <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211)
.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p78"></span>In like manner the chrism is explained
again, “The ointment is the seal of the covenants <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) ,” that is, both of God’s promises,
and of the Baptismal vows.

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p80"></span>The members to be anointed were not the
same in all Churches, but everywhere the chief ceremony was the
anointing of the forehead with the sign of the Cross.  This is what
Cyril calls “the Royal Sign <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) ,”
and “the Royal Seal to be borne upon the forehead of Christ’s
soldiers <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) ,” and again, “The Seal
of the fellowship of the Holy Ghost <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p84"></span>These last were probably the very words
pronounced by the Bishop in making the sign of the Cross on the
forehead, for by Canon 7 of the Second General Council at Antioch (381),
converts from heretical sects were to be “sealed or anointed with the
holy ointment on the forehead, eyes, nostrils, mouth, and ears.  And in
sealing them we say, ‘The seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost.’”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p85"></span>An additional prayer to be said by the
Bishop is given in the Apostolical Constitutions <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) :  “O Lord God, the Unbegotten, who
hast no Lord, who art Lord of all, who madest the odour of the knowledge
of the Gospel to go forth among all nations, grant also now that this
ointment may be efficacious upon him that is baptized (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p86.1"></span>βαπτιζομένῳ</span>),
that the sweet odour of thy Christ may remain firm and stable in him,
and that having died with Him, he may arise and live with Him.”

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p87"></span>The whole ceremony was called by the
Greeks “Chrism,” the “Unction” being regarded by them as the chief
part.  In the Latin Church the name Confirmation is of later date, and
indicates that greater importance was then attached to the “Laying on of
Hands” with prayer.

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p88"></span><span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>
<span id="ii.iii.iv-Page_xxxiv"></span>Another ceremony, not alluded to
by Cyril, was the saying of the Lord’s Prayer by the neophyte, standing
up, and facing towards the East <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217)
, after which he was also to pray, “O God Almighty, the Father of Thy
Christ, Thine Only-begotten Son, give me a body undefiled, a clean
heart, a watchful mind, an unerring knowledge, the influence (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p89.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p89.2"></span>πιφοίτησιν</span>) of
the Holy Ghost for attainment and full assurance of the truth, through
Thy Christ, by whom be glory to Thee in the Holy Ghost for ever.  Amen.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[xxix:165](2070008.htm#fr_164) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p3"></span> Cat. xviii. § 32,

<span id="fn_165"></span>[xxix:166](2070008.htm#fr_165) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p5"></span> *De. Cor. Mil*. c. 3.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[xxix:167](2070008.htm#fr_166) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p6"></span> *Myst*. i. § 2.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[xxix:168](2070008.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p7"></span> § 4.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[xxix:169](2070008.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p8"></span> § 5.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[xxix:170](2070008.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p9"></span> § 6.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[xxix:171](2070008.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p10"></span> § 8.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[xxix:172](2070008.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p12"></span> § 9, note 3.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[xxix:173](2070008.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p14"></span> Compare xviii. 22:  “One Baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins.”

<span id="fn_173"></span>[xxx:174](2070008.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p17"></span> *Creeds of the Church*, p. 17.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[xxx:175](2070008.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p20"></span> Pseudo-Dionysius Areopag. *Eccl.
Hierarch*. iii.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[xxx:176](2070008.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p21"></span> *Mystag*. ii. § 2.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[xxx:177](2070008.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p22"></span> This passage has recently (1891)
acquired a special interest from the controversy concerning Mr.
Calderon’s picture, representing St. Elisabeth of Hungary as kneeling
naked before the altar.  The word “naked” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>γυμνός</span>, nudus) is not in itself
decisive, but here in St. Cyril’s account of Baptism absolute nakedness
seems to be implied; for though women sometimes wore an under-tunic
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p22.2"></span>χιτώνιον</span>),
men had nothing beneath the tunic proper (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iv-p22.3"></span>χιτών</span>), which is here said to be put
off.  According to Theophylact, on [Matt. v.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)<span id="ii.iii.iv-p22.4"></span>,
the chiton was properly <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iv-p22.5"></span>τὸ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν λεγόμενον ὑποκάμισοε</span>. 
See *Dictionary of Biblical Antiquities*, “Baptism,” § 48.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[xxx:178](2070008.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p24"></span> Ib. § 3.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[xxx:179](2070008.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p25"></span> *Const. Apost*. vii. c. 42.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[xxx:180](2070008.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p27"></span> *Ant*. XI. c. 9, § 1.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[xxxi:181](2070008.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p28"></span> *Ephes*. i. Hom. i. § 3.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[xxxi:182](2070008.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p30"></span> *Quæstio* 137.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[xxxi:183](2070008.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p32"></span> *Mystag*. ii. § 3.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[xxxi:184](2070008.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p34"></span> Lib. iii. c. 15.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[xxxi:185](2070008.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p36"></span> *Mystag*. ii. § 4.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[xxxi:186](2070008.htm#fr_185) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p38"></span> Bingham, *Ant*. VIII. c. 7, § 2; XI. c.
11, § 3.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[xxxi:187](2070008.htm#fr_186) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p40"></span> *De Baptismo*, c. iv.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[xxxi:188](2070008.htm#fr_187) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p42"></span> VII. c. 43.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[xxxi:189](2070008.htm#fr_188) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p44"></span> Cat. iii. § 3.  See also Introduction,
ch. vi. § 2.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[xxxii:190](2070008.htm#fr_189) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p46"></span> *Mystag*. ii. § 4.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[xxxii:191](2070008.htm#fr_190) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p48"></span> Pseudo-Ambros. *de Sacramentis*, II. c.
7.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[xxxii:192](2070008.htm#fr_191) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p49"></span> *Ant*. XI. c. 7, § 11.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[xxxii:193](2070008.htm#fr_192) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p51"></span> *Mystag*.  iii. § 4.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[xxxii:194](2070008.htm#fr_193) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p52"></span> Cap. vii.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[xxxii:195](2070008.htm#fr_194) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p53"></span> *Apolog*. I. c.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[xxxii:196](2070008.htm#fr_195) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p54"></span> *De Baptismo*, c. vi.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[xxxii:197](2070008.htm#fr_196) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p55"></span> *Mystag*. ii. § 4, note 3.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[xxxii:198](2070008.htm#fr_197) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p57"></span> Cat. xvii. 35.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[xxxii:199](2070008.htm#fr_198) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p59"></span> *Ad Smyrn*. c. viii.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[xxxii:200](2070008.htm#fr_199) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p61"></span> Bingham, *Ant*. XII. c. 4, §§ 5, 6.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[xxxii:201](2070008.htm#fr_200) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p63"></span> *Mystag*. iii. § 1.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[xxxiii:202](2070008.htm#fr_201) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p64"></span> *Mystag*. iii. § 2.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[xxxiii:203](2070008.htm#fr_202) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p65"></span> *Ad Autolycum*, i.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[xxxiii:204](2070008.htm#fr_203) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p66"></span> *De Bapt*. c. 7.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[xxxiii:205](2070008.htm#fr_204) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p67"></span> Ib. c. 8.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[xxxiii:206](2070008.htm#fr_205) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p68"></span> *De Resurr. Carnis*, c. 8.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[xxxiii:207](2070008.htm#fr_206) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p70"></span> Ib. § 3.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[xxxiii:208](2070008.htm#fr_207) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p72"></span> *Myst*. iii. § 4.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[xxxiii:209](2070008.htm#fr_208) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p74"></span> *Apost. Const*. iii. § 16:  “Let the
Bishop anoint those that are baptized with ointment (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iv-p74.1"></span>μύρῳ</span>).”

<span id="fn_209"></span>[xxxiii:210](2070008.htm#fr_209) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p75"></span> See the authorities in Bingham, *Ant*.
xii. c. 2, §§ 1, 2.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[xxxiii:211](2070008.htm#fr_210) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p76"></span> iii. 17.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[xxxiii:212](2070008.htm#fr_211) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p77"></span> *Const. Apost*. vii. c. 22.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[xxxiii:213](2070008.htm#fr_212) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p79"></span> Ib. vii. c. 43.  Cf. Cat. iii. 17.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[xxxiii:214](2070008.htm#fr_213) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p81"></span> Cat. iv. § 14.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[xxxiii:215](2070008.htm#fr_214) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p82"></span> Ib. xii. § 8.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[xxxiii:216](2070008.htm#fr_215) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p83"></span> Ib. xviii. 33.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[xxxiii:217](2070008.htm#fr_216) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p85.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p86"></span> vii. c. 44.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[xxxiv:218](2070008.htm#fr_217) <span
id="ii.iii.iv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iv-p89"></span> *Const. Apost*. vii. c. 44.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eucharistic Rites.  Liturgy.](2070009)
