[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070048)  [Next](2070050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Oration VII.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p2.1"></span>Panegyric on His Brother S. Cæsarius.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span>*The date of this Oration is probably the
spring of <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>
369.  It is placed by S. Jerome first among S. Gregory’s Orations. 
Cæsarius, the Saint’s younger brother, was born probably about <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 330.  Educated in
his early years at home, he studied later in the schools of Alexandria,
where he attained great proficiency in mathematics, astronomy, and,
especially, in medicine.  On his return from Alexandria, he was offered
by the Emperor Constantius, in response to a public petition, an
honourable and lucrative post at Byzantium, but was prevailed upon by
Gregory to return with him to Nazianzus.  After a while he went back to
Byzantium, and, on the accession of Julian, was pressed to retain his
appointment at court, and did so, in spite of Gregory’s reproaches,
until Julian, who had long been trying to win him from Christianity, at
last invited him to a public discussion.  Cæsarius, in spite of the
specious arguments of the Emperor, gained the day, but, having now
distinctly declared himself a Christian, could no longer remain at
court.  On the death of Julian, he was esteemed and promoted by
successive Emperors, until he received from Valens the office of
treasurer of Bithynia.  The exact character of this office and its rank
are still undecided by historical writers, some of whom attribute to him
other offices not mentioned by S. Gregory, which most probably were
filled by a namesake.  On the 11th of October <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span> 368 the city of Nicæa was almost
entirely destroyed by an earthquake and Cæsarius miraculously escaped
with his life.  Impressed by his escape, he received Holy Baptism, and
formed plans for retiring from office and (as* <span id="page_230">p.
230</span> <span id="iii.vi-Page_230"></span>*it seems) devoting himself
to a life of ascetic discipline, which were dissipated by his early and
sudden death.*

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p4.1"></span>It</span> may be, my friends, my brethren, my
fathers (ye who are dear to me in reality as well as in name) that you
think that I, who am about to pay the sad tribute of lamentation to him
who has departed, am eager to undertake the task, and shall, as most men
delight to do, speak at great length and in eloquent style.  And so some
of you, who have had like sorrows to bear, are prepared to join in my
mourning and lamentation, in order to bewail your own griefs in mine,
and learn to feel pain at the afflictions of a friend, while others are
looking to feast their ears in the enjoyment of my words.  For they
suppose that I must needs make my misfortune an occasion for display—as
was once my wont, when possessed of a superabundance of earthly things,
and ambitious, above all, of oratorical renown—before I looked up to Him
Who is the true and highest Word, and gave all up to God, from Whom all
things come, and took God for all in all.  Now pray do not think this of
me, if you wish to think of me aright.  For I am neither going to lament
for him who is gone more than is good—as I should not approve of such
conduct even in others—nor am I going to praise him beyond due measure. 
Albeit that language is a dear and especially proper tribute to one
gifted with it, and eulogy to one who was exceedingly fond of my
words—aye, not only a tribute, but a debt, the most just of all debts. 
But even in my tears and admiration I must respect the law which regards
such matters:  nor is this alien to our philosophy; for he says The
memory of the just is accompanied with eulogies, <span
id="fr_2932"></span>[2933](#fn_2932.md) and also, Let tears fall down over
the dead, and begin to lament, as if thou hadst suffered great harm
thyself: <span id="fr_2933"></span>[2934](#fn_2933.md)   removing us
equally from insensibility and immoderation.  I shall proceed then, not
only to exhibit the weakness of human nature, but also to put you in
mind of the dignity of the soul, and, giving such consolation as is due
to those who are in sorrow, transfer our grief, from that which concerns
the flesh and temporal things, to those things which are spiritual and
eternal.

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>2.  The parents of Cæsarius, to take first
the point which best becomes me, are known to you all.  Their excellence
you are eager to notice, and hear of with admiration, and share in the
task of setting it forth to any, if there be such, who know it not:  for
no single man is able to do so entirely, and the task is one beyond the
powers of a single tongue, however laborious, however zealous.  Among
the many and great points for which they are to be celebrated (I trust I
may not seem extravagant in praising my own family) the greatest of all,
which more than any other stamps their character, is piety.  By their
hoar hairs they lay claim to reverence, but they are no less venerable
for their virtue than for their age; for while their bodies are bent
beneath the burden of their years, their souls renew their youth in God.

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span>3.  His father <span
id="fr_2934"></span>[2935](#fn_2934.md) was well grafted out of the wild
olive tree into the good one, and so far partook of its fatness as to be
entrusted with the engrafting of others, and charged with the culture of
souls, presiding in a manner becoming his high office over this people,
like a second Aaron or Moses, bidden himself to draw near to God, <span
id="fr_2935"></span>[2936](#fn_2935.md) and to convey the Divine Voice to
the others who stand afar off; <span
id="fr_2936"></span>[2937](#fn_2936.md) gentle, meek, calm in mien, <span
id="fr_2937"></span>[2938](#fn_2937.md) fervent in spirit, a fine man in
external appearance, but richer still in that which is out of sight. 
But why should I describe him whom you know?  For I could not even by
speaking at great length say as much as he deserves, or as much as each
of you knows and expects to be said of him.  It is then better to leave
your own fancy to picture him, than mutilate by my words the object of
your admiration.

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span>4.  His mother <span
id="fr_2938"></span>[2939](#fn_2938.md) was consecrated to God by virtue of
her descent from a saintly family, and was possessed of piety as a
necessary inheritance, not only for herself, but also for her
children—being indeed a holy lump from a holy firstfruits. <span
id="fr_2939"></span>[2940](#fn_2939.md)   And this she so far increased and
amplified that some, (bold though the statement be, I will utter it,)
have both believed and said that even her husband’s perfection has been
the work of none other than herself; and, oh how wonderful! she herself,
as the reward of her piety, has received a greater and more perfect
piety.  Lovers of their children and of Christ as they both were, what
is most extraordinary, they were far greater lovers of Christ than of
their children:  yea, even their one enjoyment of their children was
that they should be acknowledged and named by Christ, and their one
measure of their blessedness in their children was their <span
id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span id="iii.vi-Page_231"></span>virtue and
close association with the Chief Good. <span
id="fr_2940"></span>[2941](#fn_2940.md)   Compassionate, sympathetic,
snatching many a treasure from moths and robbers, <span
id="fr_2941"></span>[2942](#fn_2941.md) and from the prince of this
world, <span id="fr_2942"></span>[2943](#fn_2942.md) to transfer it from
their sojourn here to the \[true\] habitation, laying up in store <span
id="fr_2943"></span>[2944](#fn_2943.md) for their children the heavenly
splendour as their greatest inheritance.  Thus have they reached a fair
old age, equally reverend both for virtue and for years, and full of
days, alike of those which abide and those which pass away; each one
failing to secure the first prize here below only so far as equalled by
the other; yea, they have fulfilled the measure of every happiness with
the exception of this last trial, or discipline, whichever anyone may
think we ought to call it; I mean their having to send before them the
child who was, owing to his age, in greater danger of falling, and so to
close their life in safety, and be translated with all their family to
the realms above.

<span id="iii.vi-p20"></span>5.  I have entered into these details, not
from a desire to eulogize them, for this, I know well, it would be
difficult worthily to do, if I made their praise the subject of my whole
oration, but to set forth the excellence inherited from his parents by
Cæsarius, and so prevent you from being surprised or incredulous, that
one sprung from such progenitors, should have deserved such praises
himself; nay, strange indeed would it have been, had he looked to others
and disregarded the examples of his kinsfolk at home.  His early life
was such as becomes those really well born and destined for a good
life.  I say little of his qualities evident to all, his beauty, his
stature, his manifold gracefulness, and harmonious disposition, as shown
in the tones of his voice—for it is not my office to laud qualities of
this kind, however important they may seem to others—and proceed with
what I have to say of the points which, even if I wished, I could with
difficulty pass by.

<span id="iii.vi-p21"></span>6.  Bred and reared under such influences,
we were fully trained in the education afforded here, <span
id="fr_2944"></span>[2945](#fn_2944.md) in which none could say how far he
excelled most of us from the quickness and extent of his abilities—and
how can I recall those days without my tears showing that, contrary to
my promises, my feelings have overcome my philosophic restraint?  The
time came when it was decided that we should leave home, and then for
the first time we were separated, for I studied rhetoric in the then
flourishing schools of Palestine; he went to Alexandria, esteemed both
then and now the home of every branch of learning.  Which of his
qualities shall I place first and foremost, or which can I omit with
least injury to my description?  Who was more faithful to his teacher
than he?  Who more kindly to his classmates?  Who more carefully avoided
the society and companionship of the depraved?  Who attached himself
more closely to that of the most excellent, and among others, of the
most esteemed and illustrious of his countrymen?  For he knew that we
are strongly influenced to virtue or vice by our companions.  And in
consequence of all this, who was more honoured by the authorities than
he, and whom did the whole city (though <span
id="fr_2945"></span>[2946](#fn_2945.md) all individuals are concealed in
it, because of its size), esteem more highly for his discretion, or deem
more illustrious for his intelligence?

<span id="iii.vi-p24"></span>7.  What branch of learning did he not
master, or rather, in what branch of study did he not surpass those who
had made it their sole study?  Whom did he allow even to approach him,
not only of his own time and age, but even of his elders, who had
devoted many more years to study?  All subjects he studied as one, and
each as thoroughly as if he knew no other.  The brilliant in intellect,
he surpassed in industry, the devoted students in quickness of
perception; nay, rather he outstripped in rapidity those who were rapid,
in application those who were laborious, and in both respects those who
were distinguished in both.  From geometry and astronomy, that science
so dangerous <span id="fr_2946"></span>[2947](#fn_2946.md) to anyone else,
he gathered all that was helpful (I mean that he was led by the harmony
and order of the heavenly bodies to reverence their Maker), and avoided
what is injurious; not attributing all things that are or happen to the
influence of the stars, like those who raise their own fellow-servant,
the creation, in rebellion against the Creator, but referring, as is
reasonable, the motion of these bodies, and all other things besides, to
God.  In arithmetic and mathematics, and in the wonderful art of
medicine, in so far as it treats of physiology and temperament, and the
causes of disease, in order to remove the roots and so destroy their
offspring with them, who is there so ignorant or contentious as to think
him inferior to himself, and not to be glad to be reckoned next to him,
and carry off the second prize?  This indeed is no unsupported
assertion, but East and West <span id="fr_2947"></span>[2948](#fn_2947.md)
alike, and every place which he afterward visited, are as <span
id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span id="iii.vi-Page_232"></span>pillars
inscribed with the record of his learning.

<span id="iii.vi-p27"></span>8.  But when, after gathering into his
single soul every kind of excellence and knowledge, as a mighty
merchantman gathers every sort of ware, he was voyaging to his own city,
in order to communicate to others the fair cargo of his culture, there
befell a wondrous thing, which I must, as its mention is most cheering
to me and may delight you, briefly set forth.  Our mother, <span
id="fr_2948"></span>[2949](#fn_2948.md) in her motherly love for her
children, had offered up a prayer that, as she had sent us forth
together, she might see us together return home.  For we seemed, to our
mother at least, if not to others, to form a pair worthy of her prayers
and glances, if seen together, though now, alas, our connection has been
severed.  And God, Who hears a righteous prayer, and honours the love of
parents for well-disposed children, so ordered that, without any design
or agreement on our part, the one from Alexandria, the other from
Greece, the one by sea, the other by land, we arrived at the same city
at the same time.  This city was Byzantium, which now presides over
Europe, in which Cæsarius, after the lapse of a short time, gained such
a repute, that public honours, an alliance with an illustrious family,
and a seat in the council of state were offered him; and a mission was
despatched to the Emperor by public decision, to beg that the first of
cities be adorned and honoured by the first of scholars (if he cared at
all for its being indeed the first, and worthy of its name); and that to
all its other titles to distinction this further one be added, that it
was embellished by having Cæsarius as its physician and its inhabitant,
although its brilliancy was already assured by its throngs of great men
both in philosophy and other branches of learning.  But enough of this. 
At this time there happened what seemed to others a chance without
reason or cause, such as frequently occurs of its own accord in our day,
but was more than sufficiently manifest to devout minds as the result of
the prayers to god-fearing parents, which were answered by the united
arrival of their sons by land and sea.

<span id="iii.vi-p29"></span>9.  Well, among the noble traits of
Cæsarius’ character, we must not fail to note one, which perhaps is in
others’ eyes slight and unworthy of mention, but seemed to me, both at
the time and since, of the highest import, if indeed brotherly love be a
praiseworthy quality; nor shall I ever cease to place it in the first
rank, in relating the story of his life.  Although the metropolis strove
to retain him by the honours I have mentioned, and declared that it
would under no circumstances let him go, my influence, which he valued
most highly on all occasions, prevailed upon him to listen to the prayer
of his parents, to supply his country’s need, and to grant me my own
desire.  And when he thus returned home in my company, he preferred me
not only to cities and peoples, not only to honours and revenues, which
had in part already flowed to him in abundance from many sources and in
part were within his reach, but even to the Emperor himself and his
imperial commands.  From this time, then, having shaken off all
ambition, as a hard master and a painful disorder, I resolved to
practise philosophy and adapt myself to the higher life:  or rather the
desire was earlier born, the life came later.  But my brother, who had
dedicated to his country the firstfruits of his learning, and gained an
admiration worthy of his efforts, was afterwards led by the desire of
fame, and, as he persuaded me, of being the guardian of the city, to
betake himself to court, not indeed according to my own wishes or
judgment; for I will confess to you that I think it a better and grander
thing to be in the lowest rank with God than to win the first place with
an earthly king.  Nevertheless I cannot blame him, for inasmuch as
philosophy is the greatest, so is it the most difficult, of professions,
which can be taken in hand by but few, and only by those who have been
called forth by the Divine magnanimity, which gives its hand to those
who are honoured by its preference.  Yet it is no small thing if one,
who has chosen the lower form of life, follows after goodness, and sets
greater store on God and his own salvation than on earthly lustre; using
it as a stage, or a manifold ephemeral mask while playing in the drama
of this world, but himself living unto God with that image which he
knows that he has received from Him, and must render to Him Who gave
it.  That this was certainly the purpose of Cæsarius, we know full well.

<span id="iii.vi-p30"></span>10.  Among physicians he gained the
foremost place with no great trouble, by merely exhibiting his capacity,
or rather some slight specimen of his capacity, and was forthwith
numbered among the friends of the Emperor, and enjoyed the highest
honours.  But he placed the humane functions of his art at the disposal
of the authorities free of cost, knowing that nothing leads to further
advancement than virtue and renown for honourable deeds; so that he far
surpassed in fame those to whom he was inferior in rank.  By his modesty
he so won the love of all that they entrusted their <span
id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span id="iii.vi-Page_233"></span>precious
charges to his care, without requiring him to be sworn by Hippocrates,
since the simplicity of Crates was nothing to his own:  winning in
general a respect beyond his rank; for besides the present repute he was
ever thought to have justly won, a still greater one was anticipated for
him, both by the Emperors <span id="fr_2949"></span>[2950](#fn_2949.md)
themselves and by all who occupied the nearest positions to them.  But,
most important, neither by his fame, nor by the luxury which surrounded
him, was his nobility of soul corrupted; for amidst his many claims to
honour, he himself cared most for being, and being known to be, a
Christian, and, compared with this, all other things were to him but
trifling toys.  For they belong to the part we play before others on a
stage which is very quickly set up and taken down again—perhaps indeed
more quickly destroyed than put together, as we may see from the
manifold changes of life, and fluctuations of prosperity; while the only
real and securely abiding good thing is godliness.

<span id="iii.vi-p32"></span>11.  Such was the philosophy of Cæsarius,
even at court:  these were the ideas amidst which he lived and died,
discovering and presenting to God, in the hidden man, a still deeper
godliness than was publicly visible.  And if I must pass by all else,
his protection of his kinsmen in distress, his contempt for arrogance,
his freedom from assumption towards friends, his boldness towards men in
power, the numerous contests and arguments in which he engaged with many
on behalf of the truth, not merely for the sake of argument, but with
deep piety and fervour, I must speak of one point at least as especially
worthy of note.  The Emperor <span id="fr_2950"></span>[2951](#fn_2950.md)
of unhappy memory was raging against us, whose madness in rejecting
Christ, after making himself its first victim, had now rendered him
intolerable to others; though he did not, like other fighters against
Christ, grandly enlist himself on the side of impiety, but veiled his
persecution under the form of equity; and, ruled by the crooked serpent
which possessed his soul, dragged down into his own pit his wretched
victims by manifold devices.  His first artifice and contrivance was, to
deprive us of the honour of our conflicts (for, noble man as he was, he
grudged this to Christians), by causing us, who suffered for being
Christians, to be punished as evil doers:  the second was, to call this
process persuasion, and not tyranny, so that the disgrace of those who
chose to side with impiety might be greater than their danger.  Some he
won over by money, some by dignities, some by promises, some by various
honours, which he bestowed, not royally but in right servile style, in
the sight of all, while everyone was influenced by the witchery of his
words, and his own example.  At last he assailed Cæsarius.  How utter
was the derangement and folly which could hope to take for his prey a
man like Cæsarius, my brother, the son of parents like ours!

<span id="iii.vi-p34"></span>12.  However, that I may dwell awhile upon
this point, and luxuriate in my story as men do who are eyewitnesses in
some marvellous event, <span id="fr_2951"></span>[2952](#fn_2951.md) that
noble man, fortified with the sign of Christ, and defending himself with
His Mighty Word, entered the lists against an adversary experienced in
arms and strong in his skill in argument.  In no wise abashed at the
sight, nor shrinking at all from his high purpose through flattery, he
was an athlete ready, both in word and deed, to meet a rival of equal
power.  Such then was the arena, and so equipped the champion of
godliness.  The judge on one side was Christ, arming the athlete with
His own sufferings:  and on the other a dreadful tyrant, <span
id="fr_2952"></span>[2953](#fn_2952.md) persuasive by his skill in
argument, and overawing him by the weight of his authority; and as
spectators, on either hand, both those who were still left on the side
of godliness and those who had been snatched away by him, watching
whether victory inclined to their own side or to the other, and more
anxious as to which would gain the day than the combatants themselves.

<span id="iii.vi-p37"></span>13.  Didst thou not fear for Cæsarius, lest
aught unworthy of his zeal should befall him?  Nay, be ye of good
courage.  For the victory is with Christ, Who overcame the world. <span
id="fr_2953"></span>[2954](#fn_2953.md)   Now for my part, be well assured,
I should be highly interested in setting forth the details of the
arguments and allegations used on that occasion, for indeed the
discussion contains certain feats and elegances, which I dwell on with
no slight pleasure; but this would be quite foreign to an occasion and
discourse like the present.  And when, after having torn to shreds all
his opponent’s sophistries, and thrust aside as mere child’s play every
assault, veiled or open, Cæsarius in a loud clear voice declared that he
was and remained a Christian—not even thus was he finally dismissed. 
For indeed, the Emperor was possessed by an eager desire to enjoy and be
distinguished by his culture, <span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_234"></span>and then uttered in the hearing of all his
famous saying—O happy father, O unhappy sons! thus deigning to honour
me, whose culture and godliness <span
id="fr_2954"></span>[2955](#fn_2954.md) he had known at Athens, with a
share in the dishonour of Cæsarius, who was remanded for a further
trial <span id="fr_2955"></span>[2956](#fn_2955.md) (since Justice was
fitly arming the Emperor against the Persians), <span
id="fr_2956"></span>[2957](#fn_2956.md) and welcomed by us after his happy
escape and bloodless victory, as more illustrious for his dishonour than
for his celebrity.

<span id="iii.vi-p42"></span>14.  This victory I esteem far more sublime
and honourable than the Emperor’s mighty power and splendid purple and
costly diadem.  I am more elated in describing it than if he had won
from him the half of his Empire.  During the evil days he lived in
retirement, obedient herein to our Christian law, <span
id="fr_2957"></span>[2958](#fn_2957.md) which bids us, when occasion
offers, to make ventures on behalf of the truth, and not be traitors to
our religion from cowardice; yet refrain, as long as may be, from
rushing into danger, either in fear for our own souls, or to spare those
who bring the danger upon us.  But when the gloom had been dispersed,
and the righteous sentence had been pronounced in a foreign land, and
the glittering sword had struck down the ungodly, and power had returned
to the hands of Christians, what boots it to say with what glory and
honour, with how many and great testimonies, as if bestowing rather than
receiving a favour, he was welcomed again at the Court; his new honour
succeeding to that of former days; while time changed its Emperors, the
repute and commanding influence of Cæsarius with them was undisturbed,
nay, they vied with each other in striving to attach him most closely to
themselves, and be known as his special friends and acquaintances.  Such
was the godliness of Cæsarius, such its results.  Let all men, young and
old, give ear, and press on through the same virtue to the same
distinction, for glorious is the fruit of good labours, <span
id="fr_2958"></span>[2959](#fn_2958.md) if they suppose this to be worth
striving after, and a part of true happiness.

<span id="iii.vi-p45"></span>15.  Again another wonder concerning him is
a strong argument for his parents’ piety and his own.  He was living in
Bithynia, holding an office of no small importance from the Emperor,
viz., the stewardship of his revenue, and care of the exchequer:  for
this had been assigned to him by the Emperor as a prelude to the highest
offices.  And when, a short time ago, the earthquake <span
id="fr_2959"></span>[2960](#fn_2959.md) in Nicæa occurred, which is said to
have been the most serious within the memory of man, overwhelming in a
common destruction almost all the inhabitants and the beauty of the
city, he alone, or with very few of the men of rank, survived the
danger, being shielded by the very falling ruins in his incredible
escape, and bearing slight traces of the peril; yet he allowed fear to
lead him to a more important salvation, for he dedicated himself
entirely to the Supreme Providence; he renounced the service of
transitory things, and attached himself to another court.  This he both
purposed himself, and made the object of the united earnest prayers to
which he invited me by letter, when I seized this opportunity to give
him warning, <span id="fr_2960"></span>[2961](#fn_2960.md) as I never
ceased to do when pained that his great nature should be occupied in
affairs beneath it, and that a soul so fitted for philosophy should,
like the sun behind a cloud, be obscured amid the whirl of public life. 
Unscathed though he had been by the earthquake, he was not proof against
disease, since he was but human.  His escape was peculiar to himself;
his death common to all mankind; the one the token of his piety, the
other the result of his nature.  The former, for our consolation,
preceded his fate, so that, though shaken by his death, we might exult
in the extraordinary character of his preservation.  And now our
illustrious Cæsarius has been restored to us, when his honoured dust and
celebrated corse, after being escorted home amidst a succession of hymns
and public orations, has been honoured by the holy hands of his parents;
while his mother, substituting the festal garments of religion for the
trappings of woe, has overcome her tears by her philosophy, and lulled
to sleep lamentations by psalmody, as her son enjoys honours worthy of
his newly regenerate soul, which has been, through water, transformed by
the Spirit.

<span id="iii.vi-p48"></span>16.  This, Cæsarius, is my funeral offering
to thee, this the firstfruits of my words, which thou hast often blamed
me for withholding, yet wouldst have stripped off, had they been
bestowed on thee; with this ornament I adorn thee, an ornament, I know
well, far dearer to thee than all others, though it be not of the soft
flowing tissues of silk, in which while living, with virtue for thy sole
adorning, thou didst not, like the many, rejoice; nor texture of
transparent linen, nor <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_235"></span>outpouring of costly unguents, which thou
hadst long resigned to the boudoirs of the fair, with their sweet
savours lasting but a single day; nor any other small thing valued by
small minds, which would have all been hidden to-day with thy fair form
by this bitter stone.  Far hence be games and stories of the Greeks, the
honours of ill-fated youths, with their petty prizes for petty contests;
and all the libations and firstfruits or garlands and newly plucked
flowers, wherewith men honour the departed, in obedience to ancient
custom and unreasoning grief, rather than reason.  My gift is an
oration, which perhaps succeeding time will receive at my hand and ever
keep in motion, that it may not suffer him who has left us to be utterly
lost to earth, but may ever keep him whom we honour in men’s ears and
minds, as it sets before them, more clearly than a portrait, the image
of him for whom we mourn.

<span id="iii.vi-p49"></span>17.  Such is my offering; if it be slight
and inferior to his merit, God loveth that which is according to our
power. <span id="fr_2961"></span>[2962](#fn_2961.md)   Part of our gift is
now complete, the remainder we will now pay by offering (those of us who
still survive) every year our honours and memorials.  And now for thee,
sacred and holy soul, we pray for an entrance into heaven; mayest thou
enjoy such repose as the bosom of Abraham affords, mayest thou behold
the choir of Angels, and the glories and splendours of sainted men; aye,
mayest thou be united to that choir and share in their joy, looking down
from on high on all things here, on what men call wealth, and despicable
dignities, and deceitful honours, and the errors of our senses, and the
tangle of this life, and its confusion and ignorance, as if we were
fighting in the dark; whilst thou art in attendance upon the Great King
and filled with the light which streams forth from Him:  and may it be
ours hereafter, receiving therefrom no such slender rivulet, as is the
object of our fancy in this day of mirrors and enigmas, to attain to the
fount of good itself, gazing with pure mind upon the truth in its
purity, and finding a reward for our eager toil here below on behalf of
the good, in our more perfect possession and vision of the good on
high:  the end to which our sacred books and teachers foretell that our
course of divine mysteries shall lead us.

<span id="iii.vi-p51"></span>18.  What now remains?  To bring the
healing of the Word to those in sorrow.  And a powerful remedy for
mourners is sympathy, for sufferers are best consoled by those who have
to bear a like suffering.  To such, then, I specially address myself, of
whom I should be ashamed, if, with all other virtues, they do not show
the elements of patience.  For even if they surpass all others in love
of their children, let them equally surpass them in love of wisdom and
love of Christ, and in the special practice of meditation on our
departure hence, impressing it likewise on their children, making even
their whole life a preparation for death.  But if your misfortune still
clouds your reason and, like the moisture which dims our eyes, hides
from you the clear view of your duty, come, ye elders, receive the
consolation of a young man, ye fathers, that of a child, who ought to be
admonished by men as old as you, who have admonished many and gathered
experience from your many years.  Yet wonder not, if in my youth I
admonish the aged; and if in aught I can see better than the hoary, I
offer it to you.  How much longer have we to live, ye men of honoured
eld, so near to God?  How long are we to suffer here?  Not even man’s
whole life is long, compared with the Eternity of the Divine Nature,
still less the remains of life, and what I may call the parting of our
human breath, the close of our frail existence.  How much has Cæsarius
outstripped us?  How long shall we be left to mourn his departure?  Are
we not hastening to the same abode?  Shall we not soon be covered by the
same stone?  Shall we not shortly be reduced to the same dust?  And what
in these short days will be our gain, save that after it has been ours
to see, or suffer, or perchance even to do, more ill, we must discharge
the common and inexorable tribute to the law of nature, by following
some, preceding others, to the tomb, mourning these, being lamented by
those, and receiving from some that meed of tears which we ourselves had
paid to others?

<span id="iii.vi-p52"></span>19.  Such, my brethren, is our existence,
who live this transient life, such our pastime upon earth:  we come into
existence out of non-existence, and after existing are dissolved.  We
are unsubstantial dreams, impalpable visions, <span
id="fr_2962"></span>[2963](#fn_2962.md) like the flight of a passing bird,
like a ship leaving no track upon the sea, <span
id="fr_2963"></span>[2964](#fn_2963.md) a speck of dust, a vapour, an early
dew, a flower that quickly blooms, and quickly fades.  As for man his
days are as grass, as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth. <span
id="fr_2964"></span>[2965](#fn_2964.md)   Well hath inspired David
discoursed of our frailty, and again in these words, “Let me know the
short<span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_236"></span>ness of my days;” and he defines the days of
man as “of a span long.” <span id="fr_2965"></span>[2966](#fn_2965.md)  
And what wouldst thou say to Jeremiah, who complains of his mother in
sorrow for his birth, <span id="fr_2966"></span>[2967](#fn_2966.md) and
that on account of others’ faults?  I have seen all things, <span
id="fr_2967"></span>[2968](#fn_2967.md) says the preacher, I have reviewed
in thought all human things, wealth, pleasure, power, unstable glory,
wisdom which evades us rather than is won; then pleasure again, wisdom
again, often revolving the same objects, the pleasures of appetite,
orchards, numbers of slaves, store of wealth, serving men and serving
maids, singing men and singing women, arms, spearmen, subject nations,
collected tributes, the pride of kings, all the necessaries and
superfluities of life, in which I surpassed all the kings that were
before me.  And what does he say after all these things?  Vanity of
vanities, <span id="fr_2968"></span>[2969](#fn_2968.md) all is vanity and
vexation of spirit, possibly meaning some unreasoning longing of the
soul, and distraction of man condemned to this from the original fall: 
but hear, he says, the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God. <span
id="fr_2969"></span>[2970](#fn_2969.md)   This is his stay in his
perplexity, and this is thy only gain from life here below, to be guided
through the disorder of the things which are seen <span
id="fr_2970"></span>[2971](#fn_2970.md) and shaken, to the things which
stand firm and are not moved. <span id="fr_2971"></span>[2972](#fn_2971.md)

<span id="iii.vi-p63"></span>20.  Let us not then mourn Cæsarius but
ourselves, knowing what evils he has escaped to which we are left
behind, and what treasure we shall lay up, unless, earnestly cleaving
unto God and outstripping transitory things, we press towards the life
above, deserting the earth while we are still upon the earth, and
earnestly following the spirit which bears us upward.  Painful as this
is to the faint-hearted, it is as nothing to men of brave mind.  And let
us consider it thus.  Cæsarius will not reign, but rather will he be
reigned over by others.  He will strike terror into no one, but he will
be free from fear of any harsh master, often himself unworthy even of a
subject’s position.  He will not amass wealth, but neither will he be
liable to envy, or be pained at lack of success, or be ever seeking to
add to his gains as much again.  For such is the disease of wealth,
which knows no limit to its desire of more, and continues to make
drinking the medicine for thirst.  He will make no display of his power
of speaking, yet for his speaking will he be admired.  He will not
discourse upon the dicta of Hippocrates and Galen, and their
adversaries, but neither will he be troubled by diseases, and suffer
pain at the misfortunes of others.  He will not set forth the principles
of Eucleides, Ptolemæus, and Heron, but neither will he be pained by the
tumid vaunts of uncultured men.  He will make no display of the
doctrines of Plato, and Aristotle, and Pyrrho, and the names of any
Democritus, and Heracleitus, Anaxagoras, Cleanthes and Epicurus, and all
the members of the venerable Porch and Academy:  but neither will he
trouble himself with the solution of their cunning syllogisms.  What
need of further details?  Yet here are some which all men honour or
desire.  Nor wife nor child will he have beside him, but he will escape
mourning for, or being mourned by them, or leaving them to others, or
being left behind himself as a memorial of misfortune.  He will inherit
no property:  but he will have such heirs <span
id="fr_2972"></span>[2973](#fn_2972.md) as are of the greatest service,
such as he himself wished, so that he departed hence a rich man, bearing
with him all that was his.  What an ambition!  What a new consolation! 
What magnanimity in his executors!  A proclamation has been heard,
worthy of the ears of all, and a mother’s grief has been made void by a
fair and holy promise, to give entirely to her son his wealth as a
funeral offering on his behalf, leaving nothing to those who expected
it.

<span id="iii.vi-p65"></span>21.  Is this inadequate for our
consolation?  I will add a more potent remedy.  I believe the words of
the wise, that every fair and God-beloved soul, when, set free from the
bonds of the body, it departs hence, at once enjoys a sense and
perception of the blessings which await it, inasmuch as that which
darkened it has been purged away, or laid aside—I know not how else to
term it—and feels a wondrous pleasure and exultation, and goes rejoicing
to meet its Lord, having escaped as it were from the grievous poison of
life here, and shaken off the fetters which bound it and held down the
wings of the mind, and so enters on the enjoyment of the bliss laid up
for it, of which it has even now some conception.  Then, a little later,
it receives its kindred flesh, which once shared in its pursuits of
things above, from the earth which both gave and had been entrusted with
it, and in some way known to God, who knit them together and dissolved
them, enters with it upon the inheritance of the glory there.  And, as
it shared, through their close union, in its hardships, so also it <span
id="page_237">p. 237</span> <span id="iii.vi-Page_237"></span>bestows
upon it a portion of its joys, gathering it up entirely into itself, and
becoming with it one in spirit and in mind and in God, the mortal and
mutable being swallowed up of life.  Hear at least how the inspired
Ezekiel discourses of the knitting together of bones and sinews, <span
id="fr_2973"></span>[2974](#fn_2973.md) how after him Saint Paul speaks of
the earthly tabernacle, and the house not made with hands, the one to be
dissolved, the other laid up in heaven, alleging absence from the body
to be presence with the Lord, <span id="fr_2974"></span>[2975](#fn_2974.md)
and bewailing his life in it as an exile, and therefore longing for and
hastening to his release.  Why am I faint-hearted in my hopes?  Why
behave like a mere creature of a day?  I await the voice of the
Archangel, <span id="fr_2975"></span>[2976](#fn_2975.md) the last
trumpet, <span id="fr_2976"></span>[2977](#fn_2976.md) the transformation
of the heavens, the transfiguration of the earth, the liberation of the
elements, the renovation of the universe. <span
id="fr_2977"></span>[2978](#fn_2977.md)   Then shall I see Cæsarius
himself, no longer in exile, no longer laid upon a bier, no longer the
object of mourning and pity, but brilliant, glorious, heavenly, such as
in my dreams I have often beheld thee, dearest and most loving of
brothers, pictured thus by my desire, if not by the very truth.

<span id="iii.vi-p71"></span>22.  But now, laying aside lamentation, I
will look at myself, and examine my feelings, that I may not
unconsciously have in myself anything to be lamented.  O ye sons of men,
for the words apply to you, how long will ye be hard-hearted and gross
in mind?  Why do ye love vanity and seek after leasing, <span
id="fr_2978"></span>[2979](#fn_2978.md) supposing life here to be a great
thing and these few days many, and shrinking from this separation,
welcome and pleasant as it is, as if it were really grievous and awful? 
Are we not to know ourselves?  Are we not to cast away visible things? 
Are we not to look to the things unseen?  Are we not, even if we are
somewhat grieved, to be on the contrary distressed at our lengthened
sojourn, <span id="fr_2979"></span>[2980](#fn_2979.md) like holy David, who
calls things here the tents of darkness, and the place of affliction,
and the deep mire, <span id="fr_2980"></span>[2981](#fn_2980.md) and the
shadow of death; <span id="fr_2981"></span>[2982](#fn_2981.md) because we
linger in the tombs we bear about with us, because, though we are gods,
we die like men <span id="fr_2982"></span>[2983](#fn_2982.md) the death of
sin?  This is my fear, this day and night accompanies me, and will not
let me breathe, on one side the glory, on the other the place of
correction:  the former I long for till I can say, “My soul fainteth for
Thy salvation;” <span id="fr_2983"></span>[2984](#fn_2983.md) from the
latter I shrink back shuddering; yet I am not afraid that this body of
mine should utterly perish in dissolution and corruption; but that the
glorious creature of God (for glorious it is if upright, just as it is
dishonourable if sinful) in which is reason, morality, and hope, should
be condemned to the same dishonour as the brutes, and be no better after
death; a fate to be desired for the wicked, who are worthy of the fire
yonder.

<span id="iii.vi-p78"></span>23.  Would that I might mortify my members
that are upon the earth, <span id="fr_2984"></span>[2985](#fn_2984.md)
would that I might spend my all upon the spirit, walking in the way that
is narrow and trodden by few, not that which is broad and easy. <span
id="fr_2985"></span>[2986](#fn_2985.md)   For glorious and great are its
consequences, and our hope is greater than our desert.  What is man,
that Thou art mindful of him? <span id="fr_2986"></span>[2987](#fn_2986.md)
  What is this new mystery which concerns me?  I am small and great,
lowly and exalted, mortal and immortal, earthly and heavenly.  I share
one condition with the lower world, the other with God; one with the
flesh, the other with the spirit.  I must be buried with Christ, arise
with Christ, be joint heir with Christ, become the son of God, yea, God
Himself.  See whither our argument has carried us in its progress.  I
almost own myself indebted to the disaster which has inspired me with
such thoughts, and made me more enamoured of my departure hence.  This
is the purpose of the great mystery for us.  This is the purpose for us
of God, Who for us was made man and became poor, <span
id="fr_2987"></span>[2988](#fn_2987.md) to raise our flesh, <span
id="fr_2988"></span>[2989](#fn_2988.md) and recover His image, <span
id="fr_2989"></span>[2990](#fn_2989.md) and remodel man, <span
id="fr_2990"></span>[2991](#fn_2990.md) that we might all be made one in
Christ, <span id="fr_2991"></span>[2992](#fn_2991.md) who was perfectly
made in all of us all that He Himself is, <span
id="fr_2992"></span>[2993](#fn_2992.md) that we might no longer be male and
female, barbarian, Scythian, bond or free <span
id="fr_2993"></span>[2994](#fn_2993) (which are badges of the flesh.md),
but might bear in ourselves only the stamp of God, by Whom and for Whom
we were made, <span id="fr_2994"></span>[2995](#fn_2994.md) and have so far
received our form and model from Him, that we are recognized by it
alone.

<span id="iii.vi-p90"></span>24.  Yea, would that what we hope for might
be, according to the great kindness of our bountiful God, Who asks for
little and bestows great things, both in the present and in the future,
upon those who truly love Him; <span
id="fr_2995"></span>[2996](#fn_2995.md) bearing all things, enduring all
things <span id="fr_2996"></span>[2997](#fn_2996.md) for their love and
hope of Him, giving thanks for all things <span
id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997.md) favourable and unfavourable alike: 
I mean pleasant and painful, for reason knows that even these are often
instruments of salvation; commending to Him our own souls <span
id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998.md) and <span id="page_238">p.
238</span> <span id="iii.vi-Page_238"></span>the souls of those fellow
wayfarers who, being more ready, have gained their rest before us.  And,
now that we have done this, let us cease from our discourse, and you too
from your tears, hastening, as you now are, to your tomb, which as a sad
abiding gift you have given to Cæsarius, seasonably prepared as it was
for his parents in their old age, and now unexpectedly bestowed on their
son in his youth, though not without reason in His eyes Who disposes our
affairs.  O Lord and Maker of all things, and specially of this our
frame!  O God and Father and Pilot of men who are Thine!  O Lord of life
and death!  O Judge and Benefactor of our souls!  O Maker and
Transformer in due time of all things <span
id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999.md) by Thy designing Word, <span
id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000.md) according to the knowledge of the
depth of Thy wisdom and providence! do Thou now receive Cæsarius, the
firstfruits of our pilgrimage; and if he who was last is first, we bow
before Thy Word, by which the universe is ruled; yet do Thou receive us
also afterwards, in a time when Thou mayest be found, <span
id="fr_3001"></span>[3002](#fn_3001.md) having ordered us in the flesh as
long as is for our profit; yea, receive us, prepared and not
troubled <span id="fr_3002"></span>[3003](#fn_3002.md) by Thy fear, not
departing from Thee in our last day, nor violently borne away from
things here, like souls fond of the world and the flesh, but filled with
eagerness for that blessed and enduring life which is in Christ Jesus,
our Lord, to whom be glory, world without end.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2932"></span>[230:2933](2070049.htm#fr_2932.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span> [Prov. x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.vi-p5.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2933"></span>[230:2934](2070049.htm#fr_2933.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
38.16](../../../bib/apo/sir038.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2934"></span>[230:2935](2070049.htm#fr_2934.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span> *His father*.  S. Gregory the elder.  Cf.
Orat. xviii., 5, 6, 12–29, 32–39.  Also viii., 4, 5; xii., 2, 3; xvi.,
1–4, 20.

<span id="fn_2935"></span>[230:2936](2070049.htm#fr_2935.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span> [Exod.
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.vi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2936"></span>[230:2937](2070049.htm#fr_2936.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span> [Exod.
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019.md), [Deut.
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2937"></span>[230:2938](2070049.htm#fr_2937.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span> *<span id="iii.vi-p12.1"></span>In mien*.
v. l. “in disposition.”

<span id="fn_2938"></span>[230:2939](2070049.htm#fr_2938.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span> *His mother*.  S. Nonna.  Cf. Orat.
xviii., 7–12, 30, 31, 42, 43.  Also viii. 4, 5.

<span id="fn_2939"></span>[230:2940](2070049.htm#fr_2939.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span> [Rom. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.vi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2940"></span>[231:2941](2070049.htm#fr_2940.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p16"></span> *The Chief Good*.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi-p16.1"></span>τὸ κρειττον</span>, lit.
“that which is better.”

<span id="fn_2941"></span>[231:2942](2070049.htm#fr_2941.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p17"></span> [Matt.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019.md), [John
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.vi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2942"></span>[231:2943](2070049.htm#fr_2942.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p18"></span> S. [John xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.vi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2943"></span>[231:2944](2070049.htm#fr_2943.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p19"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.vi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2944"></span>[231:2945](2070049.htm#fr_2944.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p22"></span> *Here*, at Nazianzus.

<span id="fn_2945"></span>[231:2946](2070049.htm#fr_2945.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p23"></span> *Though,* etc.  The Ben. ed. translates
“Although his teaching was exceedingly sublime and abstruse.”

<span id="fn_2946"></span>[231:2947](2070049.htm#fr_2946.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p25"></span> *Dangerous*, as being so closely connected
with astrology.

<span id="fn_2947"></span>[231:2948](2070049.htm#fr_2947.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p26"></span> *East and West*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p26.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p26.2"></span>ῶ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p26.3"></span>ά</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p26.4"></span>τε ὅμοῦ λῆξις καὶ ἑσπέριος</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi-p26.5"></span>—</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vi-p26.6"></span>λῆξις</span> significat
*regionem, locum:  culmen* item, seu *fastigium*.  Cf. S. Greg. Naz.
Orat. xxv. 13. p. 464.  S. Chrys. Hom. LVI. in Ioan. p. 786.

<span id="fn_2948"></span>[232:2949](2070049.htm#fr_2948.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p28"></span> *Our mother*.  For further detail cf.
Orat. xviii. 31.

<span id="fn_2949"></span>[233:2950](2070049.htm#fr_2949.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p31"></span> *The Emperors*.  Constantius II., <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p31.1"></span>a.d.</span> 337–361.  Julian,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p31.2"></span>a.d.</span> 361–363. 
Jovian, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p31.3"></span>a.d.</span>
363–4.  Valens, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p31.4"></span>a.d.</span> 364–378.

<span id="fn_2950"></span>[233:2951](2070049.htm#fr_2950.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p33"></span> *The Emperor, i.e*., Julian the Apostate.

<span id="fn_2951"></span>[233:2952](2070049.htm#fr_2951.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p35"></span> Some edd. read “in the spectacle,” which
would make better sense, but has not <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p35.1"></span>ms.</span> authority.

<span id="fn_2952"></span>[233:2953](2070049.htm#fr_2952.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p36"></span> *A dreadful tyrant*.  The Evil One:  with
Billius and Clémencet.  Julian was antagonist, not Judge—unless we
consider that he combined unfairly the two offices.

<span id="fn_2953"></span>[233:2954](2070049.htm#fr_2953.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p38"></span> S. [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033.md)<span id="iii.vi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2954"></span>[234:2955](2070049.htm#fr_2954.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p39"></span> *Godliness*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi-p39.1"></span>εὐσέβειαν</span>:  here, as often, used in the
sense of “orthodoxy.”

<span id="fn_2955"></span>[234:2956](2070049.htm#fr_2955.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p40"></span> *A further trial*.  Which Julian did not
survive to carry out.  S. Greg. may allude to Cæsarius’ later return to
Court.

<span id="fn_2956"></span>[234:2957](2070049.htm#fr_2956.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p41"></span> *Persians*.  The expedition in which he
met his death.  Ammian, Marcellin. xxv. 3, 7.  Soz. vi. 2.  Socr. iii.
21.

<span id="fn_2957"></span>[234:2958](2070049.htm#fr_2957.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p43"></span> [Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.vi-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2958"></span>[234:2959](2070049.htm#fr_2958.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p44"></span> [Wisd. iii.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.vi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2959"></span>[234:2960](2070049.htm#fr_2959.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p46"></span> *The earthquake*, described by Theodoret,
H.E. ii. 26.

<span id="fn_2960"></span>[234:2961](2070049.htm#fr_2960.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p47"></span> S. Greg. Epist. xx.

<span id="fn_2961"></span>[235:2962](2070049.htm#fr_2961.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p50"></span> [2 Cor.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#003.md), [2 Cor.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.vi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2962"></span>[235:2963](2070049.htm#fr_2962.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p53"></span> [Job xx.
8](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.vi-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2963"></span>[235:2964](2070049.htm#fr_2963.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p54"></span> [Wisd. v.
10](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.vi-p54.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_2964"></span>[235:2965](2070049.htm#fr_2964.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p55"></span> [Ps. ciii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.vi-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2965"></span>[236:2966](2070049.htm#fr_2965.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p56"></span> [Ps.
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.vi-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2966"></span>[236:2967](2070049.htm#fr_2966.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p57"></span> [Jer. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.vi-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2967"></span>[236:2968](2070049.htm#fr_2967.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p58"></span> [Eccles. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.vi-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2968"></span>[236:2969](2070049.htm#fr_2968.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p59"></span> [Eccles.
12.8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.vi-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2969"></span>[236:2970](2070049.htm#fr_2969.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p60"></span> [Eccles.
12.13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.vi-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2970"></span>[236:2971](2070049.htm#fr_2970.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p61"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.vi-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2971"></span>[236:2972](2070049.htm#fr_2971.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p62"></span> [Heb. xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.vi-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2972"></span>[236:2973](2070049.htm#fr_2972.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p64"></span> *Heirs*, Cf. S. Basil Ep. 26<span
id="iii.vi-p64.1"></span> (32).  Cæsarius left all his property to the
poor.  This passage shows that his own family welcomed and approved the
bequest, which S. Gregory was at much pains to carry out, but was
greatly embarrassed by the rapacity of his brother’s servants.

<span id="fn_2973"></span>[237:2974](2070049.htm#fr_2973.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p66"></span> [Ezek. xxxvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.vi-p66.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_2974"></span>[237:2975](2070049.htm#fr_2974.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p67"></span> [2 Cor.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006.md), [Phil.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.vi-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2975"></span>[237:2976](2070049.htm#fr_2975.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p68"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.vi-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2976"></span>[237:2977](2070049.htm#fr_2976.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p69"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span id="iii.vi-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2977"></span>[237:2978](2070049.htm#fr_2977.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p70"></span> [2 Pet. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.vi-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2978"></span>[237:2979](2070049.htm#fr_2978.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p72"></span> [Ps. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.vi-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2979"></span>[237:2980](2070049.htm#fr_2979.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p73"></span> [Psa.
120.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.vi-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2980"></span>[237:2981](2070049.htm#fr_2980.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p74"></span> [Ps.
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#019.md), [Ps.
69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.vi-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2981"></span>[237:2982](2070049.htm#fr_2981.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p75"></span> [Psa.
44.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.vi-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2982"></span>[237:2983](2070049.htm#fr_2982.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p76"></span> [Ps.
72:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.vi-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2983"></span>[237:2984](2070049.htm#fr_2983.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p77"></span> [Psa.
119.81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081.md)<span id="iii.vi-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2984"></span>[237:2985](2070049.htm#fr_2984.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p79"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.vi-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2985"></span>[237:2986](2070049.htm#fr_2985.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p80"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.vi-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2986"></span>[237:2987](2070049.htm#fr_2986.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p80.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p81"></span> [Ps. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.vi-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2987"></span>[237:2988](2070049.htm#fr_2987.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p82"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.vi-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2988"></span>[237:2989](2070049.htm#fr_2988.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p83"></span> [Rom. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.vi-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2989"></span>[237:2990](2070049.htm#fr_2989.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p84"></span> S. [Luke
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#009.md), [1 Cor.
15:49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049.md)<span id="iii.vi-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2990"></span>[237:2991](2070049.htm#fr_2990.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p85"></span> [Col. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.vi-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2991"></span>[237:2992](2070049.htm#fr_2991.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p86"></span> [Gal. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.vi-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2992"></span>[237:2993](2070049.htm#fr_2992.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p87"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.vi-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2993"></span>[237:2994](2070049.htm#fr_2993.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p88"></span> [Col. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.vi-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2994"></span>[237:2995](2070049.htm#fr_2994.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p89"></span> [Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036.md)<span id="iii.vi-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2995"></span>[237:2996](2070049.htm#fr_2995.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p91"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.vi-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2996"></span>[237:2997](2070049.htm#fr_2996.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p92"></span> [1 Cor.
13.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.vi-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[237:2998](2070049.htm#fr_2997.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p92.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p93"></span> [1 Thess. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.vi-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[237:2999](2070049.htm#fr_2998.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p94"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.vi-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[238:3000](2070049.htm#fr_2999.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p95"></span> [Amos v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.vi-p95.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[238:3001](2070049.htm#fr_3000.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p95.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p96"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.vi-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3001"></span>[238:3002](2070049.htm#fr_3001.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p97"></span> [Psa.
32.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.vi-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3002"></span>[238:3003](2070049.htm#fr_3002.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p98"></span> [Psa.
119.60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060.md)<span id="iii.vi-p98.1"></span>
(LXX.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On his Sister Gorgonia.](2070050.md)
