[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070020)  [Next](2070022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p1"></span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="ii.ix-Page_29"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.ix-p1.1"></span>Lecture V.</span>

<span id="ii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix-p2.1"></span>Of Faith.</span>

<span id="ii.ix-p3"></span><span id="ii.ix-p3.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.ix-p3.2"></span>[Heb.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#002)<span id="ii.ix-p3.3"></span></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p4"></span>Now faith is the substance of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen.  For by it the elders obtained a
good report.

<span id="ii.ix-p5"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ix-p5.1"></span>How</span> great a dignity the Lord bestows on
you in transferring you from the order of Catechumens to that of the
Faithful, the Apostle Paul shews, when he affirms, *God is faithful, by
Whom ye were called into the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ* <span
id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754) .  For since God is called Faithful,
thou also in receiving this title receivest a great dignity.  For as God
is called Good, and Just, and Almighty, and Maker of the Universe, so is
He also called Faithful.  Consider therefore to what a dignity thou art
rising, seeing thou art to become partaker of a title of God <span
id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755) .

<span id="ii.ix-p8"></span>2.  Here then it is further required, that
each of you be found faithful in his conscience:  *for a faithful man it
is hard to find* <span id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) :  not that
thou shouldest shew thy conscience to me, for thou art not to *be judged
of man’s judgment* <span id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) ; but that
thou shew the sincerity of thy faith to God, *who trieth the reins and
hearts* <span id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758) , and *knoweth the
thoughts of men* <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759) .  A great
thing is a faithful man, being richest of all rich men.  For *to the
faithful man belongs the whole world of wealth* <span
id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760) , in that he disdains and tramples on
it.  For they who in appearance are rich, and have many possessions, are
poor in soul:  since the more they gather, the more they pine with
longing for what is still lacking.  But the faithful man, most strange
paradox, in poverty is rich:  for knowing that we need only to have
*food and raiment*, and being *therewith content* <span
id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761) , he has trodden riches under foot.

<span id="ii.ix-p15"></span>3.  Nor is it only among us, who bear the
name of Christ, that the dignity of faith is great <span
id="fr_762"></span>[763](#fn_762) :  but likewise all things that are
accomplished in the world, even by those who are aliens <span
id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763) from the Church, are accomplished by
faith.

<span id="ii.ix-p19"></span>By faith the laws of marriage yoke together
those who have lived as strangers:  and because of the faith in marriage
contracts a stranger is made partner of a stranger’s person and
possessions.  By faith husbandry also is sustained, for he who believes
not that he shall receive a harvest endures not the toils.  By faith
sea-faring men, trusting to the thinnest plank, exchange that most solid
element, the land, for the restless motion of the waves, committing
themselves to uncertain hopes, and carrying with them a faith more sure
than any anchor.  By faith therefore most of men’s affairs are held
together:  and not among us only has there been this belief, but also,
as I have said, among those who are without <span
id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764) .  For if they receive not the
Scriptures, but bring forward certain doctrines of their own, even these
they accept by faith.

<span id="ii.ix-p21"></span>4.  The lesson also which was read to-day
invites you to the true faith, by setting before you the way in which
you also must please God:  for it affirms that *without faith it is
impossible to please Him* <span id="fr_765"></span>[766](#fn_765) .  For
when will a man resolve to serve God, unless he believes that *He is a
giver of reward?*  When will a young woman choose a virgin life, or a
young man live soberly, if they believe not that for chastity there is
*a crown that fadeth not away* <span id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766)
?  Faith is an eye that enlightens every conscience, and <span
id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="ii.ix-Page_30"></span>imparts
understanding; for the Prophet saith, *And if ye believe not, ye shall
not understand* <span id="fr_767"></span>[768](#fn_767) .

<span id="ii.ix-p25"></span>Faith *stoppeth the mouths of lions* <span
id="fr_768"></span>[769](#fn_768) , as in Daniel’s case:  for the
Scripture saith concerning him, that *Daniel was brought up out of the
den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in
his God* <span id="fr_769"></span>[770](#fn_769) .  Is there anything
more fearful than the devil?  Yet even against him we have no other
shield than faith <span id="fr_770"></span>[771](#fn_770) , an
impalpable buckler against an unseen foe.  For he sends forth divers
arrows, and *shoots down in the dark night* <span
id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771) those that watch not; but, since the
enemy is unseen, we have faith as our strong armour, according to the
saying of the Apostle, *In all things taking the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked
one* <span id="fr_772"></span>[773](#fn_772) .  A fiery dart of desire
of base indulgence is often cast forth from the devil:  but faith,
suggesting a picture of the judgment, cools down the mind, and quenches
the dart.

<span id="ii.ix-p31"></span>5.  There is much to tell of faith, and the
whole day would not be time sufficient for us to describe it fully.  At
present let us be content with Abraham only, as one of the examples from
the Old Testament, seeing that we have been made his sons through
faith.  He was justified not only by works, but also by faith <span
id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773) :  for though he did many things well,
yet he was never called the friend of God <span
id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774) , except when he believed.  Moreover,
his every work was performed in faith.  Through faith he left his
parents; left country, and place, and home through faith <span
id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775) .  In like manner, therefore, as he
was justified be thou justified also.  In his body he was already dead
in regard to offspring, and Sarah his wife was now old, and there was no
hope left of having children.  God promises the old man a child, and
Abraham *without being weakened in faith, though he considered his own
body now as good as dead* <span id="fr_776"></span>[777](#fn_776) ,
heeded not the weakness of his body, but the power of Him who promised,
because *he counted Him faithful who had promised* <span
id="fr_777"></span>[778](#fn_777) , and so beyond all expectation gained
the child from bodies as it were already dead.  And when, after he had
gained his son, he was commanded to offer him up, although he had heard
the word, *In Isaac shall thy seed be called* <span
id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778) , he proceeded to offer up his son,
his only son, to God, believing *that God is able to raise up even from
the dead* <span id="fr_779"></span>[780](#fn_779) .  And having bound
his son, and laid him on the wood, he did in purpose offer him, but by
the goodness of God in delivering to him a lamb instead of his child, he
received his son alive.  Being faithful in these things, he was sealed
for righteousness, *and received circumcision as a seal of the faith
which he had while he was in uncircumcision* <span
id="fr_780"></span>[781](#fn_780) , having received a promise *that he
should be the father of many nations* <span
id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781) .

<span id="ii.ix-p41"></span>6.  Let us see, then, how Abraham is the
father of many nations <span id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782) .  Of
Jews he is confessedly the father, through succession according to the
flesh.  But if we hold to the succession according to the flesh, we
shall be compelled to say that the oracle was false.  For according to
the flesh he is no longer father of us all:  but the example of his
faith makes us all sons of Abraham.  How? and in what manner?  With men
it is incredible that one should rise from the dead; as in like manner
it is incredible also that there should be offspring from aged persons
as good as dead.  But when Christ is preached as having been crucified
on the tree, and as having died and risen again, we believe it.  By the
likeness therefore of our faith we are adopted into the sonship of
Abraham.  And then, following upon our faith, we receive like him the
spiritual seal, being circumcised by the Holy Spirit through Baptism,
not in the foreskin of the body, but in the heart, according to
Jeremiah, saying, *And ye shall be circumcised unto God in the foreskin
of your heart* <span id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783) :  and according
to the Apostle, *in the circumcision of Christ, having been buried with
Him in baptism*, and the rest <span id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784) .

<span id="ii.ix-p45"></span>7.  This faith if we keep we shall be free
from condemnation, and shall be adorned with all kinds of virtues.  For
so great is the strength of faith, as even to buoy men up in walking on
the sea.  Peter was a man like ourselves, made up of flesh and blood,
and living upon like food.  But when Jesus said, *Come* <span
id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) , he believed, and walked upon the
waters, and found his faith safer upon the waters than any ground; and
his heavy body was upheld by the buoyancy of his faith.  But though he
had safe footing over the water as long as he believed, yet when he
doubted, at once he began to sink:  for as <span id="page_31">p.
31</span> <span id="ii.ix-Page_31"></span>his faith gradually relaxed,
his body also was drawn down with it.  And when He saw his distress,
Jesus who remedies the distresses of our souls, said, *O thou of little
faith, wherefore didst thou doubt* <span
id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) ?  And being nerved again by Him who
grasped his right hand, he had no sooner recovered his faith, than, led
by the hand of the Master, he resumed the same walking upon the waters: 
for this the Gospel indirectly mentioned, saying, *when they were gone
up into the ship* <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) .  For it says
not that Peter swam across and went up, but gives us to understand that,
after returning the same distance that he went to meet Jesus, he went up
again into the ship.

<span id="ii.ix-p49"></span>8.  Yea, so much power hath faith, that not
the believer only is saved, but some have been saved by others
believing.  The paralytic in Capernaum was not a believer, but they
believed who brought him, and let him down through the tiles <span
id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) :  for the sick man’s soul shared the
sickness of his body.  And think not that I accuse him without cause: 
the Gospel itself says, *when Jesus saw*, not his faith, but *their
faith*, He saith to the sick of the palsy, Arise <span
id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789) !  The bearers believed, and the sick
of the palsy enjoyed the blessing of the cure.

<span id="ii.ix-p52"></span>9.  Wouldest thou see yet more surely that
some are saved by others’ faith?  Lazarus died <span
id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790) :  one day had passed, and a second,
and a third:  his sinews <span id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791) were
decayed, and corruption was preying already upon his body.  How could
one four days dead believe, and entreat the Redeemer on his own behalf? 
But what the dead man lacked was supplied by his true sisters.  For when
the Lord was come, the sister fell down before Him, and when He said,
*Where have ye laid him?* and she had made answer, *Lord, by this time
he stinketh; for he hath been four days dead*, the Lord said, *If thou
believe, thou shalt see the glory of God*; as much as saying, Supply
thou the dead man’s lack of faith:  and the sisters’ faith had so much
power, that it recalled the dead from the gates of hell.  Have then men
by believing, the one on behalf of the other, been able to raise <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) the dead, and shalt not thou, if thou
believe sincerely on thine own behalf, be much rather profited?  Nay,
even if thou be faithless, or of little faith, the Lord is loving unto
man; He condescends to thee on thy repentance:  only on thy part say
with honest mind, *Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief* <span
id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) .  But if thou thinkest that thou
really art faithful, but hast not yet the fulness of faith, thou too
hast need to say like the Apostles, *Lord, increase our faith* <span
id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) :  for some part thou hast of thyself,
but the greater part thou receivest from Him.

<span id="ii.ix-p58"></span>10.  For the name of Faith is in the form of
speech <span id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) one, but has two distinct
senses.  For there is one kind of faith, the dogmatic, involving an
assent of the soul on some particular point:  and it is profitable to
the soul, as the Lord saith:  *He that heareth My words, and believeth
Him that sent Me, hath everlasting life, and cometh not into
judgment* <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796) :  and again, *He that
believeth in the Son is not judged, but hath passed from death unto
life* <span id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797) .  Oh the great
loving-kindness of God!  For the righteous were many years in pleasing
Him:  but what they succeeded in gaining by many years of
well-pleasing <span id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798) , this Jesus now
bestows on thee in a single hour.  For if thou shalt believe that Jesus
Christ is Lord, and that God raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved, and shalt be transported into Paradise by Him who brought in
thither the robber.  And doubt not whether it is possible; for He who on
this sacred Golgotha saved the robber after one single hour of belief,
the same shall save thee also on thy believing <span
id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799) .

<span id="ii.ix-p64"></span>11.  But there is a second kind of faith,
which is bestowed by Christ as a gift of grace.  *For to one is given
through the Spirit the word of wisdom, and to another the word of
knowledge according to the same Spirit:  to another faith, by the same
Spirit, and to another gifts of healing* <span
id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800) .  This faith then which is given of
grace from the Spirit is not merely doctrinal, but also worketh things
above man’s power.  For whosoever hath this faith, *shall say to this
mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove* <span
id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801) .  For whenever any one shall say this
in faith, *believing that it cometh to pass, and shall not doubt in his
heart, then receiveth he the grace*.

<span id="ii.ix-p67"></span>And of this faith it is said, *If ye have
faith as a grain of mustard seed* <span
id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802) .  For just as the grain of mustard
seed is small in size, but fiery in its operation, and though sown in a
small space has a circle of great branches, and when grown up is able
even to shelter the fowls <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803) ; so,
likewise, faith in the swiftest moment works the greatest effects in the
<span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="ii.ix-Page_32"></span>soul. 
For, when enlightened by faith, the soul hath visions of God, and as far
as is possible beholds God, and ranges round the bounds of the universe,
and before the end of this world already beholds the Judgment, and the
payment of the promised rewards.  Have thou therefore that faith in Him
which cometh from thine own self, that thou mayest also receive from Him
that faith which worketh things above man <span
id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) .

<span id="ii.ix-p71"></span>12.  But in learning the Faith and in
professing it, acquire and keep that only, which is now delivered <span
id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) to thee by the Church, and which has
been built up strongly out of all the Scriptures.  For since all cannot
read the Scriptures, some being hindered as to the knowledge of them by
want of learning, and others by a want of leisure, in order that the
soul may not perish from ignorance, we comprise the whole doctrine of
the Faith in a few lines.  This summary I wish you both to commit to
memory when I recite it <span id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) , and to
rehearse it with all diligence among yourselves, not writing it out on
paper <span id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) , but engraving it by the
memory upon your heart <span id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) , taking
care while you rehearse it that no Catechumen chance to overhear the
things which have been delivered to you.  I wish you also to keep this
as a provision <span id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) through the whole
course of your life, and beside this to receive no other, neither if we
ourselves should change and contradict our present teaching, nor if an
adverse angel, *transformed into an angel of light* <span
id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) should wish to lead you astray.  *For
though we or an angel from heaven preach to you any other gospel than
that ye have received, let him be to you anathema* <span
id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) .  So for the present listen while I
simply say the Creed <span id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) , and
commit it to memory; but at the proper season expect the confirmation
out of Holy Scripture of each part of the contents.  For the articles of
the Faith were not composed as seemed good to men; but the most
important points collected out of all the Scripture make up one complete
teaching of the Faith.  And just as the mustard seed in one small grain
contains many branches, so also this Faith has embraced in few words all
the knowledge of godliness in the Old and New Testaments.  Take heed
then, brethren, and *hold fast the traditions* <span
id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813) which ye now receive, and *write them
an the table of your heart* <span id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) .

<span id="ii.ix-p82"></span>13.  Guard them with reverence, lest per
chance the enemy despoil any who have grown slack; or lest some heretic
pervert any of the truths delivered to you.  For faith is like putting
money into the bank <span id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) , even as we
have now done; but from you God requires the accounts of the deposit. 
*I charge you*, as the Apostle saith, *before God, who quickeneth all
things, and Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed the good
confession, that ye keep* this faith which is committed to you, *without
spot, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ* <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) .  A treasure of life has now been
committed to thee, and the Master demandeth the deposit at His
appearing, *which in His own times He shall shew, Who is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; Who only hath
immortality, dwelling in light which no man can approach unto; Whom no
man hath seen nor can see.  To Whom be glory, honour, and power* <span
id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817) for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_754"></span>[29:755](2070021.htm#fr_754) <span
id="ii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p6"></span> [1 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009)<span id="ii.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[29:756](2070021.htm#fr_755) <span
id="ii.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p7"></span> See Procatechesis 6, and Index, *Faithful*.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[29:757](2070021.htm#fr_756) <span
id="ii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p9"></span> [Prov. xx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#006)<span id="ii.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[29:758](2070021.htm#fr_757) <span
id="ii.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p10"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003)<span id="ii.ix-p10.1"></span>.  See
Index, *Confession.*

<span id="fn_758"></span>[29:759](2070021.htm#fr_758) <span
id="ii.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p11"></span> [Ps. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009)<span id="ii.ix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[29:760](2070021.htm#fr_759) <span
id="ii.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p12"></span> [Ps. xciv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011)<span id="ii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[29:761](2070021.htm#fr_760) <span
id="ii.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p13"></span> This sentence is a spurious addition to the
text of the Septuagint, variously placed after [Prov.
17.4-6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#004)<span id="ii.ix-p13.1"></span>. 
The thought is there completed by the antithesis, *but to the faithless
not even an obol*.  The origin of the interpolation is unknown.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[29:762](2070021.htm#fr_761) <span
id="ii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p14"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="ii.ix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[29:763](2070021.htm#fr_762) <span
id="ii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p16"></span> It was a common objection of Pagan
philosophers that the Christian religion was not founded upon reason but
only on faith.

<span id="ii.ix-p17"></span>Cyril’s answer that faith is necessary in
the ordinary affairs of life is the same which Origen had employed
against Celsus (I. 11):  “Why should it not be more reasonable, since
all human affairs are dependent upon faith, to believe God rather than
men?  For who takes a voyage, or marries, or begets children, or casts
seeds into the ground, without believing that better things will result,
although the contrary might and sometimes does happen?”  See also
Arnobius, *adversus Gentes*, II. 8; and Hooker’s allusion to the
scornful reproach of Julian the Apostate, “The highest point of your
wisdom is *believe*” (*Eccles. Pol.* V. lxiii. 1.).

<span id="fn_763"></span>[29:764](2070021.htm#fr_763) <span
id="ii.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p18"></span> By “aliens from the Church,” and “those who
are without,” S. Cyril here means Pagans:  so Tertullian, *de
Idololatriâ*, c. xiv.  But the latter term is applied to a Catechumen in
Procatechesis. c. 12, and was also a common description of heretics: 
see Tertullian, *de Baptismo*, c. xv.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[29:765](2070021.htm#fr_764) <span
id="ii.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p20"></span> By “aliens from the Church,” and “those who
are without,” S. Cyril here means Pagans:  so Tertullian, *de
Idololatriâ*, c. xiv.  But the latter term is applied to a Catechumen in
Procatechesis. c. 12, and was also a common description of heretics: 
see Tertullian, *de Baptismo*, c. xv.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[29:766](2070021.htm#fr_765) <span
id="ii.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p22"></span> [Heb. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span id="ii.ix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[29:767](2070021.htm#fr_766) <span
id="ii.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p23"></span> [1 Pet. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004)<span id="ii.ix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[30:768](2070021.htm#fr_767) <span
id="ii.ix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p24"></span> [Is. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009)<span id="ii.ix-p24.1"></span>,
according to the Septuagint.  But A.V. and R.V. both render:  *If ye
will not believe, surely ye shall not be established*.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[30:769](2070021.htm#fr_768) <span
id="ii.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p26"></span> [Heb. xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#034)<span id="ii.ix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[30:770](2070021.htm#fr_769) <span
id="ii.ix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p27"></span> [Dan. vi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#023)<span id="ii.ix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[30:771](2070021.htm#fr_770) <span
id="ii.ix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p28"></span> [1 Pet. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#009)<span id="ii.ix-p28.1"></span>: 
*Whom resist, stedfast in the faith.*

<span id="fn_771"></span>[30:772](2070021.htm#fr_771) <span
id="ii.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p29"></span> [Ps. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002)<span id="ii.ix-p29.1"></span>, *that
they may shoot in darkness at the upright in heart* (R.V.).  The Hebrew
word <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix-p29.2"></span>לפֶא</span>,
signifying deep darkness ([Job 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#006),
[Job 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#022)<span
id="ii.ix-p29.3"></span>) is vigorously rendered by the Seventy <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix-p29.4"></span>σκοτομήνη</span>, which is
explained by the Scholiast on Homer (Od. xiv. 457:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix-p29.5"></span>Νὺξ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἐπῆλθε κακὴ
σκοτομήνιος</span>) to be the deep darkness of the night preceding the
new moon.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[30:773](2070021.htm#fr_772) <span
id="ii.ix-p29.6"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p30"></span> [Eph. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)<span id="ii.ix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[30:774](2070021.htm#fr_773) <span
id="ii.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p32"></span> [James ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021)<span id="ii.ix-p32.1"></span>. 
Casaubon omitted <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p32.2"></span>μόνον</span>, which is found in every <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.ix-p32.3"></span>ms.,</span> thus making the
meaning to be, “He was justified not by works but by faith,” which
directly contradicts the statement of S. James, and is inconsistent with
the following context in S. Cyril.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[30:775](2070021.htm#fr_774) <span
id="ii.ix-p32.4"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p33"></span> [Jas.
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023), [2 Chr.
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#007), [Isa.
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008), [Gen.
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006)<span id="ii.ix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[30:776](2070021.htm#fr_775) <span
id="ii.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p34"></span> [Heb. xi.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008)<span id="ii.ix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[30:777](2070021.htm#fr_776) <span
id="ii.ix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p35"></span> [Rom. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019)<span id="ii.ix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[30:778](2070021.htm#fr_777) <span
id="ii.ix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p36"></span> [Heb.
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#012)<span id="ii.ix-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[30:779](2070021.htm#fr_778) <span
id="ii.ix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p37"></span> [Gen.
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012), [Gen.
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002)<span id="ii.ix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[30:780](2070021.htm#fr_779) <span
id="ii.ix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p38"></span> [Heb. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019)<span id="ii.ix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[30:781](2070021.htm#fr_780) <span
id="ii.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p39"></span> [Rom. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span id="ii.ix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[30:782](2070021.htm#fr_781) <span
id="ii.ix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p40"></span> [Gen. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005)<span id="ii.ix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[30:783](2070021.htm#fr_782) <span
id="ii.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p42"></span> [Rom.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018)<span id="ii.ix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[30:784](2070021.htm#fr_783) <span
id="ii.ix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p43"></span> [Jer. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004)<span id="ii.ix-p43.1"></span>: 
*Circumcise yourselves to the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your
heart.*  The Septuagint agrees closely with the Hebrew, but Cyril quotes
freely from memory.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[30:785](2070021.htm#fr_784) <span
id="ii.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p44"></span> [Col.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)<span id="ii.ix-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[30:786](2070021.htm#fr_785) <span
id="ii.ix-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p46"></span> [Matt. xiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#029)<span id="ii.ix-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[31:787](2070021.htm#fr_786) <span
id="ii.ix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p47"></span> [Mark xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#031)<span id="ii.ix-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[31:788](2070021.htm#fr_787) <span
id="ii.ix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p48"></span> [Mark
14.32](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032)<span id="ii.ix-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[31:789](2070021.htm#fr_788) <span
id="ii.ix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p50"></span> [Mark ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#004)<span id="ii.ix-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[31:790](2070021.htm#fr_789) <span
id="ii.ix-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p51"></span> [Matt.
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006)<span id="ii.ix-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[31:791](2070021.htm#fr_790) <span
id="ii.ix-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p53"></span> [John xi.
14-44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#014)<span id="ii.ix-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[31:792](2070021.htm#fr_791) <span
id="ii.ix-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p54.1"></span>νεῦρα</span>.  “Sinews” is the original meaning,
the application to “nerves,” as distinct organs of sensation, being
later.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[31:793](2070021.htm#fr_792) <span
id="ii.ix-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p55"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p55.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p55.2"></span>ναστῆναι</span>, retained by the Benedictine
Editor and Reischl, read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p55.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p55.4"></span>ναστῆσαι</span>, with Roe, Casaubon, and
Alexandrides.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[31:794](2070021.htm#fr_793) <span
id="ii.ix-p55.5"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p56"></span> [Mark ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024)<span id="ii.ix-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[31:795](2070021.htm#fr_794) <span
id="ii.ix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p57"></span> [Luke xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#005)<span id="ii.ix-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[31:796](2070021.htm#fr_795) <span
id="ii.ix-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p59.1"></span>κατὰ τὴν προσηγορίαν</span>.  Compare Aristotle,
*Categories*, V. 30:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p59.2"></span>τῷ σχήματι τῆς προσηγορίας</span>.  Cyril’s
description of faith as twofold, and of dogmatic faith as an assent
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix-p59.3"></span>συγκατάθεσις</span>)
of the soul to something as credible, seems to be derived from Clement
of Alexandria, Strom. II. c. 12.  Compare by all means Pearson on the
Creed, Art. I. and his Notes a, b, c.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[31:797](2070021.htm#fr_796) <span
id="ii.ix-p59.4"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p60"></span> [John v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span id="ii.ix-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[31:798](2070021.htm#fr_797) <span
id="ii.ix-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p61"></span> [John
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018), [John
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span id="ii.ix-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[31:799](2070021.htm#fr_798) <span
id="ii.ix-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p62.1"></span>εὐαρεστήσεως</span> , Bened. and Reischl, with
best <span class="sc"><span id="ii.ix-p62.2"></span>mss.</span>  Milles
and the earlier editions have <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p62.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p62.4"></span>ρευνήσεως</span>, “searching.”

<span id="fn_799"></span>[31:800](2070021.htm#fr_799) <span
id="ii.ix-p62.5"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p63"></span> [Luke xxiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)<span id="ii.ix-p63.1"></span>; the
argument is used again in Cat. xiii. 31.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[31:801](2070021.htm#fr_800) <span
id="ii.ix-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p65"></span> [1 Cor.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009)<span id="ii.ix-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[31:802](2070021.htm#fr_801) <span
id="ii.ix-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p66"></span> [Mark xi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#023)<span id="ii.ix-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[31:803](2070021.htm#fr_802) <span
id="ii.ix-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p68"></span> [Matt. xvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020)<span id="ii.ix-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[31:804](2070021.htm#fr_803) <span
id="ii.ix-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p69"></span> [Matt. xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#032)<span id="ii.ix-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[32:805](2070021.htm#fr_804) <span
id="ii.ix-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p70"></span> S. Chrysostom (Hom. xxix. in [1 Cor.
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010)<span id="ii.ix-p70.1"></span>) in
like manner distinguishes dogmatic faith from the faith which is “the
mother of miracles.”  The former S. Cyril calls our own, not meaning
that God’s help is not needed for it, but because, as he has shewn in §
10, it consists in the mind’s assent, and voluntary approval of the
doctrines set before it:  but the latter is a pure gift of grace working
in man without his own help.  Compare *Apostolic Constitutions*, VIII.
c. 1.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[32:806](2070021.htm#fr_805) <span
id="ii.ix-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p72"></span> This Lecture was to be immediately followed
by a first recitation of the Creed.  See Index, *Creed*.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[32:807](2070021.htm#fr_806) <span
id="ii.ix-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p73.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p73.2"></span>π᾽ αὐτῆς τῆς λέξεως</span>. “in ipsâ lectione”
(Milles):  “ipsis verbis” (Bened.):  “in the very phrase” (<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.ix-p73.3"></span>R.W.C.</span>).  See below,
note 4.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[32:808](2070021.htm#fr_807) <span
id="ii.ix-p73.4"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p74"></span> Compare S. August. Serm. ccxii., “At the
delivery of the Creed,” and Index, *Creed*.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[32:809](2070021.htm#fr_808) <span
id="ii.ix-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p75"></span> Compare Æschylus, *Prometheus* V. 789: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix-p75.1"></span>ἣ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix-p75.2"></span>ν ἐγγράφου σὺ μνήμοσιν
δέλτοις φρενῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[32:810](2070021.htm#fr_809) <span
id="ii.ix-p75.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p76.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p76.2"></span>φόδιον</span>, *Viaticum*, i.e. provision for a
journey, and here for the journey through this life.  It is applied
metaphorically by other Fathers (a) in this general sense, to the
reading of Holy Scripture, Prayer, and Baptism, and (b) in a special
sense to the Holy Eucharist when administered to the sick and dying, as
a preparation for departure to the life after death.  Council of Nicæa
(<span class="sc"><span id="ii.ix-p76.3"></span>a.d.</span> 325), Canon
xiii.  “With respect to the dying, the old rule of the Church should
continue to be observed, which forbids that any one who is on the point
of death should be deprived of the last and most necessary *viaticum*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix-p76.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix-p76.5"></span>φόδιον</span>).”

<span id="fn_810"></span>[32:811](2070021.htm#fr_810) <span
id="ii.ix-p76.6"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p77"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="ii.ix-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[32:812](2070021.htm#fr_811) <span
id="ii.ix-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p78"></span> [Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="ii.ix-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[32:813](2070021.htm#fr_812) <span
id="ii.ix-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p79"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p79.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix-p79.2"></span>π᾽ αὐτῆς τῆς λέξεως</span>.  (Bened. Reischl.
with best <span class="sc"><span id="ii.ix-p79.3"></span>mss.</span>). 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix-p79.4"></span>ταύτης τῆς
λέξεως</span>, “this my recitation,” (Milles).

<span id="fn_813"></span>[32:814](2070021.htm#fr_813) <span
id="ii.ix-p79.5"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p80"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#015)<span id="ii.ix-p80.1"></span>. 
Compare Cat. xxiii. 23.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[32:815](2070021.htm#fr_814) <span
id="ii.ix-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p81"></span> [Prov. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#003)<span id="ii.ix-p81.1"></span>.  Note
9, above.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[32:816](2070021.htm#fr_815) <span
id="ii.ix-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p83"></span> [Matt.
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027), [Luke
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#023)<span id="ii.ix-p83.1"></span>. 
See note on Catech. vi. 36:  “Be thou a good banker.”

<span id="fn_816"></span>[32:817](2070021.htm#fr_816) <span
id="ii.ix-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p84"></span> [1 Tim.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021), [1 Tim.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#014)<span id="ii.ix-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[32:818](2070021.htm#fr_817) <span
id="ii.ix-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p85"></span> [1 Tim.
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="ii.ix-p85.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Unity of God.  On the Article, I Believe in One
God.  Also Concerning Heresies.](2070022)
