[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070015)  [Next](2070017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="ii.iv-Page_1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span><span class="c36"><span
id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>The</span>

<span id="ii.iv-p2"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="ii.iv-p2.1"></span>Catechetical Lectures</span>

<span id="ii.iv-p3"></span><span class="c36"><span
id="ii.iv-p3.1"></span>of</span>

<span id="ii.iv-p4"></span><span class="c18"><span
id="ii.iv-p4.1"></span>S. Cyril,</span>

<span id="ii.iv-p5"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv-p5.1"></span>Archbishop of Jerusalem.</span>

<span id="ii.iv-p6"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.iv-p7"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.iv-p7.1"></span>PROCATECHESIS,</span>

<span id="ii.iv-p8"></span>OR<span class="c1"><span
id="ii.iv-p8.1"></span>,</span>

<span id="ii.iv-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv-p9.1"></span>PROLOGUE TO THE CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF OUR HOLY
FATHER,</span>

<span id="ii.iv-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv-p10.1"></span>CYRIL, ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM.</span>

<span id="ii.iv-p11"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.iv-p12"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv-p12.1"></span>Already</span> there is an odour of blessedness
upon you, O ye who are soon to be enlightened <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) :  already ye are gathering the
spiritual <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) flowers, to weave
heavenly crowns:  already the fragrance of the Holy Spirit has breathed
upon you:  already ye have gathered round the vestibule of the King’s
palace <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) ; may ye be led in also
by the King!  For blossoms now have appeared upon the trees <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) ; may the fruit also be found
perfect!  Thus far there has been an inscription of your names <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) , and a call to service, and
torches <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) of the bridal train, and
a longing for heavenly citizenship, and a good purpose, and hope
attendant thereon.  For he lieth not who said, *that to them that love
God all things work together for good*.  God is lavish in beneficence,
yet He waits for each man’s genuine will:  therefore the Apostle added
and said, *to them that are called according to a purpose* <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) .  The honesty of purpose makes thee
called:  for if thy body be here but not thy mind, it profiteth thee
nothing.

<span id="ii.iv-p20"></span>2.  Even Simon Magus once came to the
Laver <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) :  he was baptized, but
was not enlightened; and though he dipped his body in water, he
enlightened not his heart with the Spirit:  his body went down and came
up, but his soul was not buried with Christ, nor raised with Him <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) .  Now I mention the statements <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) of (men’s) falls, that thou mayest not
fall:  for these things happened to them by way of example, *and they
are written for the admonition* <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403)
of those who to this day draw near.  Let none of you be found tempting
His grace, *lest any root of bitterness spring up and trouble you* <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) .  Let none of you enter saying, Let
us see what the faithful <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) are
doing:  let me go in and see, that I may learn what is being done.  Dost
thou expect to see, and not expect to be seen?  And thinkest thou, that
whilst thou art searching out what is going on, God is not searching thy
heart?

<span id="ii.iv-p27"></span>3.  A certain man in the Gospels once pried
into the marriage feast <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) , and
took an unbecoming garment, and came in, sat down, and ate:  for the
bridegroom permitted it.  But when he saw them all clad in white <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) , he ought to have assumed a garment
of the same kind himself:  whereas he partook of the like food, but was
unlike them in fashion and in purpose.  The bridegroom, however, though
bountiful, was not undiscerning:  and in going round to each of the
guests and observing them (for his care was not for their eating, but
for their seemly behaviour), he saw a stranger *not having on a wedding
garment*, and said to him, *Friend, how camest thou in hither?*  In what
a colour <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) !  With what a
conscience!  What though the door-keeper forbade thee not, because of
the bountifulness of the entertainer? what though thou wert ignorant in
what fashion thou shouldest come in to the banquet?—thou <span
id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="ii.iv-Page_2"></span>didst come in,
and didst see the glittering fashions of the guests:  shouldest thou not
have been taught even by what was before thine eyes?  Shouldest thou not
have retired in good season, that thou mightest enter in good season
again?  But now thou hast come in unseasonably, to be unseasonably cast
out.  So he commands the servants, *Bind his feet*, which daringly
intruded:  *bind his hands*, which knew not how to put a bright garment
around him:  *and cast him into the outer darkness;* for he is unworthy
of the wedding torches <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) .  Thou
seest what happened to that man:  make thine own condition safe.

<span id="ii.iv-p32"></span>4.  For we, the ministers of Christ, have
admitted every one, and occupying, as it were, the place of door-keepers
we left the door open:  and possibly thou didst enter with thy soul
bemired with sins, and with a will defiled.  Enter thou didst, and wast
allowed:  thy name was inscribed.  Tell me, dost thou behold this
venerable constitution of the Church?  Dost thou view her order and
discipline <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) , the reading of
Scriptures <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) , the presence of the
ordained <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) , the course of
instruction <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) ?  Be abashed at the
place, and be taught by what thou seest <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) .  Go out opportunely now, and enter
most opportunely to-morrow.

<span id="ii.iv-p38"></span>If the fashion of thy soul is avarice, put
on another fashion and come in.  Put off thy former fashion, cloke it
not up.  Put off, I pray thee, fornication and uncleanness, and put on
the brightest robe of chastity.  This charge I give thee, before Jesus
the Bridegroom of souls come in and see their fashions.  A long
notice <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) is allowed thee; thou
hast forty <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) days for repentance: 
thou hast full opportunity both to put off, and wash, and to put on and
enter.  But if thou persist in an evil purpose, the speaker is
blameless, but thou must not look for the grace:  for the water will
receive, but the Spirit will not accept thee <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) .  If any one is conscious of his
wound, let him take the salve; if any has fallen, let him arise.  Let
there be no Simon among you, no hypocrisy, no idle curiosity about the
matter.

<span id="ii.iv-p42"></span>5.  Possibly too thou art come on another
pretext.  It is possible that a man is wishing to pay court to a woman,
and came hither on that account <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418)
.  The remark applies in like manner to women also in their turn.  A
slave also perhaps wishes to please his master, and a friend his
friend.  I accept this bait for the hook, and welcome thee, though thou
camest with an evil purpose, yet as one to be saved by a good hope. 
Perhaps thou knewest not whither thou wert coming, nor in what kind of
net thou art taken.  Thou art come within the Church’s nets <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) :  be taken alive, flee not:  for
Jesus is angling for thee, not in order to kill, but by killing to make
alive:  for thou must die and rise again.  For thou hast heard the
Apostle say, *Dead indeed unto sin, but living unto righteousness <span
id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420)* .  Die to thy sins, and live to
righteousness, live from this very day.

<span id="ii.iv-p46"></span>6.  See, I pray thee, how great a dignity
Jesus bestows on thee.  Thou wert called a Catechumen, while the word
echoed <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) round thee from without;
hearing of hope, and knowing it not; hearing mysteries, and not
understanding them; hearing Scriptures, and not knowing their depth. 
The echo is no longer around thee, but within thee; for *the indwelling
Spirit <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422)* henceforth makes thy
mind a house of God.  When thou shalt have heard what is written
concerning the mysteries, then wilt thou understand things which thou
knewest not.  And think not that thou receivest a small thing:  though a
miserable man, thou receivest one of God’s titles.  Hear St. Paul
saying, *God is faithful <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423)* . 
Hear another Scripture saying, *God is faithful and just <span
id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424)* .  Foreseeing this, the Psalmist,
because men are to receive a title of God, spoke thus in the person of
God:  I said, *Ye are Gods, and are all sons of the Most High* <span
id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) .  But beware lest thou have the title
of “*faithful*,” but the will of the faithless.  Thou hast entered into
a contest, toil on through the race:  another such opportunity thou
canst not have <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426) .  Were it thy
wedding-day before thee, wouldest thou not have disregarded all else,
and set about the preparation for the feast?  And on the eve of
consecrating thy soul to the heavenly Bridegroom, wilt thou not cease
from carnal things, that thou mayest win spiritual?

<span id="ii.iv-p53"></span><span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="ii.iv-Page_3"></span>7.  We may not receive Baptism twice or thrice;
else it might be said, Though I have failed once, I shall set it right a
second time:  whereas if thou fail once, the thing cannot be set right;
for there is *one Lord, and one faith, and one baptism* <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) :  for only the heretics are
re-baptized <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428) , because the former
was no baptism.

<span id="ii.iv-p56"></span>8.  For God seeks nothing else from us, save
a good purpose.  Say not, How are my sins blotted out?  I tell thee, By
willing, by believing <span id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429) .  What
can be shorter than this?  But if, while thy lips declare thee willing,
thy heart be silent, He knoweth the heart, who judgeth thee.  Cease from
this day from every evil deed.  Let not thy tongue speak unseemly words,
let thine eye abstain from sin, and from roving <span
id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430) after things unprofitable.

<span id="ii.iv-p59"></span>9.  Let thy feet hasten to the catechisings;
receive with earnestness the exorcisms <span
id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431) :  whether thou be breathed upon or
exorcised, the act is to thee salvation.  Suppose thou hast gold
unwrought and alloyed, mixed with various substances, copper, and tin,
and iron, and lead:  we seek to have the gold alone; can gold be
purified from the foreign substances without fire?  Even so without
exorcisms the soul cannot be purified; and these exorcisms are divine,
having been collected out of the divine Scriptures.  Thy face has been
veiled <span id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432) , that thy mind may
henceforward be free, lest the eye by roving make the heart rove also. 
But when thine eyes are veiled, thine ears are not hindered from
receiving the means of salvation.  For in like manner as those who are
skilled in the goldsmith’s craft throw in their breath upon the fire
through certain delicate instruments, and blowing up the gold which is
hidden in the crucible stir the flame which surrounds it, and so find
what they are seeking; even so when the exorcists inspire terror by the
Spirit of God, and set the soul, as it were, on fire in the crucible of
the body, the hostile demon flees away, and there abide salvation and
the hope of eternal life, and the soul henceforth is cleansed from its
sins and hath salvation.  Let us then, brethren, abide in hope, and
surrender ourselves, and hope, in order that the God of all may see our
purpose, and cleanse us from our sins, and impart to us good hopes of
our estate, and grant us repentance that bringeth salvation.  God hath
called, and His call is to thee.

<span id="ii.iv-p62"></span>10.  Attend closely to the catechisings, and
though we should prolong our discourse, let not thy mind be wearied
out.  For thou art receiving armour against the adverse power, armour
against heresies, against Jews, and Samaritans <span
id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433) , and Gentiles.  Thou hast many
enemies; take to thee many darts, for thou hast many to hurl them at: 
and thou hast need to learn how to strike down the Greek, how to contend
against heretic, against Jew and Samaritan.  And the armour is ready,
and most ready *the sword of the Spirit* <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434) :  but thou also must stretch forth
thy right hand with good resolution, that thou mayest war the Lord’s
warfare, and overcome adverse powers, and become invincible against
every heretical attempt.

<span id="ii.iv-p65"></span>11.  Let me give thee this charge also. 
Study our teachings and keep them for ever.  Think not that they are the
ordinary homilies <span id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435) ; for though
they also are good and trustworthy, yet if we should neglect them to-day
we may study them to-morrow.  But if the teaching concerning the laver
of regeneration delivered in a consecutive course be neglected to-day,
when shall it be made right?  Suppose it is the season for planting
trees:  if we do not dig, and dig deep, when else can that be planted
rightly which has once been planted ill?  Suppose, pray, that the
Catechising is a kind of building:  if we do not bind the house together
by regular bonds in the building, lest some gap be found, and the
building become unsound, even our former labour is of no use.  But stone
must follow stone by course, and corner match with corner, and by our
smoothing off inequalities the building must thus rise evenly.  In like
manner we are bringing to thee stones, as it were, of knowledge.  Thou
must hear concerning the living God, thou must hear of Judgment, must
hear of Christ, and of the Resurrection.  And many things there are to
be discussed in succession, which though now dropped one by one are
afterwards to be presented in harmonious connexion.  But unless thou fit
them together in the one whole, and remember what is first, and what is
second, the builder may build, but thou wilt find the building unsound.

<span id="ii.iv-p67"></span>12.  When, therefore, the Lecture is
delivered, <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="ii.iv-Page_4"></span>if a Catechumen ask thee what the teachers have
said, tell nothing to him that is without <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) .  For we deliver to thee a mystery,
and a hope of the life to come.  Guard the mystery for Him who gives the
reward.  Let none ever say to thee, What harm to thee, if I also know
it?  So too the sick ask for wine; but if it be given at a wrong time it
causes delirium, and two evils arise; the sick man dies, and the
physician is blamed.  Thus is it also with the Catechumen, if he hear
anything from the believer:  both the Catechumen becomes delirious (for
he understands not what he has heard, and finds fault with the thing,
and scoffs at what is said), and the believer is condemned as a
traitor.  But thou art now standing on the border:  take heed, pray, to
tell nothing out; not that the things spoken are not worthy to be told,
but because his ear is unworthy to receive.  Thou wast once thyself a
Catechumen, and I described not what lay before thee.  When by
experience thou hast learned how high are the matters of our teaching,
then thou wilt know that the Catechumens are not worthy to hear them.

<span id="ii.iv-p69"></span>13.  Ye who have been enrolled are become
sons and daughters of one Mother.  When ye have come in before the hour
of the exorcisms, let each one of you speak things tending to
godliness:  and if any of your number be not present, seek for him.  If
thou wert called to a banquet, wouldest thou not wait for thy fellow
guest?  If thou hadst a brother, wouldest thou not seek thy brother’s
good?

<span id="ii.iv-p70"></span>Afterwards busy not thyself about
unprofitable matters:  neither, what the city has done, nor the village,
nor the King <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) , nor the Bishop,
nor the Presbyter.  Look upward; that is what thy present hour needeth. 
*Be still* <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) , *and know that I am
God*.  If thou seest the believers ministering, and shewing no care,
they enjoy security, they know what they have received, they are in
possession of grace.  But thou standest just now in the turn of the
scale, to be received or not:  copy not those who have freedom from
anxiety, but cherish fear.

<span id="ii.iv-p73"></span>14.  And when the Exorcism has been done,
until the others who are being exorcised have come <span
id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) , let men be with men, and women with
women.  For now I need the example of Noah’s ark:  in which were Noah
and his sons, and his wife and his sons’ wives.  For though the ark was
one, and the door was shut, yet had things been suitably arranged.  If
the Church is shut, and you are all inside, yet let there be a
separation, men with men, and women with women <span
id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) :  lest the pretext of salvation
become an occasion of destruction.  Even if there be a fair pretext for
sitting near each other, let passions be put away.  Further, let the men
when sitting have a useful book; and let one read, and another listen: 
and if there be no book, let one pray, and another speak something
useful.  And again let the party of young women sit together in like
manner, either singing or reading quietly, so that their lips speak, but
others’ ears catch not the sound:  *for I suffer not a woman to speak in
the Church* <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) .  And let the
married woman also follow the same example, and pray; and let her lips
move, but her voice be unheard, that a Samuel <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) may come, and thy barren soul give
birth to the salvation of “God who hath heard thy prayer;” for this is
the interpretation of the name Samuel.

<span id="ii.iv-p78"></span>15.  I shall observe each man’s earnestness,
each woman’s reverence.  Let your mind be refined as by fire unto
reverence; let your soul be forged as metal:  let the stubbornness of
unbelief be hammered out:  let the superfluous scales of the iron drop
off, and what is pure remain; let the rust of the iron be rubbed off,
and the true metal remain.  May God sometime shew you that night, the
darkness which shines like the day, concerning which it is said, *The
darkness shall not be hidden from thee, and the night shall shine as the
day* <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443) .  Then may the gate of
Paradise be opened to every man and every woman among you.  Then may you
enjoy the Christ-bearing waters in their fragrance <span
id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444) .  Then may you receive the name of
Christ <span id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445) , and the power of things
divine.  Even now, I beseech you, lift up the eye of the <span
id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span id="ii.iv-Page_5"></span>mind:  even now
imagine the choirs of Angels, and God the Lord of all there sitting, and
His Only-begotten Son sitting with Him on His right hand, and the Spirit
present with them; and Thrones and Dominions doing service, and every
man of you and every woman receiving salvation.  Even now let your ears
ring, as it were, with that glorious sound, when over your salvation the
angels shall chant, *Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered* <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) :  when
like stars of the Church you shall enter in, bright in the body and
radiant in the soul.

<span id="ii.iv-p83"></span>16.  Great is the Baptism that lies before
you <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) :  a ransom to captives; a
remission of offences; a death of sin; a new-birth of the soul; a
garment of light; a holy indissoluble seal; a chariot to heaven; the
delight of Paradise; a welcome into the kingdom; the gift of adoption! 
But there is a serpent by the wayside watching those who pass by: 
beware lest he bite thee with unbelief.  He sees so many receiving
salvation, and is *seeking whom he may devour* <span
id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448) .  Thou art coming in unto the Father
of Spirits, but thou art going past that serpent.  How then mayest thou
pass him?  Have *thy feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of
peace* <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449) ; that even if he bite,
he may not hurt thee.  Have faith in-dwelling, stedfast hope, a strong
sandal, that thou mayest pass the enemy, and enter the presence of thy
Lord.  Prepare thine own heart for reception of doctrine, for fellowship
in holy mysteries.  Pray more frequently, that God may make thee worthy
of the heavenly and immortal mysteries.  Cease not day nor night:  but
when sleep is banished from thine eyes, then let thy mind be free for
prayer.  And if thou find any shameful thought rise up in thy mind, turn
to meditation upon Judgment to remind thee of Salvation.  Give thy mind
wholly to study, that it may forget base things.  If thou find any one
saying to thee, Art thou then going in, to descend into the water? Has
the city just now no baths? take notice that it is *the dragon of the
sea* <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450) who is laying these plots
against thee.  Attend not to the lips of the talker, but to God who
worketh in thee.  Guard thine own soul, that thou be not ensnared, to
the end that abiding in hope thou mayest become an heir of everlasting
salvation.

<span id="ii.iv-p88"></span>17.  We for our part as men charge and teach
you thus:  but make not ye our building *hay and stubble* and chaff,
lest we *suffer loss*, from our *work being burnt up:*  but make ye our
work gold, *and silver, and precious stones* <span
id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451) !  For it lies in me to speak, but in
thee to set thy mind <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) upon it,
and in God to make perfect.  Let us nerve our minds, and brace up our
souls, and prepare our hearts.  The race is for our soul:  our hope is
of things eternal:  and God, who knoweth your hearts, and observeth who
is sincere, and who a hypocrite, is able both to guard the sincere, and
to give faith to the hypocrite:  for even to the unbeliever, if only he
give his heart, God is able to give faith.  So may He *blot out the
handwriting that is against you* <span id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453)
,  and grant you forgiveness of your former trespasses; may He plant you
into His Church, and enlist you in His own service, and put on you *the
armour of righteousness* <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) :  may
He fill you with the heavenly things of the New Covenant, and give you
the seal of the Holy Spirit indelible throughout all ages, in Christ
Jesus Our Lord:  to whom be the glory for ever and ever!  Amen.

<span id="ii.iv-p93"></span>(*To the Reader* <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) .)

<span id="ii.iv-p95"></span>These Catechetical Lectures for those who
are to be enlightened thou mayest lend to candidates for Baptism, and to
believers who are already baptized, to read, but give not at all <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) , neither to Catechumens, nor to any
others who are not Christians, as thou shalt answer to the Lord.  And if
thou make a copy, write this in the beginning, as in the sight of the
Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_393"></span>[1:394](2070016.htm#fr_393) <span
id="ii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p13"></span> The “blessedness” is the grace of Baptism,
the hope of which is as a fragrant odour already borne towards the
Candidates.  These were called no longer Catechumens, but <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p13.1"></span>φωτιζόμενοι</span>, as
already on the way “to be enlightened.”  Compare xvi. 26, the last
sentence, and see Index, “enlighten.”

<span id="fn_394"></span>[1:395](2070016.htm#fr_394) <span
id="ii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p14.1"></span>νοητά</span>.  The word is much used by Plato to
distinguish things which can be discerned only by the mind from the
objects of sight and sense.  Here “the spiritual (or, mental) flowers”
are the Divine truths in which “the fragrance of the Holy Spirit”
breathes.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[1:396](2070016.htm#fr_395) <span
id="ii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p15"></span> By “the vestibule” is meant “the outer hall
of the Baptistery” (xix. 2), and by “the King’s Palace” the Baptistery
itself, which Cyril calls “the inner chamber” (xx. 1) and “the
bride-chamber” (iii. 2; xxii. 2).  See Index, “Baptistery.”  Here the
local terms have also an allegorical sense, Baptism being regarded as
the marriage of the Soul to Christ.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[1:397](2070016.htm#fr_396) <span
id="ii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p16"></span> Another allegory, from the season of
Spring, when the Lectures were delivered.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[1:398](2070016.htm#fr_397) <span
id="ii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p17.1"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p17.2"></span>νοματογραφία</span>.  See Index.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[1:399](2070016.htm#fr_398) <span
id="ii.iv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p18"></span> That the Candidates on their first
admission carried torches or lighted tapers in procession is a
conjecture founded on this passage and Lect. I. 1:  “Ye who have just
lighted the torches of faith, preserve them in your hands unquenched.” 
But see Index, “Lights.”

<span id="fn_399"></span>[1:400](2070016.htm#fr_399) <span
id="ii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p19"></span> [Rom. viii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span id="ii.iv-p19.1"></span>.  In
S. Paul’s argument the “purpose” is God’s eternal purpose of salvation
through Christ ([Eph. 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011), [Eph.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv-p19.2"></span>): 
but Cyril applies it here to sincerity of purpose in coming to Baptism.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[1:401](2070016.htm#fr_400) <span
id="ii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p21"></span> [Acts viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[1:402](2070016.htm#fr_401) <span
id="ii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p22"></span> [Rom.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004), [Col.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[1:403](2070016.htm#fr_402) <span
id="ii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p23"></span> Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p23.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p23.2"></span>πογραφή</span>, meaning either an “indictment,”
or a descriptive “sketch.”  For the former meaning, see Plato, *Theaet*.
172, E.  <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p23.3"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p23.4"></span>πογραφὴν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p23.5"></span> …</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p23.6"></span>ἣ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p23.7"></span>ν ἀντωμοσίαν
καλοῦσιν</span>.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[1:404](2070016.htm#fr_403) <span
id="ii.iv-p23.8"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p24"></span> [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[1:405](2070016.htm#fr_404) <span
id="ii.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p25"></span> [Heb. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[1:406](2070016.htm#fr_405) <span
id="ii.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p26"></span> “The faithful” are those who have been
already baptized, and instructed in those mysteries of the Christian
Faith which were reserved for the initiated.  See Index, “Faithful.”

<span id="fn_406"></span>[1:407](2070016.htm#fr_406) <span
id="ii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p28"></span> [Matt. xxii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv-p28.1"></span>.  The
same passage is applied to Baptism in Cat. iii. 2.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[1:408](2070016.htm#fr_407) <span
id="ii.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p29"></span> See Cat. xxii. 8 and Index, “White.”

<span id="fn_408"></span>[1:409](2070016.htm#fr_408) <span
id="ii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p30"></span> The Greed word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p30.1"></span>χρῶμα</span>) is used by Ignatius in the
beginning of his *Epistle to the Romans* of a discolouring stain.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[2:410](2070016.htm#fr_409) <span
id="ii.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p31"></span> Compare § 1, note 6.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[2:411](2070016.htm#fr_410) <span
id="ii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p33"></span> The Greek word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p33.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p33.2"></span>πιστήμη</span>) which commonly means “knowledge”
or “understanding,” is applied here and in vi. 35 to the intelligence
and skill displayed in the arrangement of the public services of the
Church.  Compare *Apostolic Constitutions*, ii. 57, where the Bishop is
exhorted to have the assemblies arranged <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p33.3"></span>μετὰ πάσης ἐπιστήμης</span>.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[2:412](2070016.htm#fr_411) <span
id="ii.iv-p33.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p34"></span> In the same passage of the Apostolic
Constitutions precise directions are given for reading a Lesson from the
Old Testament, singing the Psalms, and reading the Epistle and Gospel.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[2:413](2070016.htm#fr_412) <span
id="ii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p35"></span> By “the ordained” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p35.1"></span>κανονικῶν</span>) are meant
all whose names were registered as bearing office in the Church,
Priests, Deacons, Deaconesses, Monks, Virgins, Widows, all having their
appointed placed and proper duties.  *Apost. Canon*. 70, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p35.2"></span>εἴ τις ἐπίσκοπος, ἢ
πρεσβύτερος, ἢ διάκονος, ἢ ὅλως τοῦ καταλόγου τῶν κληρικῶν,
κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[2:414](2070016.htm#fr_413) <span
id="ii.iv-p35.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p36"></span> Compare *Apost. Const.* as above:  “Let the
Presbyters one by one, not all together, exhort the people; and the
Bishop last, as being the commander.”

<span id="fn_414"></span>[2:415](2070016.htm#fr_414) <span
id="ii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p37"></span> S. Aug. *de Civit. Dei*., ii. 28:  “Though
some come to mock at such admonitions, all their insolence is either
humbled by a sudden conversation (immutatio) or suppressed by fear or
shame.”

<span id="fn_415"></span>[2:416](2070016.htm#fr_415) <span
id="ii.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p39"></span> Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p39.1"></span>προθεσμία</span>.  Compare [Gal. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv-p39.2"></span>:  “the
time appointed of the father.”  At Athens it meant a “limitation,” or
fixed period within which a debt must be claimed or paid, or an action
commenced.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[2:417](2070016.htm#fr_416) <span
id="ii.iv-p39.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p40"></span> Index, “Lent.”

<span id="fn_417"></span>[2:418](2070016.htm#fr_417) <span
id="ii.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p41"></span> Compare xvii. 36.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[2:419](2070016.htm#fr_418) <span
id="ii.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p43"></span> S. Ambrose on the 119th Psalm, *Serm*. xx.
§ 48, speaks of some who pretended to be Christians in order to marry
one whose parents would not give her in marriage to a heathen.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[2:420](2070016.htm#fr_419) <span
id="ii.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p44"></span> [Matt. xiii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047)<span id="ii.iv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[2:421](2070016.htm#fr_420) <span
id="ii.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p45"></span> [Rom.
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)<span id="ii.iv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[2:422](2070016.htm#fr_421) <span
id="ii.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p47"></span> S. Cyril plays upon the word “Catechumen,”
which has the same root as “echo.”

<span id="fn_422"></span>[2:423](2070016.htm#fr_422) <span
id="ii.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p48"></span> [Rom.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[2:424](2070016.htm#fr_423) <span
id="ii.iv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p49"></span> [1 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009)<span id="ii.iv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[2:425](2070016.htm#fr_424) <span
id="ii.iv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p50"></span> [1 John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009)<span id="ii.iv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[2:426](2070016.htm#fr_425) <span
id="ii.iv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p51"></span> [Ps. lxxxi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#006)<span id="ii.iv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[2:427](2070016.htm#fr_426) <span
id="ii.iv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p52"></span> Compare xvii. 36.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[3:428](2070016.htm#fr_427) <span
id="ii.iv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p54"></span> [Eph. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[3:429](2070016.htm#fr_428) <span
id="ii.iv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p55"></span> This sentence is omitted in one <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv-p55.1"></span>ms.</span> (Paris, 1824), but
probably only through the repetition of the word “baptism.”  On the laws
of the Church against the repetition of Baptism, and concerning the
re-baptism of heretics, see Tertull. *de Baptismo*, c. xv:  *Apost.
Const.* xv.:  Bingham, xii. 5:  Hefele, *Councils*, Lib. I. c. 2: 
Dictionary Christian Antiq. I. p. 167 a.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[3:430](2070016.htm#fr_429) <span
id="ii.iv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p57"></span> Rufinus, in the *Exposition of the Creed*,
on the *Remission of sins*:  “The Pagans are wont to say in derision of
us, that we deceive ourselves in thinking that crimes which have been
committed in deed can be washed out by words.”

<span id="fn_430"></span>[3:431](2070016.htm#fr_430) <span
id="ii.iv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p58"></span> The reading in the Benedictine Edition,
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p58.1"></span>μηδὲ ὁ νοῦς σου
ῥεμβέσθω</span>, has little authority, and is quite unsuitable.  See
below, <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p58.2"></span>τὸ βλέμμα
ῥεμβόμενον</span>.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[3:432](2070016.htm#fr_431) <span
id="ii.iv-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p60"></span> Index, “Exorcism.”

<span id="fn_432"></span>[3:433](2070016.htm#fr_432) <span
id="ii.iv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p61"></span> Index, “Veiling.”

<span id="fn_433"></span>[3:434](2070016.htm#fr_433) <span
id="ii.iv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p63"></span> The Samaritans are frequently mentioned by
Epiphanius and other writers of the 4th century among the chief
adversaries of Christianity.  “In their humble synagogue, at the foot of
the mountain (Gerizim), the Samaritans still worship, the oldest and the
smallest sect in the world.”  (Stanley, *Sinai and Palestine*, p. 240.)

<span id="fn_434"></span>[3:435](2070016.htm#fr_434) <span
id="ii.iv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p64"></span> [Eph. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span id="ii.iv-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[3:436](2070016.htm#fr_435) <span
id="ii.iv-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p66"></span> See above, § 4, note 3.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[4:437](2070016.htm#fr_436) <span
id="ii.iv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p68"></span> On the Disciplina Arcani, or rule against
publishing the Christian Creed and Mysteries to Catechumens and
Gentiles, see Index, “*Mysteries*.”

<span id="fn_437"></span>[4:438](2070016.htm#fr_437) <span
id="ii.iv-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p71"></span> The title “King” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p71.1"></span>Βασιλεύς</span>) is used in the Greek Liturgies
and Fathers of the Roman Emperor, as in the Clementine Liturgy:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p71.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p71.3"></span>πὲρ τοῦ βασιλέως, καὶ τῶν ἐν
ὑπεροχῇ</span>, where it is taken from [1 Tim. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv-p71.4"></span>. 
Compare Cat. xiv. 14, and 22:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p71.5"></span>Κωνσταντίνου τοῦ βασιλέως</span>.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[4:439](2070016.htm#fr_438) <span
id="ii.iv-p71.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p72"></span> [Ps. xlvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv-p72.1"></span>. 
Sept. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p72.2"></span>σχολάσατε</span>, “give attention freely.”

<span id="fn_439"></span>[4:440](2070016.htm#fr_439) <span
id="ii.iv-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p74"></span> From S. Augustine, *de Symbolo*, i. 1
(Migne T. vi. p. 930), we learn that the Candidates were brought in
before the Congregation one by one for exorcism; and so, as Cyril here
shews, they had to wait outside till the others returned.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[4:441](2070016.htm#fr_440) <span
id="ii.iv-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p75"></span> Chrys. *in Matt. Hom*. lxxiv. § 3:  “You
ought to have within you the wall that separates you from the women: 
but since ye will not, our fathers have thought it necessary to separate
you at least by these boards; for I have heard from my elders that there
were not these walls in old times.”  These barriers had not yet been
introduced at Jerusalem, or Cyril’s admonition would have been
needless.  Compare *Apostolic Constitutions*, II. 57.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[4:442](2070016.htm#fr_441) <span
id="ii.iv-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p76"></span> [1 Cor.
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034), [1 Tim.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[4:443](2070016.htm#fr_442) <span
id="ii.iv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p77"></span> [1 Sam.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv-p77.1"></span>.  On
the various interpretations of the name Samuel, see *Dict. Bib.*
“Samuel,” and Driver on the passage.  Cyril adopts the meaning “heard of
God.”

<span id="fn_443"></span>[4:444](2070016.htm#fr_443) <span
id="ii.iv-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p79"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv-p79.1"></span>.  On
Easter Eve the Church was full of lights which were kept burning all
night, and the newly-baptized carried torches.  Gregory of Nyssa,
preaching on the Resurrection (*Orat*. iv.) describes the scene:  “This
brilliant night, by mingling the flames of torches with the morning rays
of the sun, has made one continuous day, not divided by the
interposition of darkness.”

<span id="fn_444"></span>[4:445](2070016.htm#fr_444) <span
id="ii.iv-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p80"></span> Or, as the Benedictine Editor conjectures,
“the waters which have a Christ-bearing (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p80.1"></span>χριστοφόρον</span>) fragrance.”  On the epithet
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv-p80.2"></span>χριστοφόρος</span>,
see Bishop Lightfoot’s note on Ignat. *ad Eph*. § 1 and § 9.  Its
meaning, as well as that of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p80.3"></span>Θεοφόρος</span> is defined in the answer of
Ignatius to Trajan, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p80.4"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p80.5"></span>Ο Χριστὸν ἔχων ἐν στέρνοις</span> (*Martyr. Ign.
Ant.* § 2).

<span id="fn_445"></span>[4:446](2070016.htm#fr_445) <span
id="ii.iv-p80.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p81"></span> Cat. xxi. 1:  “made partakers therefore of
Christ, ye are rightly called Christs.”

<span id="fn_446"></span>[5:447](2070016.htm#fr_446) <span
id="ii.iv-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p82"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv-p82.1"></span>, which
verse is still chanted in the Greek Church as soon as the Baptism is
completed.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[5:448](2070016.htm#fr_447) <span
id="ii.iv-p83.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p84"></span> S. Basil has a passage in praise of Baptism
almost the same, word for word, with this.  It is more likely to have
been borrowed from Cyril by Basil and other Fathers, than to be a later
interpolation here.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[5:449](2070016.htm#fr_448) <span
id="ii.iv-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p85"></span> [1 Pet. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[5:450](2070016.htm#fr_449) <span
id="ii.iv-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p86"></span> [Eph. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[5:451](2070016.htm#fr_450) <span
id="ii.iv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p87"></span> [Is. xxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[5:452](2070016.htm#fr_451) <span
id="ii.iv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p89"></span> [1 Cor.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[5:453](2070016.htm#fr_452) <span
id="ii.iv-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p90"></span> Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p90.1"></span>προσθέσθαι</span>, Sept. [Deut. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv-p90.2"></span>,
“cleave unto Him.”  Compare [Josh.
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012), [Ps.
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv-p90.3"></span>,
“Set not your heart upon them.”

<span id="fn_453"></span>[5:454](2070016.htm#fr_453) <span
id="ii.iv-p90.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p91"></span> [Col. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="ii.iv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[5:455](2070016.htm#fr_454) <span
id="ii.iv-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p92"></span> [2 Cor.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007), [Rom.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[5:456](2070016.htm#fr_455) <span
id="ii.iv-p93.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p94"></span> It is doubtful whether this caution
proceeded from Cyril himself when issuing a written copy of his
Lectures, or from some later editor.  Eusebius (*E.H.* v. 20) has
preserved an adjuration by Irenæus at the end of his treatise, *On the
Ogdoad*:  I adjure thee, who mayest transcribe this book, by Our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by His glorious advent, when He cometh to judge the
quick and the dead, to compare what thou hast written and correct it
carefully by this copy, from which thou hast transcribed it; this
adjuration also thou shalt write in like manner, and set it in the copy.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[5:457](2070016.htm#fr_456) <span
id="ii.iv-p95.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p96"></span> Gr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv-p96.1"></span>τὸ σύνολον</span>.  Plat. Leg. 654 B; Soph. 220
B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture I](2070017)
