[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070115)  [Next](2070117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>Ep. CLXXXII.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.vii-p2"></span>(Gregory after his resignation of the
Patriarchal See of Constantinople had retired to Nazianzus, and had been
persuaded to undertake the administration of the diocese then vacant,
until the vacancy should be filled.  The Bishops of the Province wished
him to retain it altogether, and therefore were in no hurry to proceed
to election.  At length however they yielded to the continually
expressed wishes of Gregory and chose his cousin Eulalius.  Soon however
Gregory’s enemies spread abroad a report that this election had been
made against his wishes, and with the intention of unfairly ousting him
from the administration of that Church.  The following letter was
written in consequence of this slander.)

<span id="iv.iv.ii.vii-p3"></span>Woe is me that my sojourning is
prolonged, and, which is the greatest of my misfortunes, that war and
dissensions are among us, and that we have not kept the peace which we
received from our holy fathers.  This I doubt not you will restore, in
the power of the Spirit who upholds you and yours.  But let no one, I
beg, spread false reports about me and my lords the bishops, as though
they had proclaimed another bishop in my place against my will.  But
being in great need, owing to my feeble health, and fearing the
responsibility of a Church neglected, I asked this favour of them, which
was not opposed to the Canon Law, and was a relief to me, that they
would give a Pastor to the Church.  He has been given to your prayers, a
man worthy of your piety, and I now place him in your hands, the most
reverend Eulalius, a bishop very dear to God, in whose arms I should
like to die.  If any be of opinion that it is not right to ordain
another in the lifetime of a Bishop, let him know that he will not in
this matter gain any hold upon us.  For it is well known that I was
appointed, not to Nazianzus, but to Sasima, although for a short time
out of reverence for my father, I as a stranger undertook the
government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXCVII](2070117)
