[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070081)  [Next](2070083.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Ep. IV.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>(In answer to Ep. XIV., of Basil, about
361.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>You may mock and pull to pieces my
affairs, whether in jest or in earnest.  This is a matter of no
consequence; only laugh, and take your fill of culture, and enjoy my
friendship.  Everything that comes from you is pleasant to me, no matter
what it may be, and how it may look.  For I think you are chaffing about
things here, not for the sake of chaffing, but that you may draw me to
yourself, if I understand you at all; just like people who block up
streams in order to draw them into another channel.  That is how your
sayings always seem to me.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p4"></span>For my part I will admire your Pontus
and your Pontic darkness, and your dwelling place so worthy of exile,
and the hills over your head, and the wild beasts which test your faith,
and your sequestered spot that lies under them…or as I should say your
mousehole with the stately names of Abode of Thought, Monastery, School;
and your thickets of wild bushes, and crown of precipitous mountains, by
which may you be, not crowned but, cloistered; and your limited air; and
the sun, for which you long, and can only see as through a chimney, O
sunless Cimmerians of Pontus, who are condemned not only to a six
months’ night, as <span id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_447"></span>some are said to be, but who have not
even a part of your life out of the shadow, but all your life is one
long night, and a real shadow of death, to use a Scripture phrase.  And
admire your strait and narrow road, leading…I know not if it be to the
Kingdom, or to Hades, but for your sake I hope it is the Kingdom…And as
for the intervening country, what is your wish?  Am I falsely to call it
Eden, and the fountain divided into four heads, by which the world is
watered, or the dry and waterless wilderness (only what Moses will come
to tame it, bringing water out of the rock with his staff)?  For all of
it which has escaped the rocks is full of gullies; and that which is not
a gully is a thicket of thorns; and whatever is above the thorns is a
precipice; and the road above that is precipitous, and slopes both ways,
exercising the mind of travellers, and calling for gymnastic exercises
for safety.  And the river rushes roaring down, which to you is a
Strymon of Amphipolis for quietness, and there are not so many fishes in
it as stones, nor does it flow into a lake, but it dashes into abysses,
O my grandiloquent friend and inventor of new names.  For it is great
and terrible, and overwhelms the psalmody of those who live above it;
like the Cataracts and Catadoupa of the Nile, so does it roar you down
day and night.  It is rough and fordless; and it has only this morsel of
kindness about it, that it does not sweep away your dwelling when the
torrents and winter storms make it mad.  This then is what I think of
those Fortunate Islands and of you happy people.  And you are not to
admire the crescent-shaped curves which strangle rather than cut off the
accessible parts of your Highlands, and the strip of mountain ridge that
hangs over your heads, and makes your life like that of Tantalus; and
the draughty breezes, and the vent-holes of the earth, which refresh
your courage when it fails; and your musical birds that sing (but only
of famine), and fly about (but only about the desert).  No one visits
it, you say, except for hunting; you might add, and except to look upon
your dead bodies.  This is perhaps too long for a letter, but it is too
short for a comedy.  If you can take my jokes kindly you will do well,
but if not, I will send you some more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter V](2070083.md)
