[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070107)  [Next](2070109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.i.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.i.iv-p1.1"></span>Ep. XX.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.i.iv-p2"></span>(In <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.i.iv-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 368 the City of Nicæa in
Bithynia was almost entirely destroyed by a terrible earthquake. 
Cæsarius lost his house, and his personal escape was almost miraculous. 
Gregory writes (as also did Basil) to congratulate him on his escape,
and profits by the occasion to urge upon him retirement from his secular
avocations.  Cæsarius soon resolved to follow this advice, and was
taking steps to carry this reso<span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="iv.iv.i.iv-Page_459"></span>lution into effect, when he died
suddenly, early in <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.i.iv-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span> 369, aged only 40.  He left the
whole of his large property to the poor, but it fell for a time into the
hands of designing persons, and Gregory, who was his brother’s executor,
had much difficulty in recovering it for the purpose for which it had
been intended.  (See the letter to Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople
on this subject.)  He was buried at Nazianzus in the Church of the
Martyrs, in a vault which his parents had prepared for themselves. 
Gregory preached the funeral sermon, which is given in the former part
of this volume.  These four are the only letters known to have passed
between the brothers.)

<span id="iv.iv.i.iv-p3"></span>Even frights are not without use to the
wise; or, as I should say, they are very valuable and salutary.  For,
although we pray that they may not happen, yet when they do they
instruct us.  For the afflicted soul, as Peter <span
id="fr_4739"></span>[4740](#fn_4739) somewhere admirably says, is near
to God; and every man who escapes a danger is brought into nearer
relation to Him Who preserved him.  Let us not then be vexed that we had
a share in the calamity, but let us give thanks that we were delivered. 
And let us not shew ourselves one thing to God in the time of peril, and
another when the danger is over, but let us resolve, whether at home or
abroad, whether in private life or in public office (for I must say this
and may not omit it), to follow Him Who has preserved us, and to attach
ourselves to His side, thinking little of the little concerns of earth;
and let us furnish a tale to those who come after us, great for our
glory and the benefit of our soul, and at the same time a very useful
lesson to all, that danger is better than security, and that misfortune
is preferable to success, at least if before our fears we belonged to
the world, but after them we belong to God.  Perhaps I seem to you
somewhat of a bore, by writing to you so often on the same subject, and
you will think my letter a piece not of exhortation but of ostentation,
so enough of this.  You will know that I desire and wish especially that
I might be with you and share your joy at your preservation, and to talk
over these matters later on.  But since that cannot be, I hope to
receive you here as soon as may be, and to celebrate our thanksgiving
together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4739"></span>[459:4740](2070108.htm#fr_4739) <span
id="iv.iv.i.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i.iv-p4"></span> Source of the quotation unknown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](2070109)
