[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070068)  [Next](2070070.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Oration XLIII.</span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop
of Cæsarea in Cappadocia.</span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p3"></span>S. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>Basil</span> died January 1, <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.xxvi-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 379.  A serious
illness, in addition to other causes, prevented S. Gregory from being
present at his funeral (Epist. 79).  Benoît holds that an expression
(Epitaph, cxix. 38) in which S. Gregory says that his “lips are
fettered” proves that he was still in retirement at Seleucia.  This is
an unwarranted deduction.  In this Oration, § 2, the Saint, alluding to
his illness in disparaging terms, alleges his labours at Constantinople
as a more pressing reason for his absence:  and says that he undertook
the task according to the judgment of S. Basil.  This implies that S.
Gregory went to Constantinople before the death of S. Basil, or that he
had then been influenced by his friend’s advice and was on the point of
setting out—more probably the former, as we may be sure that, if S.
Gregory had been still at Seleucia, no reason but physical incapacity
would have kept him from his friend’s side.  His pressing duties at
Constantinople and the difficulties of the long journey were the “other
causes” of his letter to S. Gregory of Nyssa:  and we know that he
suffered from serious illness at Constantinople (Carm. xi. 887.  Orat.
xxiii. 1).  S. Gregory left Constantinople in June, <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.xxvi-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span> 381, and
Tillemont places the date of this Oration soon after his return to
Nazianzus.  Benoît thinks that it was probably delivered on the
anniversary of S. Basil’s death.  The Oration, as all critics are
agreed, is one of great power and beauty.  Its length (62 pages folio),
the physical weakness of the speaker, and the limits of the endurance of
even an interested audience, incline us to suppose that it was not
spoken in its present form.  We cannot well set aside expressions which
clearly point to actual delivery, but it may have been amplified later.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p4"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>It</span> has then been ordained that the
great Basil, who used so constantly to furnish me with subjects for my
discourses, of which he was quite as proud as any other man of his own,
should himself now furnish me with the grandest subject which has ever
fallen to the lot of an orator.  For I think that if anyone desired, in
making trial of his powers of eloquence, to test them by the standard of
that one of all his subjects which he preferred (as painters do with
epoch-making pictures), he would choose that which stood first of all
others, but would set aside this as beyond the powers of human
eloquence.  So great a task is the praise of such a man, not only to me,
who have long ago laid aside all thought of emulation, but even to those
who live for eloquence, and whose sole object is the gaining of glory by
subjects like this.  Such is my opinion, and, as I persuade myself, with
perfect justice.  But I know not what subject I can treat with
eloquence, if not this; or what greater favour I can do to myself, to
the admirers of virtue, or to eloquence itself, than express our
admiration for this man.  To me it is the discharge of a most sacred
debt.  And our speech is a debt beyond all others due to those who have
been gifted, in particular, with powers of speech.  To the admirers of
virtue a discourse is at once a pleasure and an incentive to virtue. 
For when <span id="fr_4396"></span>[4397](#fn_4396.md) I have learned the
praises of men, I have a distinct idea of their progress:  now, there is
none of us all, within whose power it is not to attain to any point
whatsoever in that progress.  As for eloquence itself, in either case,
all must go well with it.  For, if the discourse be almost worthy of its
subject—eloquence will have given an exhibition of its power:  if it
fall far short of it, as must be the case when the praises of Basil are
being set forth, by an actual demonstration of its incapacity, it will
have declared the superiority of the excellences of its subject to all
expression in words.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p6"></span>2.  These are the reasons which have urged
me to speak, and to address myself to this contest.  And at my late
appearance, long after his praises have been set forth by so many, who
have publicly and privately done him honour, let no one be surprised. 
Yea, may I be pardoned by that divine soul, the object of my constant
reverence!  And as, when he was amongst us, he constantly corrected me
in many points, according to the rights of a friend and the still higher
law; for I am not ashamed to say this, for he was a standard of virtue
to us all; so now, looking down upon me from above, he will treat me
with indul<span id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_396"></span>gence.  I ask pardon too of any here who
are among his warmest admirers, if indeed anyone can be warmer than
another, and we are not all abreast in our zeal for his good fame.  For
it is not contempt which has caused me to fall short of what might have
been expected of me:  nor have I been so regardless of the claims of
virtue or of friendship; nor have I thought that to praise him befitted
any other more than me.  No! my first reason was, that I shrunk from
this task, for I will say the truth, as priests <span
id="fr_4397"></span>[4398](#fn_4397.md) do, who approach their sacred
duties before being cleansed both in voice and mind.  In the second
place, I remind you, though you know it well, of the task <span
id="fr_4398"></span>[4399](#fn_4398.md) in which I was engaged on behalf of
the true doctrine, which had been properly forced upon me, and had
carried me from home, according, as I suppose, to the will of God, and
certainly according to the judgment of our noble champion of the truth,
the breath of whose life was pious doctrine alone, such as promotes the
salvation of the whole world.  As for my bodily health, I ought not,
perhaps, to dare to mention it, when my subject is a man so doughty in
his conquest of the body, even before his removal hence, and who
maintained that no powers of the soul should suffer hindrance from this
our fetter. <span id="fr_4399"></span>[4400](#fn_4399.md)   So much for my
defence.  I do not think I need labour it further, in speaking of him to
you who know so clearly my affairs.  I must now proceed with my eulogy,
commending myself to his God, in order that my commendations may not
prove an insult to the man, and that I may not lag far behind all
others; even though we all equally fall as far short of his due, as
those who look upon the heavens or the rays of the Sun.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p10"></span>3.  Had I seen him to be proud of his
birth, and the rights of birth, or any of those infinitely little
objects of those whose eyes are on the ground, we should have had to
inspect a new catalogue of the Heroes.  What details as to his ancestors
might I not have laid under contribution!  Nor would even history have
had any advantage over me, since I claim this advantage, that his
celebrity depends, not upon fiction or legend, but upon actual facts
attested by many witnesses.  On his father’s side Pontus offers to me
many details, in no wise inferior to its wonders of old time, of which
all history and poesy are full; <span
id="fr_4400"></span>[4401](#fn_4400.md) there are many others concerned
with this my native land, of illustrious men of Cappadocia, renowned for
its youthful progeny, <span id="fr_4401"></span>[4402](#fn_4401.md) no less
than for its horses.  Accordingly we match with his father’s family that
of his mother.  What family owns more numerous, or more illustrious
generals and governors, or court officials, or again, men of wealth, and
lofty thrones, and public honours, and oratorical renown?  If it were
permitted me to wish to mention them, I would make nothing of the
Pelopidæ and Cecropidæ, the Alcmæonids, the Æacidæ, and Heracleidæ, and
other most noble families:  inasmuch as they, in default of public merit
in their house, betake themselves to the region of uncertainty, claiming
demigods and divinities, merely mythical personages, as the glory of
their ancestors, whose most vaunted details are incredible, and those
which we can believe are an infamy.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p13"></span>4.  But since our subject is a man who
has maintained that each man’s nobility is to be judged of according to
his own worth, and that, as forms and colours, and likewise our most
celebrated and most infamous horses, are tested by their own properties,
so we too ought not to be depicted in borrowed plumes; after mentioning
one or two traits, which, though inherited from his ancestors, he made
his own by his life, and which are specially likely to give pleasure to
my hearers, I will then proceed to deal with the man himself.  Different
families and individuals have different points of distinction and
interest, great or small, which, like a patrimony of longer or shorter
descent, come down to posterity:  the distinction of his family on
either side was piety, which I now proceed to display.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p14"></span>5.  There was a persecution, the most
frightful and severe of all; I mean, as you know, the persecution of
Maximinus, which, following closely upon those which immediately
preceded it, made them all seem gentle, by its excessive audacity, and
by its eagerness to win the crown of violence in impiety.  It was
overcome by many of our champions, who wrestled with it to the death, or
well-nigh to the death, with only life enough left in them to survive
their victory, and not pass away in the midst of the struggle; remaining
to be trainers <span id="fr_4402"></span>[4403](#fn_4402.md) in virtue,
living witnesses, breathing trophies, silent exhortations, among whose
numerous ranks were found Basil’s paternal ancestors, upon whom, <span
id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_397"></span>in their
practice of every form of piety, that period bestowed many a fair
garland.  So prepared and determined were they to bear readily all those
things on account of which Christ crowns those who have imitated His
struggle on our behalf.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p16"></span>6.  But since their strife must needs be
lawful, and the law of martyrdom alike forbids us voluntarily to go to
meet it (in consideration for the persecutors, and for the weak) or to
shrink from it if it comes upon us; for the former shows foolhardiness,
the latter cowardice; in this respect they paid due honour to the
Lawgiver; but what was their device, or rather, to what were they led by
the Providence which guided them in all things?  They betook themselves
to a thicket on the mountains of Pontus, of which there are many deep
ones of considerable extent, with very few comrades of their flight, or
attendants upon their needs.  Let others marvel at the length of time,
for their flight was exceedingly prolonged, to about seven years, or a
little more, and their mode of life, delicately nurtured as they were,
was straitened and unusual, as may be imagined, with the discomfort of
its exposure to frost and heat and rain:  and the wilderness allowed no
fellowship or converse with friends:  a great trial to men accustomed to
the attendance and honour of a numerous retinue.  But I will proceed to
speak of what is still greater and more extraordinary:  nor will anyone
fail to credit it, save those who, in their feeble and dangerous
judgment, think little of persecutions and dangers for Christ’s sake.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p17"></span>7.  These noble men, suffering from the
lapse of time, and feeling a distaste for ordinary food, felt a longing
for something more appetising.  They did not indeed speak as Israel
did, <span id="fr_4403"></span>[4404](#fn_4403.md) for they were not
murmurers <span id="fr_4404"></span>[4405](#fn_4404.md) like them, in their
afflictions in the desert, after the escape from Egypt—that Egypt would
have been better for them than the wilderness, in the bountiful supply
of its flesh-pots, and other dainties which they had left behind them
there, for the brickmaking and the clay seemed nothing to them then in
their folly—but in a more pious and faithful manner.  For why, said
they, is it incredible that the God of wonders, who bountifully
fed <span id="fr_4405"></span>[4406](#fn_4405.md) in the wilderness his
homeless and fugitive people, raining bread upon them, and abounding in
quails, nourishing them not only with necessaries, but even with
luxuries:  that He, Who divided the sea, <span
id="fr_4406"></span>[4407](#fn_4406.md) and stayed the sun, <span
id="fr_4407"></span>[4408](#fn_4407.md) and parted the river, with all the
other things that He has done; for under such circumstances the mind is
wont to recur to history, and sing the praises of God’s many wonders: 
that He, they went on, should feed us champions of piety with dainties
to-day?  Many animals which have escaped the tables of the rich, have
their lairs in these mountains, and many eatable birds fly over our
longing heads, any of which can surely be caught at the mere fiat of Thy
will!  At these words, their quarry lay before them, with food come of
its own accord, a complete banquet prepared without effort, stags
appearing all at once from some place in the hills.  How splendid they
were! how fat! how ready for the slaughter!  It might almost be imagined
that they were annoyed at not having been summoned earlier.  Some of
them made signs to draw others after them, the rest followed their
lead.  Who pursued and drove them?  No one.  What riders?  What kind of
dogs, what barking, or cry, or young men who had occupied the exits
according to the rules of the chase?  They were the prisoners of prayer
and righteous petition.  Who has known such a hunt among men of this, or
any day?

<span id="iii.xxvi-p23"></span>8.  O what a wonder!  They were
themselves stewards of the chase; what they would, was caught by the
mere will to do so; what was left, they sent away to the thickets, for
another meal.  The cooks were extemporised, the dinner exquisite, the
guests were grateful for this wonderful foretaste of their hopes.  And
hence they grew more earnest in their struggle, in return for which they
had received this blessing.  Such is my history.  And do thou, my
persecutor, in thy admiration for legends, tell of thy huntresses, <span
id="fr_4408"></span>[4409](#fn_4408.md) and Orions, and Actæons, those
ill-fated hunters, and the hind substituted for the maiden, <span
id="fr_4409"></span>[4410](#fn_4409.md) if any such thing rouses thee to
emulation, and if we grant that this story is no legend.  The sequel of
the tale is too disgraceful.  For what is the benefit of the exchange,
if a maiden is saved to be taught to murder her guests, and learn to
requite humanity with inhumanity?  Let this one instance, such as it is,
chosen out of many, represent the rest, as far as I am concerned.  I
have not related it to contribute to his reputation:  for neither does
the sea stand in need of the rivers which flow into it, many and great
though they be, nor does the present subject of my praises need any
contributions to his fair fame.  No! my object is to exhibit <span
id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_398"></span>the
character of his ancestors, and the example before his eyes, which he so
far excelled.  For if other men find it a great additional advantage to
receive somewhat of their honour from their forefathers, it is a greater
thing for him to have made such an addition to the original stock that
the stream seems to have run uphill.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p26"></span>9.  The union of his parents, cemented as
it was by a community of virtue, no less than by cohabitation, was
notable for many reasons, especially for generosity to the poor, for
hospitality, for purity of soul as the result of self-discipline, for
the dedication to God of a portion of their property, a matter not as
yet so much cared for by most men, as it now has grown to be, in
consequence of such previous examples, as have given distinction to it,
and for all those other points, which have been published throughout
Pontus and Cappadocia, to the satisfaction of many:  in my opinion,
however, their greatest claim to distinction is the excellence of their
children.  Legend indeed has its instances of men whose children were
many and beautiful, but it is practical experience which has presented
to us these parents, whose own character, apart from that of their
children, was sufficient for their fair fame, while the character of
their children would have made them, even without their own eminence in
virtue, to surpass all men by the excellence of their children.  For the
attainment of distinction by one or two of their offspring might be
ascribed to their nature; but when all are eminent, the honour is
clearly due to those who brought them up.  This is proved by the blessed
roll of priests and virgins, and of those who, when married, have
allowed nothing in their union to hinder them from attaining an equal
repute, and so have made the distinction between them to consist in the
condition, rather than in the mode of their life.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p27"></span>10.  Who has not known Basil, our
archbishop’s father, a great name to everyone, who attained a father’s
prayer, if anyone, I will not say as no one, ever did?  For he surpassed
all in virtue, and was only prevented by his son from gaining the first
prize.  Who has not known Emmelia, whose name was a forecast of what she
became, or else whose life was an exemplification of her name?  For she
had a right to the name which implies gracefulness, and occupied, to
speak concisely, the same place among women, as her husband among men. 
So that, when it was decided that he, in whose honour we are met, should
be given to men to submit to the bondage of nature, as anyone of old has
been given by God for the common advantage, it was neither fitting that
he should be born of other parents, nor that they should possess another
son:  and so the two things suitably concurred.  I have now, in
obedience to the Divine law which bids us to pay all honour to parents,
bestowed the firstfruits of my praises upon those whom I have
commemorated, and proceed to treat of Basil himself, premising this,
which I think will seem true to all who knew him, that we only need his
own voice to pronounce his eulogium.  For he is at once a brilliant
subject for praise, and the only one whose powers of speech make him
worthy of treating it.  Beauty indeed and strength and size, in which I
see that most men rejoice, I concede to anyone who will—not that even in
these points he was inferior to any of those men of small minds who busy
themselves about the body, while he was still young, and had not yet
reduced the flesh by austerity—but that I may avoid the fate of
unskilful athletes, who waste their strength in vain efforts after minor
objects, and so are worsted in the crucial struggle, whose results are
victory and the distinction of the crown.  The praise, then, which I
shall claim for him is based upon grounds which no one, I think, will
consider superfluous, or beyond the scope of my oration.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p28"></span>11.  I take it as admitted by men of
sense, that the first of our advantages is education; and not only this
our more noble form of it, which disregards rhetorical ornaments and
glory, and holds to salvation, and beauty in the objects of our
contemplation:  but even that external culture which many Christians
ill-judgingly abhor, as treacherous and dangerous, and keeping us afar
from God.  For as we ought not to neglect the heavens, and earth, and
air, and all such things, because some have wrongly seized upon them,
and honour God’s works instead of God:  but to reap what advantage we
can from them for our life and enjoyment, while we avoid their dangers;
not raising creation, as foolish men do, in revolt against the Creator,
but from the works of nature apprehending the Worker, <span
id="fr_4410"></span>[4411](#fn_4410.md) and, as the divine apostle says,
bringing into captivity every thought to Christ: <span
id="fr_4411"></span>[4412](#fn_4411.md)   and again, as we know that
neither fire, nor food, nor iron, nor any other of the elements, is of
itself most useful, or most harmful, except according to the will of
those who use it; and as we have compounded healthful drugs from certain
of the reptiles; so from secular literature we <span id="page_399">p.
399</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_399"></span>have received principles
of enquiry and speculation, while we have rejected their idolatry,
terror, and pit of destruction.  Nay, even these have aided us in our
religion, by our perception of the contrast between what is worse and
what is better, and by gaining strength for our doctrine from the
weakness of theirs.  We must not then dishonour education, because some
men are pleased to do so, but rather suppose such men to be boorish and
uneducated, desiring all men to be as they themselves are, in order to
hide themselves in the general, and escape the detection of their want
of culture.  But come now, and, after this sketch of our subject and
these admissions, let us contemplate the life of Basil.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p31"></span>12.  In his earliest years he was swathed
and fashioned, in that best and purest fashioning which the Divine David
speaks of as proceeding day by day, <span
id="fr_4412"></span>[4413](#fn_4412.md) in contrast with that of the night,
under his great father, acknowledged in those days by Pontus, as its
common teacher of virtue.  Under him then, as life and reason grew and
rose together, our illustrious friend was educated:  not boasting of a
Thessalian mountain cave, as the workshop of his virtue, nor of some
braggart Centaur, <span id="fr_4413"></span>[4414](#fn_4413.md) the tutor
of the heroes of his day:  nor was he taught under such tuition to shoot
hares, and run down fawns, or hunt stags, or excel in war, or in
breaking colts, using the same person as teacher and horse at once; nor
nourished on the fabulous marrows of stags and lions, but he was trained
in general education, and practised in the worship of God, and, to speak
concisely, led on by elementary instructions to his future perfection. 
For those who are successful in life or in letters only, while deficient
in the other, seem to me to differ in nothing from one-eyed men, whose
loss is great, but their deformity greater, both in their own eyes, and
in those of others.  While those who attain eminence in both alike, and
are ambidextrous, both possess perfection, and pass their life with the
blessedness of heaven.  This is what befell him, who had at home a model
of virtue in well-doing, the very sight of which made him excellent from
the first.  As we see foals and calves skipping beside their mothers
from their birth, so he too, running close beside his father in
foal-like wantonness, without being left far behind in his lofty
impulses toward virtue, or, if you will, sketching out and showing
traces of the future beauty of his virtue, and drawing the outlines of
perfection before the time of perfection arrived.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p34"></span>13.  When sufficiently trained at home,
as he ought to fall short in no form of excellence, and not be surpassed
by the busy bee, which gathers what is most useful from every flower, he
set out for the city of Cæsarea, <span
id="fr_4414"></span>[4415](#fn_4414.md) to take his place in the schools
there, I mean this illustrious city of ours, for it was the guide and
mistress of my studies, the metropolis of letters, no less than of the
cities which she excels and reigns over:  and if any one were to deprive
her of her literary power, he would rob her of her fairest and special
distinction.  Other cities take pride in other ornaments, of ancient or
of recent date, that they may have something to be described or to be
seen.  Letters form our distinction here, and are our badge, as if upon
the field of arms or on the stage.  His subsequent life let those detail
who trained him, or enjoyed his training, as to what he was to his
masters, what he was to his classmates, equalling the former, surpassing
the latter in every form of culture, what renown he won in a short time
from all, both of the common people, and of the leaders of the state; by
showing both a culture beyond his years, and a steadfastness of
character beyond his culture.  An orator among orators, even before the
chair of the rhetoricians, <span id="fr_4415"></span>[4416](#fn_4415.md) a
philosopher among philosophers, even before the doctrines of
philosophers:  highest of all a priest among Christians even before the
priesthood.  So much deference was paid to him in every respect by all. 
Eloquence was his by-work, from which he culled enough to make it an
assistance to him in Christian philosophy, since power of this kind is
needed to set forth the objects of our contemplation.  For a mind which
cannot express itself is like the motion of a man in a lethargy.  His
pursuit was philosophy, and breaking from the world, and fellowship with
God, by concerning himself, amid things below, with things above, and
winning, where all is unstable and fluctuating, the things which are
stable and remain.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p37"></span>14.  Thence to Byzantium, the imperial
city of the East, for it was distinguished by the eminence of its
rhetorical and philosophic teachers, whose most valuable lessons he soon
assimilated by the quickness and force of his powers:  thence he was
sent by God, and by his generous craving for culture, to Athens the home
of letters.  Athens, which has been to me, if to <span id="page_400">p.
400</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_400"></span>any one, a city truly of
gold, and the patroness of all that is good.  For it brought me to know
Basil more perfectly, though he had not been unknown to me before; and
in my pursuit of letters, I attained to happiness; and in another
fashion had the same experience as Saul, <span
id="fr_4416"></span>[4417](#fn_4416.md) who, seeking his father’s asses,
found a kingdom, and gained incidentally what was of more importance
than the object which he had in view.  Hitherto my course has been
clear, leading me in my encomiums along a level and easy, in fact, a
king’s highway:  henceforth I know not how to speak or whither to turn: 
for my task is becoming arduous.  For here I am anxious, and seize this
opportunity to add from my own experience somewhat to my speech, and to
dwell a little upon the recital of the causes and circumstances which
originated our friendship, or to speak more strictly, our unity of life
and nature.  For as our eyes are not ready to turn from attractive
objects, and, if we violently tear them away, are wont to return to them
again; so do we linger in our description of what is most sweet to us. 
I am afraid of the difficulty of the undertaking.  I will try, however,
to use all possible moderation.  And if I am at all overpowered by my
regret, pardon this most righteous of all feelings, the absence of which
would be a great loss, in the eyes of men of feeling.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p39"></span>15.  We were contained by Athens, like
two branches of some river-stream, for after leaving the common fountain
of our fatherland, we had been separated in our varying pursuit of
culture, and were now again united by the impulsion of God no less than
by our own agreement.  I preceded him by a little, but he soon followed
me, to be welcomed with great and brilliant hope.  For he was versed in
many languages, before his arrival, and it was a great thing for either
of us to outstrip the other in the attainment of some object of our
study.  And I may well add, as a seasoning to any speech, a short
narrative, which will be a reminder to those who know it, a source of
information to those who do not.  Most of the young men at Athens in
their folly are mad after rhetorical skill—not only those who are
ignobly born and unknown, but even the noble and illustrious, in the
general mass of young men difficult to keep under control.  They are
just like men devoted to horses and exhibitions, as we see, at the
horse-races; they leap, <span id="fr_4417"></span>[4418](#fn_4417.md) they
shout, raise clouds of dust, they drive in their seats, they beat the
air, (instead of the horses) with their fingers as whips, they yoke and
unyoke the horses, though they are none of theirs:  they readily
exchange with one another drivers, horses, positions, leaders:  and who
are they who do this?  Often poor and needy fellows, without the means
of support for a single day.  This is just how the students feel in
regard to their own tutors, and their rivals, in their eagerness to
increase their own numbers and thereby enrich them.  The matter is
absolutely absurd and silly.  Cities, roads, harbours, mountain tops,
coastlines, are seized upon—in short, every part of Attica, or of the
rest of Greece, with most of the inhabitants; for even these they have
divided between the rival parties.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p41"></span>16.  Whenever any newcomer arrives, and
falls into the hands of those who seize upon him, either by force or
willingly, they observe this Attic law, of combined jest and earnest. 
He is first conducted to the house of one of those who were the first to
receive him, or of his friends, or kinsmen, or countrymen, or of those
who are eminent in debating power, and purveyors of arguments, and
therefore especially honoured among them; and their reward consists in
the gain of adherents.  He is next subjected to the raillery of any one
who will, with the intention I suppose, of checking the conceit of the
newcomers, and reducing them to subjection at once.  The raillery is of
a more insolent or argumentative kind, according to the boorishness or
refinement of the railer:  and the performance, which seems very fearful
and brutal to those who do not know it, is to those who have experienced
it very pleasant and humane:  for its threats are feigned rather than
real.  Next, he is conducted in procession through the market place to
the bath.  The procession is formed by those who are charged with it in
the young man’s honour, who arrange themselves in two ranks separated by
an interval, and precede him to the bath.  But when they have approached
it, they shout and leap wildly, as if possessed, shouting that they must
not advance, but stay, since the bath will not admit them; and at the
same time frighten the youth by furiously knocking at the doors:  then
allowing him to enter, they now present him with his freedom, and
receive him after the bath as an equal, and one of themselves.  This
they consider the most pleasant part of the ceremony, as being a speedy
exchange and relief from annoyances.  On this occasion I not only
refused to put to shame my friend the great Basil, out of respect for
the gravity of <span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_401"></span>his character, and the ripeness of his
reasoning powers, but also persuaded all the rest of the students to
treat him likewise, who happened not to know him.  For he was from the
first respected by most of them, his reputation having preceded him. 
The result was that he was the only one to escape the general rule, and
be accorded a greater honour than belongs to a freshman’s position.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p42"></span>17.  This was the prelude of our
friendship.  This was the kindling spark of our union:  thus we felt the
wound of mutual love.  Then something of this kind happened, for I think
it right not to omit even this.  I find the Armenians to be not a simple
race, but very crafty and cunning.  At this time some of his special
comrades and friends, who had been intimate with him even in the early
days of his father’s instruction, for they were members of his school,
came up to him under the guise of friendship, but with envious, and not
kindly intent, and put to him questions of a disputations rather than
rational kind, trying to overwhelm him at the first onset, having known
his original natural endowments, and unable to brook the honour he had
then received.  For they thought it a strange thing that they who had
put on their gowns, and been exercised in shouting, should not get the
better of one who was a stranger and a novice.  I also, in my vain love
for Athens, and trusting to their professions without perceiving their
envy, when they were giving way, and turning their backs, since I was
indignant that in their persons the reputation of Athens should be
destroyed, and so speedily put to shame, supported the young men, and
restored the argument; and by the aid of my additional weight, for in
such cases a small addition makes all the difference, and, as the poet
says, “made equal their heads in the fray.” <span
id="fr_4418"></span>[4419](#fn_4418.md)   But, when I perceived the secret
motive of the dispute, which could no longer be kept under, and was at
last clearly exposed, I at once drew back, and retired from their ranks,
to range myself on his side, and made the victory decisive.  He was at
once delighted at what had happened, for his sagacity was remarkable,
and being filled with zeal, to describe him fully in Homer’s language,
he pursued in confusion <span id="fr_4419"></span>[4420](#fn_4419.md) with
argument those valiant youths, and, smiting them with syllogisms, only
ceased when they were utterly routed, and he had distinctly won the
honours due to his power.  Thus was kindled again, no longer a spark,
but a manifest and conspicuous blaze of friendship.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p45"></span>18.  Their efforts having thus proved
fruitless, while they severely blamed their own rashness, they cherished
such annoyance against me that it broke out into open hostility, and a
charge of treachery, not only to them, but to Athens herself:  inasmuch
as they had been confuted and put to shame at the first onset, by a
single student, who had not even had time to gain confidence.  He
moreover, according to that human feeling, which makes us, when we have
all at once attained to the high hopes which we have cherished, look
upon their results as inferior to our expectation, he, I say, was
displeased and annoyed, and could take no delight in his arrival.  He
was seeking for what he had expected, and called Athens an empty
happiness.  I however tried to remove his annoyance, both by
argumentative encounter, and by the enchantments of reasoning; alleging,
as is true, that the disposition of a man cannot at once be detected,
without a long time and more constant association, and that culture
likewise is not made known to those who make trial of her, after a few
efforts and in a short time.  In this way I restored his cheerfulness,
and by this mutual experience, he was the more closely united to me.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p46"></span>19.  And when, as time went on, we
acknowledged our mutual affection, and that philosophy <span
id="fr_4420"></span>[4421](#fn_4420.md) was our aim, we were all in all to
one another, housemates, messmates, intimates, with one object in life,
or an affection for each other ever growing warmer and stronger.  Love
for bodily attractions, since its objects are fleeting, is as fleeting
as the flowers of spring.  For the flame cannot survive, when the fuel
is exhausted, and departs along with that which kindles it, nor does
desire abide, when its incentive wastes away.  But love which is godly
and under restraint, since its object is stable, not only is more
lasting, but, the fuller its vision of beauty grows, the more closely
does it bind to itself and to one another the hearts of those whose love
has one and the same object.  This is the law of our superhuman love.  I
feel that I am being unduly borne away, and I know not how to enter upon
this point, yet I cannot restrain myself from describing it.  For if I
have omitted anything, it seems, immediately afterwards, of pressing
importance, and of more consequence than what I had preferred to
mention.  And if any one would carry me tyrannically forward, I become
like the polyps, which when they are being dragged from their holes,
cling with their suckers to the rocks, <span id="page_402">p. 402</span>
<span id="iii.xxvi-Page_402"></span>and cannot be detached, until the
last of these has had exerted upon it its necessary share of force.  If
then you give me leave, I have my request, if not I must take it from
myself.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p48"></span>20.  Such were our feelings for each
other, when we had thus supported, as Pindar <span
id="fr_4421"></span>[4422](#fn_4421.md) has it, our “well-built chamber
with pillars of gold,” as we advanced under the united influences of
God’s grace and our own affection.  Oh! how can I mention these things
without tears.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p50"></span>We were impelled by equal hopes, in a
pursuit especially obnoxious to envy, that of letters.  Yet envy we knew
not, and emulation was of service to us.  We struggled, not each to gain
the first place for himself, but to yield it to the other; for we made
each other’s reputation to be our own.  We seemed to have one soul,
inhabiting two bodies.  And if we must not believe those whose doctrine
is “All things <span id="fr_4422"></span>[4423](#fn_4422.md) are in all;”
yet in our case it was worthy of belief, so did we live in and with each
other.  The sole business of both of us was virtue, and living for the
hopes to come, having retired from this world, before our actual
departure hence.  With a view to this, were directed all our life and
actions, under the guidance of the commandment, as we sharpened upon
each other our weapons of virtue; and if this is not a great thing for
me to say, being a rule and standard to each other, for the distinction
between what was right and what was not.  Our associates were not the
most dissolute, but the most sober of our comrades; not the most
pugnacious, but the most peaceable, whose intimacy was most profitable: 
knowing that it is more easy to be tainted with vice, than to impart
virtue; just as we can more readily be infected with a disease, than
bestow health.  Our most cherished studies were not the most pleasant,
but the most excellent; this being one means of forming young minds in a
virtuous or vicious mould.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p52"></span>21.  Two ways were known to us, the first
of greater value, the second of smaller consequence:  the one leading to
our sacred buildings and the teachers there, the other to secular
instructors.  All others we left to those who would pursue them—to
feasts, theatres, meetings, banquets.  For nothing is in my opinion of
value, save that which leads to virtue and to the improvement of its
devotees.  Different men have different names, derived from their
fathers, their families, their pursuits, their exploits:  we had but one
great business and name—to be and to be called Christians of which we
thought more than Gyges <span id="fr_4423"></span>[4424](#fn_4423.md) of
the turning of his ring, if this is not a legend, on which depended his
Lydian sovereignty:  or than Midas <span
id="fr_4424"></span>[4425](#fn_4424.md) did of the gold through which he
perished, in answer to his prayer that all he had might turn to
gold—another Phrygian legend.  For why should I speak of the arrow of
the Hyperborean Abaris, <span id="fr_4425"></span>[4426](#fn_4425.md) or of
the Argive Pegasus, <span id="fr_4426"></span>[4427](#fn_4426.md) to whom
flight through the air was not of such consequence as was to us our
rising to God, through the help of, and with each other?  Hurtful as
Athens was to others in spiritual things, and this is of no slight
consequence to the pious, for the city is richer in those evil
riches—idols—than the rest of Greece, and it is hard to avoid being
carried along with their devotees and adherents, yet we, our minds being
closed up and fortified against this, suffered no injury.  On the
contrary, strange as it may seem, we were thus the more confirmed in the
faith, from our perception of their trickery and unreality, which led us
to despise these divinities in the very home of their worship.  And if
there is, or is believed to be, a river <span
id="fr_4427"></span>[4428](#fn_4427.md) flowing with fresh water through
the sea, or an animal <span id="fr_4428"></span>[4429](#fn_4428.md) which
can dance in fire, the consumer of all things, such were we among all
our comrades.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p59"></span>22.  And, best of all, we were surrounded
by a far from ignoble band, under his instruction and guidance, and
delighting in the same objects, as we ran on foot beside that Lydian
car, <span id="fr_4429"></span>[4430](#fn_4429.md) his own course and
disposition:  and so we became famous, not only among our own teachers
and comrades, but even throughout Greece, and especially in the eyes of
its most distinguished men.  We even passed beyond its boundaries, as
was made clear by the evidence of many.  For our instructors were known
to all who knew Athens, and all who knew them, knew us, as the subject
of conversation, being actually looked upon, or heard of by report, as
an illustrious pair.  Orestes and Pylades <span
id="fr_4430"></span>[4431](#fn_4430.md) were in their eyes nothing to <span
id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_403"></span>us, or
the sons of Molione, <span id="fr_4431"></span>[4432](#fn_4431.md) the
wonders of the Homeric scroll, celebrated for their union in misfortune,
and their splendid driving, as they shared in reins and whip alike.  But
I have been unawares betrayed into praising myself, in a manner I would
not have allowed in another.  And it is no wonder that I gained here in
some advantage from his friendship, and that, as in life he aided me in
virtue, so since his departure he has contributed to my renown.  But I
must return to my proper course.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p63"></span>23.  Who possessed such a degree of the
prudence of old age, even before his hair was gray?  Since it is by this
that Solomon defines old age. <span id="fr_4432"></span>[4433](#fn_4432.md)
  Who was so respectful to both old and young, not only of our
contemporaries, but even of those who long preceded him?  Who, owing to
his character, was less in need of education?  Yet who, even with his
character, was so imbued with learning?  What branch of learning did he
not traverse; and that with unexampled success, passing through all, as
no one else passed through any one of them:  and attaining such eminence
in each, as if it had been his sole study?  The two great sources of
power in the arts and sciences, ability and application, were in him
equally combined.  For, because of the pains he took, he had but little
need of natural quickness, and his natural quickness made it unnecessary
for him to take pains; and such was the cooperation and unity of both,
that it was hard to see for which of the two he was more remarkable. 
Who had such power in Rhetoric, which breathes <span
id="fr_4433"></span>[4434](#fn_4433.md) with the might of fire, different
as his disposition was from that of rhetoricians?  Who in Grammar, which
perfects our tongues in Greek and compiles history, and presides over
metres and legislates for poems?  Who in Philosophy, that really lofty
and high reaching science, whether practical and speculative, or in that
part of it whose oppositions and struggles are concerned with logical
demonstrations; which is called Dialectic, and in which it was more
difficult to elude his verbal toils, if need required, than to escape
from the Labyrinths? <span id="fr_4434"></span>[4435](#fn_4434.md)   Of
Astronomy, Geometry, and numerical proportion he had such a grasp, that
he could not be baffled by those who are clever in such sciences: 
excessive application to them he despised, as useless to those whose
desire is godliness:  so that it is possible to admire what he chose
more than what he neglected, or what he neglected more than what he
chose.  Medicine, the result of philosophy and laboriousness, was
rendered necessary for him by his physical delicacy, and his care of the
sick.  From these beginnings he attained to a mastery of the art, not
only in its empirical and practical branches, but also in its theory and
principles.  But what are these, illustrious though they be, compared
with the moral discipline of the man?  To those who have had experience
of him, Minos and Rhadamanthus <span
id="fr_4435"></span>[4436](#fn_4435.md) were mere trifles, whom the Greeks
thought worthy of the meadows of Asphodel and the Elysian plains, which
are their representations of our Paradise, derived from those books of
Moses which are also ours, for though their terms are different, this is
what they refer to under other names.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p68"></span>24.  Such was the case, and his galleon
was laden with all the learning attainable by the nature of man; for
beyond Cadiz <span id="fr_4436"></span>[4437](#fn_4436.md) there is no
passage.  There was left no other need but that of rising to a more
perfect life, and grasping those hopes upon which we were agreed.  The
day of our departure was at hand, with its attendant speeches of
farewell, and of escort, its invitations to return, its lamentations,
embraces and tears.  For there is nothing so painful to any one, as is
separation from Athens and one another, to those who have been comrades
there.  On that occasion was seen a piteous spectacle, worthy of
record.  Around us were grouped our fellow students and classmates and
some of our teachers, protesting amid entreaties, violence, and
persuasion, that, whatever happened, they would not let us go; saying
and doing everything that men in distress could do.  And here I will
bring an accusation against myself, and also, daring though it be,
against that divine and irreproachable soul.  For he, by detailing the
reasons of his anxiety to return home, was able to prevail over their
desire to retain him, and they were compelled, though with reluctance,
to agree to his departure.  But I was left behind at Athens, partly, to
say the truth, because I had been prevailed on—partly because he had
betrayed me, having been persuaded to forsake and hand over to his
captors one who refused to forsake him.  A thing incredible, before it
happened.  For <span id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_404"></span>it was like cutting one body into two, to
the destruction of either part, or the severance of two bullocks who
have shared the same manger and the same yoke, amid pitiable bellowings
after one another in protest against the separation.  However, my loss
was not of long duration, for I could not long bear to be seen in
piteous plight, nor to have to account to every one for our separation: 
so, after a brief stay at Athens, my longing desire made me, like the
horse in Homer, to burst the bonds of those who restrained me, and
prancing o’er the plains, rush to my mate.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p70"></span>25.  Upon our return, after a slight
indulgence to the world and the stage, sufficient to gratify the general
desire, not from any inclination to theatrical display, we soon became
independent, and, after being promoted from the rank of beardless boys
to that of men, made bold advances along the road of philosophy, for
though no longer together, since envy would not allow this, we were
united by our eager desire.  The city of Cæsarea took possession of him,
as a second founder and patron, but in course of time he was
occasionally absent, as a matter of necessity due to our separation, and
with a view to our determined course of philosophy.  Dutiful attendance
on my aged parents, and a succession of misfortunes kept me apart from
him, perhaps without right or justice, but so it was.  And to this cause
I am inclined to ascribe all the inconsistency and difficulty which have
befallen my life, and the hindrances in the way of philosophy, which
have been unworthy of my desire and purpose.  But as for my fate, let it
lead whither God pleases, only may its course be the better for his
intercessions.  As regards himself, the manifold love of God toward
man, <span id="fr_4437"></span>[4438](#fn_4437.md) and His providential
care for our race did, after shewing forth his merits under many
intervening circumstances with ever greater brilliancy, set him up as a
conspicuous and celebrated light for the Church, by advancing him to the
holy thrones of the priesthood, to blaze forth, through the single city
of Cæsarea, to the whole world.  And in what manner?  Not by precipitate
advancement, nor by at once cleansing and making him wise, as is the
wont of many present candidates for preferment:  but bestowing upon him
the honour in the due order of spiritual advancement.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p72"></span>26.  For I do not praise the disorder and
irregularity which sometimes exist among us, even in those who preside
over the sanctuary.  I do not venture, nor is it just, to accuse them
all.  I approve the nautical custom, which first gives the oar to the
future steersman, and afterward leads him to the stern, and entrusts him
with the command, and seats him at the helm, only after a long course of
striking the sea and observing the winds.  As is the case again in
military affairs:  private, captain, general.  This order is the best
and most advantageous for their subordinates.  And if it were so in our
case, it would be of great service.  But, as it is, there is a danger of
the holiest of all offices being the most ridiculous among us.  For
promotion depends not upon virtue, but upon villany; and the sacred
thrones fall not to the most Worthy, but to the most powerful.  Samuel,
the seer into futurity, is among the prophets:  but Saul, the rejected
one, is also there.  Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, is among the kings,
but so also is Jeroboam, the slave and apostate.  And there is not a
physician, or a painter who has not first studied the nature of
diseases, or mixed many colours, or practised drawing:  but a prelate is
easily found, without laborious training, with a reputation of recent
date, being sown and springing up in a moment, as the legend <span
id="fr_4438"></span>[4439](#fn_4438.md) of the giants goes.  We manufacture
those who are holy in a day, and bid those to be wise, who have had no
instruction, and have contributed nothing before to their dignity,
except the will.  So one man is content with an inferior position, and
abides in his low estate, who is worthy of a lofty one, and has
meditated much on the inspired words, and has reduced the flesh by many
laws into subjection to the spirit:  while the other haughtily takes
precedence, and raises his eyebrow over his betters, and does not
tremble at his position, nor is he appalled at the sight, seeing the
disciplined man beneath him; and wrongly supposes himself to be his
superior in wisdom as well as in rank, having lost his senses under the
influence of his position.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p74"></span>27.  Not so our great and illustrious
Basil.  In this grace, as in all others, he was a public example.  For
he first read to the people the sacred books, while already able to
expound them, nor did he deem himself worthy of this rank <span
id="fr_4439"></span>[4440](#fn_4439.md) in the sanctuary, and thus
proceeded to praise the Lord in the seat of the Presbyters, <span
id="fr_4440"></span>[4441](#fn_4440.md) and next in that of the Bishops,
attaining the office neither by stealth nor by violence, instead of
seeking for the honour, being sought <span id="page_405">p. 405</span>
<span id="iii.xxvi-Page_405"></span>for by it, and receiving it not as a
human favour, but as from God and divine.  The account of his bishopric
must be deferred:  over his subordinate ministry let us linger a while,
for indeed it had almost escaped me, in the midst of my discourse.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p77"></span>28.  There arose a disagreement between
him and his predecessor <span id="fr_4441"></span>[4442](#fn_4441.md) in
the rule over this Church:  its source and character it is best to pass
over in silence, yet it arose.  He was a man in other respects far from
ignoble, and admirable for his piety, as was proved by the persecution
of that time, and the opposition to him, yet his feeling against Basil
was one to which men are liable.  For Momus seizes not only upon the
common herd, but on the best of men, so that it belongs to God alone to
be utterly uninfluenced by and proof against such feelings.  All the
more eminent and wise portion of the Church was roused against him, if
those are wiser than the majority who have separated themselves from the
world and consecrated their life to God.  I mean the Nazarites <span
id="fr_4442"></span>[4443](#fn_4442.md) of our day, and those who devote
themselves to such pursuits.  They were annoyed that their chief <span
id="fr_4443"></span>[4444](#fn_4443.md) should be neglected, insulted, and
rejected, and they ventured upon a most dangerous proceeding.  They
determined to revolt and break off from the body of the Church, which
admits of no faction, severing along with themselves no small fraction
of the people, both of the lower ranks, and of those of position.  This
was most easy, owing to three very strong reasons.  In the first place,
the man was held in repute, beyond any other, I think, of the
philosophers of our time, and able, if he wished, to inspire with
courage the conspirators.  Next, his opponent <span
id="fr_4444"></span>[4445](#fn_4444.md) was suspected by the city, in
consequence of the tumult which accompanied his institution, of having
obtained his preferment in an arbitrary manner, not according to the
laws and canons.  Also there were present some of the bishops <span
id="fr_4445"></span>[4446](#fn_4445.md) of the West, drawing to themselves
all the orthodox members of the Church.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p83"></span>29.  What then did our noble friend, the
disciple of the Peaceable One?  It was not his habit to resist his
traducers or partisans, nor was it his part to fight, or rend the body
of the Church, which was from other reasons the subject of attack, and
hardly bestead, from the great power of the heretics.  With my advice
and earnest encouragement on the point, he set out from the place with
me into Pontus, and presided over the abodes of contemplation there.  He
himself too founded one <span id="fr_4446"></span>[4447](#fn_4446.md)
worthy of mention, as he welcomed the desert together with Elijah and
John, <span id="fr_4447"></span>[4448](#fn_4447.md) those professors of
austerity; thinking this to be more profitable for him than to form any
design in reference to the present juncture unworthy of his philosophy,
and to ruin in a time of storm the straight course which he was making,
where the surges of disputation were lulled to a calm.  Yet wonderfully
philosophic though his retirement was, we shall find his return still
more wonderful.  For thus it was.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p86"></span>30.  While we were thus engaged, there
suddenly arose a cloud full of hail, with destructive roar, overwhelming
every Church upon which it burst and seized:  an Emperor, <span
id="fr_4448"></span>[4449](#fn_4448.md) most fond of gold and most hostile
to Christ, infected with these two most serious diseases, insatiate
avarice and blasphemy; a persecutor in succession to the persecutor,
and, in succession to the apostate, not indeed an apostate, though no
better to Christians, or rather, to the more devout and pure party of
Christians, who worship the Trinity, which I call the only true devotion
and saving doctrine.  For we do not measure out the Godhead into
portions, nor banish from Itself by unnatural estrangements the one and
unapproachable Nature; nor cure one evil by another, destroying the
godless confusion of Sabellius by a more impious severance and division;
which was the error of Arius, whose name declares his madness, <span
id="fr_4449"></span>[4450](#fn_4449.md) the disturber and destroyer of a
great part of the Church.  For he did not honour the Father, by
dishonouring His offspring with his unequal degrees of Godhead.  But we
recognize one glory <span id="fr_4450"></span>[4451](#fn_4450.md) of the
Father, the equality of the Only-begotten; and one glory of the Son,
that of the Spirit.  And we hold that, to subordinate any of the Three,
is to destroy the whole.  For we worship and acknowledge Them as Three
in their properties, <span id="fr_4451"></span>[4452](#fn_4451.md) but One
in their Godhead.  He however had no such idea, being unable to look
<span id="page_406">p. 406</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_406"></span>up, but being debased by those who led
him, he dared to debase along with himself even the Nature of the
Godhead, and became a wicked creature reducing Majesty to bondage, and
aligning with creation the uncreated and timeless Nature.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p91"></span>31.  Such was his mind, and with such
impiety he took the field against us.  For we must consider it to be
nothing else than a barbaric inroad which, instead of destroying walls,
cities and houses, and other things of little worth, made with hands and
capable of restoration, spent its ravages upon men’s souls.  A worthy
army joined in his assault, the evil rulers of the Churches, the bitter
governors of his world-wide Empire.  Some of the Churches they now held,
some they were assaulting, others they hoped to gain by the already
exercised influence of the Emperor, and the violence which he
threatened.  But in their purpose of perverting our own, their
confidence was specially based on the smallness of mind of those whom I
have mentioned, the inexperience of our prelate, and the infirmities
which prevailed among us.  The struggle would be fierce:  the zeal of
numerous troops was far from ignoble, but their array was weak, from the
want of a leader and strategist to contend for them with the might of
the Word and of the Spirit.  What then did this noble and magnanimous
and truly Christ-loving soul?  No need of many words to urge his
presence and aid.  At once when he saw me on my mission, for the
struggle on behalf of the faith was common to us both, he yielded to my
entreaty; and decided by a most excellent distinction, based on
spiritual reasons, that the time for punctiliousness (if indeed we may
give way to such feelings at all) is a time of security, but that
forbearance is required in the hour of necessity.  He immediately
returned with me from Pontus, and as a zealous volunteer took his place
in the fight for the endangered truth, and devoted himself to the
service of his mother, the Church.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p92"></span>32.  Did then his actual efforts fall
short of his preliminary zeal?  Were they directed by courage, but not
by prudence, or by skill, while he shrank from danger?  Or, in spite of
their unexampled perfection on all these points, was there left in him
some trace of irritation?  Far from it.  He was at once completely
reconciled, and took part in every plan and effort.  He removed all the
thorns and stumbling blocks which were in our way, upon which the enemy
relied in their attack upon us.  He took hold of one, grasped another,
thrust away a third.  He became to some a stout wall and rampart, <span
id="fr_4452"></span>[4453](#fn_4452.md) to others an axe breaking the rock
in pieces, <span id="fr_4453"></span>[4454](#fn_4453.md) or a fire among
the thorns, <span id="fr_4454"></span>[4455](#fn_4454.md) as the divine
Scripture says, easily destroying those fagots who were insulting the
Godhead.  And if his Barnabas, who speaks and records these things, was
of service to Paul in the struggle, it is to Paul that thanks are due,
for choosing and making him his comrade in the strife.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p96"></span>33.  Thus the enemy failed, and, base men
as they were, for the first time were then basely put to shame and
worsted, learning not to be ready to despise the Cappadocians, of all
men in the world, whose special qualities are firmness in the faith, and
loyal devotion to the Trinity; to Whom is due their unity and strength,
and from Whom they receive an even greater and stronger assistance than
they are able to give.  Basil’s next business and purpose was to
conciliate the prelate, to allay suspicion, to persuade all men that the
irritation which had been felt was due to the temptation and effort of
the Evil one, in his envy of virtuous concord:  carefully complying with
the laws of obedience and spiritual order.  Accordingly he visited him,
with instruction and advice.  While obedient to his wishes, he was
everything to him, a good counsellor, a skilful assistant, an expounder
of the Divine Will, a guide of conduct, a staff for his old age, a
support of the faith, most trusty of those within, most practical of
those without, in a word, as much inclined to goodwill, as he had been
thought to hostility.  And so the power of the Church came into his
hands almost, if not quite, to an equal degree with the occupant of the
see.  For in return for his good-will, he was requited with authority. 
And their harmony and combination of power was wonderful.  The one was
the leader of the people, the other of their leader, like a lion-keeper,
skilfully soothing the possessor of power.  For, having been recently
installed in the see, and still somewhat under the influence of the
world, and not yet furnished with the things of the Spirit, in the midst
of the eddying tide of enemies assaulting the Church, he was in need of
some one to take him by the hand and support him.  Accordingly he
accepted the alliance, and imagined himself the conqueror of one who had
conquered him.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p97"></span>34.  Of his care for and protection of
the Church, there are many other tokens; his boldness towards the
governors and other <span id="page_407">p. 407</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_407"></span>most powerful men in the city:  the
decisions of disputes, accepted without hesitation, and made effective
by his simple word, his inclination being held to be decisive:  his
support of the needy, most of them in spiritual, not a few also in
physical distress:  for this also often influences the soul and reduces
it to subjection by its kindness; the support of the poor, the
entertainment of strangers, the care of maidens; legislation <span
id="fr_4455"></span>[4456](#fn_4455.md) written and unwritten for the
monastic life:  arrangements of prayers, <span
id="fr_4456"></span>[4457](#fn_4456.md) adornments of the sanctuary, and
other ways in which the true man of God, working for God, would benefit
the people:  one being especially important and noteworthy.  There was a
famine, the most severe one ever recorded.  The city was in distress,
and there was no source of assistance, or relief for the calamity.  For
maritime cities are able to bear such times of need without difficulty,
by an exchange of their own products for what is imported:  but an
inland city like ours can neither turn its superfluity to profit, nor
supply its need, by either disposing of what we have, or importing what
we have not:  but the hardest part of all such distress is, the
insensibility and insatiability of those who possess supplies.  For they
watch their opportunities, and turn the distress to profit, and thrive
upon misfortune:  heeding not that he who shows mercy to the poor,
lendeth to the Lord, <span id="fr_4457"></span>[4458](#fn_4457.md) nor that
he that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him: <span
id="fr_4458"></span>[4459](#fn_4458.md)   nor any other of the promises to
the philanthropic, and threats against the inhuman.  But they are too
insatiate, in their ill-judged policy; for while they shut up their
bowels against their fellows, they shut up those of God against
themselves, forgetting that their need of Him is greater than others’
need of them.  Such are the buyers and sellers of corn, who neither
respect their fellows, nor are thankful to God, from Whom comes what
they have, while others are straitened.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p102"></span>35.  He indeed could neither rain bread
from heaven by prayer, <span id="fr_4459"></span>[4460](#fn_4459.md) to
nourish an escaped people in the wilderness, <span
id="fr_4460"></span>[4461](#fn_4460.md) nor supply fountains of food
without cost from the depth of vessels which are filled by being
emptied, <span id="fr_4461"></span>[4462](#fn_4461.md) and so, by an
amazing return for her hospitality, support one who supported him; nor
feed thousands of men with five loaves whose very fragments were a
further supply for many tables. <span
id="fr_4462"></span>[4463](#fn_4462.md)   These were the works of Moses and
Elijah, and my God, from Whom they too derived their power.  Perhaps
also they were characteristic of their time and its circumstances: 
since signs are for unbelievers not for those who believe. <span
id="fr_4463"></span>[4464](#fn_4463.md)   But he did devise and execute
with the same faith things which correspond to them, and tend in the
same direction.  For by his word and advice he opened the stores of
those who possessed them, and so, according to the Scripture dealt food
to the hungry, <span id="fr_4464"></span>[4465](#fn_4464.md) and satisfied
the poor with bread, <span id="fr_4465"></span>[4466](#fn_4465.md) and fed
them in the time of dearth, <span id="fr_4466"></span>[4467](#fn_4466.md)
and filled the hungry souls with good things. <span
id="fr_4467"></span>[4468](#fn_4467.md)   And in what way? for this is no
slight addition to his praise.  He gathered together the victims of the
famine with some who were but slightly recovering from it, men and
women, infants, old men, every age which was in distress, and obtaining
contributions of all sorts of food which can relieve famine, set before
them basins of soup and such meat as was found preserved among us, on
which the poor live.  Then, imitating the ministry of Christ, Who,
girded with a towel, did not disdain to wash the disciples’ feet, using
for this purpose the aid of his own servants, and also of his fellow
servants, he attended to the bodies and souls of those who needed it,
combining personal respect with the supply of their necessity, and so
giving them a double relief.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p112"></span>36.  Such was our young furnisher of
corn, and second Joseph:  though of him we can say somewhat more.  For
the one made a gain from the famine, and bought up Egypt <span
id="fr_4468"></span>[4469](#fn_4468.md) in his philanthropy, by managing
the time of plenty with a view to the time of famine, turning to account
the dreams of others for that purpose.  But the other’s services were
gratuitous, and his succour of the famine gained no profit, having only
one object, to win kindly feelings by kindly treatment, and to gain by
his rations of corn the heavenly blessings.  Further he provided the
nourishment of the Word, and that more perfect bounty and distribution,
which is really heavenly and from on high—if the word be that bread of
angels, <span id="fr_4469"></span>[4470](#fn_4469.md) wherewith souls are
fed and given to drink, who are a hungered for God, <span
id="fr_4470"></span>[4471](#fn_4470.md) and seek for a food which does not
pass away or fail, but abides forever.  This food he, who was the
poorest and most needy man whom I have known, supplied in rich abundance
to the relief not of a famine of bread, <span id="page_408">p.
408</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_408"></span>nor of a thirst for
water, but a longing for that Word <span
id="fr_4471"></span>[4472](#fn_4471.md) which is really lifegiving and
nourishing, and causes to grow to spiritual manhood him who is duly fed
thereon.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p117"></span>37.  After these and similar actions—why
need I stay to mention them all?—when the prelate whose name <span
id="fr_4472"></span>[4473](#fn_4472.md) betokened his godliness had passed
away, having sweetly breathed his last in Basil’s arms, he was raised to
the lofty throne of a Bishop, not without difficulty or without the
envious struggles of the prelates of his native land, on whose side were
found the greatest scoundrels of the city.  But the Holy Spirit must
needs win the day—and indeed the victory was decisive.  For He brought
from a distance, to anoint him, men <span
id="fr_4473"></span>[4474](#fn_4473.md) illustrious and zealous for
godliness, and with them the new Abraham, our Patriarch, I mean my
father, in regard to whom an extraordinary thing happened.  For, failing
as he was from the number of his years, and worn away almost to his last
breath by disease, he ventured on the journey to give assistance by his
vote, relying on the aid of the Spirit.  In brief, he was placed in his
litter, as a corpse is laid in its tomb, to return in the freshness and
strength of youth, with head erect, having been strengthened by the
imposition of hands and unction, and, it is not too much to say by the
head of him who was anointed.  This must be added to the instances of
old time, which prove that labour bestows health, zealous purpose raises
the dead, and old age leaps up when anointed by the Spirit.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p120"></span>38.  Having thus been deemed worthy of
the office of prelate, as it is seemly that men should who have lived
such a life, and won such favour and consideration, he did not disgrace,
by his subsequent conduct, either his own philosophy, or the hopes of
those who had trusted him.  But he ever so far surpassed himself as he
has been shown hitherto to have surpassed others, his ideas on this
point being most excellent and philosophic.  For he held that, while it
is virtuous in a private individual to avoid vice, and be to some extent
good, it is a vice in a chief and ruler, especially in such an office,
to fail to surpass by far the majority of men, and by constant progress
to make his virtue correspond to his dignity and throne:  for it is
difficult for one in high position to attain the mean, and by his
eminence in virtue raise up his people to the golden mean.  Or rather to
treat this question more satisfactorily, I think that the result is the
same as I see in the case of our Saviour, and of every specially wise
man, I fancy, when He was with us in that form which surpassed us and
yet is ours.  For He also, the gospel says, increased in wisdom and
favour, as well as in stature, <span
id="fr_4474"></span>[4475](#fn_4474.md) not that these qualities in Him
were capable of growth:  for how could that which was perfect from the
first become more perfect, but that they were gradually disclosed and
displayed?  So I think that the virtue of Basil, without being itself
increased, obtained at this time a wider exercise, since his power
provided him with more abundant material.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p122"></span>39.  He first of all made it plain that
his office had been bestowed upon him, not by human favour, but by the
gift of God.  This will also be shown by my conduct.  For in what
philosophic research did he not, about that time, join with me?  So
every one thought that I should run to meet him after what had happened,
and show my delight at it (as would, perhaps, have been the case with
any one else) and claim a share in his authority, rather than rule
beside him, according to the inferences they drew from our friendship. 
But, in my exceeding anxiety to avoid the annoyance and jealousy of the
time, and specially since his position was still a painful and troubled
one, I remained at home, and forcibly restrained my eager desire, while,
though he blamed me, Basil accepted my excuse.  And when, on my
subsequent arrival, I refused, for the same reason the honour of this
chair, and a dignified position <span
id="fr_4475"></span>[4476](#fn_4475.md) among the Presbyters, he kindly
refrained from blaming, nay he praised me, preferring to be charged with
pride by a small clique, in their ignorance of our policy, rather than
do anything contrary to reason and his own resolutions.  And indeed, how
could a man have better shown his soul to be superior to all fawning and
flattery, and his single object to be the law of right, than by thus
treating me, whom he acknowledged as among the first of his friends and
associates?

<span id="iii.xxvi-p124"></span>40.  His next task was to appease, and
allay by magnanimous treatment, the opposition to himself:  and that
without any trace of flattery or servility, but in a most chivalrous and
magnanimous way; with a view, not merely to present exigencies, but also
to the fostering of future obedience.  For, seeing that, while
tenderness leads to laxity and slackness, severity gives rise to
stubbornness and self-will, he was able to avoid the dangers of each
course <span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_409"></span>by a combination of both, blending his
correction with consideration, and gentleness with firmness, influencing
men in most cases principally by his conduct rather than by argument: 
not enslaving them by art, but winning them by good nature, and
attracting them by the sparing use, rather than by the constant
exercise, of his power.  And, most important of all, they were brought
to recognize the superiority of his intellect and the inaccessibility of
his virtue, to consider their only safety to consist in being on his
side and under his command, their sole danger to be in opposition to
him, and to think that to differ from him involved estrangement from
God.  Thus they willingly yielded and surrendered, submitting
themselves, as if in a thunder-clap, and hastening to anticipate each
other with their excuses, and exchange the intensity of their hostility
for an equal intensity of goodwill, and advance in virtue, which they
found to be the one really effective defence.  The few exceptions to
this conduct were passed by and neglected, because their ill-nature was
incurable, and they expended their powers in wearing out themselves, as
rust consumes itself together with the iron on which it feeds.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p125"></span>41.  Affairs at home being now settled
to his mind, in a way that faithless men who did not know him would have
thought impossible, his designs became greater and took a loftier
range.  For, while all others had their eyes on the ground before them,
and directed attention to their own immediate concerns, and, if these
were safe, troubled themselves no further, being incapable of any great
and chivalrous design or undertaking; he, moderate as he was in all
other respects, could not be moderate in this, but with head erect,
casting his mental eye about him, took in the whole world over which the
word of salvation has made its way.  And when he saw the great heritage
of God, purchased by His own words and laws and sufferings, the holy
nation, the royal priesthood, <span id="fr_4476"></span>[4477](#fn_4476.md)
in such evil plight that it was torn asunder into ten thousand opinions
and errors:  and the vine brought out of Egypt and transplanted, <span
id="fr_4477"></span>[4478](#fn_4477.md) the Egypt of impious and dark
ignorance, which had grown to such beauty and boundless size that the
whole earth was covered with the shadow of it, while it overtopped
mountains and cedars, now being ravaged by that wicked wild boar, the
devil, he could not content himself with quietly lamenting the
misfortune, and merely lifting up his hands to God, and seeking from Him
the dispersion of the pressing misfortunes, while he himself was asleep,
but felt bound to come to her aid at some expense to himself.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p128"></span>42.  For what could be more distressing
than this calamity, or call more loudly on one whose eyes were raised
aloft for exertions on behalf of the common weal?  The good or ill
success of an individual is of no consequence to the community, but that
of the community involves of necessity the like condition of the
individual.  With this idea and purpose, he who was the guardian and
patron of the community (and, as Solomon says with truth, a perceptive
heart is a moth to the bones, <span id="fr_4478"></span>[4479](#fn_4478.md)
unsensitiveness is cheerily confident, while a sympathetic disposition
is a source of pain, and constant consideration wastes away the heart),
he, I say, was consequently in agony and distress from many wounds; like
Jonah and David, he wished in himself to die <span
id="fr_4479"></span>[4480](#fn_4479.md) and gave not sleep to his eyes, nor
slumber to his eyelids, <span id="fr_4480"></span>[4481](#fn_4480.md) he
expended what was left of his flesh upon his reflections, until he
discovered a remedy for the evil:  and sought for aid from God and man,
to stay the general conflagration, and dissipate the gloom which was
lowering over us.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p132"></span>43.  One of his devices was of the
greatest service.  After a period of such recollection as was possible,
and private spiritual conference, in which, after considering all human
arguments, and penetrating into all the deep things of the Scriptures,
he drew up a sketch of pious doctrine, and by wrestling with and
attacking their opposition he beat off the daring assaults of the
heretics:  overthrowing in hand to hand struggles by word of mouth those
who came to close quarters, and striking those at a distance by arrows
winged with ink, which is in no wise inferior to inscriptions on
tablets; not giving directions for one small nation only like that of
the Jews, concerning meats and drinks, temporary sacrifices, and
purifications of the flesh; <span id="fr_4481"></span>[4482](#fn_4481.md)
but for every nation and part of the world, concerning the Word of
truth, the source of our salvation.  Again, since unreasoning action and
unpractical reasoning are alike ineffectual, he added to his reasoning
the succour which comes from action; he paid visits, sent messages, gave
interviews, instructed, reproved, rebuked, <span
id="fr_4482"></span>[4483](#fn_4482.md) threatened, reproached, undertook
the defence of nations, cities and individuals, devising every kind of
succour, and procuring from every source specifics for disease:  a
second Bezaleel, an <span id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_410"></span>architect of the Divine tabernacle, <span
id="fr_4483"></span>[4484](#fn_4483.md) applying every material and art to
the work, and combining all in a harmonious and surpassing beauty.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p136"></span>44.  Why need I enter into further
detail?  We were assailed again by the Anti-Christian Emperor, <span
id="fr_4484"></span>[4485](#fn_4484.md) that tyrant of the faith, with more
abundant impiety and a hotter onset, inasmuch as the dispute must be
with a stronger antagonist, like that unclean and evil spirit, who when
sent forth upon his wanderings from man, returns to take up his abode in
him again with a greater number of spirits, as we have heard in the
Gospels. <span id="fr_4485"></span>[4486](#fn_4485.md)   This spirit he
imitated, both in renewing the contest in which he had formerly been
worsted, and in adding to his original efforts.  He thought that it was
a strange and insufferable thing that he, who ruled over so many nations
and had won so much renown, and reduced under the power of impiety all
those round about him, and overcome every adversary, should be publicly
worsted by a single man, and a single city, and so incur the ridicule
not only of those patrons of ungodliness by whom he was led, but also,
as he supposed, of all men.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p139"></span>45.  It is said that the King <span
id="fr_4486"></span>[4487](#fn_4486.md) of Persia, on his expedition into
Greece, was not only urged to immoderate threats, by elation at the
numbers of every race of men which in his wrath and pride he was leading
against them:  but thought to terrify them the more, by making them
afraid of him, in consequence of his novel treatment of the elements.  A
strange land and sea were heard of, the work of the new creator; and an
army which sailed over the dry land, and marched over the ocean, while
islands were carried off, and the sea was scourged, and all the other
mad proceedings of that army and expedition, which, though they struck
terror into the ignoble, were ridiculous in the eyes of men of brave and
steadfast hearts.  There was no need of anything of this kind in the
expedition against us, but what was still worse and more harmful, this
was what the Emperor was reported to say and do.  He stretched forth his
mouth unto heaven, speaking blasphemy against the most High, and his
tongue went through the world. <span
id="fr_4487"></span>[4488](#fn_4487.md)   Excellently did the inspired
David before our days thus describe him who made heaven to stoop to
earth, and reckoned with the creation that supermundane nature, which
the creation cannot even contain, even though in kindness to man it did
to some extent come among us, in order to draw to itself us who were
lying upon the ground.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p142"></span>46.  Furious indeed were his first acts
of wantonness, more furious still his final efforts against us.  What
shall I speak of first?  Exiles, banishments, confiscations, open and
secret plots, persuasion, where time allowed, violence, where persuasion
was impossible.  Those who clung to the orthodox faith, as we did, were
extruded from their churches; others were intruded, who agreed with the
Imperial soul-destroying doctrines, and begged for testimonials of
impiety, and subscribed to statements still harder than these. 
Burnings <span id="fr_4488"></span>[4489](#fn_4488.md) of Presbyters at
sea, impious generals, not those who conquered the Persians, or subdued
the Scythians, or reduced any other barbaric nation, but those who
assailed churches, and danced in triumph upon altars, and defiled the
unbloody sacrifices with the blood of man and victims, and offered
insult to the modesty of virgins.  With what object?  The extrusion of
the Patriarch Jacob, <span id="fr_4489"></span>[4490](#fn_4489.md) and the
intrusion in his place of Esau, who was hated, <span
id="fr_4490"></span>[4491](#fn_4490.md) even before his birth.  This is the
description of his first acts of wantonness, the mere recollection and
mention of which even now, rouses the tears of most of us.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p146"></span>47.  Accordingly, when, after passing
through all quarters, he made his attack in order to enslave this
impregnable and formidable mother of the Churches, the only still
remaining unquenched spark of the truth, he discovered that he had been
for the first time ill advised.  For he was driven back like a missile
which strikes upon some stronger body, and recoiled like a broken
hawser.  Such was the prelate of the Church that he met with, such was
the bulwark by which his efforts were broken and dissipated.  Other
particulars may be heard from those who tell and recount them, from
their own experience—and none of those who recount them is destitute of
this full experience.  But all must be filled with admiration who are
aware of the struggles of that time, the assaults, the promises, the
threats, the commissioners sent before him to try to prevail upon us,
men of judicial and military rank, men from the harem, who are men among
women, women among men, whose only manliness consisted in their impiety,
and being incapable of natural licentiousness, commit fornication in the
only way they can, with their tongues; the chief cook <span
id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_411"></span>Nebuzaradan, <span
id="fr_4491"></span>[4492](#fn_4491.md) who threatened us with the weapons
of his art, and was despatched by his own fire.  But what especially
excites my wonder, and what I could not, even if I would, pass by, I
will describe as concisely as possible.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p148"></span>48.  Who has not heard of the
prefect <span id="fr_4492"></span>[4493](#fn_4492.md) of those days, who,
for his own part, treated us with such excessive arrogance, having
himself been admitted, or perhaps committed, to baptism by the other
party; and strove by exceeding the letter of his instructions, and
gratifying his master in every particular, to guarantee and preserve his
own possession of power.  Though he raged against the Church, and
assumed a lion-like aspect, and roared like a lion till most men dared
not approach him, yet our noble prelate was brought into or rather
entered his court, as if bidden to a feast, instead of to a trial.  How
can I fully describe, either the arrogance of the prefect or the
prudence with which it was met by the Saint.  “What is the meaning, Sir
Basil,” he said, addressing him by name, and not as yet deigning to term
him Bishop, “of your daring, as no other dares, to resist and oppose so
great a potentate?”  “In what respect?” said our noble champion, “and in
what does my rashness consist?  For this I have yet to learn.”  “In
refusing to respect the religion of your Sovereign, when all others have
yielded and submitted themselves?”  “Because,” said he, “this is not the
will of my real Sovereign; nor can I, who am the creature of God, and
bidden myself to be God, submit to worship any creature.”  “And what do
we,” said the prefect, “seem to you to be?  Are we, who give you this
injunction, nothing at all?  What do you say to this?  Is it not a great
thing to be ranged with us as your associates?”  “You are, I will not
deny it,” said he, “a prefect, and an illustrious one, yet not of more
honour than God.  And to be associated with you is a great thing,
certainly; for you are yourself the creature of God; but so it is to be
associated with any other of my subjects.  For faith, and not personal
importance, is the distinctive mark of Christianity.”

<span id="iii.xxvi-p150"></span>49.  Then indeed the prefect became
excited, and rose from his seat, boiling with rage, and making use of
harsher language.  “What?” said he, “have you no fear of my authority? 
“Fear of what?” said Basil, “How could it affect me?”  “Of what?  Of any
one of the resources of my power.”  “What are these?” said Basil, “pray,
inform me.”  “Confiscation, banishment, torture, death.”  “Have you no
other threat?” said he, “for none of these can reach me.”  “How indeed
is that?” said the prefect.  “Because,” he replied, “a man who has
nothing, is beyond the reach of confiscation; unless you demand my
tattered rags, and the few books, which are my only possessions. 
Banishment is impossible for me, who am confined by no limit of place,
counting my own neither the land where I now dwell, nor all of that into
which I may be hurled; or, rather, counting it all God’s, whose guest
and dependent I am.  As for tortures, what hold can they have upon one
whose body has ceased to be?  Unless you mean the first stroke, for this
alone is in your power.  Death is my benefactor, for it will send me the
sooner to God, for Whom I live, and exist, and have all but died, and to
Whom I have long been hastening.”

<span id="iii.xxvi-p151"></span>50.  Amazed at this language, the
prefect said, “No one has ever yet spoken thus, and with such boldness,
to Modestus.”  “Why, perhaps,” said Basil, “you have not met with a
Bishop, or in his defence of such interests he would have used precisely
the same language.  For we are modest in general, and submissive to
every one, according to the precept of our law.  We may not treat with
haughtiness even any ordinary person, to say nothing of so great a
potentate.  But where the interests of God are at stake, we care for
nothing else, and make these our sole object.  Fire and sword and wild
beasts, and rakes which tear the flesh, we revel in, and fear them not. 
You may further insult and threaten us, and do whatever you will, to the
full extent of your power.  The Emperor himself may hear this—that
neither by violence nor persuasion will you bring us to make common
cause with impiety, not even though your threats become still more
terrible.”

<span id="iii.xxvi-p152"></span>51.  At the close of this colloquy, the
prefect, having been convinced by the attitude of Basil, that he was
absolutely impervious to threats and influence, dismissed him from the
court, his former threatening manner being replaced by somewhat of
respect and deference.  He himself with all speed obtained an audience
of the Emperor, and said:  “We have been worsted, Sire, by the prelate
of this Church.  He is superior to threats, invincible in argument,
uninfluenced by persuasion.  We must make trial of some more feeble
character; and in this case resort to open violence, <span
id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_412"></span>or
submit to the disregard of our threatenings.”  Hereupon the Emperor,
forced by the praises of Basil to condemn his own conduct (for even an
enemy can admire a man’s excellence), would not allow violence to be
used against him:  and, like iron, which is softened by fire, yet still
remains iron, though turned from threatening to admiration, would not
enter into communion with him, being prevented by shame from changing
his course, but sought to justify his conduct by the most plausible
excuse he could, as the sequel will show.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p153"></span>52.  For he entered the Church attended
by the whole of his train; it was the festival of the Epiphany, and the
Church was crowded, and, by taking his place among the people, he made a
profession of unity.  The occurrence is not to be lightly passed over. 
Upon his entrance he was struck by the thundering roll of the Psalms, by
the sea of heads of the congregation, and by the angelic rather than
human order which pervaded the sanctuary and its precincts:  while Basil
presided over his people, standing erect, as the Scripture says of
Samuel, <span id="fr_4493"></span>[4494](#fn_4493.md) with body and eyes
and mind undisturbed, as if nothing new had happened, but fixed upon God
and the sanctuary, as if, so to say, he had been a statue, while his
ministers stood around him in fear and reverence.  At this sight, and it
was indeed a sight unparalleled, overcome by human weakness, his eyes
were affected with dimness and giddiness, his mind with dread.  This was
as yet unnoticed by most people.  But when he had to offer the gifts at
the Table of God, which he must needs do himself, since no one would, as
usual, assist him, because it was uncertain whether Basil would admit
him, his feelings were revealed.  For he was staggering, and had not
some one in the sanctuary reached out a hand to steady his tottering
steps, he would have sunk to the ground in a lamentable fall.  So much
for this.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p155"></span>53.  As for the wisdom of his conference
with the Emperor, who, in his quasi-communion with us entered within the
veil to see and speak to him, as he had long desired to do, what else
can I say but that they were inspired words, which were heard by the
courtiers and by us who had entered with them?  This was the beginning
and first establishment of the Emperor’s kindly feeling towards us; the
impression produced by this reception put an end to the greater part of
the persecution which assailed us like a river.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p156"></span>54.  Another incident is not of less
importance than those I have mentioned.  The wicked were victorious, and
the decree for his banishment was signed, to the full satisfaction of
those who furthered it.  The night had come, the chariot was ready, our
haters were exultant, the pious in despair, we surrounded the zealous
traveller, to whose honourable disgrace nothing was wanting.  What
next?  It was undone by God.  For He Who smote the first-born of
Egypt, <span id="fr_4494"></span>[4495](#fn_4494.md) for its harshness
towards Israel, also struck the son of the Emperor with disease.  How
great was the speed!  There was the sentence of banishment, here the
decree of sickness:  the hand of the wicked scribe was restrained, and
the saint was preserved, and the man of piety presented to us, by the
fever which brought to reason the arrogance of the Emperor.  What could
be more just or more speedy than this?  This was the series of events: 
the Emperor’s child was sick and in bodily pain.  The father was pained
for it, for what can the father do?  On all sides he sought for aid in
his distress, he summoned the best physicians, he betook himself to
intercessions with the greatest fervour, and flung himself upon the
ground.  Affliction humbles even emperors, and no wonder, for the like
sufferings of David in the case of his child are recorded for us. <span
id="fr_4495"></span>[4496](#fn_4495.md)   But as no cure for the evil could
anywhere be found, he applied to the faith of Basil, not personally
summoning him, in shame for his recent ill treatment, but entrusting the
mission to others of his nearest and dearest friends.  On his arrival,
without the delay or reluctance which any one else might have shown, at
once the disease relaxed, and the father cherished better hopes; and had
he not blended salt water with the fresh, by trusting to the heterodox
at the same time that he summoned Basil, the child would have recovered
his health and been preserved for his father’s arms.  This indeed was
the conviction of those who were present at the time, and shared in the
distress.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p159"></span>55.  The same mischance is said to have
befallen the prefect.  He also was obliged by sickness to bow beneath
the hands of the Saint, and, in reality, to men of sense a visitation
brings instruction, and affliction is often better than prosperity.  He
fell sick, was in tears, and in pain, he sent for Basil, and entreated
him, crying out, “I own that you were in the right; only save me!”  His
request was granted, as he himself acknowledged, and convinced many who
had known <span id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_413"></span>nothing of it; for he never ceased to
wonder at and describe the powers of the prelate.  Such was his conduct
in these cases, such its result.  Did he then treat others in a
different way, and engage in petty disputes about trifles, or fail to
rise to the heights of philosophy in a course of action which merits no
praise and is best passed over in silence?  By no means.  He who once
stirred up the wicked Hadad against Israel, <span
id="fr_4496"></span>[4497](#fn_4496.md) stirred up against him the
prefect <span id="fr_4497"></span>[4498](#fn_4497.md) of the province of
Pontus; nominally, from annoyance connected with some poor creature of a
woman, but in reality as a part of the struggle of impiety against the
truth.  I pass by all his other insults against Basil, or, for it is the
same thing, against God; for it is against Him and on His behalf that
the contest was waged.  One instance of it, however, which brought
special disgrace upon the assailant, and exalted his adversary, if
philosophy and eminence for it be a great and lofty thing, I will
describe at length.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p162"></span>56.  The assessor of a judge was
attempting to force into a distasteful marriage a lady of high birth
whose husband was but recently dead.  At a loss to escape from this
high-handed treatment, she resorted to a device no less prudent than
daring.  She fled to the holy table, and placed herself under the
protection of God against outrage.  What, in the Name of the Trinity
Itself, if I may introduce into my panegyric somewhat of the forensic
style, ought to have been done, I do not say, by the great Basil, who
laid down the law for us all in such matters, but by any one who, though
far inferior to him, was a priest?  Ought he not to have allowed her
claim, to have taken charge of, and cared for, her; to have raised his
hand in defence of the kindness of God and the law which gives honour to
the altar?  Ought he not to have been willing to do and suffer anything,
rather than take part in any inhuman design against her, and outrage at
once the holy table, and the faith in which she had taken sanctuary? 
No! said the baffled judge, all ought to yield to my authority, and
Christians should betray their own laws.  The suppliant whom he
demanded, was at all hazards retained.  Accordingly, in his rage, he at
last sent some of the magistrates to search the saint’s bedchamber, with
the purpose of dishonouring him, rather than from any necessity.  What! 
Search the house of a man so free from passion, whom the angels revere,
at whom women do not venture even to look?  And, not content with this,
he summoned him, and put him on his defence; and that, in no gentle or
kindly manner, but as if he were a convict.  Upon Basil’s appearance,
standing, like my Jesus, before the judgment seat of Pilate, he presided
at the trial, full of wrath and pride.  Yet the thunderbolts did not
fall, and the sword of God still glittered, and waited, while His bow,
though bent, was restrained.  Such indeed is the custom of God.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p163"></span>57.  Consider another struggle between
our champion and his persecutor.  His ragged pallium having been ordered
to be torn away, “I will also, if you wish it, strip off my coat,” said
he.  His fleshless form was threatened with blows, and he offered to
submit to be torn with combs, and he said, “By such laceration you will
cure my liver, which, as you see, is wearing me away.”  Such was their
argument.  But when the city perceived the outrage and the common danger
of all—for each one considered this insolence a danger to himself, it
became all on fire with rage; and, like a hive roused by smoke, one
after another was stirred and arose, every race and every age, but
especially the men from the small-arms factory and from the imperial
weaving-sheds.  For men at work in these trades are specially
hot-tempered and daring, because of the liberty allowed them.  Each man
was armed with the tool he was using, or with whatever else came to hand
at the moment.  Torch in hand, amid showers of stones, with cudgel’s
ready, all ran and shouted together in their united zeal.  Anger makes a
terrible soldier or general.  Nor were the women weaponless, when roused
by such an occasion.  Their pins were their spears, and no longer
remaining women, they were by the strength of their eagerness endowed
with masculine courage.  It is a short story.  They thought that they
would share among themselves the piety of destroying him, and held him
to be most pious who first laid hands on one who had dared such deeds. 
What then was the conduct of this haughty and daring judge?  He begged
for mercy in a pitiable state of distress, cringing before them to an
unparalleled extent, until the arrival of the martyr without bloodshed,
who had won his crown without blows, and now restrained the people by
the force of his personal influence, and delivered the man who had
insulted him and now sought his protection.  This was the doing of the
God of Saints, Who worketh and changeth all things for the best, who
resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to <span id="page_414">p.
414</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_414"></span>the humble. <span
id="fr_4498"></span>[4499](#fn_4498.md)   And why should not He, Who
divided the sea and stayed the river, and ruled the elements, and by
stretching out set up a trophy, to save His exiled people, why should
not He have also rescued this man from his perils?

<span id="iii.xxvi-p165"></span>58.  This was the end and fortunate
close, in the Providence of God, of the war with the world, a close
worthy of his faith.  But here at once is the beginning of the war with
the Bishops, and their allies, which involved great disgrace, and still
greater injury to their subjects.  For who could persuade others to be
temperate, when such was the conduct of their prelates?  For a long time
they had been unkindly disposed towards him, on three grounds.  They
neither agreed with him in the matter of the faith, except in so far as
they were absolutely obliged to yield to the majority of the faithful. 
Nor had they altogether laid aside the grudge they owed him for his
election.  And, what was most grievous of all to them, though they would
have been most ashamed to own it—he so far outshone them in reputation. 
There was also a further cause of dissension which stirred up again the
others.  When our country had been divided into two provinces and
metropolitical sees, and a great part of the former was being added to
the new one, this again roused their factious spirit.  The one <span
id="fr_4499"></span>[4500](#fn_4499.md) thought it right that the
ecclesiastical boundaries should be settled by the civil ones:  and
therefore claimed those newly added, as belonging to him, and severed
from their former metropolitan.  The other <span
id="fr_4500"></span>[4501](#fn_4500.md) clung to the ancient custom, and to
the division which had come down from our fathers.  Many painful results
either actually followed, or were struggling in the womb of the future. 
Synods were wrongfully gathered by the new metropolitan, and revenues
seized upon.  Some of the presbyters of the churches refused obedience,
others were won over.  In consequence the affairs of the churches fell
into a sad state of dissension and division.  Novelty indeed has a
certain charm for men, and they readily turn events to their own
advantage, and it is easier to overthrow something which is already
established, than to restore it when overthrown.  What however enraged
him most was, that the revenues <span
id="fr_4501"></span>[4502](#fn_4501.md) of the Taurus, which passed along
before his eyes, accrued to his rival, as also the offerings at Saint
Orestes’, <span id="fr_4502"></span>[4503](#fn_4502.md) of which he was
greatly desirous to reap the fruits.  He even went so far as, on one
occasion when Basil was riding along his own road, to seize his mules by
the bridle and bar the passage with a robber band.  And with how
specious a pretext, the care of his spiritual children and of the souls
entrusted to him, and the defence of the faith—pretexts which veiled
that most common vice, insatiable avarice—and further, the wrongfulness
of paying dues to heretics, a heretic being any one who had displeased
him.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p170"></span>59.  The holy man of God however,
metropolitan as he was of the true Jerusalem above, was neither carried
away with the failure of those who fell, nor allowed himself to overlook
this conduct, nor did he desire any inadequate remedy for the evil.  Let
us see how great and wonderful it was, or, I would say, how worthy of
his soul.  He made of the dissension a cause of increase to the Church,
and the disaster, under his most able management, resulted in the
multiplication of the Bishops of the country.  From this ensued three
most desirable consequences; a greater care for souls, the management by
each city of its own affairs, and the cessation of the war in this
quarter.  I am afraid that I myself was treated as an appendage to this
scheme.  By no other term can I readily describe the position.  Greatly
as I admire his whole conduct, to an extent indeed beyond my powers of
expression, of this single particular I find it impossible to approve,
for I will acknowledge my feelings in regard to it, though these are
from other sources not unknown to most of you.  I mean the change and
faithlessness of his treatment of myself, a cause of pain which even
time has not obliterated.  For this is the source of all the
inconsistency and tangle of my life; it has robbed me of the practice,
or at least the reputation, of philosophy; of small moment though the
latter be.  The defence, which you will perhaps allow me to make for
him, is this; his ideas were superhuman, and having, before his death,
become superior to worldly influences, his only interests were those of
the Spirit:  while his regard for friendship was in no wise lessened by
his readiness then, and then only, to disregard its claims, when they
were in conflict with his paramount duty to God, and when the end he had
in view was of greater importance than the interests he was compelled to
set aside.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p171"></span>60.  I am afraid that, in avoiding the
imputation of indifference at the hands of those <span id="page_415">p.
415</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_415"></span>who desire to know all
that can be said about him, I shall incur a charge of prolixity from
those whose ideal is the golden mean.  For the latter Basil himself had
the greatest respect, being specially devoted to the adage “In all
things the mean <span id="fr_4503"></span>[4504](#fn_4503.md) is the best,”
and acting upon it throughout his life.  Nevertheless, disregarding
alike those who desire undue conciseness or excessive prolixity, I
proceed thus with my speech.  Different men attain success in different
ways, some applying themselves to one alone of the many forms of
excellence, but no one, of those hitherto known to me, arriving at the
highest eminence in all respects; he being in my opinion the best, who
has won his laurels on the widest field, or gained the highest possible
renown in some single particular.  Such however was the height of
Basil’s fame, that he became the pride of human kind.  Let us consider
the matter thus.  Is any one devoted to poverty and a life devoid of
property, and free from superfluity?  What did he possess besides his
body, and the necessary coverings of the flesh?  His wealth was the
having nothing, and he thought the cross, with which he lived, more
precious than great riches.  For no one, however much he may wish, can
obtain possession of all things, but any one can learn to despise, and
so prove himself superior to, all things.  Such being his mind, and such
his life, he had no need of an altar and of vainglory, nor of such a
public announcement as “Crates <span
id="fr_4504"></span>[4505](#fn_4504.md) sets Crates the Theban free.”  For
his aim was ever to be, not to seem, most excellent.  Nor did he dwell
in a tub, <span id="fr_4505"></span>[4506](#fn_4505.md) and in the midst of
the market-place, and so by luxuriating in publicity turn his poverty
into riches:  but was poor and unkempt, yet without ostentation:  and
taking cheerfully the casting overboard of all that he ever had, sailed
lightly across the sea of life.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p175"></span>61.  A wondrous thing is temperance, and
fewness of wants, and freedom from the dominion of pleasures, and from
the bondage of that cruel and degrading mistress, the belly.  Who was so
independent of food, and, without exaggeration, more free from the
flesh?  For he flung away all satiety and surfeit to creatures destitute
of reason, whose life is slavish and debasing.  He paid little attention
to such things as, next to the appetite, are of equal rank, but, as far
as possible, lived on the merest necessaries, his only luxury being to
prove himself not luxurious, and not, in consequence, to have greater
needs:  but he looked to the lilies and the birds, <span
id="fr_4506"></span>[4507](#fn_4506.md) whose beauty is artless, and their
food casual, according to the important advice of my Christ, who made
Himself poor <span id="fr_4507"></span>[4508](#fn_4507.md) in the flesh for
our sakes, that we might enjoy the riches of His Godhead.  Hence came
his single coat and well worn cloak, and his bed on the bare ground, his
vigils, his unwashedness (such were his decorations) and his most sweet
food and relish, bread, and salt, his new dainty, and the sober and
plentiful drink, with which fountains supply those who are free from
trouble.  The result, or the accompaniment, of these things were the
attendance on the sick and practice of medicine, our common intellectual
pursuit.  For, though inferior to him in all other respects, I must
needs be his equal in distress.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p178"></span>62.  A great thing is virginity, and
celibacy, and being ranked with the angels, and with the single nature;
for I shrink from calling it Christ’s, Who, though He willed to be born
for our sakes who are born, by being born of a Virgin, enacted <span
id="fr_4508"></span>[4509](#fn_4508.md) the law of virginity, to lead us
away from this life, and cut short the power of the world, or rather, to
transmit one world to another, the present to the future.  Who then paid
more honour to virginity, or had more control of the flesh, not only by
his personal example, but in those under his care?  Whose are the
convents, and the written regulations, by which he subdued every sense,
and regulated every member, and won to the real practice of virginity,
turning inward the view of beauty, from the visible to the invisible;
and by wasting away the external, and withdrawing fuel from the flame,
and revealing the secrets of the heart to God, Who is the only
bridegroom of pure souls, and takes in with himself the watchful souls,
if they go to meet him with lamps burning and a plentiful supply of
oil? <span id="fr_4509"></span>[4510](#fn_4509.md)   Moreover he reconciled
most excellently and united the solitary and the community life.  These
had been in many respects at variance and dissension, while neither of
them was in absolute and unalloyed possession of good or evil:  the one
being more calm and settled, tending to union with God, yet not free
from pride, inasmuch as its virtue lies beyond the means of testing or
comparison; the other, which is of more practical service, being not
free from the tendency to turbulence.  He founded cells <span
id="fr_4510"></span>[4511](#fn_4510.md) for ascetics <span id="page_416">p.
416</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_416"></span>and hermits, but at no
great distance from his cenobitic communities, and, instead of
distinguishing and separating the one from the other, as if by some
intervening wall, he brought them together and united them, in order
that the contemplative spirit might not be cut off from society, nor the
active life be uninfluenced by the contemplative, but that, like sea and
land, by an interchange of their several gifts, they might unite in
promoting the one object, the glory of God.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p182"></span>63.  What more?  A noble thing is
philanthropy, and the support of the poor, and the assistance of human
weakness.  Go forth a little way from the city, and behold the new
city, <span id="fr_4511"></span>[4512](#fn_4511.md) the storehouse of
piety, the common treasury of the wealthy, in which the superfluities of
their wealth, aye, and even their necessaries, are stored, in
consequence of his exhortations, freed from the power of the moth, <span
id="fr_4512"></span>[4513](#fn_4512.md) no longer gladdening the eyes of
the thief, and escaping both the emulation of envy, and the corruption
of time:  where disease is regarded in a religious light, and disaster
is thought a blessing, and sympathy is put to the test.  Why should I
compare with this work Thebes <span id="fr_4513"></span>[4514](#fn_4513.md)
of the seen portals, and the Egyptian Thebes, and the walls of Babylon,
and the Carian tomb of Mausolus, and the Pyramids, and the bronze
without weight of the Colossus, or the size and beauty of shrines that
are no more, and all the other objects of men’s wonder, and historic
record, from which their founders gained no advantage, except a slight
meed of fame.  My subject is the most wonderful of all, the short road
to salvation, the easiest ascent to heaven.  There is no longer before
our eyes that terrible and piteous spectacle of men who are living
corpses, the greater part of whose limbs have mortified, driven away
from their cities and homes and public places and fountains, aye, and
from their own dearest ones, recognizable by their names rather than by
their features:  they are no longer brought before us at our gatherings
and meetings, in our common intercourse and union, no longer the objects
of hatred, instead of pity on account of their disease; composers of
piteous songs, if any of them have their voice still left to them.  Why
should I try to express in tragic style all our experiences, when no
language can be adequate to their hard lot?  He however it was, who took
the lead in pressing upon those who were men, that they ought not to
despise their fellowmen, nor to dishonour Christ, the one Head of all,
by their inhuman treatment of them; but to use the misfortunes of others
as an opportunity of firmly establishing their own lot, and to lend to
God that mercy of which they stand in need at His hands.  He did not
therefore disdain to honour with his lips this disease, noble and of
noble ancestry and brilliant reputation though he was, but saluted them
as brethren, not, as some might suppose, from vainglory, (for who was so
far removed from this feeling?) but taking the lead in approaching to
tend them, as a consequence of his philosophy, and so giving not only a
speaking, but also a silent, instruction.  The effect produced is to be
seen not only in the city, but in the country and beyond, and even the
leaders of society have vied with one another in their philanthropy and
magnanimity towards them.  Others have had their cooks, and splendid
tables, and the devices and dainties of confectioners, and exquisite
carriages, and soft, flowing robes; Basil’s care was for the sick, and
the relief of their wounds, and the imitation of Christ, by cleansing
leprosy, not by a word, but in deed.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p186"></span>64.  As to all this, what will be said
by those who charge him with pride and haughtiness?  Severe critics they
are of such conduct, applying to him, whose life was a standard, those
who were not standards at all.  Is it possible that he who kissed the
lepers, and humiliated himself to such a degree, could treat haughtily
those who were in health:  and, while wasting his flesh by abstinence,
puff out his soul with empty arrogance?  Is it possible to condemn the
Pharisee, and expound the debasing effect of haughtiness, to know
Christ, Who condescended to the form of a slave, and ate with publicans,
and washed the disciples’ feet, and did not disdain the cross, in order
to nail my sin to it:  and, more incredible still, to see God crucified,
aye, along with robbers also, and derided by the passers by, impassible,
and beyond the reach of suffering as He is; and yet, as his slanderers
imagine, soar himself above the clouds, and think that nothing can be on
an equality with him.  Nay, what they term pride is, I fancy, the
firmness and steadfastness and stability of his character.  Such persons
would readily, it seems to me, call bravery rashness, and the
circumspect a coward, and the temperate misanthropic, and the just
illiberal.  For indeed this philosophic axiom is excellent, which says
that the vices <span id="fr_4514"></span>[4515](#fn_4514.md) are settled
close to the <span id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_417"></span>virtues, and are, in some sense, their
next-door neighbours:  and it is most easy, for those whose training in
such subjects has been defective, to mistake a man for what he is not. 
For who honoured virtue and castigated vice more than he, or showed
himself more kind to the upright, more severe to the wrong doers?  His
very smile often amounted to praise, his silence to rebuke, racking the
evil in the secret conscience.  And if a man have not been a chatterer,
and jester, and gossip, nor a general favourite, because of having
pleased others by becoming all things to all men, <span
id="fr_4515"></span>[4516](#fn_4515.md) what of that?  Is he not in the
eyes of sensible men worthy of praise rather than of blame?  Unless it
is a fault in the lion that he is terrible and royal, and does not look
like an ape, and that his spring is noble, and is valued for its
wonderfulness:  while stage-players ought to win our admiration for
their pleasant and philanthropic characters, because they please the
vulgar, and raise a laugh by their sounding slaps in the face.  And if
this indeed be our object, who was so pleasant when you met him, as I
know, who have had the longest experience?  Who was more kindly in his
stories, more refined in his wit, more tender in his rebukes?  His
reproofs gave rise to no arrogance, his relaxation to no dissipation,
but avoiding excess in either, he made use of both in reason and season,
according to the rules of Solomon, who assigns to every business a
season. <span id="fr_4516"></span>[4517](#fn_4516.md)

<span id="iii.xxvi-p190"></span>65.  But what are these to his renown
for eloquence, and his powers of instruction, which have won the favour
of the ends of the world?  As yet we have been compassing the foot of
the mountain, to the neglect of its summit, as yet we have been crossing
a strait, paying no heed to the mighty and deep ocean.  For I think that
if any one ever has become, or can become, a trumpet, in his far
sounding resonance, or a voice of God, embracing the universe, or an
earthquake of the world, by some unheard of miracle, it is his voice and
intellect which deserve these titles, for surpassing and excelling all
men as much as we surpass the irrational creatures.  Who, more than he,
cleansed himself by the Spirit, and made himself worthy to set forth
divine things?  Who was more enlightened by the light of knowledge, and
had a closer insight into the depths of the Spirit, and by the aid of
God beheld the things of God?  Whose language could better express
intellectual truth, without, as most men do, limping on one foot, by
either failing to express his ideas, or allowing his eloquence to
outstrip his reasoning powers?  In both respects he won a like
distinction, and showed himself to be his own equal, and absolutely
perfect.  To search all things, yea, the deep things of God <span
id="fr_4517"></span>[4518](#fn_4517.md) is, according to the testimony of
S. Paul, the office of the Spirit, not because He is ignorant of them,
but because He takes delight in their contemplation.  Now all the things
of the Spirit Basil had fully investigated, and hence he drew his
instructions for every kind of character, his lessons in the sublime,
and his exhortations to quit things present, and adapt ourselves to
things to come.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p192"></span>66.  The sun is extolled by David for
its beauty, its greatness, its swift course, and its power, splendid as
a bridegroom, majestic as a giant; <span
id="fr_4518"></span>[4519](#fn_4518.md) while, from the extent of its
circuit, it has such power that it equally sheds its light from one end
of heaven to the other, and the heat thereof is in no wise lessened by
distance.  Basil’s beauty was virtue, his greatness theology, his course
the perpetual motion reaching even to God by its ascents, and his power
the sowing and distribution of the Word.  So that I will not hesitate to
say even this, his utterance went out into all lands, <span
id="fr_4519"></span>[4520](#fn_4519.md) and the power of his words to the
ends of the world:  as S. Paul says of the Apostles, <span
id="fr_4520"></span>[4521](#fn_4520.md) borrowing the words from David. 
What other charm is there in any gathering to-day?  What pleasure in
banquets, in the courts, in the churches?  What delight in those in
authority, and those beneath them?  What in the hermits, or the
cenobites?  What in the leisured classes, or those busied in affairs? 
What in profane schools of philosophy or in our own?  There is one,
which runs through all, and is the greatest—his writings and labours. 
Nor do writers require any supply of matter besides his teaching or
writings.  All the laborious studies of old days in the Divine oracles
are silent, while the new ones are in everybody’s mouth, and he is the
best teacher among us who has the deepest acquaintance with his works,
and speaks of them and explains them in our ears.  For he alone more
than supplies the place of all others to those who are specially eager
for instruction.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p196"></span>67.  I will only say this of him. 
Whenever I handle his Hexaemeron, and take its words on my lips, I am
brought into the presence of the Creator, and understand the words of
creation, and admire the Creator more than before, using my teacher as
my only means of <span id="page_418">p. 418</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_418"></span>sight.  Whenever I take up his polemical
works, I see the fire of Sodom, <span
id="fr_4521"></span>[4522](#fn_4521.md) by which the wicked and rebellious
tongues are reduced to ashes, or the tower of Chalane, <span
id="fr_4522"></span>[4523](#fn_4522.md) impiously built, <span
id="fr_4523"></span>[4524](#fn_4523.md) and righteously destroyed. 
Whenever I read his writings on the Spirit, I find the God Whom I
possess, and grow bold in my utterance of the truth, from the support of
his theology and contemplation.  His other treatises, in which he gives
explanations for those who are shortsighted, by a threefold inscription
on the solid tablets of his heart, lead me on from a mere literal or
symbolical interpretation to a still wider view, as I proceed from one
depth to another, calling upon deep <span
id="fr_4524"></span>[4525](#fn_4524.md) after deep, and finding light after
light, until I attain the highest pinnacle.  When I study his panegyrics
on our athletes, I despise the body, and enjoy the society of those whom
he is praising, and rouse myself to the struggle.  His moral and
practical discourses purify soul and body, making me a temple fit for
God, and an instrument struck by the Spirit, to celebrate by its strains
the glory and power of God.  In fact, he reduces me to harmony and
order, and changes me by a Divine transformation.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p201"></span>68.  Since I have mentioned theology,
and his most sublime treatises in this science, I will make this
addition to what I have already said.  For it is of great service to the
community, to save them from being injured by an unjustifiably low
opinion of him.  My remarks are directed against those evil disposed
persons who shelter their own vices under cover of their calumnies
against others.  In his defence of orthodox teaching, and of the union
and coequal divinity of the Holy Trinity, to use terms which are, I
think, as exact and clear as possible, he would have eagerly welcomed as
a gain, and not a danger, not only expulsion from his see, in which he
had originally no desire to be enthroned, but even exile, and death, and
its preliminary tortures.  This is manifest from his actual conduct and
sufferings.  For when he had been sentenced to banishment on behalf of
the truth, the only notice which he took of it was, to bid one of his
servants to take his writing tablet and follow him.  He held it
necessary, according to the divine David’s advice, to guide his words
with discretion, <span id="fr_4525"></span>[4526](#fn_4525.md) and to
endure for a while the time of war, and the ascendency of the heretics,
until it should be succeeded by a time of freedom and calm, which would
admit of freedom of speech.  The enemy were on the watch for the
unqualified statement “the Spirit is God;” which, although it is true,
they and the wicked patron of their impiety imagined to be impious; so
that they might banish him and his power of theological instruction from
the city, and themselves be able to seize upon the church, and make it
the starting point and citadel, from which they could overrun with their
evil doctrine the rest of the world.  Accordingly, by the use of other
terms, and by statements which unmistakably had the same meaning, and by
arguments necessarily leading to this conclusion, he so overpowered his
antagonists, that they were left without reply, and involved in their
own admissions,—the greatest proof possible of dialectical power and
skill.  His treatise on this subject makes it further manifest, being
evidently written by a pen borrowed from the Spirit’s store.  He
postponed for the time the use of the exact term, begging as a favour
from the Spirit Himself and his earnest champions, that they would not
be annoyed at his economy, <span id="fr_4526"></span>[4527](#fn_4526.md)
nor, by clinging to a single expression, ruin the whole cause, from an
uncompromising temper, at a crisis when religion was in peril.  He
assured them that they would suffer no injury from a slight change in
their expressions, and from teaching the same truth in other terms.  For
our salvation is not so much a matter of words as of actions; for we
would not reject the Jews, if they desired to unite with us, and yet for
a while sought to use the term “Anointed” instead of “Christ:”  while
the community would suffer a very serious injury, if the church were
seized upon by the heretics.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p204"></span>69.  That he, no less than any other,
acknowledged that the Spirit is God, is plain from his often having
publicly preached this truth, whenever opportunity offered, and eagerly
confessed it when questioned in private.  But he made it more clear in
his conversations with me, from whom he concealed nothing during our
conferences upon this subject.  Not content with simply asserting it, he
proceeded, as he had but very seldom done before, to imprecate upon
himself that most terrible fate of separation from the Spirit, if he did
not adore the Spirit as consubstantial and coequal with the Father and
the Son.  And if any one would accept me as having been his fellow
labourer in this cause, I will set forth one point hitherto unknown to
most men.  Under the pressure of the difficulties <span id="page_419">p.
419</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_419"></span>of the period, he himself
undertook the economy, while allowing freedom of speech to me, whom no
one was likely to drag from obscurity to trial or banishment, in order
that by our united efforts our Gospel might be firmly established.  I
mention this, not to defend his reputation, for the man is stronger than
his assailants, if there are any such; but to prevent men from thinking
that the terms found in his writings are the utmost limit of the truth,
and so have their faith weakened, and consider that their own error is
supported by his theology, which was the joint result of the influences
of the time and of the Spirit, instead of considering the sense of his
writings, and the object with which they were written, so as to be
brought closer to the truth, and enabled to silence the partisans of
impiety.  At any rate let his theology be mine, and that of all dear to
me!  And so confident am I of his spotlessness in this respect, that I
take him for my partner in this, as in all else:  and may what is mine
be attributed to him, what is his to me, both at the hands of God, and
of the wisest of men!  For we would not say that the Evangelists are at
variance with one another, because some are more occupied with the human
side of the Christ, and others pay attention to His Divinity; some
having commenced their history with what is within our own experience,
others with what is above us; and by thus sharing the substance of their
message, they have procured the advantage of those who receive it, and
followed the impressions of the Spirit Who was within them.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p205"></span>70.  Come then, there have been many men
of old days illustrious for piety, as lawgivers, generals, prophets,
teachers, and men brave to the shedding of blood.  Let us compare our
prelate with them, and thus recognize his merit.  Adam was honoured by
the hand of God, <span id="fr_4527"></span>[4528](#fn_4527.md) and the
delights of Paradise, <span id="fr_4528"></span>[4529](#fn_4528.md) and the
first legislation: <span id="fr_4529"></span>[4530](#fn_4529.md)   but,
unless I slander the reputation of our first parent, he kept not the
command.  Now Basil both received and observed it, and received no
injury from the tree of knowledge, and escaped the flaming sword, and,
as I am well assured, has attained to Paradise.  Enos first ventured to
call upon the Lord. <span id="fr_4530"></span>[4531](#fn_4530.md)   Basil
both called upon Him himself, and, what is far more excellent, preached
Him to others.  Enoch was translated, <span
id="fr_4531"></span>[4532](#fn_4531.md) attaining to his translation as the
reward of a little piety (for the faith was still in shadow) and escaped
the peril of the remainder of life, but Basil’s whole life was a
translation, and he was completely tested in a complete life.  Noah was
entrusted with the ark, <span id="fr_4532"></span>[4533](#fn_4532.md) and
the seeds of a new world committed to a small house of wood, in their
preservation from the waters.  Basil escaped the deluge of impiety and
made of his own city an ark of safety, which sailed lightly over the
heretics, and afterwards recovered the whole world.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p212"></span>71.  Abraham was a great man, a
patriarch, the offerer of the new sacrifice, <span
id="fr_4533"></span>[4534](#fn_4533.md) by presenting to Him who had given
it the promised seed, as a ready offering, eager for slaughter.  But
Basil’s offering was no slight one, when he offered himself to God,
without any equivalent being given in his stead, (for how could that
have been possible?) so that his sacrifice was consummated.  Isaac was
promised even before his birth, <span
id="fr_4534"></span>[4535](#fn_4534.md) Basil promised himself, and took
for his spouse Rebekah, I mean the Church, not fetched from a distance
by the mission of a servant, <span id="fr_4535"></span>[4536](#fn_4535.md)
but bestowed upon and entrusted to him by God close at home:  nor was he
outwitted in the preference of his children, but bestowed upon each what
was due to him, without any deception, according to the judgment of the
Spirit.  I extol the ladder of Jacob, <span
id="fr_4536"></span>[4537](#fn_4536.md) and the pillar which he anointed to
God, and his wrestling with Him, whatever it was; and, in my opinion, it
was the contrast and opposition of the human stature to the height of
God, resulting in the tokens of the defeat <span
id="fr_4537"></span>[4538](#fn_4537.md) of his race.  I extol also his
clever devices and success in cattle-breeding, and his children, the
twelve Patriarchs, and the distribution of his blessings, with their
glorious prophecy of the future.  But I still more extol Basil for the
ladder which he did not merely see, but which he ascended by successive
steps towards excellence, and the pillar which he did not anoint, but
which he erected to God, by pillorying the teaching of the ungodly; and
the wrestling with which he wrestled, not with God, but, on behalf of
God, to the overthrow of the heretics; and his pastoral care, whereby he
grew rich, through gaining for himself a number of marked sheep greater
than that of the unmarked, and his illustrious fruitfulness in spiritual
children, and the blessing with which he established many.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p218"></span>72.  Joseph was a provider of
corn, <span id="fr_4538"></span>[4539](#fn_4538.md) but in Egypt only, and
not frequently, and of bodily food.  Basil did so for all men, and at
all <span id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span
id="iii.xxvi-Page_420"></span>times, and in spiritual food, and
therefore, in my opinion, his was the more honourable function.  Like
Job, the man of Uz, <span id="fr_4539"></span>[4540](#fn_4539.md) he was
both tempted, and overcame, and at the close of his struggles gained
splendid honour, having been shaken by none of his many assailants, and
having gained a decisive victory over the efforts of the tempter, and
put to silence the unreason of his friends, who knew not the mysterious
character of his affliction.  “Moses and Aaron among His priests.” <span
id="fr_4540"></span>[4541](#fn_4540.md)   Truly was Moses great, who
inflicted the plagues upon Egypt, <span
id="fr_4541"></span>[4542](#fn_4541.md) and delivered the people among many
signs and wonders, and entered within the cloud, and sanctioned the
double law, outward in the letter, and inward in the Spirit.  Aaron was
Moses’ brother, <span id="fr_4542"></span>[4543](#fn_4542.md) both
naturally and spiritually, and offered sacrifices and prayers for the
people, as the hierophant of the great and holy tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched, and not man. <span id="fr_4543"></span>[4544](#fn_4543.md)  
Of both of them Basil was a rival, for he tortured, not with bodily but
with spiritual and mental plagues, the Egyptian race of heretics, and
led to the land of promise <span id="fr_4544"></span>[4545](#fn_4544.md)
the people of possession, zealous of good works; <span
id="fr_4545"></span>[4546](#fn_4545.md) he inscribed laws, which are no
longer obscure, but entirely spiritual, on tables <span
id="fr_4546"></span>[4547](#fn_4546.md) which are not broken but are
preserved; he entered the Holy of holies, <span
id="fr_4547"></span>[4548](#fn_4547.md) not once a year, but often, I may
say every day, and thence he revealed to us the Holy Trinity; and
cleansed the people, not with temporary sprinklings, but with eternal
purifications:  What is the special excellence of Joshua? <span
id="fr_4548"></span>[4549](#fn_4548.md)   His generalship, and the
distribution of the inheritance, and the taking possession of the Holy
Land.  And was not Basil an Exarch? <span
id="fr_4549"></span>[4550](#fn_4549.md)   Was he not a general of those who
are saved by faith? <span id="fr_4550"></span>[4551](#fn_4550.md)   Did he
not assign the different inheritances and abodes, according to the will
of God, among his followers?  So that he too could use the words, “The
lot is fallen unto me in pleasant places; <span
id="fr_4551"></span>[4552](#fn_4551.md) and “my fortunes are in Thy
hands,” <span id="fr_4552"></span>[4553](#fn_4552.md) fortunes more
precious than those which come to us on earth, and can be snatched away.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p234"></span>73.  Further, to run over the Judges, or
the most illustrious of the Judges, there is “Samuel among those that
call upon His Name,” <span id="fr_4553"></span>[4554](#fn_4553.md) who was
given to God before his birth, <span
id="fr_4554"></span>[4555](#fn_4554.md) and sanctified immediately after
his birth, and the anointer with his horn of kings and priests. <span
id="fr_4555"></span>[4556](#fn_4555.md)   But was not Basil as an infant
consecrated to God from the womb, and offered with a coat <span
id="fr_4556"></span>[4557](#fn_4556.md) at the altar, and was he not a seer
of heavenly things, and anointed of the Lord, and the anointer of those
who are perfected by the Spirit?  Among the kings, David is celebrated,
whose victories and trophies <span id="fr_4557"></span>[4558](#fn_4557.md)
gained from the enemy are on record, but his most characteristic trait
was his gentleness, <span id="fr_4558"></span>[4559](#fn_4558.md) and,
before his kingly office, his power with the harp, able to soothe even
the evil spirit.  Solomon asked of God and obtained breadth of
heart, <span id="fr_4559"></span>[4560](#fn_4559.md) making the furthest
possible progress in wisdom and contemplation, so that he became the
most famous man of his time.  Basil, in my opinion, was in no wise, or
but little inferior, to the one in gentleness, to the other in wisdom,
so that he soothed the arrogance of infuriated sovereigns; and did not
merely bring the queen of the south from the ends of the earth, or any
other individual, to visit him because of his renown for wisdom, but
made his wisdom known in all the ends of the world.  I pass over the
rest of Solomon’s life.  Even if we spare it, it is evident to all.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p242"></span>74.  Do you praise the courage of
Elijah <span id="fr_4560"></span>[4561](#fn_4560.md) in the presence of
tyrants, and his fiery translation? <span
id="fr_4561"></span>[4562](#fn_4561.md)   Or the fair inheritance of
Elisha, the sheepskin mantle, accompanied by the spirit of Elijah? <span
id="fr_4562"></span>[4563](#fn_4562.md)   You must also praise the life of
Basil, spent in the fire.  I mean in the multitude of temptations, and
his escape through fire, which burnt, but did not consume, the mystery
of “the bush,” <span id="fr_4563"></span>[4564](#fn_4563.md) and the fair
cloak of skin from on high, his indifference to the flesh.  I pass by
the rest, the three young men bedewed in the fire, <span
id="fr_4564"></span>[4565](#fn_4564.md) the fugitive prophet praying in the
whale’s belly, <span id="fr_4565"></span>[4566](#fn_4565.md) and coming
forth from the creature, as from a chamber; the just man in the den,
restraining the lions’ rage, <span id="fr_4566"></span>[4567](#fn_4566.md)
and the struggle of the seven Maccabees, <span
id="fr_4567"></span>[4568](#fn_4567.md) who were perfected with their
father and mother in blood, and in all kinds of tortures.  Their
endurance he rivalled, and won their glory.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p251"></span>75.  I now turn to the New Testament,
and comparing his life with those who are here illustrious, I shall find
in the teachers a source of honour for their disciple.  Who was the
forerunner of Jesus? <span id="fr_4568"></span>[4569](#fn_4568.md)   John,
the voice of the Word, <span id="fr_4569"></span>[4570](#fn_4569.md) the
lamp of the Light, <span id="fr_4570"></span>[4571](#fn_4570.md) before
Whom he even leaped in the womb, <span
id="fr_4571"></span>[4572](#fn_4571.md) and Whom he preceded to Hades,
whither he was despatched by the rage of Herod, <span
id="fr_4572"></span>[4573](#fn_4572.md) to herald even there <span
id="page_421">p. 421</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_421"></span>Him who
was coming.  And, if my language seems audacious to anyone, let me
assure him beforehand, that in making this comparison, I neither prefer
Basil, nor imply that he is equal to him who surpasses all who are born
of women, <span id="fr_4573"></span>[4574](#fn_4573.md) but only show that
he was stirred to emulation, and possessed to some extent his striking
features.  For it is no slight thing for the earnest to imitate the
greatest of men, even in a slight degree.  Is it not indeed manifest
that Basil was a copy of John’s asceticism?  He also lived in the
wilderness, and wore in nightly watchings a ragged garb, during his
shrinking retirement; he also loved a similar food, purifying himself
for God by abstinence; he also was thought worthy to be a herald, if not
a forerunner, of Christ, and there went out to him not only all the
region round about, <span id="fr_4574"></span>[4575](#fn_4574.md) but also
that which was beyond its borders; he also stood between the two
covenants, abolishing the letter of the one by administering the spirit
of the other, and bringing about the fulfilment of the hidden law
through the dissolution of that which was apparent.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p259"></span>76.  He emulated the zeal of
Peter, <span id="fr_4575"></span>[4576](#fn_4575.md) the intensity of Paul,
the faith of both these men of name and of surname, the lofty utterance
of the sons of Zebedee, the frugality and simplicity of all the
disciples.  Therefore he was also entrusted with the keys of the
heavens, <span id="fr_4576"></span>[4577](#fn_4576.md) and not only from
Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum, <span
id="fr_4577"></span>[4578](#fn_4577.md) but he embraces a wider circle in
the Gospel; he is not named, but becomes, a Son of thunder; and lying
upon the breast of Jesus, he draws thence the power of his word, and the
depth of his thoughts.  He was prevented from becoming a Stephen, <span
id="fr_4578"></span>[4579](#fn_4578.md) eager though he was, since
reverence stayed the hands of those who would have stoned him.  I am
able to sum up still more concisely, to avoid treating in detail on
these points of each individual.  In some respects he discovered, in
some he emulated, in others he surpassed the good.  In his many-sided
virtues he excelled all men of this day.  I have but one thing left to
say, and in few words.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p264"></span>77.  So great was his virtue, and the
eminence of his fame, that many of his minor characteristics, nay, even
his physical defects, have been assumed by others with a view to
notoriety.  For instance his paleness, his beard, his gait, his
thoughtful, and generally meditative, hesitation in speaking, which, in
the ill-judged, inconsiderate imitation of many, took the form of
melancholy.  And besides, the style of his dress, the shape of his bed,
and his manner of eating, none of which was to him a matter of
consequence, but simply the result of accident and chance.  So you might
see many Basils in outward semblance, among these statues in outline,
for it would be too much to call them his distant echo.  For an echo,
though it is the dying away of a sound, at any rate represents it with
great clearness, while these men fall too far short of him to satisfy
even their desire to approach him.  Nor was it a slight thing, but a
matter with good reason held in the highest estimation, to chance to
have met him or done him some service, or to carry away the souvenir of
something which he had said or done in jest or in earnest:  as I know
that I have myself often taken pride in doing; for his improvisations
were much more precious and brilliant than the laboured efforts of other
men.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p265"></span>78.  But when, after he had finished his
course, and kept the faith, <span id="fr_4579"></span>[4580](#fn_4579.md)
he longed to depart, and the time for his crown was approaching, <span
id="fr_4580"></span>[4581](#fn_4580.md) he did not hear the summons:  “Get
thee up into the mountain and die,” <span
id="fr_4581"></span>[4582](#fn_4581.md) but “Die and come up to us.”  And
here again he wrought a wonder in no wise inferior to those mentioned
before.  For when he was almost dead, and breathless, and had lost the
greater part of his powers; he grew stronger in his last words, so as to
depart with the utterances of religion, and, by ordaining the most
excellent of his attendants, bestowed upon them both his hand and the
Spirit:  so that his disciples, who had aided him in his priestly
office, might not be defrauded of the priesthood.  The remainder of my
task I approach, but with reluctance, as it would fall more fully from
the mouths of others than from my own.  For I cannot philosophise over
my misfortune, even if I greatly longed to do so, when I recollect that
the loss is common to us all, and that the misfortune has befallen the
whole world.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p269"></span>79.  He lay, drawing his last breath,
and awaited by the choir on high, towards which he had long directed his
gaze.  Around him poured the whole city, unable to bear his loss,
inveighing against his departure, as if it had been an oppression, and
clinging to his soul, as though it had been capable of restraint or
compulsion at their hands or their prayers.  Their suffering had driven
them distracted, all were eager, were it possible, to add to his life a
portion of their own.  And when they failed, for it must needs be proved
that he was a man, and, with his last words “Into thy Hands I commend my
spirit,” <span id="fr_4582"></span>[4583](#fn_4582.md) he had joyfully
resigned his soul to the care of the angels who carried him away; not
without having some religious instructions and injunctions for the
benefit of those who were present—then occurred a wonder more remarkable
than any which had happened before.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p271"></span>80.  The saint was being carried out,
lifted high by the hands of holy men, and everyone was eager, some to
seize the hem of his garment, <span id="fr_4583"></span>[4584](#fn_4583.md)
others only just to touch the shadow, <span
id="fr_4584"></span>[4585](#fn_4584.md) or the bier which bore his holy
remains (for what could be more holy or pure than that body), others to
draw near to those who were carrying <span id="page_422">p. 422</span>
<span id="iii.xxvi-Page_422"></span>it, others only to enjoy the sight,
as if even this were beneficial.  Market places, porticos, houses of two
or three stories were filled with people escorting, preceding,
following, accompanying him, and trampling upon each other; tens of
thousands of every race and age, beyond all previous experience.  The
psalmody was overborne by the lamentations, philosophic resignation sank
beneath the misfortune.  Our own people vied with strangers, Jews,
Greeks, and foreigners, and they with us, for a greater share in the
benefit, by means of a more abundant lamentation.  To close my story,
the calamity ended in danger; many souls departed along with him, from
the violence of the pushing and confusion, who have been thought happy
in their end, departing together with him, “funeral victims,” perhaps
some fervid orator might call them.  The body having at last escaped
from those who would seize it, and made its way through those who went
before it, was consigned to the tomb of his fathers, the high priest
being added to the priests, the mighty voice which rings in my ears to
the heralds, the martyr to the martyrs.  And now he is in heaven, where,
if I mistake not, he is offering sacrifices for us, and praying for the
people, for though, he has left us, he has not entirely left us.  While
I, Gregory, who am half dead, and, cleft in twain, torn away from our
great union, and dragging along a life of pain which runs not easily, as
may be supposed, after separation from him, know not what is to be my
end now that I have lost my guidance.  And even now I am admonished and
instructed in nightly visions, if ever I fall short of my duty.  And my
present object is not so much to mingle lamentations with my praises, or
to portray the public life of the man, or publish a picture of virtue
common to all time, and an example salutary to all churches, and to all
souls, which we may keep in view, as a living law, and so rightly direct
our lives as to counsel you, who have been completely initiated into his
doctrine, to fix your eyes upon him, as one who sees you and is seen by
you, and thus to be perfected by the Spirit.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p274"></span>81.  Come hither then, and surround me,
all ye members of his choir, both of the clergy and the laity, both of
our own country and from abroad; aid me in my eulogy, by each supplying
or demanding the account of some of his excellences.  Regard, ye
occupants of the bench, the lawgiver; ye politicians, the statesman; ye
men of the people, his orderliness; ye men of letters, the instructor;
ye virgins, the leader of the bride; ye who are yoked in marriage, the
restrainer; ye hermits, him who gave you wings; ye cenobites, the judge;
ye simple men, the guide; ye contemplatives, the divine; ye cheerful
ones, the bridle; ye unfortunate men, the consoler, the staff of hoar
hairs, the guide of youth, the relief of poverty, the steward of
abundance.  Widows also will, I imagine, praise their protector, orphans
their father, poor men their friend, strangers their entertainer,
brothers the man of brotherly love, the sick their physician, whatever
be their sickness and the healing they need, the healthy the preserver
of health, and all men him who made himself all things to all that he
might gain the majority, if not all.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p275"></span>82.  This is my offering to thee, Basil,
uttered by the tongue which once was the sweetest of all to thee, of him
who was thy fellow in age and rank.  If it have approached thy deserts,
thanks are due to thee, for it was from confidence in thee that I
undertook to speak of thee.  But if it fall far short of thy
expectations, what must be our feelings, who are worn out with age and
disease and regret for thee?  Yet God is pleased, when we do what we
can.  Yet mayest thou gaze upon us from above, thou divine and sacred
person; either stay by thy entreaties our thorn in the flesh, <span
id="fr_4585"></span>[4586](#fn_4585.md) given to us by God for our
discipline, or prevail upon us to bear it boldly, and guide all our life
towards that which is most for our profit.  And if we be translated, do
thou receive us there also in thine own tabernacle, that, as we dwell
together, and gaze together more clearly and more perfectly upon the
holy and blessed Trinity, of Which we have now in some degree received
the image, our longing may at last be satisfied, by gaining this
recompense for all the battles we have fought and the assaults we have
endured.  Such are our words on thy behalf:  who will there be to praise
us, since we leave this life after thee, even if we offer any topic
worthy of words or praise in Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom be glory
forever?  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4396"></span>[395:4397](2070069.htm#fr_4396.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p5"></span> *For when*, etc.  This seems to be the
sense of an admittedly difficult sentence.

<span id="fn_4397"></span>[396:4398](2070069.htm#fr_4397.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p7"></span> *As priests*, or, more generally, “as
those who approach our temples.”  In the E. there were lavers at the
entrance to the churches for the ablutions of intending worshippers.

<span id="fn_4398"></span>[396:4399](2070069.htm#fr_4398.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p8"></span> *Of the task*, i.e., of restoring the
orthodox faith in Constantinople.

<span id="fn_4399"></span>[396:4400](2070069.htm#fr_4399.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p9"></span> *Fetter*, i.e., the body.

<span id="fn_4400"></span>[396:4401](2070069.htm#fr_4400.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p11"></span> *History and poesy*, e.g., Xenophon,
Polybius, and Apollonius.

<span id="fn_4401"></span>[396:4402](2070069.htm#fr_4401.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p12"></span> *Renowned*, etc.  Cf. Homer, Od. ix. 27.

<span id="fn_4402"></span>[396:4403](2070069.htm#fr_4402.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p15"></span> *Trainers*, lit. “anointers”—those who
physically and by their advice prepared athletes for their exercises.

<span id="fn_4403"></span>[397:4404](2070069.htm#fr_4403.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p18"></span> [Exod. xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p18.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_4404"></span>[397:4405](2070069.htm#fr_4404.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p19"></span> [1 Cor. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4405"></span>[397:4406](2070069.htm#fr_4405.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p20"></span> [Exod. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4406"></span>[397:4407](2070069.htm#fr_4406.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p21"></span> [Exod.
14.21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4407"></span>[397:4408](2070069.htm#fr_4407.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p22"></span> [Josh.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016.md), [Josh.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4408"></span>[397:4409](2070069.htm#fr_4408.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p24"></span> *Huntresses*, esp. Artemis, a passion
for whom was fatal to Orion and Actæon.

<span id="fn_4409"></span>[397:4410](2070069.htm#fr_4409.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p25"></span> *The maiden*, Iphigenia, daughter of
Agamemnon.

<span id="fn_4410"></span>[398:4411](2070069.htm#fr_4410.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p29"></span> [Rom.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4411"></span>[398:4412](2070069.htm#fr_4411.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p30"></span> [2 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4412"></span>[399:4413](2070069.htm#fr_4412.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p32"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4413"></span>[399:4414](2070069.htm#fr_4413.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p33"></span> *Centaur*.  Alluding to Chiron, the
tutor of Achilles.

<span id="fn_4414"></span>[399:4415](2070069.htm#fr_4414.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p35"></span> *Cæsarea*, the Cappadocian city, as
seems plain from the context.  Yet Tillemont and Billius incline to
think Cæsarea in Palestine is meant.

<span id="fn_4415"></span>[399:4416](2070069.htm#fr_4415.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p36"></span> *Chair*, etc., Before he had studied
rhetoric and philosophy.

<span id="fn_4416"></span>[400:4417](2070069.htm#fr_4416.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p38"></span> [1 Sam. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4417"></span>[400:4418](2070069.htm#fr_4417.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p40"></span> *They leap*, etc.  This passage refers
to the spectators who unite in sympathy with, and imitate as far as
possible, in their excitement, the actions of, those who drive the
chariots in the races.

<span id="fn_4418"></span>[401:4419](2070069.htm#fr_4418.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p43"></span> Homer Il. xi. 72.

<span id="fn_4419"></span>[401:4420](2070069.htm#fr_4419.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p44"></span> Ib. xi. 496.

<span id="fn_4420"></span>[401:4421](2070069.htm#fr_4420.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p47"></span> *Philosophy*, here, a truly Christian
life.

<span id="fn_4421"></span>[402:4422](2070069.htm#fr_4421.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p49"></span> Olymp. Od. vi. 1.

<span id="fn_4422"></span>[402:4423](2070069.htm#fr_4422.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p51"></span> *All things*, etc., i.e. Empedocles and
Anaxagoras.

<span id="fn_4423"></span>[402:4424](2070069.htm#fr_4423.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p53"></span> *Gyges* is said to have had a ring by
means of which he could make himself invisible, and by thus using it was
able to seize on the Kingdom of Lydia.

<span id="fn_4424"></span>[402:4425](2070069.htm#fr_4424.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p54"></span> *Midas*, said to have had the power
granted of turning everything he touched to gold.  Accordingly, as this
power took effect on his food, he died of hunger.

<span id="fn_4425"></span>[402:4426](2070069.htm#fr_4425.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p55"></span> *Abaris*, a Hyperborean priest of
Apollo, who was said to have given him an arrow, on which he rode
through the air.

<span id="fn_4426"></span>[402:4427](2070069.htm#fr_4426.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p56"></span> *Pegasus*, called Argive, because caught
near to Argos, the winged horse, by the aid of which Bellerophon was
said to have destroyed the Chimæra.

<span id="fn_4427"></span>[402:4428](2070069.htm#fr_4427.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p57"></span> *A river*, etc.  The Alpheus, a river of
Arcadia.

<span id="fn_4428"></span>[402:4429](2070069.htm#fr_4428.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p58"></span> *Animal*.  The salamander, a lizard said
to be impervious to the action of fire.  Plin. N. H. x. 67.

<span id="fn_4429"></span>[402:4430](2070069.htm#fr_4429.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p60"></span> *Lydian car*, proverbial expression for
anything whose speed distances all competitors.

<span id="fn_4430"></span>[402:4431](2070069.htm#fr_4430.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p61"></span> *Orestes and Pylades*, types of close
comradeship in Greek tragedies.

<span id="fn_4431"></span>[403:4432](2070069.htm#fr_4431.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p62"></span> *Sons of Molione*, Eurytus and Cteatus,
Hom. Il. ii. 621.  Their father was Actor.

<span id="fn_4432"></span>[403:4433](2070069.htm#fr_4432.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p64"></span> [Wisd. iv.
8](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4433"></span>[403:4434](2070069.htm#fr_4433.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p65"></span> *Which breathes*, a phrase used Hom. Il.
vi. 182 of the Chimæra.

<span id="fn_4434"></span>[403:4435](2070069.htm#fr_4434.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p66"></span> *Labyrinths*, the mythical mazes of
Crete, the home of the Minotaur.

<span id="fn_4435"></span>[403:4436](2070069.htm#fr_4435.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p67"></span> *Minos and Rhadamanthus*, Kings of Crete
and Lycia, fabled to have been made judges in the lower world because of
their justice when on earth.

<span id="fn_4436"></span>[403:4437](2070069.htm#fr_4436.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p69"></span> *Beyond Cadiz*.  The Atlantic Ocean
beyond Cadiz was reputed impassable by the ancients.

<span id="fn_4437"></span>[404:4438](2070069.htm#fr_4437.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p71"></span> [Tit. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4438"></span>[404:4439](2070069.htm#fr_4438.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p73"></span> *The legend,* i.e., of Cadmus who sowed
at Thebes the dragon’s teeth from which sprung giants.

<span id="fn_4439"></span>[404:4440](2070069.htm#fr_4439.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p75"></span> *This rank*, i.e., the office of Lector,
or Reader.

<span id="fn_4440"></span>[404:4441](2070069.htm#fr_4440.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p76"></span> [Ps. cvii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#032.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4441"></span>[405:4442](2070069.htm#fr_4441.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p78"></span> *His predecessor*, Eusebius, Archbishop
of Cæsarea.

<span id="fn_4442"></span>[405:4443](2070069.htm#fr_4442.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p79"></span> *Nazarites*, i.e., the monks.

<span id="fn_4443"></span>[405:4444](2070069.htm#fr_4443.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p80"></span> *Their chief*, i.e., Basil.

<span id="fn_4444"></span>[405:4445](2070069.htm#fr_4444.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p81"></span> *His opponent*, lit. “the man who was
vexing him,” i.e., Eusebius.

<span id="fn_4445"></span>[405:4446](2070069.htm#fr_4445.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p82"></span> *Bishops*.  It is uncertain who these
bishops were.  Clémencet thinks they were Lucifer and Eusebius of
Vercellæ.  But a separation had ere this taken place between them in
consequence of Lucifer’s rash action at Antioch.  Nor is it certain that
Eusebius had not already returned to Italy.

<span id="fn_4446"></span>[405:4447](2070069.htm#fr_4446.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p84"></span> *One*, a monastery.  The rule of S.
Basil is widely observed to this day in Eastern monasteries.  Cf. § 34.

<span id="fn_4447"></span>[405:4448](2070069.htm#fr_4447.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p85"></span> *John*, Saint John Baptist.

<span id="fn_4448"></span>[405:4449](2070069.htm#fr_4448.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p87"></span> *An Emperor*, Valens.

<span id="fn_4449"></span>[405:4450](2070069.htm#fr_4449.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p88"></span> *Madness*, cf. ii. 37, Note.

<span id="fn_4450"></span>[405:4451](2070069.htm#fr_4450.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p89"></span> *Glory*.  The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxvi-p89.1"></span>δόξα</span> means both
“doctrine” and “glory.”

<span id="fn_4451"></span>[405:4452](2070069.htm#fr_4451.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p90"></span> *Properties*.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p90.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p90.2"></span>διότητες</span>.  Petav. de Trin. iv. Proem.
§ 2 gives other Greek equivalent terms.  The Latin terms are
“*notiones*” (S. Thom. Aq. Summa. I. xxxii. qu. 2), “*proprietates*” or
*relationes*.  They denote those relative “attributes ad intra” which
distinguish the Persons, if they do not actually constitute the
Personality of each of the Three Divine Persons.  They are five in
number, Unbegottenness, Paternity, Filiation, active and passive
Spiration.  Perhaps the nearest English equivalent is “characteristic
(or distinctive) relations.”—Cf. Orat. xlii. 15.

<span id="fn_4452"></span>[406:4453](2070069.htm#fr_4452.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p93"></span> [Jer. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4453"></span>[406:4454](2070069.htm#fr_4453.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p94"></span> [Jer.
23.29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4454"></span>[406:4455](2070069.htm#fr_4454.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p95"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4455"></span>[407:4456](2070069.htm#fr_4455.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p98"></span> *Legislation*.  Cf. § 30.

<span id="fn_4456"></span>[407:4457](2070069.htm#fr_4456.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p99"></span> *Prayers*.  The liturgy of S. Basil
together with that of S. Chrysostom are still the authorized liturgies
of the Eastern Church.

<span id="fn_4457"></span>[407:4458](2070069.htm#fr_4457.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p100"></span> [Prov. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4458"></span>[407:4459](2070069.htm#fr_4458.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p100.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p101"></span> [Prov.
11.26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4459"></span>[407:4460](2070069.htm#fr_4459.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p103"></span> [Exod. xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4460"></span>[407:4461](2070069.htm#fr_4460.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p104"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4461"></span>[407:4462](2070069.htm#fr_4461.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p104.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p105"></span> [1 Kings xvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4462"></span>[407:4463](2070069.htm#fr_4462.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p105.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p106"></span> S. [Matt. xiv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4463"></span>[407:4464](2070069.htm#fr_4463.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p106.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p107"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4464"></span>[407:4465](2070069.htm#fr_4464.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p107.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p108"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000.md), [Isa.
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4465"></span>[407:4466](2070069.htm#fr_4465.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p108.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p109"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4466"></span>[407:4467](2070069.htm#fr_4466.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p109.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p110"></span> [Psa.
33.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4467"></span>[407:4468](2070069.htm#fr_4467.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p110.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p111"></span> [Ps.
107:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#009.md), [Luke
1:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#053.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4468"></span>[407:4469](2070069.htm#fr_4468.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p113"></span> [Gen. xli.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p113.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_4469"></span>[407:4470](2070069.htm#fr_4469.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p113.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p114"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4470"></span>[407:4471](2070069.htm#fr_4470.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p114.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p115"></span> [Ps.
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md), [Matt.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4471"></span>[408:4472](2070069.htm#fr_4471.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p115.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p116"></span> [Amos viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4472"></span>[408:4473](2070069.htm#fr_4472.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p118"></span> *Name*, Eusebius, i.e., “pious,”
“godly.”

<span id="fn_4473"></span>[408:4474](2070069.htm#fr_4473.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p119"></span> *Men*.  Eusebius of Samosaba and S.
Gregory the Elder.

<span id="fn_4474"></span>[408:4475](2070069.htm#fr_4474.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p121"></span> S. [Luke ii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4475"></span>[408:4476](2070069.htm#fr_4475.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p123"></span> *Dignified position*, known later as
that of Vicar General.  Thomassin.  Disc. Eccl. I. ii. 7. § 3.

<span id="fn_4476"></span>[409:4477](2070069.htm#fr_4476.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p126"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4477"></span>[409:4478](2070069.htm#fr_4477.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p126.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p127"></span> [Ps. lxxx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4478"></span>[409:4479](2070069.htm#fr_4478.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p128.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p129"></span> [Prov. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p129.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_4479"></span>[409:4480](2070069.htm#fr_4479.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p129.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p130"></span> [Jonah iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4480"></span>[409:4481](2070069.htm#fr_4480.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p130.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p131"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4481"></span>[409:4482](2070069.htm#fr_4481.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p132.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p133"></span> [Heb. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4482"></span>[409:4483](2070069.htm#fr_4482.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p133.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p134"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4483"></span>[410:4484](2070069.htm#fr_4483.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p134.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p135"></span> [Exod. xxxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4484"></span>[410:4485](2070069.htm#fr_4484.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p136.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p137"></span> *Emperor*.  Valens.

<span id="fn_4485"></span>[410:4486](2070069.htm#fr_4485.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p137.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p138"></span> S. [Luke xi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4486"></span>[410:4487](2070069.htm#fr_4486.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p139.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p140"></span> *King*.  Xerxes.

<span id="fn_4487"></span>[410:4488](2070069.htm#fr_4487.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p140.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p141"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4488"></span>[410:4489](2070069.htm#fr_4488.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p142.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p143"></span> *Burnings*, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p143.1"></span>a.d.</span> 370.  Eighty ecclesiastics, sent
on a mission to Valens at Nicomedia, were by his orders sent to sea off
the coast of Bithynia, and, the vessel being set on fire, were burnt to
death.

<span id="fn_4489"></span>[410:4490](2070069.htm#fr_4489.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p143.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p144"></span> *Jacob*, i.e., Athanasius.  Esau =
George.

<span id="fn_4490"></span>[410:4491](2070069.htm#fr_4490.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p144.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p145"></span> [Rom. ix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4491"></span>[411:4492](2070069.htm#fr_4491.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p146.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p147"></span> *Nebuzaradan*.  Demosthenes, a creature
of Valens, sent to persuade Basil to yield to the Emperor.

<span id="fn_4492"></span>[411:4493](2070069.htm#fr_4492.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p148.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p149"></span> *Prefect*.  Modestus.

<span id="fn_4493"></span>[412:4494](2070069.htm#fr_4493.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p153.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p154"></span> [1 Sam. xix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4494"></span>[412:4495](2070069.htm#fr_4494.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p156.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p157"></span> [Exod. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4495"></span>[412:4496](2070069.htm#fr_4495.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p157.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p158"></span> [2 Sam. xii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4496"></span>[413:4497](2070069.htm#fr_4496.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p159.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p160"></span> [1 Kings xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p160.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4497"></span>[413:4498](2070069.htm#fr_4497.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p160.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p161"></span> *The prefect*.  Eusebius.

<span id="fn_4498"></span>[414:4499](2070069.htm#fr_4498.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p163.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p164"></span> S. [James iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4499"></span>[414:4500](2070069.htm#fr_4499.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p165.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p166"></span> *The one*, i.e., Anthimus, Bishop of
Tyana.

<span id="fn_4500"></span>[414:4501](2070069.htm#fr_4500.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p166.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p167"></span> *The other*, i.e., Basil.

<span id="fn_4501"></span>[414:4502](2070069.htm#fr_4501.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p167.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p168"></span> *Revenues*.  The dues and offerings of
the people of the diocese.

<span id="fn_4502"></span>[414:4503](2070069.htm#fr_4502.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p168.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p169"></span> *Orestes*.  A chapel dedicated to S.
Orestes at the foot of Mt. Taurus, where the offerings were collected.

<span id="fn_4503"></span>[415:4504](2070069.htm#fr_4503.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p171.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p172"></span> *The mean, etc*.  A saying of
Cleobulus, one of the seven Sages.

<span id="fn_4504"></span>[415:4505](2070069.htm#fr_4504.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p172.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p173"></span> *Crates*.  He made this proclamation
when he had stripped himself of all his possessions.

<span id="fn_4505"></span>[415:4506](2070069.htm#fr_4505.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p173.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p174"></span> *In a tub*, like Diogenes, the Cynic.

<span id="fn_4506"></span>[415:4507](2070069.htm#fr_4506.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p175.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p176"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p176.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4507"></span>[415:4508](2070069.htm#fr_4507.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p176.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p177"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4508"></span>[415:4509](2070069.htm#fr_4508.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p178.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p179"></span> *Enacted* by his religious rule, or as
some say by a treatise on Virginity.

<span id="fn_4509"></span>[415:4510](2070069.htm#fr_4509.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p179.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p180"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p180.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4510"></span>[415:4511](2070069.htm#fr_4510.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p180.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p181"></span> *Cells, etc*.  This passage strongly
favours the view of Clemencet that S. Gregory uses <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxvi-p181.1"></span>μοναστήρια</span> in the
literal sense of “the abodes of solitaries,” and that there is no great
distinction between <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p181.2"></span>κοινωνικοί</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xxvi-p181.3"></span>μιγάδες</span>.  Cf. ii.
29. xxi. 10–19.

<span id="fn_4511"></span>[416:4512](2070069.htm#fr_4511.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p182.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p183"></span> *New city*—a hospital for the sick.

<span id="fn_4512"></span>[416:4513](2070069.htm#fr_4512.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p183.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p184"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4513"></span>[416:4514](2070069.htm#fr_4513.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p184.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p185"></span> *Thebes, etc*.  The “seven wonders of
the world.”

<span id="fn_4514"></span>[416:4515](2070069.htm#fr_4514.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p186.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p187"></span> *The vices*.  This was the doctrine of
Menander and Aristotle.

<span id="fn_4515"></span>[417:4516](2070069.htm#fr_4515.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p187.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p188"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4516"></span>[417:4517](2070069.htm#fr_4516.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p188.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p189"></span> [Eccles. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p189.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4517"></span>[417:4518](2070069.htm#fr_4517.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p190.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p191"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p191.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4518"></span>[417:4519](2070069.htm#fr_4518.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p192.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p193"></span> [Ps. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p193.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4519"></span>[417:4520](2070069.htm#fr_4519.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p193.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p194"></span> [Ps. xix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4520"></span>[417:4521](2070069.htm#fr_4520.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p194.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p195"></span> [Rom. x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4521"></span>[418:4522](2070069.htm#fr_4521.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p196.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p197"></span> [Gen. xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p197.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4522"></span>[418:4523](2070069.htm#fr_4522.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p197.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p198"></span> *Chalane*.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p198.1"></span>LXX.</span> for Babel.

<span id="fn_4523"></span>[418:4524](2070069.htm#fr_4523.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p198.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p199"></span> [Gen. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4524"></span>[418:4525](2070069.htm#fr_4524.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p199.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p200"></span> [Ps. xlii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p200.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4525"></span>[418:4526](2070069.htm#fr_4525.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p201.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p202"></span> [Psa.
112.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p202.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4526"></span>[418:4527](2070069.htm#fr_4526.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p202.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p203"></span> *Economy*.  In refraining from the
express assertion “The Holy Ghost is God”—some have blamed S. Basil for
this:  but his conduct has the approval of S. Athanasius.  Ep. ad
Palladium.

<span id="fn_4527"></span>[419:4528](2070069.htm#fr_4527.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p205.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p206"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4528"></span>[419:4529](2070069.htm#fr_4528.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p206.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p207"></span> [Gen.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p207.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4529"></span>[419:4530](2070069.htm#fr_4529.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p207.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p208"></span> [Gen.
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p208.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4530"></span>[419:4531](2070069.htm#fr_4530.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p208.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p209"></span> [Gen.
4.26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4531"></span>[419:4532](2070069.htm#fr_4531.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p209.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p210"></span> [Gen.
5.21](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p210.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4532"></span>[419:4533](2070069.htm#fr_4532.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p210.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p211"></span> [Gen. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p211.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4533"></span>[419:4534](2070069.htm#fr_4533.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p212.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p213"></span> [Gen.
22.1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p213.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4534"></span>[419:4535](2070069.htm#fr_4534.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p213.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p214"></span> [Gen.
18.10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p214.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4535"></span>[419:4536](2070069.htm#fr_4535.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p214.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p215"></span> [Gen.
24.3](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p215.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4536"></span>[419:4537](2070069.htm#fr_4536.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p215.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p216"></span> [Gen.
28.12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p216.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4537"></span>[419:4538](2070069.htm#fr_4537.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p216.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p217"></span> *Defeat* or “loss of generative power.”

<span id="fn_4538"></span>[419:4539](2070069.htm#fr_4538.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p218.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p219"></span> [Gen. xli.
40](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#040.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p219.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4539"></span>[420:4540](2070069.htm#fr_4539.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p219.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p220"></span> [Job i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p220.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4540"></span>[420:4541](2070069.htm#fr_4540.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p220.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p221"></span> [Ps. xcix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p221.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4541"></span>[420:4542](2070069.htm#fr_4541.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p221.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p222"></span> [Exod. vii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p222.1"></span>.
et seq.

<span id="fn_4542"></span>[420:4543](2070069.htm#fr_4542.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p222.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p223"></span> [Exod.
29.4](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p223.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4543"></span>[420:4544](2070069.htm#fr_4543.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p223.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p224"></span> [Heb. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4544"></span>[420:4545](2070069.htm#fr_4544.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p224.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p225"></span> [Heb.
11.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p225.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4545"></span>[420:4546](2070069.htm#fr_4545.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p225.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p226"></span> [Tit. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p226.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4546"></span>[420:4547](2070069.htm#fr_4546.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p226.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p227"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p227.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4547"></span>[420:4548](2070069.htm#fr_4547.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p227.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p228"></span> [Exod.
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008.md), [Heb.
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p228.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4548"></span>[420:4549](2070069.htm#fr_4548.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p228.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p229"></span> [Josh. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p229.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4549"></span>[420:4550](2070069.htm#fr_4549.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p229.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p230"></span> *Exarch* or Metropolitan.

<span id="fn_4550"></span>[420:4551](2070069.htm#fr_4550.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p230.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p231"></span> [Eph. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p231.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4551"></span>[420:4552](2070069.htm#fr_4551.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p231.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p232"></span> [Ps. xvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p232.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4552"></span>[420:4553](2070069.htm#fr_4552.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p232.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p233"></span> [Psa.
31.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p233.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4553"></span>[420:4554](2070069.htm#fr_4553.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p234.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p235"></span> [Psa.
119.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p235.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4554"></span>[420:4555](2070069.htm#fr_4554.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p235.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p236"></span> [1 Sam. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p236.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4555"></span>[420:4556](2070069.htm#fr_4555.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p236.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p237"></span> [1 Sam.
16.13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p237.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4556"></span>[420:4557](2070069.htm#fr_4556.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p237.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p238"></span> Cf. [1 Sam. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p238.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4557"></span>[420:4558](2070069.htm#fr_4557.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p238.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p239"></span> [2 Sam. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p239.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4558"></span>[420:4559](2070069.htm#fr_4558.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p239.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p240"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p240.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_4559"></span>[420:4560](2070069.htm#fr_4559.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p240.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p241"></span> [1 Kings iv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#029.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p241.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4560"></span>[420:4561](2070069.htm#fr_4560.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p242.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p243"></span> [2 Kings i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p243.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4561"></span>[420:4562](2070069.htm#fr_4561.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p243.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p244"></span> [2 Kings
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p244.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4562"></span>[420:4563](2070069.htm#fr_4562.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p244.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p245"></span> [2 Kings
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#013.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p245.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4563"></span>[420:4564](2070069.htm#fr_4563.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p245.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p246"></span> [Exod. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p246.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4564"></span>[420:4565](2070069.htm#fr_4564.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p246.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p247"></span> [Dan. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p247.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4565"></span>[420:4566](2070069.htm#fr_4565.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p247.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p248"></span> [Jonah ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p248.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4566"></span>[420:4567](2070069.htm#fr_4566.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p248.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p249"></span> [Dan. vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p249.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4567"></span>[420:4568](2070069.htm#fr_4567.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p249.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p250"></span> [2 Macc. vii.
1](../../../bib/apo/ma2007.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p250.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4568"></span>[420:4569](2070069.htm#fr_4568.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p251.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p252"></span> S. [Luke i.
76](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p252.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4569"></span>[420:4570](2070069.htm#fr_4569.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p252.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p253"></span> [Luke
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p253.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4570"></span>[420:4571](2070069.htm#fr_4570.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p253.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p254"></span> S. [John
5:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035.md), [John
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p254.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4571"></span>[420:4572](2070069.htm#fr_4571.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p254.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p255"></span> S. [Luke ii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p255.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4572"></span>[420:4573](2070069.htm#fr_4572.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p255.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p256"></span> S. [Matt. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p256.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4573"></span>[421:4574](2070069.htm#fr_4573.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p256.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p257"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p257.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4574"></span>[421:4575](2070069.htm#fr_4574.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p257.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p258"></span> [Matt.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p258.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4575"></span>[421:4576](2070069.htm#fr_4575.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p259.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p260"></span> [Acts iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p260.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4576"></span>[421:4577](2070069.htm#fr_4576.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p260.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p261"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p261.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4577"></span>[421:4578](2070069.htm#fr_4577.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p261.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p262"></span> [Rom. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p262.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4578"></span>[421:4579](2070069.htm#fr_4578.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p262.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p263"></span> [Acts vii.
58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p263.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4579"></span>[421:4580](2070069.htm#fr_4579.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p265.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p266"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p266.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4580"></span>[421:4581](2070069.htm#fr_4580.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p266.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p267"></span> [Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p267.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4581"></span>[421:4582](2070069.htm#fr_4581.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p267.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p268"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#049.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p268.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4582"></span>[421:4583](2070069.htm#fr_4582.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p269.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p270"></span> [Ps. xxxi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p270.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4583"></span>[421:4584](2070069.htm#fr_4583.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p271.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p272"></span> S. [Luke viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#044.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p272.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4584"></span>[421:4585](2070069.htm#fr_4584.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p272.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p273"></span> [Acts v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p273.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4585"></span>[422:4586](2070069.htm#fr_4585.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p275.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p276"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p276.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oration XLV](2070070.md)
