[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070004)  [Next](2070006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.i"></span> <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_ix"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p1"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>Chapter I.—Life of S. Cyril.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p4"></span>The works of S. Cyril of Jerusalem owe
much of their peculiar interest and value to the character of the times
in which he wrote. Born a few years before the outbreak of

<span id="ii.iii.i-p5"></span>Arianism in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 318, he lived to see its
suppression by the Edict of Theodosius, 380, and to take part in its
condemnation by the Council of Constantinople in the following year.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p6"></span>The story of Cyril’s life is not told in
detail by any contemporary author; in his own writings there is little
mention of himself; and the Church historians refer only to  the events
of his manhood and old age.  We have thus no direct knowledge of his
early years, and can only infer from the later circumstances of his life
what may probably have been the nature of his previous training.  The
names of his parents are quite unknown; but in the Greek Menæa, or
monthly catalogues of Saints, and in the Roman Martyrology for the 18th
day of March, Cyril is said to have been “born of pious parents,
professing the orthodox Faith, and to have been bred up in the same, in
the reign of Constantine.”  This account of his parentage and education
derives some probability from the fact that Cyril nowhere speaks as one
who had been converted from paganism or from any heretical sect.  His
language at the close of the viith Lecture seems rather to be inspired
by gratitude to his own parents for a Christian education:  “The first
virtuous observance in a Christian is to honour his parents, to requite
their trouble, and to provide with all his power for their comfort:  for
however much we may repay them, yet we can never be to them what they as
parents have been to us.  Let them enjoy the comfort we can give, and
strengthen us with blessings.”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p7"></span>One member only of Cyril’s family is
mentioned by name, his sister’s son Gelasius, who was appointed by Cyril
to be Bishop of Cæsarea on the death of Acacius, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>a.d</span>. 366 *circ*.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p8"></span>Cyril himself was probably born, or at
least brought up, in or near Jerusalem, for it was usual to choose a
Bishop from among the Clergy over whom he was to preside, a preference
being given to such as were best known to the people generally <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) .

<span id="ii.iii.i-p10"></span>That Cyril, whether a native of Jerusalem
or not, had passed a portion of his childhood there, is rendered
probable by his allusions to the condition of the Holy Places before
they were cleared and adorned by Constantine and Helena.  He seems to
speak as an eye-witness of their former state, when he says that a few
years before the place of the Nativity at Bethlehem had been
wooded <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) , that the place where Christ
was crucified and buried was a garden, of which traces were still
remaining <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) , that the wood of the Cross
had been distributed to all nations <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) ,
and that before the decoration of the Holy Sepulchre by Constantine,
there was a cleft or cave before the door of the Sepulchre, hewn out of
the <span id="page_x">p. x</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_x"></span>rock
itself, but now no longer to be seen, because the outer cave had been
cut away for the sake of the recent adornments <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) .

<span id="ii.iii.i-p15"></span>This work was undertaken by Constantine
after the year 326 <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p15.1"></span>a.d</span>. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)
; and if Cyril spoke from remembrance of what he had himself seen, he
could hardly have been less than ten or twelve years old, and so must
have been born not later, perhaps a few years earlier, than 315 <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.i-p16.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p17"></span>The tradition that Cyril had been a monk
and an ascetic was probably founded upon the passages in which he seems
to speak as one who had himself belonged to the order of Solitaries, and
shared the glory of chastity <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) .  We
need not, however, suppose that the “Solitaries” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p18.1"></span>μονάζοντες</span>)of whom
he speaks were either hermits living in remote and desert places, or
monks secluded in a monastery:  they commonly lived in cities, only in
separate houses, and frequented the same Churches with ordinary
Christians.  To such a life of perpetual chastity, strict asceticism,
and works of charity, Cyril may probably, in accordance with the custom
of the age, have been devoted from early youth.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p19"></span>A more important question is that which
relates to the time and circumstances of his ordination as Deacon, and
as Priest, matters closely connected with some of the chief troubles of
his later life.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p20"></span>That he was ordained Deacon by Macarius,
Bishop of Jerusalem, who died in 334 or 335, may be safely inferred from
the unfriendly notice of S. Jerome, *Chron*. ann. 349 (350 <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.i-p20.1"></span>a.d</span>.):  “Cyril having
been ordained Priest by Maximus, and after his death permitted by
Acacius, Bishop of Cæsarea, and the other Arian Bishops, to be made
Bishop on condition of repudiating his ordination by Maximus, served in
the Church as a Deacon:  and after he had been paid for this impiety by
the reward of the Episcopate (*Sacerdotii*), he by various plots
harassed Heraclius, whom Maximus when dying had substituted in his own
place, and degraded him from Bishop to Priest.”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p21"></span>From this account, incredible as it is in
the main, and strongly marked by personal prejudice, we may conclude
that Cyril had been ordained Deacon not by Maximus, but by his
predecessor Macarius; for otherwise he would have been compelled to
renounce his Deacon’s Orders, as well as his Priesthood.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p22"></span>Macarius died in or before the year 335;
for at the Council of Tyre, assembled in that year to condemn
Athanasius, Maximus sat as successor to Macarius in the See of
Jerusalem <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) .  This date is confirmed by
the fact that after the accession of Maximus, a great assembly of
Bishops was held at Jerusalem in the year 335, for the dedication of the
Church of the Holy Resurrection <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) .

<span id="ii.iii.i-p25"></span>It thus appears that Cyril’s ordination
as Deacon cannot be put later than 334 or the beginning of 335.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p26"></span>Towards the close of the latter year the
Bishops who had deposed Athanasius at the Council of Tyre proceeded to
Jerusalem “to celebrate the *Tricennalia* of Constantine’s reign by
consecrating his grand Church on Mount Calvary <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) .”  On that occasion “Jerusalem became the
gathering point for distinguished prelates from every province, and the
whole city was thronged by a vast assemblage of the servants of God……In
short, the whole of Syria and Mesopotamia, Phœnicia and Arabia,
Palestine, Egypt, and Libya, with the dwellers in the Thebaid, all
contributed to swell the mighty concourse of God’s ministers, followed
as they were by vast numbers from every province.  They were attended by
an imperial escort, and officers of trust had also been sent from the
palace itself, with instructions to heighten the splendour of the
festival at the Emperor’s expense <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)
.”  Eusebius proceeds to describe <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xi"></span>the splendid banquets, the lavish
distribution of money and clothes to the naked and destitute, the
offerings of imperial magnificence, the “intellectual feast” of the many
Bishops’ discourses, and last, not least, his own “various public
orations pronounced in honour of this solemnity.”  Among the Clergy
taking part in this gorgeous ceremony, the newly ordained Deacon of the
Church of Jerusalem would naturally have his place.  It was a scene
which could not fail to leave a deep impression on his mind, and to
influence his attitude towards the contending parties in the great
controversy by which the Church was at this time distracted.  He knew
that Athanasius had just been deposed, he had seen Arius triumphantly
restored to communion in that august assembly of Bishops “from every
province,” with his own Bishop Maximus, and Eusebius of Cæsarea, the
Metropolitan, at their head.  It is much to the praise of his wisdom and
steadfastness that he was not misled by the notable triumph of the
Arians to join their faction or adopt their tenets.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p29"></span>In September, 346, Athanasius returning
from his second exile at Trèves passed through Jerusalem.  The aged
Bishop Maximus, who had been induced to acquiesce in the condemnation of
Athanasius at Tyre, and in the solemn recognition of Arius at Jerusalem,
had afterwards refused to join the Eusebians at Antioch in 341, for the
purpose of confirming the sentence passed at Tyre, and now gave a
cordial welcome to Athanasius, who thus describes his reception <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) :  “As I passed through Syria, I met with
the Bishops of Palestine, who, when they had called a Council at
Jerusalem, received me cordially, and themselves also sent me on my way
in peace, and addressed the following letter to the Church and the
Bishops <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) .”  The letter
congratulating the Egyptian Bishops and the Clergy and people of
Alexandria on the restoration of their Bishop is signed first by
Maximus, who seems to have acted without reference to the Metropolitan
Acacius, successor of Eusebius as Bishop of Cæsarea, and a leader of the
Arians, a bitter enemy of Athanasius.  Though Cyril in his writings
never mentions Athanasius or Arius by name, we can hardly doubt that, as
Touttée suggests <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) , he must at this
time have had an opportunity of learning the true character of the
questions in dispute between the parties of the great heresiarch and his
greater adversary.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p33"></span>We have already learned from Jerome that
Cyril was admitted to the Priesthood by Maximus.  There is no evidence
of the exact date of his ordination:  but we may safely assume that he
was a Priest of some years’ standing, when the important duty of
preparing the candidates for Baptism was intrusted to him in or about
the year 348 <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) .  There appears to be
no authority for the statement (*Dict. Chr. Antiq*. “Catechumens,” p.
319 a), that  the *Catecheses* of Cyril of Jerusalem were delivered by
him partly as a Deacon, partly as a Presbyter <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) .”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p36"></span>At the very time of delivering the
lectures, Cyril was also in the habit of preaching to the general
congregation on the Lord’s day <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) ,
when the candidates for Baptism were especially required to be
present <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) .  In the Church of
Jerusalem it was still the custom for sermons to be preached by several
Presbyters in succession, the Bishop preaching last.  From Cyril’s
*Homily on the Paralytic* (§ 20) we learn that he preached immediately
before the Bishop, and so must have held a distinguished position among
the Priests.  This is also implied in the fact, that within three or
four years after delivering his Catechetical Lectures to the candidates
for Baptism, he was chosen to succeed Maximus in the See of Jerusalem.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p39"></span>The date of his consecration is
approximately determined by his own letter to Constantius concerning the
appearance of a luminous cross in the sky at Jerusalem.  The letter was
written on the 7th of May, 351, and is described by Cyril as the
first-fruit of his Episcopate.  He must therefore have been consecrated
in 350, or early in 351.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p40"></span><span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xii"></span>Socrates and Sozomen agree in the
assertion that Acacius, Patrophilus the Arian Bishop of Scythopolis, and
their adherents ejected Maximus and put Cyril in his place <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) .  But according to the statement of
Jerome already quoted <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) Maximus, when
dying, had not only nominated Heraclius to be his successor, which, with
the consent of the Clergy and people was not unusual, but had actually
established him as Bishop in his stead (*in suum locum substituerat*). 
The two accounts are irreconcileable, and both improbable.  Touttée
argues not without reason, that the consecration of Heraclius, which
Jerome attributes to Maximus, would have been opposed to the right of
the people and Clergy to nominate their own Bishop, and to the authority
of the Metropolitan and other Bishops of the province, by whom the
choice was to be confirmed and the consecration performed, and that it
had moreover been expressly forbidden seven years before by the 23rd
Canon of the Council of Antioch.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p43"></span>Still more improbable is the charge that
Cyril had renounced the priesthood conferred on him by Maximus, and
after serving in the Church as a Deacon, had been rewarded by the
Episcopate, and then himself degraded Heraclius from Bishop to Priest. 
As a solution of these difficulties, it is suggested by Reischl <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) that Cyril had been designated in the
lifetime of Maximus as his successor, and after his decease had been
duly and canonically consecrated, but had incurred the calumnious
charges of the party opposed to Acacius and the Eusebians, because he
was supposed to have bound himself to them by accepting consecration at
their hands.  This view is in some measure confirmed by the fact that
“in the great controversy of the day Cyril belonged to the Asiatic
party, Jerome to that of Rome.  In the Meletian schism also they took
opposite sides, Cyril supporting Meletius, Jerome being a warm adherent
of Paulinus <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) ,” by whom he had been
recently ordained Priest.  It is also worthy of notice that Jerome’s
continuation of the Chronicle of Eusebius was written at Constantinople
in 380–381, the very time when the many injurious charges fabricated by
Cyril’s bitter enemies were most industriously circulated in popular
rumour on the eve of a judicial inquiry by the second general Council
which met there in 381, under the presidency of Meletius, Cyril, and
Gregory of Nazianzum <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) .  Had Jerome
written of Cyril a year or two later, he must have known that these
calumnies had been emphatically rejected by the Synod of Constantinople
(382) consisting of nearly the same Bishops who had been present at the
Council of the preceding year.  In their Synodical letter <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) to Pope Damasus they wrote:  “And of the
Church in Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all the Churches, we notify
that the most reverend and godly Cyril is Bishop:  who was long ago
canonically appointed by the Bishops of the Province, and had many
conflicts in various places against the Arians.”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p48"></span>The beginning of Cyril’s Episcopate was
marked by the appearance of a bright Cross in the sky, about nine
o’clock in the morning of Whitsunday, the 7th of May, 351 <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.i-p48.1"></span>a.d.</span>  Brighter than
the sun, it hung over the hill of Golgotha, and extended to Mount
Olivet, being visible for many hours.  The whole population of
Jerusalem, citizens and foreigners, Christians and Pagans, young and
old, flocked to the Church, singing the praises of Christ, and hailing
the phænomenon as a sign from heaven confirming the truth of the
Christian religion.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p49"></span>Cyril regarded the occasion as favourable
for announcing to the Emperor Constantius the commencement of his
Episcopate; and in his extant letter described the sign as a proof of
God’s favour towards the Empire and its Christian ruler.  The piety of
his father Constantine had been rewarded by the discovery of the true
Cross and the Holy places:  and now the greater devotion of the Son had
won a more signal manifestation of Divine approval.  <span
id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xiii"></span>The
letter ends with a prayer that God may grant to the Emperor long to
reign as the protector of the Church and of the Empire, “ever glorifying
the Holy and Consubstantial Trinity, our true God.”  The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p49.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p49.2"></span>μοούσιον</span>, it is
alleged, had not at this time been accepted by Cyril, and its use has
therefore been thought to cast doubt upon the genuineness of this final
prayer, which is nevertheless maintained by the Benedictine Editor <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) .  The letter as a whole is certainly
genuine, and the phenomenon is too strongly attested by the historians
of the period to be called in question.  While, therefore, we must
reject Cyril’s explanation, we have no reason to suspect him of
intentional misrepresentation.  A parhelion, or other remarkable
phenomenon, of which the natural cause was at that time unknown, might
well appear “to minds excited by the struggle between the Christian
Faith and a fast-declining heathenism to be a miraculous manifestation
of the symbol of Redemption, intended to establish the Faith and to
confute its gainsayers <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) .”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p52"></span>The first few years of Cyril’s episcopate
fell within that so-called “Golden Decade,” 346–355, which is otherwise
described as “an uneasy interval of suspense rather than of peace <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) .”  Though soon to be engaged in a
dispute with Acacius concerning the privileges of their respective Sees,
Cyril seems to have been in the interval zealous and successful in
promoting the peace and prosperity of his own Diocese.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p54"></span>We learn from a letter of Basil the Great
that he had visited Jerusalem about the year 357, when he had been
recently baptized, and was preparing to adopt a life of strict
asceticism.  He speaks of the many saints whom he had there embraced,
and of the many who had fallen on their knees before him, and touched
his hands as holy <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) ,—signs, as
Touttée suggests, of a flourishing state of religion and piety.  Cyril’s
care for the poor, and his personal poverty, were manifested by an
incident, of which the substantial truth is proved by the malicious use
to which it was afterwards perverted.  “Jerusalem and the neighbouring
region being visited with a famine, the poor in great multitudes, being
destitute of necessary food, turned their eyes upon Cyril as their
Bishop.  As he had no money to succour them in their need, he sold the
treasures and sacred veils of the Church.  It is said, therefore, that
some one recognised an offering of his own as worn by an actress on the
stage, and made it his business to inquire whence she had it, and found
that it had been sold to her by a merchant, and to the merchant by the
Bishop <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) .”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p57"></span>This was one of the charges brought
against Cyril in the course of the disputes between himself and Acacius,
which had commenced soon after he had been installed in the Bishopric of
Jerusalem.  As Bishop of Cæsarea, Acacius exercised Metropolitan
jurisdiction over the Bishops of Palestine.  But Cyril, as presiding
over an Apostolic See, “the Mother of all the Churches,” claimed
exemption from the jurisdiction of Cæsarea, and higher rank than its
Bishop.  It is not alleged, nor is it in any way probable, that Cyril
claimed also the jurisdiction over other Bishops.  The rights and
privileges of his See had been clearly defined many years before by the
7th Canon of the Council of Nicæa:  “As custom and ancient tradition
shew that the Bishop of Ælia ought to be honoured, let him have
precedence in honour, without prejudice to the proper dignity of the
Metropolitical See.”  Eusebius <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) , in
reference to a Synod concerning the time of Easter, says:  “There is
still extant a writing of those who were then assembled in Palestine
(about 200 <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p58.1"></span>a.d</span>.), over whom Theophilus, Bishop of
Cæsarea, and Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, presided.”  If one Synod
only is here meant, it would appear that the Bishop of Cæsarea took
precedence of the Bishop of Jerusalem, which would be the natural order
in a Synod held at Cæsarea.  Bishop Hefele, however, takes a different
view <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) :  “According to the
*Synodicon*, two Synods were held in Palestine on the <span
id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xiv"></span>subject
of the Easter controversy:  the one at Jerusalem presided over by
Narcissus, and composed of fourteen Bishops; and the other at Cæsarea,
comprising twelve Bishops, and presided over by Theophilus.”  In
confirmation of this view we may observe that when next Eusebius
mentions Narcissus and Theophilus, he reverses the previous order, and
names the Bishop of Jerusalem first.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p60"></span>However this may have been, Acacius, who
as an Arian was likely to have little respect for the Council of Nicæa,
seems to have claimed both precedence and jurisdiction over Cyril. 
From <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) Socrates we learn that Cyril
was frequently summoned to submit to the judgment of Acacius, but for
two whole years refused to appear.  He was therefore deposed by Acacius
and the other Arian Bishops of Palestine on the charge of having sold
the property of the Church, as before mentioned.  Socrates, who
confesses that he does not know for what Cyril was accused, yet suggests
that he was afraid to meet the accusations <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) .  But Theodoret, a more impartial
witness, says <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) that Acacius took
advantage of some slight occasion (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p63.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p63.2"></span>φορμάς</span>) and deposed him. 
Sozomen <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) also describes the
accusation as a pretext (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p64.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p64.2"></span>πὶ προφάσει τοιᾷδε</span>), and the
deposition as hastily decreed, to forestall any countercharge of heresy
by Cyril (<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p64.3"></span>φθάνει
καθελών</span>).  The deposition was quickly followed by Cyril’s
expulsion from Jerusalem, and a certain Eutychius was appointed to
succeed him <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) .  Passing by Antioch,
which at this time, 357–358, was left without a Bishop by the recent
decease of the aged Arian Leontius Castratus <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) , Cyril took refuge in Tarsus with its
Bishop the “admirable Silvanus,” “one of the Semi-Arians,” who, as
Athanasius testifies, agreed almost entirely with the Nicene doctrine,
only taking offence at the expression <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p66.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p66.2"></span>μοούσιος</span>, because in their opinion it
contained latent Sabellianism <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) .” 
Cyril now sent to the Bishops who had deposed him a formal notice that
he appealed to a higher Court (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p67.1"></span>μεῖζον ἐπεκαλέσατο δικαστήριον</span> ), and
his appeal was approved by the Emperor Constantius <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) .  Acasius, on learning the place of
Cyril’s retreat, wrote to Silvanus announcing his deposition.  But
Silvanus out of respect both to Cyril, and to the people, who were
delighted with his teaching, still permitted him to exercise his
ministry in the Church.  Socrates finds fault with Cyril for his
appeal:  “In this,” he says, “he was the first and only one who acted
contrary to the custom of the Ecclesiastical Canon, by having recourse
to appeals as in a civil court.”  The reproach implied in this statement
is altogether undeserved.  The question, as Touttée argues, is not
whether others had done the like before or after, but whether Cyril’s
appeal was in accordance with natural justice, and the custom of the
Church.  On the latter point he refers to the case of the notorious
heretic Photinus, who after being condemned in many Councils appealed to
the Emperor, and was allowed to dispute in his presence with Basil the
Great as his opponent.  Athanasius himself, in circumstances very
similar to Cyril’s, declined to appear before Eusebius and a Synod of
Arian Bishops at Cæsarea, by whom he was condemned <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.i-p68.1"></span>a.d.</span> 334, and
appealed in person to Constantine, requesting either that a lawful
Council of Bishops might be assembled, or that the Emperor would himself
receive his defence. <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) ”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p70"></span>In justification of Cyril’s appeal it is
enough to say that it was impossible for him to submit to the judgment
of Acacius and his Arian colleagues.  They could not be impartial in a
matter where the jurisdiction of Acacius their president, and his
unsoundness in the Faith, were as much in question as any of the charges
brought against Cyril.  He took the only course open to him in
requesting the Emperor to remit his case to the higher juris<span
id="page_xv">p. xv</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xv"></span>diction of
a greater Council, and in giving formal notice of this appeal to the
Bishops who had expelled him.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p71"></span>While the appeal was pending, Cyril
became acquainted with “ the learned Bishop, Basil of Ancyra “ (Hefele),
with Eustathius of Sebaste in Armenia, and George of Laodicea, the chief
leaders of the party “usually (since Epiphanius), but with some
injustice, designated Semi-Arian <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)
.”  One of the charges brought against Cyril in the Council of
Constantinople (360, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p72.1"></span>a.d</span>.) was, as we shall see, that he
held communion with these Bishops.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p73"></span>Cyril had not long to wait for the
hearing of his appeal.  In the year 359 the Eastern Bishops met at
Seleucia in Isauria, and the Western at Ariminum.  Constantius had at
first wished to convene a general Council of all the Bishops of the
Empire, but this intention he was induced to abandon by representations
of the long journeys and expense, and he therefore directed the two
Synods then assembled at Ariminum and at Seleucia “the Rugged” to
investigate first the disputes concerning the Faith, and then to turn
their attention to the complaints of Cyril, and other Bishops against
unjust decrees of deposition and banishment <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) .  This order of proceeding was
discussed, and after much controversy adopted on the first day of
meeting, the 27th of September <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) . 
On the second day Acacius and his friends refused to remain unless the
Bishops already deposed, or under accusation, were excluded.  Theodoret
relates that “ several friends of peace tried to persuade Cyril of
Jerusalem to withdraw, but that, as he would not comply, Acacius left
the assembly <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) .”  Three days
afterwards, according to Sozomen, a third meeting was held at which the
demand of Acacius was complied with; “for the Bishops of the opposite
party were determined that he should have no pretext for dissolving the
Council, which was evidently his object in order to prevent the
impending examination of the heresy of Aëtius and of the accusations
which had been brought against him and his partisans <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) .”  A creed put forward by Acacius having
been rejected, he refused to attend any further meetings, though
repeatedly summoned to be present at an investigation of his own charges
against Cyril.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p78"></span>In the end Acacius and many of his
friends were deposed or excommunicated.  Some of these, however, in
defiance of the sentence of the Council, returned to their dioceses, as
did also the majority who had deposed them.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p79"></span>It is not expressly stated whether any
formal decision on the case of Cyril was adopted by the Council:  but as
his name does not appear in the lists of those who were deposed or
excommunicated, it is certain that he was not condemned.  It is most
probable that the charges against him were disregarded after his accuser
Acacius had refused to appear, and that he returned, like the others, to
his diocese.  But he was not to be left long in peace.  Acacius and some
of his party had hastened to Constantinople, where they gained over to
their cause the chief men attached to the palace, and through their
influence secured the favour of Constantius, and roused his anger
against the majority of the Council.  But what especially stirred the
Emperor’s wrath were the charges which Acacius concocted against Cyril: 
“For,” he said that “the holy robe which the Emperor Constantine of
blessed memory, in his desire to honour the Church of Jerusalem, had
presented to Macarius, the Bishop of that city, to be worn when he
administered the rite of Holy Baptism, all fashioned as it was with
golden threads, had been sold by Cyril, and bought by one of the dancers
at the theatre, who had put it on, and while dancing had fallen, and
injured himself, and died.  With such an ally as this Cyril,” he said,
“they undertake to judge and pass sentence upon the rest of the
world <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) .”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p81"></span>Ten deputies who at the close of the
Council of Seleucia had been appointed to report its <span
id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xvi"></span>proceedings to the Emperor, “met, on their
arrival at the Court, the deputies of the Council of Ariminum, and
likewise the partisans of Acacius <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)
.  After much controversy and many intrigues, a mutilated and ambiguous
Creed adopted at Ariminum in which the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p82.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p82.2"></span>μοούσιος</span> of Nicæa was replaced by
“like to the Father that begat Him according to the Scriptures,” and the
mention of either “essence” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p82.3"></span>οὐσία</span>) or “subsistence” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p82.4"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p82.5"></span>πόστασις</span>)
condemned <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) , was brought forward and
approved by the Emperor.  “After having, on the last day of the year
359, discussed the matter with the Bishops till far into the night <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) , he at length extorted their
signatures….It is in this connexion that Jerome says:  *Ingemuit totus
orbis, et Arianum se esse miratus est* <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) .”  Early in the following year, 360
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.i-p85.1"></span>a.d</span>., through
the influence of Acacius a new Synod was held at Constantinople, in
which, among other Semi-Arian Bishops, Cyril also was deposed on the
charge of having held communion with Eustathius of Sebaste, Basil of
Ancyra, and George of Laodicea.  Cyril, as we have seen, had become
acquainted with these Bishops during his residence at Tarsus in 358, at
which time they were all zealous opponents of Acacius and his party, but
differed widely in other respects.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p86"></span>George of Laodicea was a profligate in
morals, and an Arian at heart, whose opposition to Acacius and Eudoxius
was prompted by self-interest rather than by sincere conviction.  He had
been deposed from the priesthood by Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria,
both on that ground of false doctrine, and of the open and habitual
irregularities of his life.  Athanasius styles him “the most wicked of
all the Arians,” reprobated even by his own party for his grossly
dissolute conduct <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) .

<span id="ii.iii.i-p88"></span>Basil of Ancyra was a man of high moral
character, great learning, and powerful intellect, a consistent opponent
both of the Sabellianism of Marcellus, and of every form of Arian and
Anomœan heresy, a chief among those of whom Athanasius wrote <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) , “We discuss the matter with them as
brothers with brothers, who mean what we mean, and dispute only about
the word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p89.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p89.2"></span>μοούσιος</span>)….Now such is Basil who wrote
from Ancyra concerning the Faith” (358 <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p89.3"></span>a.d</span>., the same year in which Cyril met
him at Tarsus).

<span id="ii.iii.i-p90"></span>Eustathius is described as a man unstable
in doctrine, vacillating from party to party, subscribing readily to
Creeds of various tendency, yet commanding the respect even of his
enemies by a life of extraordinary holiness, in which active benevolence
was combined with extreme austerity.  “He was a man,” says Mr.
Gwatkin <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) , “too active to be
ignored, too unstable to be trusted, too famous for ascetic piety to be
lightly made an open enemy.”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p92"></span>S. Basil the Great, when travelling from
place to place, to observe the highest forms of ascetic life, had met
with Eustathius at Tarsus, and formed a lasting friendship with a man
whom he describes as “exhibiting something above human excellence,” and
of whom, after the painful dissensions which embittered Basil’s later
life, that great saint could say, that from childhood to extreme old age
he (Eustathius) had watched over himself with the greatest care, the
result of his self-discipline being seen in his life and character <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) .

<span id="ii.iii.i-p94"></span>Of any intimate friendship between Cyril,
and these Semi-Arian leaders, we have no evidence in the vague charges
of Acacius:  their common fault was that they condemned him in the Synod
of Seleucia.  The true reason of Cyril’s deposition, barely concealed by
the frivolous charges laid against him, was the hatred of Acacius,
incurred by the refusal to acknowledge the Metropolitan jurisdiction of
the See of Cæsarea.  The deposition was confirmed by Constantius, and
followed by a sentence of banishment.  The place of Cyril’s exile is not
mentioned; nor is it known whether he joined in the protest of the other
deposed Bishops, described by S. Basil, *Epist*. 75.  His banishment was
not of longer continuance than two years.  Constantius died on the 3rd
of November, 361, and the accession of Julian was soon <span
id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xvii"></span>followed by the recall of all the exiled
Bishops, orthodox and heretical, and the restoration of their
confiscated estates <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) .  Julian’s
object, according to Socrates, was “ to brand the memory of Constantius
by making him appear to have been cruel towards his subjects.”  An
equally amiable motive imputed to him is mentioned by Sozomen:  “It is
said that he issued this order in their behalf not out of mercy, but
that through contention among themselves the Church might be involved in
fraternal strife <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) .”  Cyril,
returning with the other Bishops, seems to have passed through Antioch
on his way home, and to have been well received by the excellent Bishop
Meletius.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p97"></span>It happened that the son of a heathen
priest attached to the Emperor’s Court, having been instructed in his
youth by a Deaconess whom he visited with his mother, had secretly
become a Christian.  On discovering this, his father had cruelly
scourged and burnt him with hot spits on his hands, and feet, and back. 
He contrived to escape, and took refuge with his friend the Deaconess. 
“‘She dressed me in women’s garments, and took me in her covered
carriage to the divine Meletius.  He handed me over to the Bishop of
Jerusalem, at that time Cyril, and we started by night for Palestine.’ 
After the death of Julian, this young man led his father also into the
way of truth.  This act he told me with the rest <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) .”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p99"></span>The next incident recorded in the life of
S. Cyril is his alleged prediction of the failure of Julian’s attempt to
rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem.  “The vain and ambitious mind of
Julian,” says Gibbon, “might aspire to restore the ancient glory of the
Temple of Jerusalem.  As the Christians were firmly persuaded that a
sentence of everlasting destruction had been pronounced against the
whole fabric of the Mosaic law, the Imperial sophist would have
converted the success of his undertaking into a specious argument
against the faith of prophecy and the truth of revelation.”  Again he
writes:  “The Christians entertained a natural and pious expectation,
that in this memorable contest, the honour of religion would be
vindicated by some signal miracle <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)
.”  That such an expectation may have been shared by Cyril is not
impossible:  but there is no satisfactory evidence that he ventured to
foretell any miraculous interposition.  According to the account of
Rufinus <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) , “lime and cement had been
brought, and all was ready for destroying the old foundations and laying
new on the next day.  But Cyril remained undismayed, and after careful
consideration either of what he had read in Daniel’s prophecy concerning
the ‘times,’ or of our Lord’s predictions in the Gospels, persisted that
it was impossible that one stone should ever there be laid upon another
by the Jews.”  This account of Cyril’s expectation, though probable
enough in itself, seems to be little more than a conjecture founded on
his statement (*Cat*. xv. 15), that “Antichrist will come at the time
when there shall not be left one stone upon another in the Temple of the
Jews.”  That doom was not completed in Cyril’s time, nor did he expect
it to be fulfilled until the coming of the Jewish Antichrist, who was to
restore the Temple shortly before the end of the world.  It was
impossible for Cyril to see in Julian such an Antichrist as he has
described; and therefore, without any gift or pretence of prophecy, he
might very well express a firm conviction that the attempted restoration
at that time must fail.  Though Gibbon is even more cynical and
contemptuous than usual in his examination of the alleged miracles, he
does not attempt to deny the main facts of the story <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) :  with their miraculous character we are
not here concerned, but only with Cyril’s conduct on so remarkable an
occasion.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p103"></span>In the same year, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p103.1"></span>a.d</span>. 363, Julian was killed in his
Persian campaign on the 26th of June, and was succeeded by Jovian, whose
universal tolerance, and personal profession of the Nicene faith, though
discredited by the looseness of his morals, gave an interval <span
id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> <span id="ii.iii.i-Page_xviii"></span>of
comparative rest to the Church.  In his reign Athanasius was recalled,
and Acacius and his friends subscribed the Nicene Creed, with an
explanation of the sense in which they accepted the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p103.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p103.3"></span>μοούσιον</span> <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) .  As Cyril’s name is not mentioned in
any of the records of Jovian’s short reign of seven months, we may infer
that he dwelt in peace at Jerusalem.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p105"></span>Jovian died on the 17th of February,
364, and was succeeded by Valentinian, who in the following March gave
over the Eastern provinces of the Empire to his brother Valens.  During
the first two years of the new reign we hear nothing of Cyril:  but at
the beginning of the year 366, on the death of his old enemy Acacius,
Cyril assumed the right to nominate his successor in the See of Cæsarea,
and appointed a certain Philumenus <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)
.  Whether this assumption of authority was in accordance with the 7th
Canon of Nicæa may be doubted:  Cyril’s choice of his nephew was,
however, in after times abundantly justified by the conduct and
character of Gelasius, who is described by Theodoret as a man
“distinguished by the purity of his doctrine, and the sanctity of his
life,” and is quoted by the same historian as “the admirable,” and “the
blessed Gelasius <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) .”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p108"></span>Epiphanius relates <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) that “after these three had been set up,
and could do nothing on account of mutual contentions,” Euzoius was
appointed by the Arians, and held the See until the accession of
Theodosius in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p109.1"></span>a.d.</span> 379, when he was deposed, and
Gelasius restored.  In the meantime Cyril had been a third time deposed
and driven from Jerusalem, probably in the year 367.  For at that time
Valens, who had fallen under the influence of Eudoxius, the Arian Bishop
of Constantinople, by whom he was baptized, “wrote to the Governors of
the provinces, commanding that all Bishops who had been banished by
Constantius, and had again assumed their sacerdotal offices under the
Emperor Julian, should be ejected from their Churches <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) .”  Of this third and longest banishment
we have no particulars, but we may safely apply to it the words of the
Synod at Constantinople, 382, that Cyril “ had passed through very many
contests with the Arians in various places.”

<span id="ii.iii.i-p111"></span>The terrible defeat and miserable death
of Valens in the great battle against the Goths at Adrianople (<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.i-p111.1"></span>a.d</span>. 378) brought a
respite to the defenders of the Nicene doctrine.  For Gratian
“disapproved of the late persecution that had been carried on for the
purpose of checking the diversities in religious Creeds, and recalled
all those who had been banished on account of their religion <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) .”  Gratian associated Theodosius with
himself in the Empire on the 19th of January, 379; and “at this period,”
says Sozomen <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) , “all the Churches of
the East, with the exception of that of Jerusalem, were in the hands of
the Arians.”  Cyril, therefore, had been one of the first to return to
his own See.  During his long absence the Church of Jerusalem had been
the prey both of Arianism and of the new heresy of Apollinarius, which
had spread among the monks who were settled on Mount Olivet.  Egyptian
Bishops, banished for their orthodoxy, having taken refuge in Palestine,
there found themselves excluded from communion.  Jerusalem was given
over to heresy and schism, to the violent strife of rival factions, and
to extreme licentiousness of morals.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p114"></span>Gregory of Nyssa, who had been
commissioned by a Council held at Antioch in 378 to visit the Churches
in Arabia and Palestine, “because matters with them were in confusion,
and needed an arbiter,” gives a mournful account both of the distracted
state of the Church, and of the prevailing corruption.  “If the Divine
grace were more abundant about Jerusalem than elsewhere, sin would not
be so much the fashion among those who live there , but as it is, there
is no form of uncleanness that is not perpetrated among them; rascality,
adultery, theft, idolatry, poisoning, quarrelling, murder, are rife.” 
In a letter <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) written after his
return <span id="page_xix">p. xix</span> <span
id="ii.iii.i-Page_xix"></span>to Cæsarea in Cappadocia he asks, “What
means this opposing array of new Altars?  Do we announce another Jesus? 
Do we produce other Scriptures?  Have any of ourselves dared to say
“Mother of Man” of the Holy Virgin, the Mother of God?

<span id="ii.iii.i-p116"></span>In the year <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p116.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381 Theodosius summoned the
Bishops of his division of the Empire to meet in Council at
Constantinople, in order to settle the disputes by which the Eastern
Church had been so long distracted, and to secure the triumph of the
Nicene Faith over the various forms of heresy which had arisen in the
half-century which had elapsed since the first General Council.  Among
the Bishops present were Cyril of Jerusalem, and his nephew Gelasius,
who on the death of Valens had regained possession of the See of Cæsarea
from the Arian intruder Euzoius.  Cyril is described by Sozomen <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) as one of three recognised leaders of the
orthodox party, and, according to Bishop Hefele <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) , as sharing the presidency with the
Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch.  This latter point, however, is not
clearly expressed in the statement of Sozomen.  Socrates writes that
Cyril at this time recognised the doctrine of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p118.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.i-p118.2"></span>μοούσιον</span>, having retracted his former
opinion:  and Sozomen says that he had at this period renounced the
tenets of the Macedonians which he previously held <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) .  Touttée rightly rejects these
reproaches as unfounded:  they are certainly opposed to all his teaching
in the Catechetical Lectures, where the doctrine of Christ’s unity of
essence with the Father is fully and frequently asserted, though the
term <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p119.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.i-p119.2"></span>μοούσιος</span> is not
used, and the co-equal Deity of the Holy Ghost is everywhere maintained.

<span id="ii.iii.i-p120"></span>We find no further mention of Cyril in
the proceedings of the Council itself.  As consisting of Eastern Bishops
only, its authority was not at first acknowledged, nor its acts approved
in the Western Church.  The two Synods held later in the same year at
Aquileia and at Milan, sent formal protests to Theodosius, and urged him
to summon a General Council at Alexandria or at Rome.  But instead of
complying with this request, the Emperor summoned the Bishops of his
Empire to a fresh Synod at Constantinople, and there in the summer of
382 very nearly the same Bishops were assembled who had been present at
the Council of the preceding year.  Their Synodical letter addressed to
the Bishops assembled at Rome is preserved by Theodoret <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) and in it we read as follows:  “Of the
Church in Jerusalem, the Mother of all the Churches, we make known that
Cyril the most reverend and most beloved of God is Bishop; and that he
was canonically ordained long ago by the Bishops of the province, and
that he has very often fought a good fight in various places against the
Arians.”  Thus justice was done at last to one whose prudence,
moderation, and love of peace, had exposed him in those days of bitter
controversy to undeserved suspicion and relentless persecution.  His
justification by the Council is the last recorded incident in Cyril’s
life.  We are told by Jerome that he held undisturbed possession of his
See for eight years under Theodosius.  The eighth year of Theodosius was
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.i-p121.1"></span>a.d.</span> 386, and
in the Roman Martyrology, the 18th of March in that year is marked as
“The birthday (‘Natalis,’ i.e. of his heavenly life) of Cyril, Bishop of
Jerusalem, who after suffering many wrongs from the Arians for the sake
of the Faith, and having been several times driven from his See, became
at length renowned for the glory of sanctity, and rested in peace:  an
Ecumenical Council in a letter to Damasus gave a noble testimony to his
untarnished faith.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[ix:1](2070005.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p9"></span> Bingham, *The Antiquities of the
Christian Church*, Book II. c. 10, § 2.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[ix:2](2070005.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p11"></span> Cat. xii. 20.  The wood had been cleared
away about sixteen years before this Lecture was delivered.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[ix:3](2070005.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p12"></span> Cat. xiii. 32; xiv. 5.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[ix:4](2070005.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p13"></span> Cat. iv. 10; x. 19; xiii. 4.  Gregor.
Nyss. *Baptism of Christ*, p. 520, in this Series:  “The wood of the
Cross is of saving efficacy for all men, though it is, as I am informed,
a piece of a poor tree, less valuable than most trees are.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[x:5](2070005.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p14"></span> Cat. xiv. 9.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[x:6](2070005.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p16"></span> Eusebius; *Vita Const*. iii. 29 ff.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[x:7](2070005.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p18"></span> Cat. xii. 1, 33, 34.  Compare iv. 24,
note 8.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[x:8](2070005.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p23"></span> Hefele, *History of Councils*, ii. 17;
Sozom. *H. E*. ii. 25.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[x:9](2070005.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p24"></span> Euseb. *Vita Const*. iv. 43.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[x:10](2070005.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p27"></span> Robertson, *Prolegomena to Athanasius*,
p. xxxix.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[x:11](2070005.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p28"></span> Euseb. *V. C.* iv. 43.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xi:12](2070005.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p30"></span> *Apolog. contra Arian*. § 57.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xi:13](2070005.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p31"></span> Cf. Athan. *Hist. Arian*. § 25.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xi:14](2070005.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p32"></span> Introductory note to Cyril’s Letter to
Constantius, § x.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xi:15](2070005.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p34"></span> On the exact date of the Lectures, see
below, ch. ix.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xi:16](2070005.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p35"></span> See more below on the office of
“Catechist,” ch. ii. § 2.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xi:17](2070005.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p37"></span> Cat. x. 14.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xi:18](2070005.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p38"></span> Cat. i. 6.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xii:19](2070005.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p41"></span> Socr. *H. E*. ii. 38; Soz. iv. 20.  The
Bishops of Palestine, except two or three, had received Athanasius most
cordially a few years before (Athan. *Hist. Arian*. § 25).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xii:20](2070005.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p42"></span> p. ii.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xii:21](2070005.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p44"></span> Vol. I. p. xli. note.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xii:22](2070005.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p45"></span> *Dict. Chr. Biogr*. “Cyrillus,” p. 761: 
and for the Meletian Schism, see “Meletius,” “Paulinus,” “Vitalius.”

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xii:23](2070005.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p46"></span> Hefele, ii. 344.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xii:24](2070005.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p47"></span> Theodoret, *Hist. Eccl*. v. 9.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xiii:25](2070005.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p49.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p50"></span> *Epist. ad Constantium*—Monitum, § x.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xiii:26](2070005.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p51"></span> *Dict. Chr. Biogr*. p. 761.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xiii:27](2070005.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p53"></span> Gwatkin, p. 74.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xiii:28](2070005.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p55"></span> Epist. iv. p. 12.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xiii:29](2070005.htm#fr_28) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p56"></span> Sozom. *H. E*. iv. 25.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xiii:30](2070005.htm#fr_29) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p58"></span> *Hist. Eccl*. v. 23.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xiii:31](2070005.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p59"></span> *History of the Christian Councils*,
Book I. Sec. ii. c.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xiv:32](2070005.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p61"></span> *Hist. Eccl*. ii. 40.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xiv:33](2070005.htm#fr_32) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p62"></span> Ib.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xiv:34](2070005.htm#fr_33) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p63"></span> Ib. ii. 26.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xiv:35](2070005.htm#fr_34) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p63.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p64"></span> *H. E*. iv. 25.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xiv:36](2070005.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p64.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p65"></span> There is much uncertainty and confusion
in the names of the Bishops who succeeded Cyril on the three occasions
of his being deposed.  His successor in 357 is said by Jerome to have
been a certain Eutychius, probably the same who was afterwards
excommunicated at Seleucia (*Dict. Chr. Biogr*. Eutychius 13).  The
subject is discussed at length by Touttée (*Diss*. I. vii.).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xiv:37](2070005.htm#fr_36) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p66"></span> See the account of his remarkable career
in the *Dict. Chr. Biogr*.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xiv:38](2070005.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p66.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p67"></span> Athan. *De Synodis*, c. xii.; Hefele,
ii. 262.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xiv:39](2070005.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p68"></span> Socrates, *H. E.* ii. 40.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xiv:40](2070005.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p69"></span> Athan. *contr. Arianos Apol*. c. 36: 
Hefele, ii. p. 27, note.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xv:41](2070005.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p72"></span> Robertson, *Prolegomena ad Athanas*. ii.
§ 8 (2) c.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xv:42](2070005.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p74"></span> Soz. iv. 17.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xv:43](2070005.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p75"></span> Socrat. ii. 39.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xv:44](2070005.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p76"></span> *H. E*. ii. 26.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xv:45](2070005.htm#fr_44) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p77"></span> Sozom. iv. 22.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xv:46](2070005.htm#fr_45) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p80"></span> Theodoret, *H. E*. ii. 23.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xvi:47](2070005.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p82"></span> Sozom. iv. 23.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xvi:48](2070005.htm#fr_47) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p82.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p83"></span> Athan. *de. Syn*. § 30, where this Creed
is given in full.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xvi:49](2070005.htm#fr_48) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p84"></span> S. Hilar. ii. Num. 708<span
id="ii.iii.i-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xvi:50](2070005.htm#fr_49) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p85"></span> Hefele, *Councils*, ii. 271.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xvi:51](2070005.htm#fr_50) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p87"></span> *Dict. Chr. Biogr*.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xvi:52](2070005.htm#fr_51) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p89"></span> *De Synodis*, § 41.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xvi:53](2070005.htm#fr_52) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p91"></span> *The Arian Controversy*, p. 135.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xvi:54](2070005.htm#fr_53) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p93"></span> Basil, *Epist*. 244.  Compare Newman,
*Preface to Catechetical Lectures*, p. iv.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xvii:55](2070005.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p95"></span> Socr. *H. E*. iii. 1.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xvii:56](2070005.htm#fr_55) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p96"></span> Sozom. *H. E*. v. c. 5.  Compare Gibbon,
Ch. xxiii.:  “The impartial Ammianus has ascribed this affected clemency
to the desire of fomenting the intestine divisions of the Church.”

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xvii:57](2070005.htm#fr_56) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p98"></span> Theodoret, *H. E.* iii. 10.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xvii:58](2070005.htm#fr_57) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p100"></span> Gibbon, c. xxiii.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xvii:59](2070005.htm#fr_58) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p101"></span> *Hist*. i. 37.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xvii:60](2070005.htm#fr_59) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p102"></span> See Gibbon’s remarks on the testimony
of Ammianus, “a contemporary and a Pagan,” and on the explanation from
natural causes suggested by Michaelis.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xviii:61](2070005.htm#fr_60) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p103.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p104"></span> Socr. iii. 25; Sozom. vi. 4.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xviii:62](2070005.htm#fr_61) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p106"></span> Epiphanius, *Hær*. 73, § 37.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xviii:63](2070005.htm#fr_62) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p107"></span> *Hist. Eccl*. V. 8; *Dialog*. i. iii.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xviii:64](2070005.htm#fr_63) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p109"></span> *Hæres*. lxxiii. § 37.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xviii:65](2070005.htm#fr_64) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p110"></span> Sozom. vi. 12.  Cf. Tillemont,
*Mémoires*, Tom. viii. p. 357:  “As Cyril was, no doubt, then persecuted
only on account of his firmness in the true Faith, the title of
Confessor cannot be refused to him.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xviii:66](2070005.htm#fr_65) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p111.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p112"></span> Soz. vii. 1.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xviii:67](2070005.htm#fr_66) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p113"></span> Ib. 2.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xviii:68](2070005.htm#fr_67) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p115"></span> Greg. Nyss. *Epist*. xvii. in this
Series.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xix:69](2070005.htm#fr_68) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p116.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p117"></span> *H. E*. vii. 7.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xix:70](2070005.htm#fr_69) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p118"></span> *Councils*, ii. 344.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xix:71](2070005.htm#fr_70) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p118.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p119"></span> Socrat. v. 8; Sozom. vii. 7.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xix:72](2070005.htm#fr_71) <span
id="ii.iii.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.i-p121"></span> *H. E*. v. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Catechetical Instruction.](2070006)
