[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070010)  [Next](2070012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Eucharistic Doctrine.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p2"></span>We have seen that Cyril makes the
consecration of sacramental elements in every case consist in the
Invocation of the Holy Ghost, after which the water of Baptism is no
longer <span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.vii-Page_xliv"></span>mere simple water <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) , the ointment no longer plain
ointment <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281.md) , the bread and the
wine no longer plain bread and wine, but the Body and Blood of
Christ <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282.md) .

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p6"></span>Upon these statements an argument
against Transubstantiation has been founded by Bishop Cosin <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283.md) , and adopted both by Dr. Pusey <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284.md) and Dean Goode <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285.md) .  It being universally admitted that
the substance of the water and of the ointment remains unchanged, it is
argued from the identity of the language employed in each case that,
according to Cyril, no *substantial* change takes place in the Bread and
Wine.  Bishop Cosin quotes the following passage, of which the original
is given below:  “Take heed thou dost not think that this is a mere
ointment only.  For as the bread of the Eucharist after the invocation
of the Holy Ghost is no longer ordinary bread, but is the body of
Christ; so this holy ointment is no longer a bare common ointment after
it is consecrated, but is the gift or grace of Christ, which, by His
Divine Nature, and the coming of the Holy Ghost, is made efficacious; so
that the body is anointed with the ointment, but the soul is sanctified
by the holy and vivifying Spirit <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286.md)
.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p11"></span>Bishop Cosin proceeds to argue thus: 
“Can anything more clear be said?  Either the ointment is
transubstantiated by consecration into the spirit and grace of Christ,
or the bread and wine are not transubstantiated by consecration into the
Body and Blood of Christ.  Therefore as the ointment retains still its
substance, and yet is not called a mere or common ointment, but the
Chrism or grace of Christ:  so the bread and wine remaining so, as to
their substance, yet are not said to be only bread and wine common and
ordinary, but also the Body and Blood of Christ.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p12"></span>Notwithstanding the great authority of
Bishop Cosin, and the assent of Theologians of such opposite schools as
Dr. Pusey and Dean Goode, it must be admitted that the argument, even as
against Transubstantiation, is pressed beyond its just limits.  The
identity of language extends only to two points, (1) the mode of
consecration by Invocation, (2) the effect negatively stated, that the
material element in each case is no longer simply a material element.  A
change, therefore, of some kind has taken place, and we have still to
inquire how the change in each case is described by Cyril.  “The water
acquires a power of sanctity,” otherwise described as “the spiritual
grace given with the water <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p14"></span>“The ointment is Christ’s gift of grace
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p14.1"></span>Χάρισμα</span>),
and becomes effectual to impart by the presence of the Holy Ghost His
Divine Nature <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288.md) .”  “The Bread
becomes the Body and the Wine the Blood of Christ <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289.md) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p17"></span>There is here no such identity of
language as would justify the assertion that the change described is of
the same nature in each case, that because it leaves the substance of
the water and the ointment untouched, therefore the substance of the
Bread also must, according to Cyril, remain unchanged:  this must be
proved by other arguments.  We must also remember that if this argument
based upon the identity of the language used on the two sides of a
comparison is trustworthy, there is another passage in Cyril to which it
may be applied:  “He once, in Cana of Galilee, changed the water into
wine akin to blood (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p17.1"></span>οἰκεῖον αἵματι</span>) <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290.md) , and is it incredible that He changed
wine into blood?”  The change of the water into wine was a change of
substance:  are we then prepared to agree with the Roman Church that the
change of the bread also is a change of substance?  Nay further, would
the Roman Church itself accept the principle of the argument?  For
observe that in fact Bishop Cosin himself, when he comes to deal with
this passage, gives up his former argument, and distinctly rejects it. 
<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.vii-Page_xlv"></span>“Protestants,” he says, “do freely grant
and firmly believe that the wine, in the sense already often mentioned,
is changed into the Blood of Christ; but every change is not a
transubstantiation; neither doth Cyril say that this change (i.e. of the
wine) is like that of the water, for then it would appear to our senses;
but that He who changed the water sensibly can also change the wine
sacramentally, will not be doubted by any <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291.md) .”  Again, in describing the act of
consecration, Cyril says:  “We beseech the merciful God to send forth
His Holy Spirit upon the gifts lying before Him, that He may make the
bread the Body of Christ, and the wine the Blood of Christ, for
certainly whatsoever the Holy Ghost has touched, is sanctified and
changed (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p19.1"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p19.2"></span>γίασται καὶ μεταβέβληται</span> ) <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292.md) .”  Here again, as in the passage
quoted from *Myst*. iii. § 3, a sacramental change of some sort is
asserted, but its specific character is not defined.

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p21"></span>There is, however, a passage which
throws some light on Cyril’s conception of the change in *Myst*. iv. §
3:  “In the figure of Bread is given to thee His Body, and in the figure
of Wine His Blood, that thou by partaking of the Body and Blood of
Christ mightest be made of the same body and the same blood with Him. 
For thus we come to bear Christ in us, His Body and His Blood being
distributed to our members (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p21.1"></span>εἰς τὰ ἡμέτερα ἀναδιδομένου μέλη</span>).” 
Several good MSS read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p21.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p21.3"></span>ναδεδεγμένοι</span>, which would give the
meaning, “having received of His Body and of His blood into our
members.”  This does not alter the general sense of the passage; but the
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p21.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p21.5"></span>ναδιδομένου</span> is supported by another
passage, *Myst*. v. § 15:  “Our common bread is not substantial (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p21.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p21.7"></span>πιούσιος</span>):  but
this Holy Bread is substantial, that is, appointed for the substance of
the soul.  This Bread *goeth* not *into the belly and is not cast out
into the draught*, but is distributed (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p21.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p21.9"></span>ναδίδοται</span>) into thy whole system for
the benefit of body and soul.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p22"></span>In order to accommodate these passages
to the Roman doctrine of Transubstantiation the Benedictine Editor here
introduces the idea of *species*, the outward forms or accidents of the
bread.  “We must not suppose,” he says, “that Cyril thought the Body of
Christ to be divided and digested (*digeri*) into our body; but by a
customary way of speaking he attributes to the Holy Body what is
suitable only to the species which conceal it.  And he does not deny
that the species pass into the draught, but only that the Body of Christ
does so.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p23"></span>But Cyril draws no such distinction
between the *species* and the Body of Christ:  to him the Bread and Wine
after consecration are the Body and the Blood of Christ.  For how could
it be said that the *species*, which in Transubstantiation are the mere
outward accidents of bread and wine, are distributed into the whole
system for the benefit of body and *soul*?

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p24"></span>In whatever sense the bread and wine
become by consecration the Body and Blood of Christ, in that same sense
the Body and Blood of Christ are, according to Cyril, distributed to our
whole system.

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p25"></span>This was no new doctrine:  Ignatius,
*Ephes*. xxi., speaks of Christians as “breaking one Bread, which is the
medicine of immortality, and the antidote that we should not die, but
live for ever in Jesus Christ.”  This is perhaps the earliest expression
of the belief that the resurrection of the body is secured by *the
communion of the Body of Christ* in the Eucharist.  The manner in which
this communion is effected is described by Justin Martyr (*Apolog*. I. §
66) in language which shews clearly what Cyril meant:  “We do not
receive these things as common bread and common drink:  but in the same
way as Jesus Christ our Saviour was made flesh by the Word of God, and
took both flesh and blood for our salvation, so we have been taught that
the food over which thanksgiving has been made by prayer in the word
received from Him (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p25.1"></span>τὴν δι᾽ εὐχῆς λόγου τοῦ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ
εὐχαριστηθεῖσαν τροφήν</span>), from which (food) our blood and flesh
are by transmutation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p25.2"></span>κατὰ μεταβολήν</span>) nourished, is both
the Flesh and Blood of Him the Incarnate Jesus.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p26"></span>Here it is plainly taught that by
consecration the Bread and Wine have become the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, and that as such they nourish our “blood and flesh” (observe the
<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span> <span
id="ii.iii.vii-Page_xlvi"></span>inverted order) by undergoing a
change:  in other words, the Eucharistic Body and Blood of Christ are
changed into nourishment of our blood and flesh, by being distributed
(as Cyril says) to all our members, that is by being subjected to the
natural processes of digestion and assimilation.  The unusual order of
the words “our blood and flesh” is not accidental, but answers to the
process of assimilation, in which the digested food first nourishes the
blood and then the blood nourishes the flesh.

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p27"></span>The meaning is, as Otto says in his
note, “that the divine food passes away into our bodies entire, so that
nothing remains:”  and Dr. Pusey seems to take the same view, in his
note on the words, “from which (food) through transmutation our blood
and flesh are nourished:  “*i.e*. the material parts are changed into
the substance of the human body <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293.md)
.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p29"></span>Thus then, according to Cyril, the
Eucharistic Body and Blood of Christ are distributed to all our members;
His Flesh and Blood pass by a change into our blood and flesh, and we
thereby become “of the same body and the same blood with Him <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md) :”  and “this Bread does not pass into
the belly, and is not cast out into the draught <span
id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295.md) ,” but wastes away as the body itself
wastes <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296.md) .

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p33"></span>However much this view of the
Sacramental mystery may differ from later theories, it was certainly
held by many of the Greek Fathers.  Irenæus, for example, in addition to
those already mentioned, thus writes:  “When therefore both the mingled
cup and the created bread receive the Word of God, and the Eucharist
becomes the Body of Christ, and from these the substance of our flesh
increaseth and consisteth, how say they that the flesh is incapable of
the gift of God which is eternal life, that flesh which is nourished
from the Body and Blood of the Lord, and is already (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p33.1"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p33.2"></span>πάρχουσα</span>) a
member of Him?—even as the blessed Paul saith, that we are members of
His Body, of His Flesh, and of His Bones <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297.md) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p35"></span>That this was also the teaching of
Cyril’s contemporaries is clear from the famous passage of Gregory of
Nyssa, in which this doctrine is fully developed.  It will be sufficient
to quote here the latter part of the passage, in which Gregory is
speaking of the Wine.  “Since then that God-containing flesh partook for
its substance and support of this particular nourishment also, and since
the God who was manifested infused Himself into perishable humanity for
this purpose, viz. that by this communion with Deity mankind might at
the same time be deified, for this end it is that, by dispensation of
His grace, He disseminates Himself in every believer through that flesh
whose substance comes from bread and wine, blending Himself with the
bodies of believers, to secure that, by this union with the immortal,
man too may be a sharer in incorruption.  He gives these gifts by virtue
of the benediction through which He transelements the natural quality of
these visible things to that immortal thing <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298.md) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p37"></span>In another remarkable passage <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299.md) Cyril gives a further explanation of
the effect of consecration:  “In the New Testament there is heavenly
Bread and a Cup of salvation, sanctifying soul and body:  for as the
Bread corresponds to the body, so also the Word (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p38.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p38.2"></span>λόγος</span>) is
appropriate to the soul.”  With this language of Cyril we may compare
further what is said by Gregory of Nyssa in the context of the passage
already quoted:  “Just then, as in the case of ourselves, as has been
repeatedly said already, if a person sees bread he also in a kind of way
looks on a human body, for by being within this it becomes this, so in
that other case the Body into which God entered (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p38.3"></span>τὸ θεοδόχον
σῶμα</span>), by partaking of the nourishment of bread was in a certain
sense the same with it, since that nourishment, as we have said, is
changed into the nature of the body:  for that which is proper to all
men is acknowledged also in the case of <span id="page_xlvii">p.
xlvii</span> <span id="ii.iii.vii-Page_xlvii"></span>That Flesh, namely,
that That Body too was maintained by bread; which Body also by the
indwelling of God the Word was changed into the dignity of Godhead. 
Rightly then do we believe that now also the bread which is sanctified
by the Word of God is changed into the Body of God the Word.  For even
that Body was once virtually (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p38.4"></span>τῇ δυνάμει</span>) bread, but has been
sanctified by the inhabitation of the Word that tabernacled in the
flesh.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p39"></span>In this passage we have the full
explanation of what Irenæus meant when he said that the elements “by
receiving the Word of God become the Eucharist,” and what Cyril meant by
saying that “as the Bread corresponds to the body, so also the Word is
appropriate to the soul.”  Their common doctrine is, that besides the
Body and Blood of Christ, that is, His Humanity offered upon the Cross
for our redemption, His Divine Nature, the Word is also present, and
that it is by receiving the Divine Word that the Bread is made the Body
of Christ.  “The fathers,” says Touttée, “often play upon the ambiguity
of the term, saying at one time that the Divine Word, at another that
the word and oracles of God nourish our soul.  Both are true.  For the
whole life-giving power of the Eucharist is derived from the Divine Word
united with the flesh which He assumed:  and the whole benefit
(*fructus*) of Eucharistic eating consists in the union of our soul with
the Word, by meditation on His mysteries and words, and conformation
thereto <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md) .”  *O si sic omnia!*

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p41"></span>In this view the Bread and Wine are
signs or figures of the natural Body of Christ crucified, but they are
also much more, they are endued *by* the Divine Word, and through the
operation of the Holy Ghost, with the life-giving power of the same Body
and Blood of Christ,—a power which being imparted to the faithful
recipient makes him to be “of the same body and the same blood with
Christ,” thereby assuring him of the resurrection of the body to eternal
life, and at the same time strengthening and refreshing the soul by its
being united through faith with the Word, and being thus made “*partaker
of the Divine nature*.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p42"></span>This is not the language of the Western
Church, whether Roman, Lutheran, or Anglican, but it is the language of
the earliest Greek Fathers, and of Cyril, as is partly and reluctantly
admitted by so cautious a writer as Dr. Waterland.  After referring to
the passage quoted above from Justin Martyr (*Apol*. i. 66) he
proceeds:  “There is another the like obscure hint in Irenæus, which may
probably be best interpreted after the same way.  He supposes the
elements to become *Christ’s body* by receiving *the word* (Word).  He
throws two considerations into one, and does not distinguish so
accurately as Origen afterwards did between the *symbolical* food and
the *true food*.”  The elements, Waterland adds, “are made the
*representative* body of Christ; but they are at the same time, *to
worthy receivers*, made the means of their spiritual union with Christ
Himself; which Irenæus points at in what he says of the *bread’s*
receiving the *Logos*, but should rather have said it of the
*communicants* themselves, as receiving the *spiritual* presence of
Christ, in the worthy *use* of the *sacred* symbols <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301.md) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p44"></span>Again, in c. vii., he says more
explicitly of Irenæus, what is equally true of Cyril; “Least of all does
he favour the *figurists* or *memorialists*; for his doctrine runs
directly counter to them almost in every line:  he asserts over and
over, that Christ’s *body* and *blood* are eaten and drunk in the
Eucharist, and our bodies thereby *fed*; and not only so, but *insured*
thereby for a happy *resurrection*:  and the reason he gives is, that
our *bodies* are thereby made or continued members of Christ’s *body,
flesh, and bones*.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p45"></span>From this view of Cyril’s doctrine
concerning the Sacramental elements we can easily understand in what
sense he applies the terms “ type” and “antitype” to the Eucharistic
elements.  “The Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist having two parts, an
outward and an inward, and the outward part having been instituted by
our Blessed Lord with a certain relation to the inward, and gifted with
a certain significance of it, nothing is more natural than that the
titles, type, antitype, symbol, figure, image, should be given to the
outward part <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md) .”  <span
id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.vii-Page_xlviii"></span>Add to this that, according to
Cyril’s doctrine as already explained, the bread after the Invocation,
without ceasing to be bread, not only signifies but also *is* the Body,
and we see how natural it was for him to say in one passage that “His
Body bore the figure of bread <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303.md) ,”
in another that “in the figure of bread the Body is given <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304.md) .”  The Body which “is given” cannot
be an *absent* Body of our Lord, but must be that Sacramental Body, of
which Cyril goes on to say in the same sentence that it is “distributed
to our members.”  Thus the Bread broken is a type or figure of Christ’s
Body as crucified for us; and by virtue of its union with the Divine
Word it becomes the life-giving Body, which makes the faithful recipient
to be, in Cyril’s words, “of the same body and same blood with Christ.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p49"></span>Another term applied by Cyril and other
Greek Fathers to the sacramental elements is “antitype.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p50"></span>In *Mystag*. ii. § 6, where Baptism is
called “the counterpart (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p50.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p50.2"></span>ντίτυπον</span>) of Christ’s sufferings,”
the meaning is clearly explained by the context:  for in § 5 the reality
of Christ’s sufferings is emphatically and repeatedly contrasted with
the figurative representation of the same; and this figurative
representation no less emphatically contrasted with the real and actual
bestowal of the grace of salvation:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p50.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p50.4"></span>ν εἰκόνι ἡ μίμησις, ἐν ἀληθείᾳ δὲ ἡ
σωτηρία,</span>.…<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p50.5"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p50.6"></span>να τῇ μιμήσει τῶν παθημάτων αὐτοῦ
κοινωνήσαντες, ἀληθείᾳ τὴν σωτηρίαν κερδήσωμεν</span>.

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p51"></span>We have thus a clear distinction of (1)
the ‘res sacramenti,’ Christ’s Death and Resurrection, (2) the
‘sacramentum’ or ‘sign,’ the outward form of Baptism, and (3) the
‘virtus sacramenti,’ our real participation in the benefits of Christ’s
Passion, “a death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness.”  Thus,
as Cyril adds at the end of the section, Baptism “has the fellowship by
representation of Christ’s true sufferings,” it is the spiritual
counterpart in us of that which was actual in Him.

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p52"></span>In *Mystag*. iii. § i, speaking of the
Chrism, Cyril says, “Now ye have been made Christs (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p52.1"></span>Χρισοί</span>) by
receiving the antitype of the Holy Ghost, and all things have been
wrought in you by imitation, because ye are images of Christ:”  and
again, “there was given to you an Unction, the antitype of that
wherewith Christ was anointed, and this is the Holy Ghost.”

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p53"></span>Here again we have (1) the ‘res
sacramenti,’ the anointing of Christ with the Holy Ghost at His Baptism,
(2) the sacramental sign or figure, the anointing of the baptized, and
(3) the spiritual benefit received in the gift of the Holy Ghost, for,
as Cyril adds at the end of § 3, “while Thy body is anointed with the
visible ointment, thy soul is sanctified by the Holy and Life-giving
Spirit.”  In these passages we see a distinction between <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p53.1"></span>τύπος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p53.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p53.3"></span>ντίτυπος</span>.  The
former is simply the outward sign or figure; the latter includes with
the sign the spiritual counterpart in us of the thing signified, the
benefits of Christ’s Passion in the one case, the gift of the Holy Ghost
in the other.

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p54"></span>It only remains to inquire whether
there is the same distinction in the meaning of the words as applied to
the Holy Eucharist.

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p55"></span>In *Mystag*. v. § 20, Cyril informs us
that during the Administration the words, “O taste and see that the Lord
is good,” were sung:  and in reference to that passage he adds, “In
tasting we are bidden to taste not bread and wine, but the antitypical
Body and Blood of Christ.”  To taste “the antitypical Body” is therefore
to taste “that the Lord is good,” whence it clearly follows that “the
antitypical Body” is not the mere sign or figure of Christ’s own natural
Body, but the sacramental and spiritual counterpart of it, by which
those who faithfully receive it are so united to Him, that their
*spirit, and soul, and body, are to be preserved entire without blame*
at His coming <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305.md) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[xliv:281](2070011.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p3"></span> Cat. iii. § 3.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[xliv:282](2070011.htm#fr_281.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p4"></span> *Mystag*. iii. § 3.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[xliv:283](2070011.htm#fr_282.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p5"></span> *Mystag*. iii. § 3.  In the same
Lecture, § 7, the consecration of the bread and wine is said to follow
“the Invocation of the Holy and Adorable Trinity.”

<span id="fn_283"></span>[xliv:284](2070011.htm#fr_283.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p7"></span> *The History of Popish
Transubstantiation*, Ch. v. § 14.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[xliv:285](2070011.htm#fr_284.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p8"></span> *The Doctrine of the Real Presence*,
pp. 277–281.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[xliv:286](2070011.htm#fr_285.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p9"></span> *The Nature of Christ’s Presence in the
Eucharist*, p. 483.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[xliv:287](2070011.htm#fr_286.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p10.2"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p10.3"></span>λλ᾽ ὅρα μὴ ὑπονοήσῃς ἐκεῖνο τὸ μύρον ψιλὸν
εἶναι. ὥσπερ γὰρ ὁ ἄρτος τῆς εὐχαριστίας μετὰ τὴν ἐπίκλησιν τοῦ ἁγίου
Πνεύματος οὐκ ἔτι ἄρτος λιτός, ἀλλὰ σῶμα Χριστοῦ, οὕτω καὶ τὸ ἅγιον
τοῦτο μύρον οὐκ ἔτι ψιλόν, οὐδ᾽ ὡς ἂν εἴποι τις κοινὸν μετ᾽ ἐπίκλησιν,
ἀλλὰ Χριστοῦ χάρισμα, καὶ Πνεύματος ἁγίου παρουσίᾳ τῆς αὐτοῦ θεότητος
ἐνεργητικὸν γινόμενον</span>.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[xliv:288](2070011.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p13"></span> Cat. iii. 3.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[xliv:289](2070011.htm#fr_288.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p15"></span> *Mystag*. iii. 3.  On the translation
see note on the passage.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[xliv:290](2070011.htm#fr_289.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p16"></span> Ib. i. § 7.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[xliv:291](2070011.htm#fr_290.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p18"></span> On this reading, see *Mystag*. iv. §
2, note 4.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[xlv:292](2070011.htm#fr_291.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p19"></span> *Of Transubstantiation*, Ch. vi. § 14.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[xlv:293](2070011.htm#fr_292.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p20"></span> *Mystag*. v. § 7.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[xlvi:294](2070011.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p28"></span> *Real Presence*, p. 144.  See note 8,
below.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[xlvi:295](2070011.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p30"></span> *Mystag*. iv. §§ 1, 3.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[xlvi:296](2070011.htm#fr_295.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p31"></span> Ib. v. § 15.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[xlvi:297](2070011.htm#fr_296.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p32"></span> See Pusey, *R. P*. p. 151, note 3: 
“Dr. Gaisford, on my applying to him, kindly answered me,—<span
class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vii-p32.1"></span>῾συναναλίσκεσθαι</span>.  It appears to me
that this word can only be explained by a periphrasis.  The writer
appears to me to mean that the elements are not thrown off like ordinary
food, but that they become blended or assimilated to the body, and waste
away as the body wastes away.’  Mr. Field gives the same meaning.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[xlvi:298](2070011.htm#fr_297.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p34"></span> V. ii. § 3.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[xlvi:299](2070011.htm#fr_298.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p36"></span> *Oratio Catechetica*, c. xxxvii.  The
whole chapter should be read with the Rev. W. Moore’s notes in this
Series, Vol. V. pp. 504–506.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[xlvi:300](2070011.htm#fr_299.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p38"></span> *Mystag*. iv. § 5.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[xlvii:301](2070011.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p40"></span> *Mystag*. iv. note 4.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[xlvii:302](2070011.htm#fr_301.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p43"></span> *Review of the Doctrine of the
Eucharist*, c. V.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[xlvii:303](2070011.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p46"></span> Pusey, *R. P*. p. 94.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[xlviii:304](2070011.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p47"></span> Cat. xiii. § 19:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p47.1"></span>τὸ σῶμα αὔτου κατὰ τὸ
εὐαγγέλιον τύπον ἔφερεν ἄρτου</span>.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[xlviii:305](2070011.htm#fr_304.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p48"></span> *Mystag*. iv. § 3:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p48.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vii-p48.2"></span>ν τύπῳ γὰρ ἄρτου
δίδοταί σοι τὸ σῶμα</span>.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[xlviii:306](2070011.htm#fr_305.md) <span
id="ii.iii.vii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vii-p56"></span> [1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md)<span id="ii.iii.vii-p56.1"></span>,
quoted at the end of *Mystag*. v. § 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Place of S. Cyril's Lectures.](2070012.md)
