[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070051)  [Next](2070053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>Oration XVI.</span>

<span id="iii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.ix-p2.1"></span>On His Father’s Silence, Because of the Plague
of Hail.</span>

<span id="iii.ix-p3"></span>*<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ix-p3.1"></span>This</span>Oration belongs to the year <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.ix-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 373.  A series of
disasters had befallen the people of Nazianzus.  A deadly cattle plague,
which had devastated their herds, had been followed by a prolonged
drought, and now their just ripened crops had been ruined by a storm of
rain and hail.  The people flocked to the church, and finding S. Gregory
the elder so overwhelmed by his sense of these terrible misfortunes that
he was unable to address them, implored his coadjutor to enter the
pulpit.  The occasion gave no time for preparation, so S. Gregory poured
out his feelings in a discourse which was in the fullest sense of the
words* *ex tempore.  Its present form, however, as Benoît suggests, may
be due to a later polishing of notes taken down at the time of
delivery.*

<span id="iii.ix-p4"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ix-p4.1"></span>Why</span> do you infringe upon the approved
order of things?  Why would you do violence to a tongue which is under
obligation to the law?  Why do you challenge a speech which is in
subjection to the Spirit?  Why, when you have excused the head, have you
hastened to the feet?  Why do you pass by Aaron <span
id="fr_3047"></span>[3048](#fn_3047) and urge forward Eleazar?  I cannot
allow the fountain to be dammed up, while the rivulet runs its course;
the sun to be hidden, while the star shines forth; hoar hairs to be in
retirement, while youth lays down the law; wisdom to be silent, while
inexperience speaks with assurance.  A heavy rain is not always more
useful than a gentle shower.  Nay, indeed, if it be too violent, it
sweeps away the earth, and increases the proportion of the farmer’s
loss:  while a gentle fall, which sinks deep, enriches the soil,
benefits the tiller and makes the corn grow to a fine crop.  So the
fluent speech is not more profitable than the wise.  For the one, though
it perhaps gave a slight pleasure, passes away, and is dispersed as
soon, and with as little effect, as the air on which it struck, though
it charms with its eloquence the greedy ear.  But the other sinks into
the mind, and opening wide its mouth, fills it <span
id="fr_3048"></span>[3049](#fn_3048) with the Spirit, and, showing
itself nobler than its origin, produces a rich harvest by a few
syllables.

<span id="iii.ix-p7"></span>2.  I have not yet alluded to the true and
first wisdom, for which our wonderful husbandman and shepherd is
conspicuous.  The first wisdom is a life worthy of praise, and kept pure
for God, or being purified for Him Who is all-pure and all-luminous, Who
demands of us, us His only sacrifice, purification—that is, a contrite
heart and the sacrifice of praise, <span
id="fr_3049"></span>[3050](#fn_3049) and a new creation in Christ, <span
id="fr_3050"></span>[3051](#fn_3050) and the new man, <span
id="fr_3051"></span>[3052](#fn_3051) and the like, as the Scripture
loves to call it.  The first wisdom is to despise that wisdom which
consists of language and figures of speech, and spurious and unnecessary
embellishments.  Be it mine to speak five words with my understanding in
the church, rather than ten thousand words in a tongue, <span
id="fr_3052"></span>[3053](#fn_3052) and with the unmeaning voice of a
trumpet, <span id="fr_3053"></span>[3054](#fn_3053) which does not rouse
my soldier to the spiritual combat.  This is the wisdom which I praise,
which I welcome.  By this the ignoble have won renown, and the despised
have attained the highest honours.  By this a crew of fishermen have
taken the whole world in the meshes of the Gospel-net, <span
id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span id="iii.ix-Page_248"></span>and
overcome by a word finished and cut short <span
id="fr_3054"></span>[3055](#fn_3054) the wisdom that comes to
naught. <span id="fr_3055"></span>[3056](#fn_3055)   I count not wise
the man who is clever in words, nor him who is of a ready tongue, but
unstable and undisciplined in soul, like the tombs which, fair and
beautiful as they are outwardly, are fetid with corpses within, <span
id="fr_3056"></span>[3057](#fn_3056) and full of manifold ill-savours;
but him who speaks but little of virtue, yet gives many examples of it
in his practice, and proves the trustworthiness of his language by his
life.

<span id="iii.ix-p16"></span>3.  Fairer in my eyes, is the beauty which
we can gaze upon than that which is painted in words:  of more value the
wealth which our hands can hold, than that which is imagined in our
dreams; and more real the wisdom of which we are convinced by deeds,
than that which is set forth in splendid language.  For “a good
understanding,” he saith, “have all they that do thereafter,” <span
id="fr_3057"></span>[3058](#fn_3057) not they who proclaim it.  Time is
the best touchstone of this wisdom, and “the hoary head is a crown of
glory.” <span id="fr_3058"></span>[3059](#fn_3058)   For if, as it seems
to me as well as to Solomon, we must “judge none blessed before his
death,” <span id="fr_3059"></span>[3060](#fn_3059) and it is uncertain
“what a day may bring forth,” <span id="fr_3060"></span>[3061](#fn_3060)
since our life here below has many turnings, and the body of our
humiliation <span id="fr_3061"></span>[3062](#fn_3061) is ever rising,
falling and changing; surely he, who without fault has almost drained
the cup of life, and nearly reached the haven of the common sea of
existence is more secure, and therefore more enviable, than one who has
yet a long voyage before him.

<span id="iii.ix-p22"></span>4.  Do not thou, therefore, restrain a
tongue whose noble utterances and fruits have been many, which has
begotten many children of righteousness—yea, lift up thine eyes round
about and see, <span id="fr_3062"></span>[3063](#fn_3062) how many are
its sons, and what are its treasures; even this whole people, whom thou
hast begotten in Christ through the Gospel. <span
id="fr_3063"></span>[3064](#fn_3063)   Grudge not to us those words
which are excellent rather than many, and do not yet give us a foretaste
of our impending loss. <span id="fr_3064"></span>[3065](#fn_3064)  
Speak in words which, if few, are dear and most sweet to me, which, if
scarcely audible, are perceived from their spiritual cry, as God heard
the silence of Moses, and said to him when interceding mentally, “Why
criest thou unto Me?” <span id="fr_3065"></span>[3066](#fn_3065)  
Comfort this people, I pray thee, I, who was thy nursling, and have
since been made Pastor, and now even Chief Pastor.  Give a lesson, to me
in the Pastor’s art, to this people of obedience.  Discourse awhile on
our present heavy blow, about the just judgments of God, whether we
grasp their meaning, or are ignorant of their great deep. <span
id="fr_3066"></span>[3067](#fn_3066)   How again “mercy is put in the
balance,” <span id="fr_3067"></span>[3068](#fn_3067) as holy Isaiah
declares, for goodness is not without discernment, as the first
labourers in the vineyard <span id="fr_3068"></span>[3069](#fn_3068)
fancied, because they could not perceive any distinction between those
who were paid alike:  and how anger, which is called “the cup in the
hand of the Lord,” <span id="fr_3069"></span>[3070](#fn_3069) and “the
cup of falling which is drained,” <span
id="fr_3070"></span>[3071](#fn_3070) is in proportion to transgressions,
even though He abates to all somewhat of what is their due, and dilutes
with compassion the unmixed draught of His wrath.  For He inclines from
severity to indulgence towards those who accept chastisement with fear,
and who after a slight affliction conceive and are in pain with
conversion, and bring forth <span id="fr_3071"></span>[3072](#fn_3071)
the perfect spirit of salvation; but nevertheless he reserves the
dregs, <span id="fr_3072"></span>[3073](#fn_3072) the last drop of His
anger, that He may pour it out entire upon those who, instead of being
healed by His kindness, grow obdurate, like the hard-hearted
Pharaoh, <span id="fr_3073"></span>[3074](#fn_3073) that bitter
taskmaster, who is set forth as an example of the power <span
id="fr_3074"></span>[3075](#fn_3074) of God over the ungodly.

<span id="iii.ix-p36"></span>5.  Tell us whence come such blows and
scourges, and what account we can give of them.  Is it some disordered
and irregular motion or some unguided current, some unreason of the
universe, as though there were no Ruler of the world, which is therefore
borne along by chance, as is the doctrine of the foolishly wise, who are
themselves borne along at random by the disorderly spirit of darkness? 
Or are the disturbances and changes of the universe, (which was
originally constituted, blended, bound together, and set in motion in a
harmony known only to Him Who gave it motion,) directed by reason and
order under the guidance of the reins of Providence?  Whence come
famines and tornadoes and hailstorms, our present warning blow?  Whence
pestilences, diseases, earthquakes, tidal waves, and fearful things in
the heavens?  And how is the creation, once ordered for the enjoyment of
men, their common and equal delight, changed for the punishment of the
ungodly, in order that we may be chastised through that for which, when
honoured with it, we did not give thanks, and recognise in <span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span id="iii.ix-Page_249"></span>our
sufferings that power which we did not recognise in our benefits?  How
is it that some receive at the Lord’s hand double for their sins, <span
id="fr_3075"></span>[3076](#fn_3075) and the measure of their wickedness
is doubly filled up, as in the correction of Israel, while the sins of
others are done away by a sevenfold recompense into their bosom? <span
id="fr_3076"></span>[3077](#fn_3076)   What is the measure of the
Amorites that is not yet full? <span
id="fr_3077"></span>[3078](#fn_3077)   And how is the sinner either let
go, or chastised again, let go perhaps, because reserved for the other
world, chastised, because healed thereby in this?  Under what
circumstances again is the righteous, when unfortunate, possibly being
put to the test, or, when prosperous, being observed, to see if he be
poor in mind or not very far superior to visible things, as indeed
conscience, our interior and unerring tribunal, tells us.  What is our
calamity, and what its cause?  Is it a test of virtue, or a touchstone
of wickedness?  And is it better to bow beneath it as a chastisement,
even though it be not so, and humble ourselves under the mighty hand of
God, <span id="fr_3078"></span>[3079](#fn_3078) or, considering it as a
trial, to rise superior to it?  On these points give us instruction and
warning, lest we be too much discouraged by our present calamity, or
fall into the gulf of evil and despise it; for some such feeling is very
general; but rather that we may bear our admonition quietly, and not
provoke one more severe by our insensibility to this.

<span id="iii.ix-p41"></span>6.  Terrible is an unfruitful season, and
the loss of the crops.  It could not be otherwise, when men are already
rejoicing in their hopes, and counting on their all but harvested
stores.  Terrible again is an unseasonable harvest, when the farmers
labour with heavy hearts, sitting as it were beside the grave of their
crops, which the gentle rain nourished, but the wild storm has rooted
up, whereof the mower filleth not his hand, neither he that bindeth up
the sheaves his bosom, <span id="fr_3079"></span>[3080](#fn_3079) nor
have they obtained the blessing which passers-by bestow upon the
farmers.  Wretched indeed is the sight of the ground devastated,
cleared, and shorn of its ornaments, over which the blessed Joel wails
in his most tragic picture of the desolation of the land, and the
scourge of famine; <span id="fr_3080"></span>[3081](#fn_3080) while
another <span id="fr_3081"></span>[3082](#fn_3081) prophet wails, as he
contrasts with its former beauty its final disorder, and thus discourses
on the anger of the Lord when He smites the land:  before him is the
garden of Eden, behind Him a desolate wilderness. <span
id="fr_3082"></span>[3083](#fn_3082)   Terrible indeed these things are,
and more than terrible, when we are grieved only at what is present, and
are not yet distressed by the feeling of a severer blow:  since, as in
sickness, the suffering which pains us from time to time is more
distressing than that which is not present.  But more terrible still are
those which the treasures <span id="fr_3083"></span>[3084](#fn_3083) of
God’s wrath contain, of which God forbid that you should make trial; nor
will you, if you fly for refuge to the mercies of God, and win over by
your tears Him Who will have mercy, <span
id="fr_3084"></span>[3085](#fn_3084) and avert by your conversion what
remains of His wrath.  As yet, this is gentleness and loving-kindness
and gentle reproof, and the first elements of a scourge to train our
tender years:  as yet, the smoke <span
id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085) of His anger, the prelude of His
torments; not yet has fallen the flaming fire, <span
id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086) the climax of His being moved; not
yet the kindled coals, <span id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087) the
final scourge, part of which He threatened, when He lifted up the other
over us, part He held back by force, when He brought the other upon us;
using the threat and the blow alike for our instruction, and making a
way for His indignation, in the excess of His goodness; beginning with
what is slight, so that the more severe may not be needed; but ready to
instruct us by what is greater, if He be forced so to do.

<span id="iii.ix-p51"></span>7.  I know the glittering sword, <span
id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088) and the blade made drunk in heaven,
bidden to slay, to bring to naught, to make childless, and to spare
neither flesh, nor marrow, nor bones.  I know Him, Who, though free from
passion, meets us like a bear robbed of her whelps, like a leopard in
the way of the Assyrians, <span id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089) not
only those of that day, but if anyone now is an Assyrian in wickedness: 
nor is it possible to escape the might and speed of His wrath when He
watches over our impieties, and His jealousy, <span
id="fr_3090"></span>[3091](#fn_3090) which knoweth to devour His
adversaries, pursues His enemies to the death. <span
id="fr_3091"></span>[3092](#fn_3091)   I know the emptying, the making
void, the making waste, the melting of the heart, and knocking of the
knees together, <span id="fr_3092"></span>[3093](#fn_3092) such are the
punishments of the ungodly.  I do not dwell on the judgments to come, to
which indulgence in this world delivers us, as it is better to be
punished and cleansed now than to be transmitted to the torment to come,
when it is the time of chastisement, not of cleansing.  For as he who
remembers God here is conqueror of death (as David <span
id="fr_3093"></span>[3094](#fn_3093) has most excellently <span
id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span id="iii.ix-Page_250"></span>sung) so
the departed have not in the grave confession and restoration; for God
has confined life and action to this world, and to the future the
scrutiny of what has been done.

<span id="iii.ix-p58"></span>8.  What shall we do in the day of
visitation, <span id="fr_3094"></span>[3095](#fn_3094) with which one of
the Prophets terrifies me, whether that of the righteous sentence of God
against us, or that upon the mountains and hills, of which we have
heard, or whatever and whenever it may be, when He will reason with us,
and oppose us, and set before us <span
id="fr_3095"></span>[3096](#fn_3095) those bitter accusers, our sins,
comparing our wrongdoings with our benefits, and striking thought with
thought, and scrutinising action with action, and calling us to account
for the image <span id="fr_3096"></span>[3097](#fn_3096) which has been
blurred and spoilt by wickedness, till at last He leads us away
self-convicted and self-condemned, no longer able to say that we are
being unjustly treated—a thought which is able even here sometimes to
console in their condemnation those who are suffering.

<span id="iii.ix-p62"></span>9.  But then what advocate shall we have? 
What pretext?  What false excuse?  What plausible artifice?  What device
contrary to the truth will impose upon the court, and rob it of its
right judgment, which places in the balance for us all, our entire life,
action, word, and thought, and weighs against the evil that which is
better, until that which preponderates wins the day, and the decision is
given in favour of the main tendency; after which there is no appeal, no
higher court, no defence on the ground of subsequent conduct, no oil
obtained from the wise virgins, or from them that sell, for the lamps
going out, <span id="fr_3097"></span>[3098](#fn_3097) no repentance of
the rich man wasting away in the flame, <span
id="fr_3098"></span>[3099](#fn_3098) and begging for repentance for his
friends, no statute of limitations; but only that final and fearful
judgment-seat, more just even than fearful; or rather more fearful
because it is also just; when the thrones are set and the Ancient of
days takes His seat, <span id="fr_3099"></span>[3100](#fn_3099) and the
books are opened, and the fiery stream comes forth, and the light before
Him, and the darkness prepared; and they that have done good shall go
into the resurrection of life, <span
id="fr_3100"></span>[3101](#fn_3100) now hid in Christ <span
id="fr_3101"></span>[3102](#fn_3101) and to be manifested hereafter with
Him, and they that have done evil, into the resurrection of
judgment, <span id="fr_3102"></span>[3103](#fn_3102) to which they who
have not believed have been condemned already by the word which judges
them. <span id="fr_3103"></span>[3104](#fn_3103)   Some will be welcomed
by the unspeakable light and the vision of the holy and royal Trinity,
Which now shines upon them with greater brilliancy and purity and unites
Itself wholly to the whole soul, in which solely and beyond all else I
take it that the kingdom of heaven consists.  The others among other
torments, but above and before them all must endure the being outcast
from God, and the shame of conscience which has no limit.  But of these
anon.

<span id="iii.ix-p70"></span>10.  What are we to do now, my brethren,
when crushed, cast down, and drunken but not with strong drink nor with
wine, <span id="fr_3104"></span>[3105](#fn_3104) which excites and
obfuscates but for a while, but with the blow which the Lord has
inflicted upon us, Who says, And thou, O heart, be stirred and
shaken, <span id="fr_3105"></span>[3106](#fn_3105) and gives to the
despisers the spirit of sorrow and deep sleep to drink: <span
id="fr_3106"></span>[3107](#fn_3106)   to whom He also says, See, ye
despisers, behold, and wonder and perish? <span
id="fr_3107"></span>[3108](#fn_3107)   How shall we bear His
convictions; or what reply shall we make, when He reproaches us not only
with the multitude of the benefits for which we have continued
ungrateful, but also with His chastisements, and reckons up the remedies
with which we have refused to be healed?  Calling us His children <span
id="fr_3108"></span>[3109](#fn_3108) indeed, but unworthy children, and
His sons, but strange sons <span id="fr_3109"></span>[3110](#fn_3109)
who have stumbled from lameness out of their paths, in the trackless and
rough ground.  How and by what means could I have instructed you, and I
have not done so?  By gentler measures?  I have applied them.  I passed
by the blood drunk in Egypt from the wells and rivers and all reservoirs
of water <span id="fr_3110"></span>[3111](#fn_3110) in the first
plague:  I passed over the next scourges, the frogs, lice, and flies.  I
began with the flocks and the cattle and the sheep, the fifth plague,
and, sparing as yet the rational creatures, I struck the animals.  You
made light of the stroke, and treated me with less reason and attention
than the beasts who were struck.  I withheld from you the rain; one
piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not
withered, <span id="fr_3111"></span>[3112](#fn_3111) and ye said “We
will brave it.” <span id="fr_3112"></span>[3113](#fn_3112)   I brought
the hail upon you, chastising you with the opposite kind of blow, I
uprooted your vineyards and shrubberies, and crops, but I failed to
shatter your wickedness.

<span id="iii.ix-p80"></span>11.  Perchance He will say to me, who am
not reformed even by blows, I know that thou art obstinate, and thy neck
is an iron sinew, <span id="fr_3113"></span>[3114](#fn_3113) the
heedless is heedless and the lawless man acts lawlessly, <span
id="fr_3114"></span>[3115](#fn_3114) naught is the heavenly correction,
naught the scourges.  The bellows are <span id="page_251">p. 251</span>
<span id="iii.ix-Page_251"></span>burnt, the lead is consumed, <span
id="fr_3115"></span>[3116](#fn_3115) as I once reproached you by the
mouth of Jeremiah, the founder melted the silver in vain, your
wickednesses are not melted away.  Can ye abide my wrath, saith the
Lord.  Has not My hand the power to inflict upon you other plagues
also?  There are still at My command the blains breaking forth from the
ashes of the furnace, <span id="fr_3116"></span>[3117](#fn_3116) by
sprinkling which toward heaven, Moses, or any other minister of God’s
action, may chastise Egypt with disease.  There remain also the locusts,
the darkness that may be felt, and the plague which, last in order, was
first in suffering and power, the destruction and death of the
firstborn, and, to escape this, and to turn aside the destroyer, it were
better to sprinkle the doorposts of our mind, contemplation and action,
with the great and saving token, with the blood of the new covenant, by
being crucified and dying with Christ, that we may both rise and be
glorified and reign with Him both now and at His final appearing, and
not be broken and crushed, and made to lament, when the grievous
destroyer smites us all too late in this life of darkness, and destroys
our firstborn, the offspring and results of our life which we had
dedicated to God.

<span id="iii.ix-p85"></span>12.  Far be it from me that I should ever,
among other chastisements, be thus reproached by Him Who is good, but
walks contrary to me in fury <span id="fr_3117"></span>[3118](#fn_3117)
because of my own contrariness:  I have smitten you with blasting and
mildew, and blight; <span id="fr_3118"></span>[3119](#fn_3118) without
result.  The sword from without <span
id="fr_3119"></span>[3120](#fn_3119) made you childless, yet have ye not
returned unto Me, saith the Lord.  May I not become the vine of the
beloved, which after being planted and entrenched, and made sure with a
fence and tower and every means which was possible, when it ran wild and
bore thorns, was consequently despised, and had its tower broken down
and its fence taken away, and was not pruned nor digged, but was
devoured and laid waste and trodden down by all! <span
id="fr_3120"></span>[3121](#fn_3120)   This is what I feel I must say as
to my fears, thus have I been pained by this blow, and this, I will
further tell you, is my prayer.  We have sinned, we have done amiss, and
have dealt wickedly, <span id="fr_3121"></span>[3122](#fn_3121) for we
have forgotten Thy commandments and walked after our own evil
thought, <span id="fr_3122"></span>[3123](#fn_3122) for we have behaved
ourselves unworthily of the calling and gospel of Thy Christ, and of His
holy sufferings and humiliation for us; we have become a reproach to Thy
beloved, priest and people, we have erred together, we have all gone out
of the way, we have together become unprofitable, there is none that
doeth judgment and justice, no not one. <span
id="fr_3123"></span>[3124](#fn_3123)   We have cut short Thy mercies and
kindness and the bowels and compassion of our God, by our wickedness and
the perversity of our doings, in which we have turned away.  Thou art
good, but we have done amiss; Thou art long-suffering, but we are worthy
of stripes; we acknowledge Thy goodness, though we are without
understanding, we have been scourged for but few of our faults; Thou art
terrible, and who will resist Thee? <span
id="fr_3124"></span>[3125](#fn_3124) the mountains will tremble before
Thee; and who will strive against the might of Thine arm?  If Thou shut
the heaven, who will open it?  And if Thou let loose Thy torrents, who
will restrain them?  It is a light thing in Thine eyes to make poor and
to make rich, to make alive and to kill, to strike and to heal, and Thy
will is perfect action.  Thou art angry, and we have sinned, <span
id="fr_3125"></span>[3126](#fn_3125) says one of old, making confession;
and it is now time for me to say the opposite, “We have sinned, and Thou
art angry:”  therefore have we become a reproach to our
neighbours. <span id="fr_3126"></span>[3127](#fn_3126)   Thou didst turn
Thy face from us, and we were filled with dishonour.  But stay, Lord,
cease, Lord, forgive, Lord, deliver us not up for ever because of our
iniquities, and let not our chastisements be a warning for others, when
we might learn wisdom from the trials of others.  Of whom?  Of the
nations which know Thee not, and kingdoms which have not been subject to
Thy power.  But we are Thy people, <span
id="fr_3127"></span>[3128](#fn_3127) O Lord, the rod of Thine
inheritance; therefore correct us, but in goodness and not in Thine
anger, lest Thou bring us to nothingness <span
id="fr_3128"></span>[3129](#fn_3128) and contempt among all that dwell
on the earth.

<span id="iii.ix-p98"></span>13.  With these words I invoke mercy:  and
if it were possible to propitiate His wrath with whole burnt offerings
or sacrifices, I would not even have spared these.  Do you also
yourselves imitate your trembling priest, you, my beloved children,
sharers with me alike of the Divine correction and loving-kindness. 
Possess your souls in tears, and stay His wrath by amending your way of
life.  Sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly, <span
id="fr_3129"></span>[3130](#fn_3129) as blessed Joel with us charges
you:  gather the elders, and the babes that suck the breasts, whose
tender age wins our pity, and is specially worthy of the loving-kindness
of God.  I know also what he enjoins both upon me, the <span
id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span id="iii.ix-Page_252"></span>minister
of God, and upon you, who have been thought worthy of the same honour,
that we should enter His house in sackcloth and lament night and day
between the porch and the altar, in piteous array, and with more piteous
voices, crying aloud without ceasing on behalf of ourselves and the
people, sparing nothing, either toil or word, which may propitiate God: 
saying “Spare, O Lord, Thy people, and give not Thine heritage to
reproach,” <span id="fr_3130"></span>[3131](#fn_3130) and the rest of
the prayer; surpassing the people in our sense of the affliction as much
as in our rank, instructing them in our own persons in compunction and
correction of wickedness, and in the consequent long-suffering of God,
and cessation of the scourge.

<span id="iii.ix-p101"></span>14.  Come then, all of you, my brethren,
let us worship and fall down, and weep before the Lord our Maker; <span
id="fr_3131"></span>[3132](#fn_3131) let us appoint a public mourning,
in our various ages and families, let us raise the voice of
supplication; and let this, instead of the cry which He hates, enter
into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth.  Let us anticipate His anger by
confession; <span id="fr_3132"></span>[3133](#fn_3132) let us desire to
see Him appeased, after He was wroth.  Who knoweth, he says, if He will
turn and repent, and leave a blessing behind Him? <span
id="fr_3133"></span>[3134](#fn_3133)   This I know certainly, I the
sponsor of the loving-kindness of God.  And when He has laid aside that
which is unnatural to Him, His anger, He will betake Himself to that
which is natural, His mercy.  To the one He is forced by us, to the
other He is inclined.  And if He is forced to strike, surely He will
refrain, according to His Nature.  Only let us have mercy on ourselves,
and open a road for our Father’s righteous affections.  Let us sow in
tears, that we may reap in joy, <span
id="fr_3134"></span>[3135](#fn_3134) let us show ourselves men of
Nineveh, not of Sodom. <span id="fr_3135"></span>[3136](#fn_3135)   Let
us amend our wickedness, lest we be consumed with it; let us listen to
the preaching of Jonah, lest we be overwhelmed by fire and brimstone,
and if we have departed from Sodom let us escape to the mountain, let us
flee to Zoar, let us enter it as the sun rises; let us not stay in all
the plain, let us not look around us, lest we be frozen into a pillar of
salt, a really immortal pillar, to accuse the soul which returns to
wickedness.

<span id="iii.ix-p107"></span>15.  Let us be assured that to do no
wrong <span id="fr_3136"></span>[3137](#fn_3136) is really superhuman,
and belongs to God alone.  I say nothing about the Angels, that we may
give no room for wrong feelings, nor opportunity for harmful
altercations.  Our unhealed condition arises from our evil and unsubdued
nature, and from the exercise of its powers.  Our repentance when we
sin, is a human action, but an action which bespeaks a good man,
belonging to that portion which is in the way of salvation.  For if even
our dust contracts somewhat of wickedness, and the earthly tabernacle
presseth down the upward flight of the soul, <span
id="fr_3137"></span>[3138](#fn_3137) which at least was created to fly
upward, yet let the image be cleansed from filth, and raise aloft the
flesh, its yoke-fellow, lifting it on the wings of reason; and, what is
better, let us neither need this cleansing, nor have to be cleansed, by
preserving our original dignity, to which we are hastening through our
training here, and let us not by the bitter taste of sin be banished
from the tree of life:  though it is better to turn again when we err,
than to be free from correction when we stumble.  For whom the Lord
loveth He chasteneth, <span id="fr_3138"></span>[3139](#fn_3138) and a
rebuke is a fatherly action; while every soul which is unchastised, is
unhealed.  Is not then freedom from chastisement a hard thing?  But to
fail to be corrected by the chastisement is still harder.  One of the
prophets, speaking of Israel, whose heart was hard and uncircumcised,
says, Lord, Thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved, Thou
hast consumed them but they have refused to receive correction; <span
id="fr_3139"></span>[3140](#fn_3139) and again, The people turned not to
Him that smiteth them; <span id="fr_3140"></span>[3141](#fn_3140) and
Why is my people slidden back by a perpetual backsliding, <span
id="fr_3141"></span>[3142](#fn_3141) because of which it will be utterly
crushed and destroyed?

<span id="iii.ix-p114"></span>16.  It is a fearful thing, my brethren,
to fall into the hands of a living God, <span
id="fr_3142"></span>[3143](#fn_3142) and fearful is the face of the Lord
against them that do evil, <span id="fr_3143"></span>[3144](#fn_3143)
and abolishing wickedness with utter destruction.  Fearful is the ear of
God, listening even to the voice of Abel speaking through his silent
blood.  Fearful His feet, which overtake evildoing.  Fearful also His
filling of the universe, so that it is impossible anywhere to escape the
action of God, <span id="fr_3144"></span>[3145](#fn_3144) not even by
flying up to heaven, or entering Hades, or by escaping to the far East,
or concealing ourselves in the depths and ends of the sea. <span
id="fr_3145"></span>[3146](#fn_3145)   Nahum the Elkoshite was afraid
before me, when he proclaimed the burden of Nineveh, God is jealous, and
the Lord takes vengeance in wrath upon His adversaries, <span
id="fr_3146"></span>[3147](#fn_3146) and uses such abundance of severity
that no room is left for further vengeance upon the wicked.  For
whenever I hear Isaiah threaten the people of Sodom and rulers of
Gomorrah, <span id="fr_3147"></span>[3148](#fn_3147) and say Why will
<span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span id="iii.ix-Page_253"></span>ye
be smitten any more, adding sin to sin? <span
id="fr_3148"></span>[3149](#fn_3148)   I am almost filled with horror,
and melted to tears.  It is impossible, he says, to find any blow to add
to those which are past, because of your newly added sins; so completely
have you run through the whole, and exhausted every form of
chastisement, ever calling upon yourselves some new one by your
wickedness.  There is not a wound, nor bruise, nor putrefying
sore; <span id="fr_3149"></span>[3150](#fn_3149) the plague affects the
whole body and is incurable:  for it is impossible to apply a plaster,
or ointment or bandages.  I pass over the rest of the threatenings, that
I may not press upon you more heavily than your present plague.

<span id="iii.ix-p123"></span>17.  Only let us recognise the purpose of
the evil.  Why have the crops withered, our storehouses been emptied,
the pastures of our flocks failed, the fruits of the earth been
withheld, and the plains been filled with shame instead of with
fatness:  why have valleys lamented and not abounded in corn, the
mountains not dropped sweetness, as they shall do hereafter to the
righteous, but been stript and dishonoured, and received on the contrary
the curse of Gilboa? <span id="fr_3150"></span>[3151](#fn_3150)   The
whole earth has become as it was in the beginning, before it was adorned
with its beauties.  Thou visitedst the earth, and madest it to
drink <span id="fr_3151"></span>[3152](#fn_3151) —but the visitation has
been for evil, and the draught destructive.  Alas! what a spectacle! 
Our prolific crops reduced to stubble, the seed we sowed is recognised
by scanty remains, and our harvest, the approach of which we reckon from
the number of the months, instead of from the ripening corn, scarcely
bears the firstfruits for the Lord.  Such is the wealth of the ungodly,
such the harvest of the careless sower; as the ancient curse runs, to
look for much, and bring in little, <span
id="fr_3152"></span>[3153](#fn_3152) to sow and not reap, to plant and
not press, <span id="fr_3153"></span>[3154](#fn_3153) ten acres of
vineyard to yield one bath: <span id="fr_3154"></span>[3155](#fn_3154)  
and to hear of fertile harvests in other lands, and be ourselves pressed
by famine.  Why is this, and what is the cause of the breach?  Let us
not wait to be convicted by others, let us be our own examiners.  An
important medicine for evil is confession, and care to avoid stumbling.
I will be first to do so, as I have made my report to my people from on
high, and performed the duty of a watcher. <span
id="fr_3155"></span>[3156](#fn_3155)   For I did not conceal the coming
of the sword that I might save my own soul <span
id="fr_3156"></span>[3157](#fn_3156) and those of my hearers.  So will I
now announce the disobedience of my people, making what is theirs my
own, if I may perchance thus obtain some tenderness and relief.

<span id="iii.ix-p131"></span>18.  One of us has oppressed the poor, and
wrested from him his portion of land, and wrongly encroached upon his
landmark by fraud or violence, and joined house to house, and field to
field, to rob his neighbour of something, and been eager to have no
neighbour, so as to dwell alone on the earth. <span
id="fr_3157"></span>[3158](#fn_3157)   Another has defiled the land with
usury and interest, both gathering where he had not sowed and reaping
where he had not strawed, <span id="fr_3158"></span>[3159](#fn_3158)
farming, not the land, but the necessity of the needy.  Another has
robbed God, <span id="fr_3159"></span>[3160](#fn_3159) the giver of all,
of the firstfruits of the barnfloor and winepress, showing himself at
once thankless and senseless, in neither giving thanks for what he has
had, nor prudently providing, at least, for the future.  Another has had
no pity on the widow and orphan, and not imparted his bread and meagre
nourishment to the needy, or rather to Christ, Who is nourished in the
persons of those who are nourished even in a slight degree; a man
perhaps of much property unexpectedly gained, for this is the most
unjust of all, who finds his many barns too narrow for him, filling some
and emptying others, to build greater <span
id="fr_3160"></span>[3161](#fn_3160) ones for future crops, not knowing
that he is being snatched away with hopes unrealised, to give an account
of his riches and fancies, and proved to have been a bad steward of
another’s goods.  Another has turned aside the way of the meek, <span
id="fr_3161"></span>[3162](#fn_3161) and turned aside the just among the
unjust; another has hated him that reproveth in the gates, <span
id="fr_3162"></span>[3163](#fn_3162) and abhorred him that speaketh
uprightly; <span id="fr_3163"></span>[3164](#fn_3163) another has
sacrificed to his net which catches much, <span
id="fr_3164"></span>[3165](#fn_3164) and keeping the spoil of the poor
in his house, <span id="fr_3165"></span>[3166](#fn_3165) has either
remembered not God, or remembered Him ill—by saying “Blessed be the
Lord, for we are rich,” <span id="fr_3166"></span>[3167](#fn_3166) and
wickedly supposed that he received these things from Him by Whom he will
be punished.  For because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon
the children of disobedience. <span id="fr_3167"></span>[3168](#fn_3167)
  Because of these things the heaven is shut, or opened for our
punishment; and much more, if we do not repent, even when smitten, and
draw near to Him, Who approaches us through the powers of nature.

<span id="iii.ix-p143"></span>19.  What shall be said to this by those
of us who are buyers and sellers of corn, and watch the hardships of the
seasons, in order to grow prosperous, and luxuriate in the misfor<span
id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span id="iii.ix-Page_254"></span>tunes of
others, and acquire, not, like Joseph, the property of the
Egyptians, <span id="fr_3168"></span>[3169](#fn_3168) as a part of a
wide policy, (for he could both collect and supply corn duly, as he also
could foresee the famine, and provide against it afar off,) but the
property of their fellow countrymen in an illegal manner, for they say,
“When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell, and the sabbaths,
that we may open our stores?” <span id="fr_3169"></span>[3170](#fn_3169)
  And they corrupt justice with divers measures and balances, <span
id="fr_3170"></span>[3171](#fn_3170) and draw upon themselves the ephah
of lead. <span id="fr_3171"></span>[3172](#fn_3171)   What shall we say
to these things who know no limit to our getting, who worship gold and
silver, as those of old worshipped Baal, and Astarte and the abomination
Chemosh? <span id="fr_3172"></span>[3173](#fn_3172)   Who give heed to
the brilliance of costly stones, and soft flowing garments, the prey of
moths, and the plunder of robbers and tyrants and thieves; who are proud
of their multitude of slaves and animals, and spread themselves over
plains and mountains, with their possessions and gains and schemes, like
Solomon’s horseleach <span id="fr_3173"></span>[3174](#fn_3173) which
cannot be satisfied, any more than the grave, and the earth, and fire,
and water; who seek for another world for their possession, and find
fault with the bounds of God, as too small for their insatiable
cupidity?  What of those who sit on lofty thrones and raise the stage of
government, with a brow loftier than that of the theatre, taking no
account of the God over all, and the height of the true kingdom that
none can approach unto, so as to rule their subjects as fellow-servants,
as needing themselves no less loving-kindness?  Look also, I pray you,
at those who stretch themselves upon beds of ivory, whom the divine Amos
fitly upbraids, who anoint themselves with the chief ointments, and
chant to the sound of instruments of music, and attach themselves to
transitory things as though they were stable, but have not grieved nor
had compassion for the affliction of Joseph; <span
id="fr_3174"></span>[3175](#fn_3174) though they ought to have been kind
to those who had met with disaster before them, and by mercy have
obtained mercy; as the fir-tree should howl, because the cedar had
fallen, <span id="fr_3175"></span>[3176](#fn_3175) and be instructed by
their neighbours’ chastisement, and be led by others’ ills to regulate
their own lives, having the advantage of being saved by their
predecessors’ fate, instead of being themselves a warning to others.

<span id="iii.ix-p152"></span>20.  Join with us, thou divine and sacred
person, in considering these questions, with the store of experience,
that source of wisdom, which thou hast gathered in thy long life. 
Herewith instruct thy people.  Teach them to break their bread to the
hungry, to gather together the poor that have no shelter, to cover their
nakedness and not neglect those of the same blood, <span
id="fr_3176"></span>[3177](#fn_3176) and now especially that we may gain
a benefit from our need instead of from abundance, a result which
pleases God more than plentiful offerings and large gifts.  After this,
nay before it, show thyself, I pray, a Moses, <span
id="fr_3177"></span>[3178](#fn_3177) or Phinehas <span
id="fr_3178"></span>[3179](#fn_3178) to-day.  Stand on our behalf and
make atonement, and let the plague be stayed, either by the spiritual
sacrifice, <span id="fr_3179"></span>[3180](#fn_3179) or by prayer and
reasonable intercession. <span id="fr_3180"></span>[3181](#fn_3180)  
Restrain the anger of the Lord by thy mediation:  avert any succeeding
blows of the scourge.  He knoweth to respect the hoar hairs of a father
interceding for his children.  Intreat for our past wickedness:  be our
surety for the future.  Present a people purified by suffering and
fear.  Beg for bodily sustenance, but beg rather for the angels’ food
that cometh down from heaven.  So doing, thou wilt make God to be our
God, wilt conciliate heaven, wilt restore the former and latter
rain: <span id="fr_3181"></span>[3182](#fn_3181) the Lord shall show
loving-kindness <span id="fr_3182"></span>[3183](#fn_3182) and our land
shall yield her fruit; <span id="fr_3183"></span>[3184](#fn_3183) our
earthly land its fruit which lasts for the day, and our frame, which is
but dust, the fruit which is eternal, which we shall store up in the
heavenly winepresses by thy hands, who presentest both us and ours in
Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory for evermore.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3047"></span>[247:3048](2070052.htm#fr_3047) <span
id="iii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p5"></span> *Aaron*, S. Gregory the elder.  *Eleazar*,
S. Gregory Nazianzen.

<span id="fn_3048"></span>[247:3049](2070052.htm#fr_3048) <span
id="iii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p6"></span> [Ps. lxxxi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3049"></span>[247:3050](2070052.htm#fr_3049) <span
id="iii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p8"></span> [Ps.
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023), [Ps.
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3050"></span>[247:3051](2070052.htm#fr_3050) <span
id="iii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p9"></span> [2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3051"></span>[247:3052](2070052.htm#fr_3051) <span
id="iii.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p10"></span> [Eph. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3052"></span>[247:3053](2070052.htm#fr_3052) <span
id="iii.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p11"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3053"></span>[247:3054](2070052.htm#fr_3053) <span
id="iii.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p12"></span> [1 Cor.
14.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3054"></span>[248:3055](2070052.htm#fr_3054) <span
id="iii.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p13"></span> [Isa.
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023), [Rom.
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)<span id="iii.ix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3055"></span>[248:3056](2070052.htm#fr_3055) <span
id="iii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p14"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3056"></span>[248:3057](2070052.htm#fr_3056) <span
id="iii.ix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p15"></span> S. [Matt. xxiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027)<span id="iii.ix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3057"></span>[248:3058](2070052.htm#fr_3057) <span
id="iii.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p17"></span> [Ps. cxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3058"></span>[248:3059](2070052.htm#fr_3058) <span
id="iii.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p18"></span> [Prov. xvi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#031)<span id="iii.ix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3059"></span>[248:3060](2070052.htm#fr_3059) <span
id="iii.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p19"></span> [Eccles. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#028)<span id="iii.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3060"></span>[248:3061](2070052.htm#fr_3060) <span
id="iii.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p20"></span> [Prov. xxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001)<span id="iii.ix-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3061"></span>[248:3062](2070052.htm#fr_3061) <span
id="iii.ix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p21"></span> [Phil. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span id="iii.ix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3062"></span>[248:3063](2070052.htm#fr_3062) <span
id="iii.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p23"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018)<span id="iii.ix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3063"></span>[248:3064](2070052.htm#fr_3063) <span
id="iii.ix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p24"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3064"></span>[248:3065](2070052.htm#fr_3064) <span
id="iii.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p25"></span> *Loss*, i.e., the death of his father,
which, from his age, could not be long delayed.

<span id="fn_3065"></span>[248:3066](2070052.htm#fr_3065) <span
id="iii.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p26"></span> [Exod. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3066"></span>[248:3067](2070052.htm#fr_3066) <span
id="iii.ix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p27"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3067"></span>[248:3068](2070052.htm#fr_3067) <span
id="iii.ix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p28"></span> [Is. xxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix-p28.1"></span>.
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3068"></span>[248:3069](2070052.htm#fr_3068) <span
id="iii.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p29"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3069"></span>[248:3070](2070052.htm#fr_3069) <span
id="iii.ix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p30"></span> [Ps. lxxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3070"></span>[248:3071](2070052.htm#fr_3070) <span
id="iii.ix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p31"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix-p31.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3071"></span>[248:3072](2070052.htm#fr_3071) <span
id="iii.ix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p32"></span> [Isa.
26.18](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#018)<span id="iii.ix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3072"></span>[248:3073](2070052.htm#fr_3072) <span
id="iii.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p33"></span> [Ps. lxxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3073"></span>[248:3074](2070052.htm#fr_3073) <span
id="iii.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p34"></span> [Exod.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#006), [Exod.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#022)<span id="iii.ix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3074"></span>[248:3075](2070052.htm#fr_3074) <span
id="iii.ix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p35"></span> [Rom. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3075"></span>[249:3076](2070052.htm#fr_3075) <span
id="iii.ix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p37"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3076"></span>[249:3077](2070052.htm#fr_3076) <span
id="iii.ix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p38"></span> [Ps. lxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3077"></span>[249:3078](2070052.htm#fr_3077) <span
id="iii.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p39"></span> [Gen. xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3078"></span>[249:3079](2070052.htm#fr_3078) <span
id="iii.ix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p40"></span> [1 Pet. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3079"></span>[249:3080](2070052.htm#fr_3079) <span
id="iii.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p42"></span> [Ps. cxxix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3080"></span>[249:3081](2070052.htm#fr_3080) <span
id="iii.ix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p43"></span> [Joel i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3081"></span>[249:3082](2070052.htm#fr_3081) <span
id="iii.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p44"></span> *Another*.  Either this is a wrong
reading, or S. Gregory’s memory fails him.  The second quotation is also
from Joel.

<span id="fn_3082"></span>[249:3083](2070052.htm#fr_3082) <span
id="iii.ix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p45"></span> [Joel ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3083"></span>[249:3084](2070052.htm#fr_3083) <span
id="iii.ix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p46"></span> [Deut.
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034), [Jer.
50:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#025)<span id="iii.ix-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3084"></span>[249:3085](2070052.htm#fr_3084) <span
id="iii.ix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p47"></span> [Hos. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[249:3086](2070052.htm#fr_3085) <span
id="iii.ix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p48"></span> [Ps. xviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[249:3087](2070052.htm#fr_3086) <span
id="iii.ix-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p49"></span> [Psa.
105.32](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#032)<span id="iii.ix-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[249:3088](2070052.htm#fr_3087) <span
id="iii.ix-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p50"></span> [Psa.
78.50](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#050)<span id="iii.ix-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[249:3089](2070052.htm#fr_3088) <span
id="iii.ix-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p52"></span> [Ezek. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[249:3090](2070052.htm#fr_3089) <span
id="iii.ix-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p53"></span> [Hos.
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3090"></span>[249:3091](2070052.htm#fr_3090) <span
id="iii.ix-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p54"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix-p54.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3091"></span>[249:3092](2070052.htm#fr_3091) <span
id="iii.ix-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p55"></span> [Hos. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3092"></span>[249:3093](2070052.htm#fr_3092) <span
id="iii.ix-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p56"></span> [Nahum ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3093"></span>[249:3094](2070052.htm#fr_3093) <span
id="iii.ix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p57"></span> [Ps. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p57.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3094"></span>[250:3095](2070052.htm#fr_3094) <span
id="iii.ix-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p59"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3095"></span>[250:3096](2070052.htm#fr_3095) <span
id="iii.ix-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p60"></span> [Ps. l.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021)<span id="iii.ix-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3096"></span>[250:3097](2070052.htm#fr_3096) <span
id="iii.ix-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p61"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="iii.ix-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3097"></span>[250:3098](2070052.htm#fr_3097) <span
id="iii.ix-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p63"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3098"></span>[250:3099](2070052.htm#fr_3098) <span
id="iii.ix-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p64"></span> S. [Luke xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3099"></span>[250:3100](2070052.htm#fr_3099) <span
id="iii.ix-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p65"></span> [Dan. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3100"></span>[250:3101](2070052.htm#fr_3100) <span
id="iii.ix-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p66"></span> S. [John v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="iii.ix-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3101"></span>[250:3102](2070052.htm#fr_3101) <span
id="iii.ix-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p67"></span> [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3102"></span>[250:3103](2070052.htm#fr_3102) <span
id="iii.ix-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p68"></span> S. [John v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="iii.ix-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3103"></span>[250:3104](2070052.htm#fr_3103) <span
id="iii.ix-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p69"></span> S. [John
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018), [John
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048)<span id="iii.ix-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3104"></span>[250:3105](2070052.htm#fr_3104) <span
id="iii.ix-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p71"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3105"></span>[250:3106](2070052.htm#fr_3105) <span
id="iii.ix-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p72"></span> [Hab. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3106"></span>[250:3107](2070052.htm#fr_3106) <span
id="iii.ix-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p73"></span> [Ps.
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003), [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3107"></span>[250:3108](2070052.htm#fr_3107) <span
id="iii.ix-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p74"></span> [Hab.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005), [Acts
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041)<span id="iii.ix-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3108"></span>[250:3109](2070052.htm#fr_3108) <span
id="iii.ix-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p75"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3109"></span>[250:3110](2070052.htm#fr_3109) <span
id="iii.ix-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p76"></span> [Ps. xviii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046)<span id="iii.ix-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3110"></span>[250:3111](2070052.htm#fr_3110) <span
id="iii.ix-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p77"></span> [Exod. vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3111"></span>[250:3112](2070052.htm#fr_3111) <span
id="iii.ix-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p78"></span> [Amos iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3112"></span>[250:3113](2070052.htm#fr_3112) <span
id="iii.ix-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p79"></span> [Jer. xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix-p79.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3113"></span>[250:3114](2070052.htm#fr_3113) <span
id="iii.ix-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p81"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#004)<span id="iii.ix-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3114"></span>[250:3115](2070052.htm#fr_3114) <span
id="iii.ix-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p82"></span> [Isa.
21.2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix-p82.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3115"></span>[251:3116](2070052.htm#fr_3115) <span
id="iii.ix-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p83"></span> [Jer. vi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#029)<span id="iii.ix-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3116"></span>[251:3117](2070052.htm#fr_3116) <span
id="iii.ix-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p84"></span> [Exod. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3117"></span>[251:3118](2070052.htm#fr_3117) <span
id="iii.ix-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p86"></span> [Lev.
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#028)<span id="iii.ix-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3118"></span>[251:3119](2070052.htm#fr_3118) <span
id="iii.ix-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p87"></span> [Lev.
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001), [Amos
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3119"></span>[251:3120](2070052.htm#fr_3119) <span
id="iii.ix-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p88"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#025)<span id="iii.ix-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3120"></span>[251:3121](2070052.htm#fr_3120) <span
id="iii.ix-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p89"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)<span id="iii.ix-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3121"></span>[251:3122](2070052.htm#fr_3121) <span
id="iii.ix-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p90"></span> [Dan. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3122"></span>[251:3123](2070052.htm#fr_3122) <span
id="iii.ix-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p91"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3123"></span>[251:3124](2070052.htm#fr_3123) <span
id="iii.ix-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p92"></span> [Ps. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3124"></span>[251:3125](2070052.htm#fr_3124) <span
id="iii.ix-p92.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p93"></span> [Psa.
76.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3125"></span>[251:3126](2070052.htm#fr_3125) <span
id="iii.ix-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p94"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
64:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3126"></span>[251:3127](2070052.htm#fr_3126) <span
id="iii.ix-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p95"></span> [Ps. lxxix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#004)<span id="iii.ix-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3127"></span>[251:3128](2070052.htm#fr_3127) <span
id="iii.ix-p95.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p96"></span> [Ps.
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#013)<span id="iii.ix-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3128"></span>[251:3129](2070052.htm#fr_3128) <span
id="iii.ix-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p97"></span> [Jer. x.
24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3129"></span>[251:3130](2070052.htm#fr_3129) <span
id="iii.ix-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p99"></span> [Joel ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3130"></span>[252:3131](2070052.htm#fr_3130) <span
id="iii.ix-p99.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p100"></span> [Joel ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3131"></span>[252:3132](2070052.htm#fr_3131) <span
id="iii.ix-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p102"></span> [Ps. xcv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3132"></span>[252:3133](2070052.htm#fr_3132) <span
id="iii.ix-p102.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p103"></span> [Psa.
95.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix-p103.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3133"></span>[252:3134](2070052.htm#fr_3133) <span
id="iii.ix-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p104"></span> [Joel ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#014)<span id="iii.ix-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3134"></span>[252:3135](2070052.htm#fr_3134) <span
id="iii.ix-p104.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p105"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3135"></span>[252:3136](2070052.htm#fr_3135) <span
id="iii.ix-p105.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p106"></span> [Gen.
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#017),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#023), [Jonah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3136"></span>[252:3137](2070052.htm#fr_3136) <span
id="iii.ix-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p108"></span> *To do no wrong*. etc.  Clémencet quotes
this as an aphorism from Demosth. de Cor.

<span id="fn_3137"></span>[252:3138](2070052.htm#fr_3137) <span
id="iii.ix-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p109"></span> [Wisd. ix.
15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3138"></span>[252:3139](2070052.htm#fr_3138) <span
id="iii.ix-p109.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p110"></span> [Prov. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3139"></span>[252:3140](2070052.htm#fr_3139) <span
id="iii.ix-p110.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p111"></span> [Jer. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3140"></span>[252:3141](2070052.htm#fr_3140) <span
id="iii.ix-p111.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p112"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)<span id="iii.ix-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3141"></span>[252:3142](2070052.htm#fr_3141) <span
id="iii.ix-p112.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p113"></span> [Jer. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3142"></span>[252:3143](2070052.htm#fr_3142) <span
id="iii.ix-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p115"></span> [Heb. x.
31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#031)<span id="iii.ix-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3143"></span>[252:3144](2070052.htm#fr_3143) <span
id="iii.ix-p115.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p116"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3144"></span>[252:3145](2070052.htm#fr_3144) <span
id="iii.ix-p116.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p117"></span> [Jer. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3145"></span>[252:3146](2070052.htm#fr_3145) <span
id="iii.ix-p117.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p118"></span> [Ps.
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3146"></span>[252:3147](2070052.htm#fr_3146) <span
id="iii.ix-p118.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p119"></span> [Nah.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3147"></span>[252:3148](2070052.htm#fr_3147) <span
id="iii.ix-p119.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p120"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3148"></span>[253:3149](2070052.htm#fr_3148) <span
id="iii.ix-p120.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p121"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p121.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_3149"></span>[253:3150](2070052.htm#fr_3149) <span
id="iii.ix-p121.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p122"></span> [Isa.
1.6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3150"></span>[253:3151](2070052.htm#fr_3150) <span
id="iii.ix-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p124"></span> [2 Sam. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021)<span id="iii.ix-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3151"></span>[253:3152](2070052.htm#fr_3151) <span
id="iii.ix-p124.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p125"></span> [Ps. lxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3152"></span>[253:3153](2070052.htm#fr_3152) <span
id="iii.ix-p125.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p126"></span> [Hag. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3153"></span>[253:3154](2070052.htm#fr_3153) <span
id="iii.ix-p126.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p127"></span> [Deut. xxviii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#039)<span id="iii.ix-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3154"></span>[253:3155](2070052.htm#fr_3154) <span
id="iii.ix-p127.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p128"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3155"></span>[253:3156](2070052.htm#fr_3155) <span
id="iii.ix-p128.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p129"></span> [Isa.
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006), [Isa.
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006), [Hab.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)<span id="iii.ix-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3156"></span>[253:3157](2070052.htm#fr_3156) <span
id="iii.ix-p129.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p130"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3157"></span>[253:3158](2070052.htm#fr_3157) <span
id="iii.ix-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p132"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix-p132.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3158"></span>[253:3159](2070052.htm#fr_3158) <span
id="iii.ix-p132.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p133"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#026)<span id="iii.ix-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3159"></span>[253:3160](2070052.htm#fr_3159) <span
id="iii.ix-p133.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p134"></span> [Mal. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3160"></span>[253:3161](2070052.htm#fr_3160) <span
id="iii.ix-p134.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p135"></span> S. [Luke xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#018)<span id="iii.ix-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3161"></span>[253:3162](2070052.htm#fr_3161) <span
id="iii.ix-p135.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p136"></span> [Amos ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3162"></span>[253:3163](2070052.htm#fr_3162) <span
id="iii.ix-p136.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p137"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#021)<span id="iii.ix-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3163"></span>[253:3164](2070052.htm#fr_3163) <span
id="iii.ix-p137.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p138"></span> [Amos v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3164"></span>[253:3165](2070052.htm#fr_3164) <span
id="iii.ix-p138.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p139"></span> [Habak. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3165"></span>[253:3166](2070052.htm#fr_3165) <span
id="iii.ix-p139.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p140"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014)<span id="iii.ix-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3166"></span>[253:3167](2070052.htm#fr_3166) <span
id="iii.ix-p140.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p141"></span> [Zech. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3167"></span>[253:3168](2070052.htm#fr_3167) <span
id="iii.ix-p141.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p142"></span> [Eph. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3168"></span>[254:3169](2070052.htm#fr_3168) <span
id="iii.ix-p143.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p144"></span> [Gen. xli.
39](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#039)<span id="iii.ix-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3169"></span>[254:3170](2070052.htm#fr_3169) <span
id="iii.ix-p144.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p145"></span> [Amos viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3170"></span>[254:3171](2070052.htm#fr_3170) <span
id="iii.ix-p145.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p146"></span> [Prov. xx.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3171"></span>[254:3172](2070052.htm#fr_3171) <span
id="iii.ix-p146.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p147"></span> [Zech. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3172"></span>[254:3173](2070052.htm#fr_3172) <span
id="iii.ix-p147.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p148"></span> [1 Kings xi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033)<span id="iii.ix-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3173"></span>[254:3174](2070052.htm#fr_3173) <span
id="iii.ix-p148.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p149"></span> [Prov. xxx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3174"></span>[254:3175](2070052.htm#fr_3174) <span
id="iii.ix-p149.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p150"></span> [Amos vi.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004)<span id="iii.ix-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3175"></span>[254:3176](2070052.htm#fr_3175) <span
id="iii.ix-p150.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p151"></span> [Zech. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3176"></span>[254:3177](2070052.htm#fr_3176) <span
id="iii.ix-p152.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p153"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3177"></span>[254:3178](2070052.htm#fr_3177) <span
id="iii.ix-p153.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p154"></span> [Exod. xxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3178"></span>[254:3179](2070052.htm#fr_3178) <span
id="iii.ix-p154.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p155"></span> [Ps.
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#023),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#030)<span id="iii.ix-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3179"></span>[254:3180](2070052.htm#fr_3179) <span
id="iii.ix-p155.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p156"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3180"></span>[254:3181](2070052.htm#fr_3180) <span
id="iii.ix-p156.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p157"></span> [Rom. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="iii.ix-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3181"></span>[254:3182](2070052.htm#fr_3181) <span
id="iii.ix-p157.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p158"></span> [Joel ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023)<span id="iii.ix-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3182"></span>[254:3183](2070052.htm#fr_3182) <span
id="iii.ix-p158.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p159"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#013)<span id="iii.ix-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3183"></span>[254:3184](2070052.htm#fr_3183) <span
id="iii.ix-p159.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p160"></span> [Psa.
67.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix-p160.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oration XVIII](2070053)
