[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070141)  [Next](2070143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p1.1"></span>Ep. CLXXXIV.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p2"></span>(Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia in
Cappadocia Secunda, who had apparently taken a prominent part in the
election and consecration of Eulalius to the See of Nazianzus, was
accused of heresy by Helladius Archbishop of Cæsarea, and a Council met
at Parnassus to try him, <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 383.  Gregory, not being able
personally to attend this Synod, writes to Amphilochius, to beg him to
undertake the defence of the accused.  The letter is lost, but Gregory’s
friend carried out his mission with success, and the following letter is
to thank him for his kindness.)

<span id="iv.iv.v.x-p3"></span>The <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.x-p3.1"></span>Lord</span> fulfil all thy petitions (do not
despise a father’s prayer), for you have abundantly refreshed my age,
both by having gone to Parnassus, as you were invited to do, and by
having refuted the calumny against the most Reverend and God-beloved
Bishop.  For evil men love to set down their own faults to those who
convict them.  For the age of this man is stronger than all the
accusations, and so is his life, and we too who have often heard from
him and taught others, and those whom he has recovered from error and
added to the common body of the church; but yet the present evil times
called for more accurate proof on account of the slanderers and
evil-disposed; and this you have supplied us with, or rather you have
supplied it to those who are of fickler mind and easily led away by such
men.  But if you will undertake a longer journey, and will personally
give testimony, and settle the matter with the other bishops, you will
be doing a spiritual work worthy of your Perfection.  I and those with
me salute your Fraternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](2070143)
