[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070160)  [Next](2070162.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>Ep. CLXXXIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p2"></span>(Helladius, Archbishop of Cæsarea,
contested the validity of the election of Eulalius to the Bishopric of
Nazianzus, and accused Bosporius of heresy.  S. Gregory here throws the
whole weight of his authority into the other scale.  It is however
manifest from the very terms of the letter that the person addressed is
not Theodore of Tyana.  It was conjectured by Clémencet that perhaps he
was Theodore of Mopsuestia.)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p3"></span>Envy, which no one easily escapes, has
got some foothold amongst us.  See, even we Cappadocians are in a state
of faction, so to speak—a calamity never heard of before, and not to be
believed—so that no flesh may glory <span
id="fr_4772"></span>[4773](#fn_4772.md) in the sight of God, but that we
may be careful, since we are all human, not to condemn each other
rashly.  For myself, there is some gain even from the misfortune (if I
may speak somewhat <span id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-Page_475"></span>paradoxically), and I really gather a
rose out of thorns, as the proverb has it.  Hitherto I have never met
Your Reverence face to face, nor conversed with you by letter, but have
only been illuminated by your reputation; but now I am of necessity
compelled to approach you by letter, and I am very grateful to him who
has procured me this privilege.  I omit to write to the other Bishops
about whom you wrote to me, as the opportunity has not yet arisen. 
Moreover my weak health makes me less active in this matter; but what I
write to you I write to them also through you.  My Lord the God-beloved
Bishop Helladius <span id="fr_4773"></span>[4774](#fn_4773.md) must cease
to waste his labour on our concerns.  For it is not through spiritual
earnestness, but through party zeal, that he is seeking this; and not
for the sake of accurate compliance with the canons, but for the
satisfaction of anger, as is evident by the time he has chosen, and
because many have moved with him unreasonably, for I must say this, and
not trouble myself about it.  If I were physically in a condition to
govern the Church of Nazianzus, to which I was originally appointed, and
not to Sasima as some would falsely persuade you, I should not have been
so cowardly or so ignorant of the Divine Constitutions as either to
despise that Church, or to seek for an easy life in preference to the
prizes which are in store for those who labour according to God’s will,
and work with the talent committed to their care.  For what profit
should I have from my many labours and my great hopes, if I were ill
advised in the most important matters?  But since my bodily health is
bad, as everyone can plainly see, and I have not any responsibility to
fear on account of this withdrawal, for the reason I have mentioned, and
I saw that the Church through cleaving to me was suffering in its best
interests and almost being destroyed through my illness, I prayed both
before and now again my Lords the God-beloved Bishops (I mean those of
our own Province) to give the Church a head, which they have done by
God’s Grace, worthy both of my desire and of your prayers.  This I would
have you both know yourself, most honourable Lord, and also inform the
rest of the Bishops, that they may receive him and support him by their
votes, and not bear heavily on my old age by believing the slander.  Let
me add this to any letter.  If your examination finds my Lord the
God-beloved Priest Bosporius guilty concerning the faith—a thing which
it is not lawful even to suggest—(I pass over his age and my personal
testimony) judge him so yourselves.  But if the discussion about the
dioceses is the cause of this evil report and this novel accusation, do
not be led away by the slander, and do not give to falsehoods a greater
strength than to the truth, I beg you, lest you should cast into despair
those who desire to do what is right.  May you be granted good health
and spirits and courage and continual progress in the things of God to
us and to the Church, whose common boast you are.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4772"></span>[474:4773](2070161.htm#fr_4772.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p4"></span> [1 Cor. i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4773"></span>[475:4774](2070161.htm#fr_4773.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p5"></span> Basil’s successor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXIX](2070162.md)
