[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070014)  [Next](2070016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—S. Cyril’s Writings.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p2"></span>§ 1.  *List of Works*.  Besides the
Catechetical and Mystagogic Lectures translated in this volume, the
extant works of S. Cyril include (1) the “Letter to the Emperor
Constantius concerning the appearance at Jerusalem of a luminous Cross
in the sky:”  (2) “The Homily on the Paralytic at the Pool of
Bethesda:”  and (3) Fragments of Sermons on the Miracle of the water
changed into wine, and on [John xvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span id="ii.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>,
“I go to My Father.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p3"></span>Another work attributed by some
authorities to Cyril of Jerusalem and by others to Cyril of Alexandria
is a Homily *De Occursu Domini*, that is, On the Presentation of Christ
in the Temple, and the meeting with Symeon, called in the Greek Church
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.xi-p3.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.xi-p3.2"></span>῾Υπαπαντή</span>.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p4"></span>The other Fragments and Letters mentioned
in the Benedictine Edition have no claim to be considered genuine.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p5"></span>§ 2.  *Authenticity of the Lectures*. 
The internal evidence of the time and place at which the Lectures were
delivered has been already discussed in chapters viii. and ix., and
proves beyond doubt that they must have been composed at Jerusalem in
the middle of the fourth century.  At that date Cyril was the only
person living in Jerusalem who is mentioned by the Ecclesiastical
Historians as an author of Catechetical Lectures:  and S. Jerome, a
younger contemporary of Cyril, expressly mentions the Lectures which
Cyril had written in his youth.  In fact their authenticity seems never
to have been doubted before the seventeenth century, when it was
attacked with more zeal than success by two French Protestant
Theologians of strongly Calvinistic opinions, Andrew Rivet (*Critic.
Sacr*. Lib. iii. cap. 8, Genev. 1640), and Edmund Aubertin (*De
Sacramento Eucharistiæ*, Lib. ii. p. 422, Ed. Davent., 1654).  Their
objections, which were reprinted at full length by Milles at the end of
his Edition, were directed chiefly against the Mystagogic Lectures, and
rested on dogmatic rather than on critical grounds.  The argument most
worthy of notice was that in a MS. of the Library of Augsburg the
Mystagogic Lectures were attributed to John, Bishop of Jerusalem.  This
is admitted by Milles, who gives the title thus:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.xi-p5.1"></span>Μυσταγωγικαὶ κατηχήσεις
πέντε ᾽Ιωάννου ᾽Επισκόπου ῾Ιεροσολύμων, περὶ βαπτίσματος, χρίσματος,
σώματος, καὶ αἵματος Χριστοῦ</span>.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p6"></span>I do not find this Codex Augustinus
mentioned elsewhere by any of the Editors under that name:  but the
Augsburg MSS. were removed to Munich in 1806, and in the older Munich
MS. (Cod. Monac. i), the title of the first Mystagogic Lecture is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.xi-p6.1"></span>Μυσταγωγία πρώτη ᾽Ιωάννου
ἐπισκόπου ῾Ιεροσολύμων</span>.  Also in Codd. Monac. 2, Ottobon. there
is added at the end of the Title, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.xi-p6.2"></span>τοῦ αὐτοῦ Κυρίλλου καὶ ᾽Ιωάννου
ἐπισκόπου</span>.  That John, Cyril’s successor, did deliver
Catechetical Lectures, we know from his own correspondence with Jerome: 
and this very circumstance may account for his name having been
associated with, or substituted for that of Cyril.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p7"></span>To Rivet’s objection Milles makes answer
that if the mistakes of a transcriber or the stumbling of an ignorant
Librarian (*imperiti Librarii cæspitationes*) have in one or two MSS.
ascribed the Lectures to John or any one else, this cannot be set
against the testimony of those who lived nearest to the time when the
Lectures were composed, as Jerome and Theodoret.  Also the internal
evidence proves that the Lectures could not have been delivered later
than the middle of the fourth century, whereas John succeeded Cyril
about 386.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p8"></span>Moreover it is quite impossible to assign
the two sets of Lectures to different authors.  <span id="page_lxii">p.
lxii</span> <span id="ii.iii.xi-Page_lxii"></span>In Cat. xviii. § 33
the author promises, as we have seen, that he will fully explain the
Sacramental Mysteries in other Lectures to be given in Easter week, in
the Holy Sepulchre itself, and describes the subject of each Lecture; to
which description the Mystagogic Lectures correspond in all
particulars.  Other promises of future explanations are given in Cat.
xiii. § 19, and xvi. § 26, and fulfilled in *Myst*. iv. § 3, and ii. §
6, and iii. § i.  On the other hand the author of *Myst*. i. § 9, after
quoting the words, “I believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the
Holy Ghost, and in one Baptism of repentance,” adds, “Of which things I
spoke to thee at length in the former Lectures.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p9"></span>By these and many other arguments drawn
from internal evidence Touttée has shewn convincingly that all the
Lectures must have had the same author, and that he could be no other
than Cyril.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p10"></span>§ 3.  *Early Testimony*.  Under the
title “Veterum Testimonia de S. Cyrillo Hierosolymitano ejusque
Scriptis,” Milles collected a large number of passages bearing on the
life and writings of S. Cyril, of which it will be sufficient to quote a
few which refer expressly to his Lectures.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p11"></span>S. Jerome, in his *Book of Illustrious
Men*, or *Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers*, composed at Bethlehem
about six years after Cyril’s death, writes in Chapter 112:  “Cyril,
Bishop of Jerusalem, having been often driven out from the Church,
afterwards in the reign of Theodosius held his Bishopric undisturbed for
eight years:  by whom there are Catechetical Lectures, which he composed
in his youth.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p12"></span>Theodoret, born six or seven years after
the death of Cyril, in his *Dialogues* (p. 211 in this Series) gives the
“Testimony of Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, from his fourth Catechetical
Oration concerning the ten dogmas.  Of the birth from a virgin, “Believe
thou this, &c.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p13"></span>Theophanes (575 *circ*.)
*Chronographia*, p. 34, Ed. Paris, 1655, defends the orthodoxy of Cyril,
as follows:  “It was right to avoid the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.xi-p13.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.xi-p13.2"></span>μοούσιος</span>, which at that time offended
most persons, and through the objections of the adversaries deterred
those who were to be baptized, and to explain clearly the co-essential
doctrine by words of equivalent meaning:  which also the blessed Cyril
has done, by expounding the Creed of Nicæa word for word, and
proclaiming Him <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.xi-p13.3"></span>Very
God of Very God</span>.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p14"></span>Gelasius, Pope 492, *De duabus in
Christo naturis*, quotes as from Gregory Nazianzen the words of Cyril,
Cat. iv. § 9:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.xi-p14.1"></span>Διπλοῦς ἦν ὁ Χριστός, κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p15"></span>Leontius Byzantinus (610 *circ*.)
*Contra Nestor. et Eutychem*, Lib. 1. quotes the same passage expressly
as taken “From the 4th Catechetical Oration of Cyril, Bishop of
Jerusalem.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p16"></span>Many other references to the Catecheses
as the work of Cyril are given by Touttée, pp. 306–315.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p17"></span>§ 4.  *Editions*.  1.  Our earliest
information concerning the Greek text and translations of S. Cyril’s
Lectures is derived from John Grodecq, Dean of Glogau in Bohemia.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p18"></span>From his statement it appears that Jacob
Uchanski, Archbishop of Gnessen and Primate of Poland, had obtained from
Macedonia a version of the Catecheses in the Slavonic dialect, and had
translated it into the Polish language some years before 1560.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p19"></span>2.  In that year Grodecq himself
published at Vienna an edition of the Mystagogic Lectures, thus
described in the catalogue of the Imperial Library:—

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p20"></span>“S. Cyril’s Mystagogic Lectures to the
newly baptized, which now for the first time are edited in Greek and
Latin together, that he who doubts the Latin may have recourse to the
Greek, and he who does not understand Greek well may read the Latin,
translated by John Grodecq.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p21"></span>Nothing more is known of this edition: 
Fabricius, Milles, Touttée, and Reischl, all say that they have been
unable to find any trace of it.  Uchanski about this time sent to
Grodecq his Slavonic and Polish versions, in order that they might be
compared with the <span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.xi-Page_lxiii"></span>Greek original.  The result according
to Grodecq was that the fidelity of both versions was clearly shewn, and
“there could not possibly remain any doubt that these Lectures of Cyril
are perfectly genuine.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p22"></span>Whether Uchanski’s book was written or
printed is unknown, as no trace of it has hitherto been found.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p23"></span>3.  S. Cyrilli Hier. Catecheses ad
Illuminandos et Mystagogicæ.  Interpretatus est Joannes Grodecius.  Romæ
1564.  8°.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p24"></span>Grodecq had come to Rome in the suite of
Stanislaus Hosius, Cardinal Legate at the Council of Trent, who in the
year 1562 had published in the Confession of Petricow the 4th and part
of the 3rd Mystagogic Lectures from a Greek MS. belonging to Cardinal
Sirlet.  From this MS. Grodecq made his Latin translation, using also
the work of Uchanski before mentioned.  The preface is dated from Trent,
on the 9th of July, 1563.  The translation was published in the
following year at Rome, Cologne, Antwerp, and Paris, and often elsewhere
until superseded by the new Latin Version of Touttée in the Benedictine
Edition.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p25"></span>4.  In the same year, 1564, the
Mystagogic Lectures and Catecheses iv., vi., viii.–x., xv., xviii. were
published at Paris by William Morel, the King’s Printer, under the
following title:—

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p26"></span>“S. Cyrilli Hier. Catecheses, id est
institutiones ad res sacras, Græce editæ, ex bibliotheca Henrici Memmii,
cum versione Latina.  Cura Guil. Morellii.  Paris.  G. Morel., 1564.  4°
min.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p27"></span>The Greek text depending on de Mesme’s
one MS., and that mutilated and faulty, is said by Touttée to have many
faults and omissions, but to have been nevertheless very useful to him
in correcting the text.  The MS. itself had entirely disappeared.  The
Latin version, appended to the copy in the Royal (National) Library at
Paris, but not always attached to the Greek, is said by Touttée to be a
careful and elegant version, independent of Grodecq’s.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p28"></span>A copy of Morel’s Edition which formerly
belonged to Du Fresne, containing various readings in the margin from
two other MSS., was lent to Touttée from the Library of S. Geneviève
(Genovef.).

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p29"></span>Reischl describes the MS. as “Cod.
Mesmianus (Montf. I. 185).  Sec. xi.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p30"></span>5.  “S. Cyrilli H. Catecheses Græce et
Latine ex interpretatione Joan. Grodecii nunc primum editæ, ex variis
bibliothecis, præcipue Vaticana, studio et opera Joan. Prevotii. Paris.
(Claude Morellus), 1608.”  This was the first complete edition of the
Greek text.  Prevot, a native of Bordeaux, states in the Dedication to
Pope Paul V., that by the help of MSS. “melioris notæ” found in the
Vatican, he had both corrected the text of the Lectures previously
published by Morel, and carefully transcribed the rest.  He made,
according to Touttée, many useful emendations, but did not mention the
number, age, nor various readings of the MSS. employed.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p31"></span>6.  “S. Cyrilli Hier. Arch. opera quæ
supersunt omnia; quorum quædam nunc primum ex Codd. MSS. edidit, reliqua
cum Codd. MSS. contulit, plurimis in locis emendavit, Notisque
illustravit Tho. Milles S.T.B. ex Æde Christi Oxoniæ, e Theatro
Sheldoniano, Impensis Richardi Sare Bibliopol. *Lond*. MDCCIII.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p32"></span>The author of this fine Edition gives us
in his Preface the following description of his work:—

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p33"></span>“In the first place I wished to amend
more thoroughly the text of J. Prevot, which, as I said, he himself
largely corrected and supplied from MSS. in the Vatican, and which I
have printed in this Edition:  I have therefore compared it with all the
other Editions that I could collect, and in this manner have easily
removed many errors both of the printers and of Prevot himself. 
Afterwards I carefully compared all the Catecheses and the Epistle to
Constantinus with two MSS. and some with three, namely iv., vi.,
viii.–x., xv., xvi., xviii.  The first Codex, written on parchment
apparently six hundred years ago, I found among those MSS. which Sir
Tho. Roe, our first Ambassador from King James I. to the Great Mogul,
brought from the East, and presented to the Bodleian Library.  The
second we owe to the <span id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.xi-Page_lxiv"></span>diligence of Isaac Casaubon, who
collated the Catecheses and Epistle to Constantius  with a MS. which he
chanced to find, I think, in some Library in France, and carefully noted
all the various readings in the margin.  This copy of Casaubon’s the
Right Reverend Father in Christ, John Bishop of Norwich, very kindly
lent to me out of his well-furnished Library, and of his great love for
learning did not disdain to shew the highest favour to my slight
endeavours.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p34"></span>Touttée thinks that the MS. from which
Casaubon drew his various readings was C. Roe itself, or that one of the
two MSS. had been copied from the other, or both from the same.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p35"></span>7.  “S. Cyrilli Arch. Hier, opera quæ
exstant omnia et ejus nomine circumferuntur, ad MSS. codices necnon ad
superiores Editiones castigata, Dissertationibus et Notis illustrata,
cum nova interpretatione et copiosis indicibus.  Cura et studio Domni
Antonii-Augustini Touttéi, Presbyteri et Monachi Benedictini e
Congregatione S. Mauri. Paris. Typis Jac. Vincent. 1720, fol. (Recusa
Venet. 1763).”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p36"></span>Of the Greek text the Editor says, “I
have collated it as carefully as I could with Grodecq’s translation,
Morel’s and Prevot’s Editions, and with MSS. to be found in this City. 
The various readings of the Roman MSS. I have obtained by the help of
friends:  those which Milles had collected from the English Codices I
have adopted for my own use.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p37"></span>8.  “S. Cyrilli Hier. Arch. opp. quæ
supersunt omnia ad libros MSS. et impressos recensuit Notis criticis
commentariis indicibusque locupletissimis illustravit Gulielm. Car.
Reischl S. Th. D. et Reg. Lycei Ambergensis Professor. Vol. I Monac. M
DCCC XLVIII.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p38"></span>The Editor says in his Preface that he
has altered the Benedictine text only when the evidence was very
weighty, and has then given all the various readings in the critical
notes.  The exegetical commentary was to be reserved for the 2nd Volume,
but this Dr. Reischl did not live to complete.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p39"></span>The Prolegomena contain (1) Touttée’s
inordinately long “Life of Cyril,” (2) a Dissertation on the general
character and authenticity of the Catecheses, and (3) an “Apparatus
Litterarius,” to which I have been indebted.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p40"></span>Vol. ii., containing Catecheses
xii.–xviii., *Myst*. i.–v., and the other works, genuine and spurious,
attributed to Cyril, was published by J. Rupp at Munich, 1860.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p41"></span>The MSS. used in revising the text of
this, the best critical edition, will be noticed below.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p42"></span>9.  An Edition of the Catecheses only
was published at Jerusalem in 1867, having been commenced in 1849 at the
request of the Archbishop, Cyril II., by Dionysius Kleopas, Principal of
the Theological School of Jerusalem, and, after his death in 1861,
continued by his successor Photius Alexandrides, “Archdeacon of the
Apostolic and Patriarchal See of Jerusalem, and Principal of the
Theological School.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p43"></span>The Editor gives in the Preface an
interesting account of the life of Kleopas, and of the work which he
left unfinished.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p44"></span>§ 5.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.xi-p44.1"></span>Manuscripts</span>.  From the preceding
account of the various Editions of S. Cyril we may obtain the following
list of authorities which have been hitherto used in revising the Text.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p45"></span>1.  Codex Sirletianus, known only by
Grodecq’s Latin version, Rome, 1564.  Cf. § 1. 3.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p46"></span>2.  C. Mesmianus, known only in Morel’s
edition, Paris, 1564.  Cf. § i. 4.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p47"></span>3.  Vatican MSS. used by Prevot. 1608,
but not identified.  Cf. § i. 5.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p48"></span>4.  C. Roe, Bibl. Bodleian. Oxon. 
“Codex membranaceus in folio, ff. 223, sec. xi„ binis columnis bene
exaratus;” \[ol. 271\].

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p49"></span>5.  C. Casaubon.  On this and the
preceding MS. see Milles as quoted above, § i. 6.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p50"></span>6.  C. Ottobonianus (1) ol. [Rom.
iv.](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#000)<span id="ii.iii.xi-p50.1"></span>
membran. sec. xi. “Continet Catecheses omnes et Epist. ad Constantium. 
Multas habet insignes ab editis varietates.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p51"></span>C. Ottob. (2), “Chartaceus et recens
est, nihil fere ab editis discrepans.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p52"></span>These are the Roman MSS. mentioned by
Touttée:  see above, § i. 7.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p53"></span><span id="page_lxv">p. lxv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.xi-Page_lxv"></span>7.  C. Coislin. 227 (ol. 101).  Membran.
Sæc. xi. *circ*.  “From this came many important emendations” (Touttée,
*Notitia Codicum MSS*.).

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p54"></span>In the descriptions of the following
MSS. of the National Library at Paris there is so much discrepancy
between Touttée and Reischl, that it is better to quote both.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p55"></span>8.  “Catecheses xii., xiii., xiv., xv.,
comparavi cum Codice Reg. bibliothecæ num. 2503.  Scriptus est in
bombycina charta an. 1231, quam anni notam apposuit calligraphus”
(Touttée, *Not. Codd. MSS*.).

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p56"></span>Reischl has no notice of a MS. at all
answering to this description.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p57"></span>9.  Cod. Reg. alter, “ol. 1260, nunc
1824, qui S. Basilii opera complectitur, sub ejus nomine Procatechesin
continet “ (Touttée, *Not. Codd. MSS*.):  *aliter*, “Cod. Reg. ol. 260,
nunc 1284, pag. 254, qui duodecimi circiter est sæculi, in quo habetur
Procatechesis hæc sub nomine S. Basilii” (Id. *Monit. in
Procatechesin*).

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p58"></span>“Cod. Reg. 467 (apud Touttéum, 1824)
Fonteblandensis, chartac. fol. sec. x.  Continet sub S. Basilii nomine
*Orationem de Baptismo*, quæ est S. Cyrilli Hier. Procatechesis.  C.
Reg. Touttéi” (Reischl).

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p59"></span>10.  “Cod. Reg. 969 (ol. Mazarin.)
Epistolarum S. Basilii. 4°. Sec. xiv.  Exhibet sub n. 7 Basilii homiliam
*quo* (sic) *ostenditur Deum esse incomprehensibilem*, quæ non S.
Basilii, sed Cyrilli est Procatechesis” (Reischl).

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p60"></span>This description agrees in substance
with Touttée’s.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p61"></span>11.  C. Colbert.  “Catecheses iv., vi.,
viii., ix., x., xv., xviii., contuli cum cod. Colbert. Biblioth.
chartaceo et recenti 4863 notato…In omnibus pene cum Morelliana editione
consentit” (Touttée, *Notitia Codd. MSS*.).

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p62"></span>Reischl makes no mention of this MS.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p63"></span>12.  C. Colbert. alter. “membran. sign.
1717, Sec. xiii. diversas Patrum homilias continet, et Cat. xiii.
exhibet sub nomine Cyrillianæ in Crucem et Porasceven homiliæ” (Touttée,
*Notitia*).

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p64"></span>This is described by Reischl as “Cod.
Reg. 771 (ol. 1717) Colbertinus.  Membran. fol. seculi xiii.–xiv.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p65"></span>The following MSS. have been used in
Editions later than the Benedictine.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p66"></span>13.  “C. Monacensis I. 394 membran.
fol., titulis et initialibus miniatis, f. 261 nitidissime uncialibus
minutis circiter seculo decimo in Oriente scriptus.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p67"></span>This was regarded both by Reischl and by
Rupp as the most important authority for the text:  it is much older
than Codd. Roe, Casaub., and seems to be related to Codd. Ottobon.
Coislin.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p68"></span>C. Mon. 2 of the 16th Century is of
little value.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p69"></span>14.  “C. Vindobonensis, 55, membran. fol
antiquissimus, sed incerto sæculo.”

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p70"></span>A full account is given by Rupp in the
Preface to Vol. ii.  It was collated by Joseph Müller, 1848, and
contains all Cyril’s Lectures, except the Procatechesis.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p71"></span>15.  Codex A, found by Kleopas in the
Library of the Archbishop of Cyprus, and used as the basis of his text,
sometimes stands alone in preserving the true reading.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p72"></span>§ 6.  *Versions*.  Besides the Latin
Translations published with the Greek text, as mentioned above, Reischl
mentions the first three of the following:—

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p73"></span>(a)  Les catéchèses de Sainct Cyrille. 
Traduit par Louis Ganey.  Paris, 1564.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p74"></span>(b)  Cyrill’s Schriften übersetzt und
mit Anmerkungen versehen von J. Mich. Feder.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p75"></span>Bamberg, 1786.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p76"></span>(c)  Cyrilli Hier. Catecheses in Armen.
Linguam versæ.  Viennæ 1832.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p77"></span>(d)  The Catechetical Lectures of S.
Cyril, Archbishop of Jerusalem, Translated, with Notes and Indices
(Library of Fathers of the Holy Catholic Church.) Parker, Oxford, 1838. 
See Preface.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p78"></span><span id="page_lxvi">p. lxvi</span>
<span id="ii.iii.xi-Page_lxvi"></span>(e)  S. Cyril on the Mysteries. 
(The five Mystagogic Lectures.)  H. de Romestin.  Parker, Oxford, 1887.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p79"></span>(f)  On Faith and the Creed.  C. A.
Heurtley, D.D., Margaret Professor of Divinity, and Canon of Christ
Church, Oxford.  Parker, 3rd Ed., 1889.  Contains, with other Treatises,
the Fourth Catechetical Lecture of S. Cyril.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p80"></span>In the present volume the translation
given in the Oxford “Library of Fathers” has been carefully revised
throughout.  Where it has been found necessary to depart from the
Benedictine text, the Editor has consulted the readings and critical
notes of Milles, Reischl, and Rupp, and the Jerusalem edition of Kleopas
and Anaxandrides.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p81"></span>A few additions have been made to the
index of Subjects:  the Indices of Greek Words and of Scripture Texts
have been much enlarged, and carefully revised.  For any errors which
may have escaped observation the indulgence of the critical reader will
not, it is hoped, be asked in vain.

<span id="ii.iii.xi-p82"></span>E. H. G

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Procatechesis, or Prologue to the Catechetical Lectures of our
Holy Father, Cyril, Archbishop of Jerusalem.](2070016)
