[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070022)  [Next](2070024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xi"></span> <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span
id="ii.xi-Page_44"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p1"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.xi-p1.1"></span>Lecture VII.</span>

<span id="ii.xi-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.xi-p2.1"></span>The Father.</span>

<span id="ii.xi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xi-p3.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xi-p3.2"></span>[Eph.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xi-p3.3"></span></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p4"></span>For this cause I bow my knees unto the
Father,…of whom all fatherhood in heaven and earth is named, &c.

<span id="ii.xi-p5"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xi-p5.1"></span>Of</span> God as the sole Principle we have said
enough to you yesterday <span id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959) :  by
“enough” I mean, not what is worthy of the subject, (for to reach that
is utterly impossible to mortal nature), but as much as was granted to
our infirmity.  I traversed also the bye-paths of the manifold error of
the godless heretics:  but now let us shake off their foul and
soul-poisoning doctrine, and remembering what relates to them, not to
our own hurt, but to our greater detestation of them, let us come back
to ourselves, and receive the saving doctrines of the true Faith,
connecting the dignity of Fatherhood with that of the Unity, and
believing <span class="sc"><span id="ii.xi-p6.1"></span>In One God the
Father</span>:  for we must not only believe in one God; but this also
let us devoutly receive, that He is the Father of the Only-begotten, our
Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="ii.xi-p7"></span>2.  For thus shall we raise our thoughts
higher than the Jews <span id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960) , who admit
indeed by their doctrines that there is One God, (for what if they often
denied even this by their idolatries?); but that He is also the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, they admit not; being of a contrary mind to
their own Prophets, who in the Divine Scriptures affirm, *The Lord said
unto me, Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten thee* <span
id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) .  And to this day they *rage and
gather themselves together against the Lord, and against His
Anointed* <span id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962) , thinking that it is
possible to be made friends of the Father apart from devotion towards
the Son, being ignorant that *no man cometh unto the Father but
by* <span id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963) the Son, who saith, *I am
the Door, and I am the Way* <span id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) . 
He therefore that refuseth the Way which leadeth to the Father, and he
that denieth the Door, how shall he be deemed worthy of entrance unto
God?  They contradict also what is written in the eighty-eighth Psalm,
*He shall call Me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the helper of my
salvation.  And I will make him my first-born, high among the kings of
the earth* <span id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965) .  For if they should
insist that these things are said of David or Solomon or any of their
successors, let them shew how *the throne* of him, who is in their
judgment described in the prophecy, is *as the days of heaven, and as
the sun before God, and as the moon established for ever* <span
id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) .  And how is it also that they are
not abashed at that which is written, *From the womb before the
morning-star have I begotten thee* <span
id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) :  also this, *He shall endure with
the sun, and before the moon, from generation to generation* <span
id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968) .  To refer these passages to a man is
a proof of utter and extreme insensibility.

<span id="ii.xi-p17"></span>3.  Let the Jews, however, since they so
will, suffer their usual disorder of unbelief, both in these and the
like statements.  But let us adopt the godly doctrine of our Faith,
worshipping one God the Father of the Christ, (for to deprive Him, who
grants to all the gift of generation, of the like dignity would be
impious):  and let us <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xi-p17.1"></span>Believe in One God the Father</span>, in order
that, before we touch upon our teaching concerning Christ, the faith
concerning the Only-begotten may be implanted in the soul of the
hearers, without being at all interrupted by the intervening doctrines
concerning the Father.

<span id="ii.xi-p18"></span>4.  For the name of the Father, with the
very utterance of the title, suggests the thought of the Son:  as in
like manner one who names the Son thinks straightway of the Father
also <span id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969) .  For if a Father, He is
certainly <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span
id="ii.xi-Page_45"></span>the Father of a Son; and if a Son, certainly
the Son of a Father.  Lest therefore from our speaking thus, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xi-p19.1"></span>In One God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of All Things Visible and
Invisible</span>, and from our then adding this also, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.xi-p19.2"></span>And in One Lord Jesus
Christ</span>, any one should irreverently suppose that the
Only-begotten is second in rank to heaven and earth,—for this reason
before naming them we named <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xi-p19.3"></span>God the Father</span>, that in thinking of the
Father we might at the same time think also of the Son:  for between the
Son and the Father no being whatever comes.

<span id="ii.xi-p20"></span>5.  God then is in an improper sense <span
id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970) the Father of many, but by nature and
in truth of One only, the Only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ; not
having attained in course of time to being a Father, but being ever the
Father of the Only-begotten <span id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971) . 
Not that being without a Son before, He has since by change of purpose
become a Father:  but before every substance and every intelligence,
before times and all ages, God hath the dignity of Father, magnifying
Himself in this more than in His other dignities; and having become a
Father, not by passion <span id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972) , or
union, not in ignorance, not by effluence <span
id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973) , not by diminution, not by
alteration, *for every good gift and every perfect gift is from above,
coming down from the Father of lights, with whom can be no variation,
neither shadow of turning* <span id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974) . 
Perfect Father, He begat a perfect Son, and delivered all things to Him
who is begotten:  (for *all things*, He saith, *are delivered unto Me of
My Father* <span id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975) :)  and is honoured
by the Only-begotten:  for, *I honour My Father* <span
id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976) , saith the Son; and again, *Even as I
have kept My Father’s commandments, and abide in His love* <span
id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977) .  Therefore we also say like the
Apostle, *Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and God of all consolation* <span
id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978) :  and, *We bow our knees unto the
Father from whom all fatherhood in heaven and on earth is named* <span
id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979) :  glorifying Him with the
Only-begotten:  for *he that denieth the Father, denieth the Son
also* <span id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980) :  and again, *He that
confesseth the Son, hath the Father also* <span
id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981) ; knowing that Jesus Christ is Lord to
the glory of God the Father <span id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982) .

<span id="ii.xi-p34"></span>6.  We worship, therefore, as the Father of
Christ, the Maker of heaven and earth, *the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob* <span id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983) ; to whose honour the
former temple also, over against us here, was built.  For we shall not
tolerate the heretics who sever the Old Testament from the New <span
id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984) , but shall believe Christ, who says
concerning the temple, *Wist ye not that I must be in My Father’s
house* <span id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985) ? and again, *Take these
things hence, and make not my Father’s house a house of
merchandise* <span id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) , whereby He most
clearly confessed that the former temple in Jerusalem was His own
Father’s house.  But if any one from unbelief wishes to receive yet more
proofs as to the Father of Christ being the same as the Maker of the
world, let him hear Him say again, *Are not two sparrows sold for a
farthing, and not one of them shall fall on the ground without My Father
which is in heaven* <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987) ; this also,
*Behold the fowls of the heaven that they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barns; and your heavenly Father feedeth them* <span
id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988) ; and this, *My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work* <span id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989) .

<span id="ii.xi-p42"></span>7.  But lest any one from simplicity or
perverse ingenuity should suppose that Christ is but equal in honour to
righteous men, from His saying, *I ascend to My Father, and your* <span
id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990) *Father*, it is well to make this
distinction beforehand, that the name of the Father is one, but the
power of His operation <span id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991)
manifold.  And Christ Himself knowing this has spoken unerringly, *I go
to My Father, and your Father:*  not saying ‘to our Father,’ but
distinguishing, and saying first what was proper to Himself, *to My
Father*, which was by nature; then adding, *and your Father*, which was
by adoption.  For however high the privilege we have received of saying
in our prayers, *Our Father*, <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="ii.xi-Page_46"></span>*which art in heaven*, yet the gift is of
loving-kindness.  For we call Him Father, not as having been by nature
begotten of Our Father which is in heaven; but having been transferred
from servitude to sonship by the grace of the Father, through the Son
and Holy Spirit, we are permitted so to speak by ineffable
loving-kindness.

<span id="ii.xi-p45"></span>8.  But if any one wishes to learn how we
call God “Father,” let him hear Moses, the excellent schoolmaster,
saying, *Did not this thy Father Himself buy thee, and make thee, and
create thee* <span id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992) ?  Also Esaias the
Prophet, *And now, O Lord.  Thou art our Father:  and we all are clay,
the works of Thine hands* <span id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993) .  For
most clearly has the prophetic gift declared that not according to
nature, but according to God’s grace, and by adoption, we call Him
Father.

<span id="ii.xi-p48"></span>9.  And that thou mayest learn more exactly
that in the Divine Scriptures it is not by any means the natural father
only that is called father, hear what Paul says:—*For though ye should
have ten thousand tutors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers:  for
in Christ Jesus I begat you through the Gospel* <span
id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) .  For Paul was father of the
Corinthians, not by having begotten them after the flesh, but by having
taught and begotten them again after the Spirit.  Hear Job also saying,
*I was a father of the needy* <span id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995) : 
for he called himself a father, not as having begotten them all, but as
caring for them.  And God’s Only-begotten Son Himself, when nailed in
His flesh to the tree at the time of crucifixion, on seeing Mary, His
own Mother according to the flesh, and John, the most beloved of His
disciples, said to him, *Behold! thy mother*, and to her, *Behold! thy
Son* <span id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996) :  teaching her the
parental affection due to him <span id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997) ,
and indirectly explaining that which is said in Luke, and *His father
and His mother marvelled at Him* <span id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998)
:  words which the tribe of heretics snatch up, saying that He was
begotten of a man and a woman.  For like as Mary was called the mother
of John, because of her parental affection, not from having given him
birth, so Joseph also was called the father of Christ, not from having
begotten Him (for *he knew her not*, as the Gospel says, *until she had
brought forth her first-born Son* <span
id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999) ), but because of the care bestowed
on His nurture.

<span id="ii.xi-p55"></span>10.  Thus much then at present, in the way
of a digression, to put you in remembrance.  Let me, however, add yet
another testimony in proof that God is called the Father of men in an
improper sense.  For when in Esaias God is addressed thus, *For Thou art
our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us* <span
id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000) , and *Sarah travailed not with
us* <span id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001) , need we inquire further
on this point?  And if the Psalmist says, *Let them be troubled from His
countenance, the Father of the fatherless, and Judge of the
widows* <span id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002) , is it not manifest
to all, that when God is called the Father of orphans who have lately
lost their own fathers, He is so named not as begetting them of Himself,
but as caring for them and shielding them.  But whereas God, as we have
said, is in an improper sense the Father of men, of Christ alone He is
the Father by nature, not by adoption:  and the Father of men in time,
but of Christ before all time, as He saith, *And now, O Father, glorify
Thou Me with Thine own self, with the glory which I had with Thee before
the world was* <span id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003) .

<span id="ii.xi-p60"></span>11.  We believe then <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.xi-p60.1"></span>In One God the Father</span> the Unsearchable
and Ineffable, *Whom no man hath seen* <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004) , *but the Only-begotten alone hath
declared Him* <span id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005) .  *For He
which is of God, He hath seen God* <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006) :  whose face the Angels do alway
behold in heaven <span id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007) , behold,
however, each according to the measure of his own rank.  But the
undimmed vision of the Father is reserved in its purity for the Son with
the Holy Ghost.

<span id="ii.xi-p65"></span>12.  Having reached this point of my
discourse, and being reminded of the passages just before mentioned, in
which God was addressed as the Father of men, I am greatly amazed at
men’s insensibility.  For God with unspeakable loving-kindness deigned
to be called the Father of men,—He in heaven, they on earth,—and He the
Maker of Eternity, they made in time,—He *who holdeth the earth in the
hollow of His hand*, they upon the earth as grasshoppers <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008) .  Yet man forsook his heavenly
Father, and said to the stock, *Thou art my father, and to the stone,
Thou hast begotten me* <span id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009) .  And
for this reason, methinks, the Psalmist says to mankind, *Forget also
thine own people, and thy father’s house* <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010) , whom thou hast chosen for a
father, whom thou hast drawn upon thyself to thy destruction.

<span id="ii.xi-p69"></span>13.  And not only stocks and stones, but
even Satan himself, the destroyer of souls, have some ere now chosen for
a father; to whom the Lord said as a rebuke, *Ye do the deeds of your
father* <span id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011) , that is of the
devil, he being the father of men not by nature, but by fraud.  <span
id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span id="ii.xi-Page_47"></span>For like as
Paul by his godly teaching came to be called the father of the
Corinthians, so the devil is called the father of those who of their own
will *consent unto him* <span id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012) .

<span id="ii.xi-p72"></span>For we shall not tolerate those who give a
wrong meaning to that saying, *Hereby know we the children of God, and
the children of the devil* <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013) ,
as if there were by nature some men to be saved, and some to be lost. 
Whereas we come into such holy sonship not of necessity but by choice: 
nor was the traitor Judas by nature a son of the devil and of perdition;
for certainly he would never have cast out devils at all in the name of
Christ:  *for Satan casteth not out Satan* <span
id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014) .  Nor on the other hand would Paul
have turned from persecuting to preaching.  But the adoption is in our
own power, as John saith, *But as many as received Him, to them gave He
power to become the children of God, even to them that believe in His
name* <span id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) .  For not before their
believing, but from their believing they were counted worthy to become
of their own choice the children of God.

<span id="ii.xi-p76"></span>14.  Knowing this, therefore, let us walk
spiritually, that we may be counted worthy of God’s adoption.  *For as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God* <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016) .  For it profiteth us nothing to
have gained the title of Christians, unless the works also follow; lest
to us also it be said, *If ye were Abraham’s children, ye would do the
works of Abraham* <span id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017) .  *For if
we call on Him as Father, who without respect of persons judgeth
according to every man’s work, let us pass the time of our sojourning
here in fear* <span id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018) , *loving not
the world, neither the things that are in the world:  for if any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him* <span
id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019) .  Wherefore, my beloved children,
let us by our works offer glory to *our Father which is in heaven, that
they may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in
heaven* <span id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020) .  *Let us cast all
our care upon Him, for our Father knoweth what things we have need
of* <span id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021) .

<span id="ii.xi-p83"></span>15.  But while honouring our heavenly Father
let us honour also *the fathers of our flesh* <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022) :  since the Lord Himself hath
evidently so appointed in the Law and the Prophets, saying, *Honour thy
father and thy mother, that it may be well with thee, and thy days shall
be long in the land* <span id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023) .  And
let this commandment be especially observed by those here present who
have fathers and mothers.  *Children, obey your parents in all things: 
for this is well pleasing to the Lord* <span
id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024) .  For the Lord said not, *He that
loveth father or mother is not worthy of Me*, lest thou from ignorance
shouldest perversely mistake what was rightly written, but He added,
*more than Me* <span id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025) .  For when
our fathers on earth are of a contrary mind to our Father in heaven,
then we must obey Christ’s word.  But when they put no obstacle to
godliness in our way, if we are ever carried away by ingratitude, and,
forgetting their benefits to us, hold them in contempt, then the oracle
will have place which says, *He that curseth father or mother, let him
die the death* <span id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026) .

<span id="ii.xi-p89"></span>16.  The first virtue of godliness in
Christians is to honour their parents, to requite the troubles of those
who begat them <span id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027) , and with all
their might to confer on them what tends to their comfort (for if we
should repay them ever so much, yet we shall never be able to return
their gift of life <span id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028) ), that
they also may enjoy the comfort provided by us, and may confirm us in
those blessings which Jacob the supplanter shrewdly seized; and that our
Father in heaven may accept <span id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029)
our good purpose, and judge us worthy *to shine amid righteous as the
sun in the kingdom of our Father <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030)* :  To whom be the glory, with the
Only-begotten our Saviour Jesus Christ, and with the Holy and
Life-giving Spirit, now and ever, to all eternity.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_959"></span>[44:960](2070023.htm#fr_959) <span
id="ii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p6"></span> See Lecture VI. 1, and 5.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[44:961](2070023.htm#fr_960) <span
id="ii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p8"></span> “In Athanasius, *Quæstio* i. *ad Antiochum*,
tom. II. p. 331, Monarchia is opposed to Polytheism:  ‘If we worship One
God, it is manifest that we agree with the Jews in believing in a
Monarchia:  but if we worship three gods, it is evident that we follow
the Greeks by introducing Polytheism, instead of piously worshipping One
Only God.’”  (Suicer, *Thesaurus*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p8.1"></span>Μοναρχία</span>.)

<span id="fn_961"></span>[44:962](2070023.htm#fr_961) <span
id="ii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p9"></span> [Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="ii.xi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[44:963](2070023.htm#fr_962) <span
id="ii.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p10"></span> [Psa.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span id="ii.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[44:964](2070023.htm#fr_963) <span
id="ii.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p11"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.xi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[44:965](2070023.htm#fr_964) <span
id="ii.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p12"></span> [John
10.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009)<span id="ii.xi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[44:966](2070023.htm#fr_965) <span
id="ii.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p13"></span> [Ps.
89:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027)<span id="ii.xi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[44:967](2070023.htm#fr_966) <span
id="ii.xi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p14"></span> [Ps.
89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span id="ii.xi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[44:968](2070023.htm#fr_967) <span
id="ii.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p15"></span> [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="ii.xi-p15.1"></span>: 
“From the womb of the morning thou hast the dew of thy youth” (R.V.).

<span id="fn_968"></span>[44:969](2070023.htm#fr_968) <span
id="ii.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p16"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#005)<span id="ii.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[44:970](2070023.htm#fr_969) <span
id="ii.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p19"></span> Compare Athanasius (*de Sententiâ
Dionyssi*, § 17):  “Each of the names I have mentioned is inseparable
and indivisible from that next to it.  I spoke of the Father, and before
bringing in the Son, I designated Him also in the Father.  I brought in
the Son, and even if I had not previously mentioned the Father, in any
wise He would have been presupposed in the Son.”

<span id="fn_970"></span>[45:971](2070023.htm#fr_970) <span
id="ii.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p21.1"></span>καταχρηστικῶς</span>.  A technical term in
Grammar, applied to the use of a word in a derived or metaphorical
sense.  See Aristotle’s description of the various kinds of metaphor,
*Poet*. § xxi. 7–16.  The opposite to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p21.2"></span>καταχρηστικῶς</span> is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xi-p21.3"></span>κυρίως</span>, as used in a
parallel passage by Athanasius, *Oratio* i. *contra Arianos*, § 21 fin. 
“It belongs to the Godhead alone, that the Father is properly (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xi-p21.4"></span>κυρίως</span>) Father, and
the Son properly Son.”

<span id="fn_971"></span>[45:972](2070023.htm#fr_971) <span
id="ii.xi-p21.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p22"></span> “And in Them, and Them only, does it hold,
that the Father is ever Father, and the Son ever Son.”  (Athan., *as
above*.)

<span id="fn_972"></span>[45:973](2070023.htm#fr_972) <span
id="ii.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p23"></span> Compare vi. 6:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p23.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p23.2"></span>γεννηθεὶς ἀπαθῶς.</span>  The importance
attached to the assertion of a “passionless generation” arose from the
objections offered by Eusebius of Nicomedia and others to the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xi-p23.3"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xi-p23.4"></span>μοούσιος</span> when
proposed by Constantine at Nicæa.  We learn from Eusebius of Cæsarea
(*Epist ad suæ parœciæ homines*, § 4) that the Emperor himself explained
that the word was used “not in the sense of the affections (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.xi-p23.5"></span>πάθη</span>) of bodies,”
because “the immaterial, and intellectual, and incorporeal nature could
not be the subject of any corporeal affection.”  Again, in § 7, Eusebius
admits that “there are grounds for saying that the Son is ‘one in
essence’ with the Father, not in the way of bodies, nor like mortal
beings, for He is not such by division of essence, or by severance, no,
nor by any affection, or alteration, or changing of the Father’s essence
and power.”  (See the next note.)

<span id="fn_973"></span>[45:974](2070023.htm#fr_973) <span
id="ii.xi-p23.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p24"></span> Athanasius (*Expos. Fidei*, § 1):  “Word
not pronounced nor mental, nor an effluence of the Perfect, nor a
dividing of the passionless nature.”  Also (*de Decretis*, § 11):  “God
being without parts is Father of the Son without partition or passion;
for there is neither effluence of the Immaterial, nor influx from
without, as among men.”

<span id="fn_974"></span>[45:975](2070023.htm#fr_974) <span
id="ii.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p25"></span> [James i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="ii.xi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[45:976](2070023.htm#fr_975) <span
id="ii.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p26"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="ii.xi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[45:977](2070023.htm#fr_976) <span
id="ii.xi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p27"></span> [John viii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#049)<span id="ii.xi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[45:978](2070023.htm#fr_977) <span
id="ii.xi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p28"></span> [John xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#010)<span id="ii.xi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[45:979](2070023.htm#fr_978) <span
id="ii.xi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p29"></span> [2 Cor. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003)<span id="ii.xi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[45:980](2070023.htm#fr_979) <span
id="ii.xi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p30"></span> [Eph.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span id="ii.xi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[45:981](2070023.htm#fr_980) <span
id="ii.xi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p31"></span> [1 John ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022)<span id="ii.xi-p31.1"></span>: 
“This is the Antichrist, even he that denieth the Father and the Son”
(<span class="sc"><span id="ii.xi-p31.2"></span>R.V.</span>).

<span id="fn_981"></span>[45:982](2070023.htm#fr_981) <span
id="ii.xi-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p32"></span> [1 John
2.23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#023)<span id="ii.xi-p32.1"></span>,
bracketed in the A.V. as spurious, but rightly restored in R.V.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[45:983](2070023.htm#fr_982) <span
id="ii.xi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p33"></span> [Phil. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span id="ii.xi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[45:984](2070023.htm#fr_983) <span
id="ii.xi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p35"></span> [Ex. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)<span id="ii.xi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[45:985](2070023.htm#fr_984) <span
id="ii.xi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p36"></span> Compare Lect. iv. 33.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[45:986](2070023.htm#fr_985) <span
id="ii.xi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p37"></span> [Luke ii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#049)<span id="ii.xi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[45:987](2070023.htm#fr_986) <span
id="ii.xi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p38"></span> [John ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#016)<span id="ii.xi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[45:988](2070023.htm#fr_987) <span
id="ii.xi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p39"></span> [Matt. x.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)<span id="ii.xi-p39.1"></span>.  S.
Cyril instead of “your Father” writes “my Father which is in heaven:” 
so Origen and Athanasius.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[45:989](2070023.htm#fr_988) <span
id="ii.xi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p40"></span> [Matt. vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026)<span id="ii.xi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[45:990](2070023.htm#fr_989) <span
id="ii.xi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p41"></span> [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="ii.xi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[45:991](2070023.htm#fr_990) <span
id="ii.xi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p43"></span> [John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="ii.xi-p43.1"></span>.  On
this text, quoted again in Cat. xi. 19, see the three Sermons of Bishop
Andrewes *On the Resurrection.*

<span id="fn_991"></span>[45:992](2070023.htm#fr_991) <span
id="ii.xi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p44.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p44.2"></span>νεργεία</span>, meaning here, the operation of
God, by nature in begetting His Son, by adoption in making many sons.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[46:993](2070023.htm#fr_992) <span
id="ii.xi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p46"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)<span id="ii.xi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[46:994](2070023.htm#fr_993) <span
id="ii.xi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p47"></span> [Is. lxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008)<span id="ii.xi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[46:995](2070023.htm#fr_994) <span
id="ii.xi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p49"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span id="ii.xi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[46:996](2070023.htm#fr_995) <span
id="ii.xi-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p50"></span> [Job xxix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#016)<span id="ii.xi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[46:997](2070023.htm#fr_996) <span
id="ii.xi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p51"></span> [John
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#027)<span id="ii.xi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[46:998](2070023.htm#fr_997) <span
id="ii.xi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p52.1"></span>φιλοστοργία</span> might be applied to the
mutual affection of mother and son, but the context shews that it refers
here to parental love only; see Polybius, V. § 74, 5; Xenoph. *Cyrop*.
I. § 3, 2.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[46:999](2070023.htm#fr_998) <span
id="ii.xi-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p53"></span> [Luke ii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#033)<span id="ii.xi-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[46:1000](2070023.htm#fr_999) <span
id="ii.xi-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p54"></span> [Matt. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025)<span id="ii.xi-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[46:1001](2070023.htm#fr_1000) <span
id="ii.xi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p56"></span> [Is. lxiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016)<span id="ii.xi-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[46:1002](2070023.htm#fr_1001) <span
id="ii.xi-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p57"></span> [Isa.
51.2](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#002)<span id="ii.xi-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[46:1003](2070023.htm#fr_1002) <span
id="ii.xi-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p58"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005)<span id="ii.xi-p58.1"></span>. 
Cyril quotes as usual from the Septuagint ([Ps. lxvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006)<span id="ii.xi-p58.2"></span>),
where the clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p58.3"></span>ταραχθήσονται ἀπὸ προσώπου αὐτοῦ</span>,
answering to nothing in the Hebrew, is evidently an interpolation, and
may have crept in from a marginal quotation of [Is. lxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#002)<span id="ii.xi-p58.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[46:1004](2070023.htm#fr_1003) <span
id="ii.xi-p58.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p59"></span> [John xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span id="ii.xi-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[46:1005](2070023.htm#fr_1004) <span
id="ii.xi-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p61"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#016)<span id="ii.xi-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[46:1006](2070023.htm#fr_1005) <span
id="ii.xi-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p62"></span> [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="ii.xi-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[46:1007](2070023.htm#fr_1006) <span
id="ii.xi-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p63"></span> [John vi.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span id="ii.xi-p63.1"></span>:  *He
hath seen the Father*.  The weight of authority is against the reading
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.xi-p63.2"></span>τὸν θεόν</span>)
which Cyril follows.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[46:1008](2070023.htm#fr_1007) <span
id="ii.xi-p63.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p64"></span> [Matt. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="ii.xi-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[46:1009](2070023.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="ii.xi-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p66"></span> [Isa.
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)<span id="ii.xi-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[46:1010](2070023.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="ii.xi-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p67"></span> [Jer. ii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)<span id="ii.xi-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[46:1011](2070023.htm#fr_1010) <span
id="ii.xi-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p68"></span> [Ps. xlv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010)<span id="ii.xi-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[46:1012](2070023.htm#fr_1011) <span
id="ii.xi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p70"></span> [John viii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#041)<span id="ii.xi-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[47:1013](2070023.htm#fr_1012) <span
id="ii.xi-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p71"></span> [Ps. l.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#018)<span id="ii.xi-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[47:1014](2070023.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="ii.xi-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p73"></span> [1 John iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010)<span id="ii.xi-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[47:1015](2070023.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="ii.xi-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p74"></span> [Mark iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#023)<span id="ii.xi-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[47:1016](2070023.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="ii.xi-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p75"></span> [John i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="ii.xi-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[47:1017](2070023.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="ii.xi-p76.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p77"></span> [Rom. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014)<span id="ii.xi-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[47:1018](2070023.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="ii.xi-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p78"></span> [John viii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039)<span id="ii.xi-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[47:1019](2070023.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="ii.xi-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p79"></span> [1 Pet. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017)<span id="ii.xi-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[47:1020](2070023.htm#fr_1019) <span
id="ii.xi-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p80"></span> [1 John ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)<span id="ii.xi-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[47:1021](2070023.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="ii.xi-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p81"></span> [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="ii.xi-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[47:1022](2070023.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="ii.xi-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p82"></span> [1 Pet.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007), [Matt.
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#008)<span id="ii.xi-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[47:1023](2070023.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="ii.xi-p83.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p84"></span> [Heb. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009)<span id="ii.xi-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[47:1024](2070023.htm#fr_1023) <span
id="ii.xi-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p85"></span> [Deut. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#016)<span id="ii.xi-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[47:1025](2070023.htm#fr_1024) <span
id="ii.xi-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p86"></span> [Col. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#020)<span id="ii.xi-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[47:1026](2070023.htm#fr_1025) <span
id="ii.xi-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p87"></span> [Matt. x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)<span id="ii.xi-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[47:1027](2070023.htm#fr_1026) <span
id="ii.xi-p87.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p88"></span> [Exod.
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017), [Lev.
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009), [Matt.
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#004)<span id="ii.xi-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[47:1028](2070023.htm#fr_1027) <span
id="ii.xi-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p90"></span> Compare for the thought Euripides, *Medea*,
1029–1035.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[47:1029](2070023.htm#fr_1028) <span
id="ii.xi-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p91"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p91.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p91.2"></span>ντιγεννῆσαι</span>.  Jeremy Taylor (*Ductor
Dubitantium*, Book III. cap. ii. §17) mentions several stories in which
a parent is nourished from a daughter’s breast, who thus ‘saves the life
she cannot give.’

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[47:1030](2070023.htm#fr_1029) <span
id="ii.xi-p91.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p92"></span> On the change of Moods, see Jelf, *Greek
Grammar*, § 809.  The second verb (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p92.1"></span>καταξίωσειεν</span>) expresses a wish and a
consequence which might follow, if the first (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.xi-p92.2"></span>στηρίξωσιν</span>) wish be realized, as it
probably may be.  Cf. Herod. ix. 51.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[47:1031](2070023.htm#fr_1030) <span
id="ii.xi-p92.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p93"></span> [Matt. xiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span id="ii.xi-p93.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Almighty.](2070024)
