[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070006)  [Next](2070008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—Special Preparation for
Baptism.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p2"></span>§ 1.  *Penitence*.  The candidate for
Baptism, having been duly admitted and registered, was required not only
to be diligent in attending the course of Catechetical instruction <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) , but also to enter at once upon a
course of strict devotion and penitential discipline.  “Those who are
coming to Baptism,” says Tertullian, “must be constantly engaged in
prayers, fastings, kneelings, and watchings, together with confession of
all past faults <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p5"></span>On these subjects Cyril’s teaching is
earnest, wise, and sympathetic:  he seeks to lead to repentance by
gentle persuasion, and pleads for self-discipline as needful for the
good of the soul <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) .  One whole
Lecture is devoted to the necessity of thorough repentance for all past
sins, and forgiveness of all offences <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) :  another to the sure efficacy of
repentance for the remission of sins <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) .

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p9"></span>§ 2.  *Confession*.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p9.2"></span>Ε</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p9.3"></span>ξομολόγησις</span>. 
Great stress is laid by Cyril on the necessity not only of sincere
inward repentance, but also of open confession.  The words <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p9.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p9.5"></span>ξομολογεῖσθαι,
ἐξομολόγησις</span> have a twofold meaning and a wide application.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p10"></span>(1.)  In the Septuagint they occur very
frequently, especially in the Psalms, in the sense of “giving thanks or
praise” (Heb. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>הדוּה</span>) <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) , a meaning which is also found in the
New Testament <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) .  Perhaps the
earliest instance in an Ecclesiastical writer is in Hermas, *Mandat*. X.
iii. 2:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p12.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p12.3"></span>ξομολογούμενος τῷ θεῷ</span>.  I have not
found any instance of this meaning in Cyril.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p13"></span>S. Chrysostom, commenting on the words,
“*I will give thanks unto Thee, O Lord* <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) ,” says, “There are two kinds of
*exomologesis*; for it is either a condemnation of our own sins or a
giving of thanks to God.”  The link between these two ideas is seen in
Joshua’s exhortation to Achan, *My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p14.5"></span>Lord</span>, the God
of Israel, and make confession* <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126)
*unto Him*.  R.V. Margin.  Or, *give praise*.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p16"></span>(2.)  In the sense of “confessing”
sins, the Verb is not uncommon in the N.T. <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) , and in the early Fathers <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) .  Tertullian adopts the Greek word,
and calls *exomologesis* “the handmaid of repentance <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) ,” adding that it will extinguish the
fire of Gehenna in the heart, being a second remedy for sin, after
Baptism.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p20"></span>Again, speaking of the outward act of
repentance, he says:  “This act, which is more usually expressed and
commonly spoken of under a Greek name, is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p20.2"></span>ξομολόγησις</span>, whereby we confess our
sins to the Lord, not indeed as if He were ignorant of them, but
inasmuch as by confession satisfaction is appointed, and of confession
repentance is born, and God appeared by repentance.  Accordingly
*exomologesis* is a discipline for man’s prostration and humiliation,
enjoining a demeanour calculated to move mercy.  With regard also to the
very dress and food, it commands (the penitent) to lie in sackcloth and
ashes…to know no food and drink but such <span id="page_xxvii">p.
xxvii</span> <span id="ii.iii.iii-Page_xxvii"></span>as is plain,—to
feed prayers on fastings, to groan, to weep and roar (*mugire*) unto the
Lord God; to roll before the feet of the presbyters, and kneel to God’s
dear ones, to enjoin on all the brethren embassies of intercession on
his behalf.  All this *exomologesis* does, that it may enhance
repentance <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) , &c.”

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p22"></span>In this highly rhetorical description
of the ecclesiastical discipline so dear to Tertullian there are many
features of extreme severity to which Cyril makes no allusion; yet he
frequently and very earnestly insists on the necessity and the efficacy
of confession.  “The present is the season of confession:  confess what
thou hast done in word or in deed, by night or by day; confess *in an
acceptable time, and in the day of salvation* receive the heavenly
treasure <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) ”  “Tell the Physician
thine ailment:  say thou also, like David, *I said, I will confess me my
sin unto the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>Lord</span>* ; and the same shall be done
in thy case, which he says forthwith, *and Thou forgavest the wickedness
of my heart* <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) .”  “ Seest thou
the humility of the king?  Seest thou his confession?.…The deed was
quickly done, and straightway the Prophet appeared as accuser, and the
offender confessed his fault; and because he candidly confessed, he
received a most speedy cure <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p26"></span>“Ezekias prevailed to the cancelling of
God’s decree, and cannot Jesus grant remission of sins?  Turn and bewail
thyself, shut thy door, and pray to be forgiven, pray that He may remove
from thee the burning flames.  For confession has power to quench even
fire, power to tame even lions <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134)
.”

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p28"></span>The confession to which Cyril attaches
so high a value, whether made in the privacy of solitude, or openly
before the Ministers of the Church and the Congregation, is a confession
to God, and not to man.  “Having therefore, brethren, many examples of
those who have sinned and repented and been saved, do ye also heartily
make confession unto the Lord <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135)
.”  Elsewhere he expressly disclaims the necessity of private confession
to man:  “Not that thou shouldest shew thy conscience to me, for thou
art not to *be judged of man’s judgment*; but that thou shew the
sincerity of thy faith to God, *who trieth the reins and hearts*, and
*knoweth the thoughts of men <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136)*
.”  He also limits the season of confession and repentance to this
present life:  “Therefore the just shall then offer praise; but they who
have died in sins have no further season for confession <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p32"></span>§ 3.  *Exorcism*.  One of the earliest
ceremonies, after the registration of names, was Exorcism, which seems
to have been often repeated during the Candidate’s course of
preparation.  “Receive with earnestness the exorcisms:  whether thou be
breathed upon or exorcised, the act is to thee salvation <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p34"></span>The power of casting out devils,
promised by our Lord <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) , and
exercised by Apostles <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) , and by
Philip the Deacon and Evangelist <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141)
, was long regarded in the early Church as a direct gift still bestowed
by the Holy Ghost, apart from any human ordinance.  Justin Martyr <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) , Tertullian <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) , Origen <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) , all speak of exorcism as being
practised by laymen, even by soldiers, and women, by means of prayer and
invocation of the name of Jesus.  Accordingly “an Exorcist is not
ordained, for it is a gift of the spontaneous benevolence and grace of
God through Christ by visitation of the Holy Ghost.  For he who has
received the gift of healing is declared by revelation from God, the
grace which is in him being manifest to all <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) .”  When the extraordinary gift was
found to have been withdrawn, exorcists are mentioned among the inferior
officers of the Church, after readers and subdeacons <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) .  From an early period certain set
formulæ, such as the Divine names, “The God of Abraham, and God of
Isaac, and God <span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.iii-Page_xxviii"></span>of Jacob,” “The God of Israel,” “The
God who drowned the king of Egypt and the Egyptians in the Red Sea,”
were frequently invoked against demons and certain wicked persons <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) .

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p44"></span>Accordingly, when an exorcist was
ordained the Bishop was directed to give him the book in which the
exorcisms were written, with the words, “Receive thou these, and commit
them to memory, and have thou power to lay hands upon the Energumens,
whether they be baptized or only Catechumens <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) .”  Though this Canon speaks only of
exorcising Energumens, or such persons as were supposed to be possessed
by evil spirits, we must remember that the power of such spirits was
believed to extend to the whole world outside the Christian Church. 
Thus all converts from Paganism and Judaism, and even the children of
Christian parents were exorcised before being baptized.  The practice
was closely connected with the doctrine of original sin, as we see in
many passages of S. Augustine, and is declared by him to be very ancient
and universal <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) .  In expounding
the Creed to candidates for Baptism, he says:  “Therefore, as you have
seen this day, and as you know, even little children are breathed on and
exorcised, that the hostile power of the devil may be driven out of
them, which deceived one man in order that he might get possession of
all men <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) .”

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p48"></span>We find accordingly that Cyril enforces
the duty of attending the Exorcisms on all the candidates alike, and
from his use of the Plural (Exorcisms) we see that the ceremony was
often repeated for each person.  Thus in the Clementine Homilies Peter
is represented as saying, “Whoever of you wish to be baptized, begin
from to-morrow to fast, and each day have hands laid upon you <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) ,” the imposition of hands being one
of the ceremonies used in exorcism <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) .  From expressions in the
Introductory Lecture, “When ye have come in before the hour of the
exorcisms <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) ,” and again, “when
your exorcism has been done, until the others who are to be exorcised
have come <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) ,” it seems that
before each Catechizing the candidates were all exorcised, one by
one <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) , and that the earlier,
after returning from their own exorcism, had to wait for those who came
later.  The catechizing was thus frequently delayed till late in the
day, and Cyril often complains of the shortness of the time left at his
disposal <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) .

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p55"></span>At Antioch, the Catechizing preceded
the Exorcism, as we learn from S. Chrysostom:  “After you have heard our
instruction, they take off your sandals, and unclothe you, and send you
on naked and barefoot, with your tunic only, to the utterances of the
Exorcists <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) .”  Cyril says nothing
of this unclothing, but mentions another ceremony as practised at
Jerusalem:  “Thy face has been veiled, that thy mind may henceforward be
free, lest the eye by roving make the heart rove also.  But when thine
eyes are veiled, thine ears are not hindered from receiving the means of
salvation <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) .”  The veil may also
have been a symbol of the slavery and darkness of sin, as S. Augustine
regards the removal of the veil on the octave of Easter as symbolising
the spiritual liberty of the baptized <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) .  Of this meaning Cyril makes no
express mention.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p59"></span>In the Greek Euchologion, as quoted by
Kleopas, the act of the Exorcist is thus described:  “And the Priest
breathes upon his mouth, his forehead, and his breast, saying, Drive
forth from him every evil and unclean spirit, hidden and lurking in his
heart, the spirit of error, the spirit of wickedness <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) , &c.”

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p61"></span><span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>
<span id="ii.iii.iii-Page_xxix"></span>Besides such invocations of the
names of God, as we have mentioned above, the Exorcist used set forms of
prayer “collected out of the Holy Scriptures.”  Their effect, as
described by Cyril, is to “set the soul, as it were, on fire,” and scare
the evil spirit away; and his meaning may be illustrated by a passage of
Tertullian, who says <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) :  “All the
authority and power we have over them is from naming the name of Christ,
and recalling to their memory the woes with which God threatens them at
the hands of Christ as Judge.…So at our touch and breathing, overwhelmed
by the thought of those judgment-fires, they leave the bodies they have
entered, at our command, unwilling and distressed, and before your very
eyes put to an open shame.”

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p63"></span>The Exorcisms were performed in the
Church; where also the Lectures were delivered, Catechumens of the lower
order being excluded, “and the doors looking towards the city
closed <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) , while those which
looked towards the Holy Sepulchre, from which the ruins of the ancient
Temple, Golgotha, and the old city could be seen, were left open <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[xxvi:119](2070007.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p3"></span> *Procat*. § 9:  “Let thy feet haste to
the Catechisings,” § 10:  “Abide thou in the Catechisings:  though our
discourse be long, let not thy mind be wearied out.”  Cf. Cat. i. 5.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[xxvi:120](2070007.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p4"></span> *De Baptismo*, c. 20.  Cf. Justin M.
*Apol*. I. c. 61; *Const. Apost*. vii. 22.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[xxvi:121](2070007.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p6"></span> Compare his teaching on Prayer,
*Procat*. § 16; Cat. ix. 7:  and on Fasting Cat. iv. 27, 37; xviii. 17.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[xxvi:122](2070007.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p7"></span> Cat. i.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[xxvi:123](2070007.htm#fr_122) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p8"></span> Cat. ii.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[xxvi:124](2070007.htm#fr_123) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p11"></span> [Ps.
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005), [Ps.
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#005)<span id="ii.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p11.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p11.3"></span>ξομολογήσομαι</span>);
and [Ps. c. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iii.iii-p11.4"></span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p11.5"></span>ἐ</span>? <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p11.6"></span>ἐξομολογήσει</span>).

<span id="fn_124"></span>[xxvi:125](2070007.htm#fr_124) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p11.7"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p12"></span> [Matt.
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025), [Phil.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[xxvi:126](2070007.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p14"></span> [Ps. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)<span id="ii.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p14.2"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p14.3"></span>Ε</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p14.4"></span>ξομολογήσομαί σοι,
Κύριε.</span>

<span id="fn_126"></span>[xxvi:127](2070007.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p14.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p15"></span> [Joshua vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019)<span id="ii.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>,
Sept. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p15.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p15.3"></span>ξομολόγησιν.</span>

<span id="fn_127"></span>[xxvi:128](2070007.htm#fr_127) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p17"></span> [Matt.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006), [Mark
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#005), [Jas.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#016)<span
id="ii.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[xxvi:129](2070007.htm#fr_128) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p18"></span> Irenæus, I. xiii. § 5; III. iv. § 3;
Clem. Alex. *Protrept*. ii. § 41:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p18.2"></span>ξομολογοῦνται οἱ δαίμονες τὴν γαστριμαργίαν
τὴν αὑτῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[xxvi:130](2070007.htm#fr_129) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p19"></span> *De Pœnitentia*, c. xii.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[xxvii:131](2070007.htm#fr_130) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p21"></span> *De Pœnitentia*, c. ix.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[xxvii:132](2070007.htm#fr_131) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p23"></span> Cat. i. § 5.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[xxvii:133](2070007.htm#fr_132) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p24"></span> Ib. § 6.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[xxvii:134](2070007.htm#fr_133) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p25"></span> Ib. § 11.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[xxvii:135](2070007.htm#fr_134) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p27"></span> Cat. ii. 15.  For similar statements,
see Cat. i. 2; ii. 19, 20, &c.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[xxvii:136](2070007.htm#fr_135) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p29"></span> Cat. ii. § 20.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[xxvii:137](2070007.htm#fr_136) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p30"></span> Ib. v. § 2.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[xxvii:138](2070007.htm#fr_137) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p31"></span> Ib. xviii. 14.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[xxvii:139](2070007.htm#fr_138) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p33"></span> *Procat*. § 9.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[xxvii:140](2070007.htm#fr_139) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p35"></span> [Mark
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017), [Luke
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#001), [Luke
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)<span
id="ii.iii.iii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[xxvii:141](2070007.htm#fr_140) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p36"></span> [Acts
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#016), [Acts
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#018), [Acts
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012)<span
id="ii.iii.iii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[xxvii:142](2070007.htm#fr_141) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p37"></span> [Acts viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#007)<span id="ii.iii.iii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[xxvii:143](2070007.htm#fr_142) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p38"></span> *Apologia* I. §§ 6, 8; *Tryph*. lxxxv.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[xxvii:144](2070007.htm#fr_143) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p39"></span> *De Idolol*. c. xi.; *de Corona Mil*.
xi.; *de Anima*, lvii. *de Spectac*. xxvi.; *de Præscript. Hæret*. xli.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[xxvii:145](2070007.htm#fr_144) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p40"></span> *Contra Celsum*, vii. c. 57.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[xxvii:146](2070007.htm#fr_145) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p41"></span> *Const. Apost*. viii. 26.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[xxvii:147](2070007.htm#fr_146) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p42"></span> Euseb. *H. E*. vi. 43; Syn. Antioch.
in Encæniis, Can. 10:  Syn. Laod. Can. 24.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[xxviii:148](2070007.htm#fr_147) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p43"></span> Origen, *Contra Cels*. iv. c. 34 (p.
184).

<span id="fn_148"></span>[xxviii:149](2070007.htm#fr_148) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p45"></span> Fourth Council of Carthage, *Can*. 7
(<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p45.1"></span>a.d.</span> 398).

<span id="fn_149"></span>[xxviii:150](2070007.htm#fr_149) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p46"></span> *De Nupt. et Concup*. II. § 33:  *de
Pecc. Orig*. § 45; *contra aulian Pelag*. VI. § 11; *Op. Imperf. c.
Julian*. I. § 50; III. § 144, &c.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[xxviii:151](2070007.htm#fr_150) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p47"></span> *De Symbolo*, § 2.  Cf. Cat. xx.
(*Myst*. ii.) § 2.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[xxviii:152](2070007.htm#fr_151) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p49"></span> *Hom*. iii. c. 73.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[xxviii:153](2070007.htm#fr_152) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p50"></span> Orig. in Josu. xxiv. § 1: 
“exorcistarum manus impositione.”

<span id="fn_153"></span>[xxviii:154](2070007.htm#fr_153) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p51"></span> *Procat*. § 13.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[xxviii:155](2070007.htm#fr_154) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p52"></span> Ib. § 14.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[xxviii:156](2070007.htm#fr_155) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p53"></span> Aug. *Sermo de Symb*. ii. § 1:  “ut ex
locis secretis singuli produceremini.”  This may possibly refer only to
the final exorcism immediately before Baptism.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[xxviii:157](2070007.htm#fr_156) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p54"></span> Cat. xiii. 8:  xv. 33; xviii. 16, &c.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[xxviii:158](2070007.htm#fr_157) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p56"></span> *Ad Illuminandos*, Cat. i. § 2.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[xxviii:159](2070007.htm#fr_158) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p57"></span> *Procat*. § 9.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[xxviii:160](2070007.htm#fr_159) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p58"></span> S. Aug. *Serm*. 376.  “Hodie octavæ
dicuntur Infantium; revelanda sunt capita eorum, quod est indicium
libertatis.  Habet enim libertatem ista spiritualis nativitas, propriæ
autem carnis nativitas servitutem.”

<span id="fn_160"></span>[xxviii:161](2070007.htm#fr_160) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p60"></span> *Procat*. § 14.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[xxix:162](2070007.htm#fr_161) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p62"></span> *Apologet*. c. 23.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[xxix:163](2070007.htm#fr_162) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p64"></span> *Procat*. § 9.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[xxix:164](2070007.htm#fr_163) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p65"></span> Cat. xiii. 23:  “Thou seest this spot
of Golgotha?  Thou answerest with a shout of praise, as if assenting.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ceremonies of Baptism and Chrism.](2070008)
