[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070002)  [Next](2070004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span> <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span
id="ii.ii-Page_vii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii-p3.1"></span>The</span> present translation of the
Catechetical Lectures of S. Cyril of Jerusalem is based on a careful
revision of the English translation published in the “Library of the
Fathers of the Holy Catholic Church,” with a most interesting Preface by
John Henry Newman, dated from Oxford, The Feast of St. Matthew, 1838.

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span>In his Preface Mr. Newman stated with respect
to the translation “that for almost the whole of it the Editors were
indebted to Mr. Church, Fellow of Oriel College.”  Mr. Church was at
that time a very young man, having taken his First Class in Michaelmas
Term, 1836; and this his first published work gave abundant promise of
that peculiar felicity of expression, which made him in maturer life one
of the most perfect masters of the English tongue.  Having received full
liberty to make such use of his translation as I might deem most
desirable for the purpose of the present Edition, I have been obliged to
exercise my own judgment both in preserving much of Dean Church’s work
unaltered, and in revising it wherever the meaning of the original
appeared to be less perfectly expressed.

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>In this constant study and use of Dean
Church’s earliest work I have had always before my mind a grateful and
inspiring remembrance of one whose friendship it was my great privilege
to enjoy during the few last saddened years of his saintly and noble
life.

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span>In the notes of the Edition one of my chief
objects has been to illustrate S. Cyril’s teaching by comparing it with
the works of earlier Fathers to whom he may have been indebted, and with
the writings of his contemporaries.

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span>In the chapters of the Introduction which
touch on S. Cyril’s doctrines of Baptism, Chrism, and the Holy
Eucharist, I have not attempted either to criticise or to defend his
teaching, but simply to give as faithful a representation as I could of
his actual meaning.  The Eastern Church had long before S. Cyril’s day,
and still has its own peculiar Sacramental doctrines, which,
notwithstanding the efforts of rival theologians, can never be reduced
to exact conformity with the tenets of our own or other Western
Churches.

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span>The Indices have been revised, and large
additions made to the lists of Greek words,

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span>E.H.G.

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii-p10.1"></span>Oxford</span>,

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span>*26 May, 1893.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction.](2070004)
