[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070067)  [Next](2070069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Oration XLII.</span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xxv-p2.1"></span>The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One
Hundred and Fifty Bishops.</span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p3"></span>*<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxv-p3.1"></span>This</span>Oration was delivered during the
Second Œcumenical Council, held at Constantinople <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxv-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 381.  Historical as well as
personal motives render the occasion of the deepest interest.  The
audience consisted of the one hundred and fifty Bishops of the Eastern
Church who took part in the Council, and of the speaker’s own flock, the
orthodox Christians of Constantinople.  He had by his own exertions
gathered that flock together, after it had been ravaged by heretical
teachers.  He had won the admiration and affection of its members, by
his courageous championship of the Faith, his lucid teaching, and his
fatherly care for their spiritual needs.  He had been, against his will,
enthroned with acclamation in the highest ecclesiastical position in the
Eastern Church, and called to preside over the Synod of its assembled
Bishops.  Finding himself unable to guide the deliberations of the
Council in regard to a question of the highest importance, and
perceiving that he himself and his position were made by some of the
Bishops a fresh cause of dissension, he felt bound to resign his high
office, and endeavour by this personal sacrifice to restore peace to the
Church.  His language is worthy of the occasion.  Obliged to deal with
the topics which had caused dissension, he handles them with gentle and
discriminating tact; he speaks with great self-restraint in his own
defence; he sets forth with tenderest feeling the common experiences of
himself and his flock;  he gives with dignity and clearness his last
public exposition of the Faith; and finally, in language of exquisite
beauty, spoken with the quivering tones of an aged man, he bids a tender
farewell to his flock, his cathedral, and his throne, with all their
affecting associations.  It was an occasion whose pathos is unsurpassed
in history.  Orator and audience were alike deeply moved, and the
emotion has been renewed in all those who have read his words, and
realised the scene of their delivery.*

<span id="iii.xxv-p4"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxv-p4.1"></span>What</span> think ye of our affairs, dear
shepherds and fellow-shepherds:  whose feet are beautiful, for you bring
glad tidings of peace <span id="page_386">p. 386</span> <span
id="iii.xxv-Page_386"></span>and of the good things <span
id="fr_4277"></span>[4278](#fn_4277) with which ye have come; beautiful
again in our eyes, to whom ye have come in season, not to convert a
wandering sheep, <span id="fr_4278"></span>[4279](#fn_4278) but to
converse with a pilgrim shepherd?  What think ye of this our
pilgrimage?  And of its fruit, or rather of that of the Spirit <span
id="fr_4279"></span>[4280](#fn_4279) within us, <span
id="fr_4280"></span>[4281](#fn_4280) by Whom we are ever moved, <span
id="fr_4281"></span>[4282](#fn_4281) and specially have now been moved,
desiring to have, and perhaps having, nothing of our own?  Do you of
yourselves understand and perceive—and are you kindly critics of our
actions?  Or must we, like those from whom a reckoning is demanded as to
their military command, or civil government, or administration of the
exchequer, publicly and in person submit to you the accounts of our
administration?  Not indeed that we are ashamed of being judged, for we
are ourselves judges in turn, and both with the same charity.  But the
law is an ancient one:  for even Paul communicated to the Apostles his
Gospel: <span id="fr_4282"></span>[4283](#fn_4282)   not for the sake of
ostentation, for the Spirit is far removed from all ostentation, but in
order to establish his success and correct his failure, if indeed there
were any such in his words or actions, as he declares when writing of
himself.  Since even the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
prophets, <span id="fr_4283"></span>[4284](#fn_4283) according to the
order of the Spirit who regulates and divides all things well.  And do
not wonder that, while he rendered his account privately and to some, I
do so publicly, and to all.  For my need is greater than his, of being
aided by the freedom of my censors, if I am proved to have failed in my
duty, lest I should run, or have run, in vain. <span
id="fr_4284"></span>[4285](#fn_4284)   And the only possible mode of
self-defence is speech in the presence of men who know the facts.

<span id="iii.xxv-p13"></span>2.  What then is my defence? <span
id="fr_4285"></span>[4286](#fn_4285)   If it be false, you must convict
me, but if true, you on behalf of whom <span
id="fr_4286"></span>[4287](#fn_4286) and in whose presence I speak, must
bear witness to it.  For you are my defence, my witnesses, and my crown
of rejoicing, <span id="fr_4287"></span>[4288](#fn_4287) if I also may
venture to boast myself a little in the Apostle’s language.  This flock
was, when it was small and poor, as far as appearances went, nay, not
even a flock, but a slight trace and relic of a flock, without order, or
shepherd, or bounds, with neither right to pasturage, nor the defence of
a fold, wandering upon the mountains and in caves and dens of the
earth, <span id="fr_4288"></span>[4289](#fn_4288) scattered and
dispersed hither and thither as each one could find shelter or pasture,
or could gratefully secure its own safety; like that flock which was
harassed by lions, dispersed by tempest, or scattered in darkness, the
lamentation of prophets who compared it to the misfortunes of
Israel, <span id="fr_4289"></span>[4290](#fn_4289) given up to the
Gentiles; over which we also lamented, so long as our lot was worthy of
lamentation.  For in very deed we also were thrust out and cast off, and
scattered upon every mountain and hill, from the need of a
shepherd: <span id="fr_4290"></span>[4291](#fn_4290)   and a dreadful
storm fell upon the Church, and fearful beasts assailed her, who do not
even now, after the calm, spare us, but without being ashamed of
themselves, wield a greater power than the time should allow; while a
gloomy darkness, far more oppressive than the ninth plague of Egypt, the
darkness which might be felt, <span id="fr_4291"></span>[4292](#fn_4291)
enveloped and concealed everything, so that we could scarcely even see
one another.

<span id="iii.xxv-p21"></span>3.  To speak in a more feeling strain,
trusting in Him Who then forsook me, as in a Father, “Abraham has been
ignorant of us, Israel has acknowledged us not, but Thou art our Father,
and unto Thee do we look; <span id="fr_4292"></span>[4293](#fn_4292)
beside Thee we know none else, we make mention of Thy name.” <span
id="fr_4293"></span>[4294](#fn_4293)   Therefore, says Jeremiah, I will
plead with Thee, I will reason the cause with Thee. <span
id="fr_4294"></span>[4295](#fn_4294)   We are become as at the
beginning, when Thou barest not rule <span
id="fr_4295"></span>[4296](#fn_4295) over us, and Thou hast forgotten
Thy holy covenant, and shut up Thy mercies from us.  Therefore we, the
worshippers of the Trinity, the perfect suppliants of the perfect Deity,
became a reproach to Thy Beloved, neither daring to bring down to our
own level any of the things above us, nor in such wise to rise up
against the godless tongues which fought against God, as to make His
Majesty a fellow servant with ourselves; but, as is plain, we were
delivered up on account of our other sins, and because our conduct had
been unworthy of Thy commandments, and we had walked after our own evil
mind.  For what other reason can there be for our being delivered up to
the most unrighteous and wicked men of all the dwellers upon the earth? 
First Nebuchadnezzar <span id="fr_4296"></span>[4297](#fn_4296)
afflicted us, <span id="fr_4297"></span>[4298](#fn_4297) possessed
during the Christian era with an anti-Christian rage, hating Christ just
because he had through Him gained salvation, and having bartered the
sacred books for sacrifices to those who are no gods.  He devoured me,
he tore me in pieces, a slight darkness enveloped me, <span
id="fr_4298"></span>[4299](#fn_4298) if I may even in my lamentation
<span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="iii.xxv-Page_387"></span>keep to the language of Scripture.  If the
Lord had not helped me, <span id="fr_4299"></span>[4300](#fn_4299) and
righteously delivered him to the hands of the lawless, by casting him
off (such are the judgments of God) to the Persians, by whom his blood
was righteously shed for his unholy sheddings of blood, since in this
case alone justice could not afford even to be longsuffering, my soul
had shortly dwelt in the grave. <span
id="fr_4300"></span>[4301](#fn_4300)   The second <span
id="fr_4301"></span>[4302](#fn_4301) no more kindly, if he were not even
more grievous still, for while he bore the name of Christ, he was a
false Christ, and at once a burden and a reproach to the Christians,
for, while to obey him was ungodly, to suffer at his hands was
inglorious, since they did not even seem to be wronged, nor to gain by
their sufferings the glorious title of martyr, inasmuch as the truth was
in this case perverted, for while they suffered as Christians, they were
supposed to be punished as heretics.  Alas! how rich we were in
misfortunes, for the fire consumed the beauties of the world. <span
id="fr_4302"></span>[4303](#fn_4302)   That which the palmerworm left
did the locust eat, and that which the locust left did the caterpillar
eat:  then came the cankerworm, <span
id="fr_4303"></span>[4304](#fn_4303) then, what next I know not, one
evil springing up after another.  But for what purpose should I give a
tragic description of the evils of the time, and of the penalty exacted
from us, or, if I must rather call it so, the testing and refining we
endured?  At any rate, we went through fire and water, <span
id="fr_4304"></span>[4305](#fn_4304) and have attained a place of
refreshment by the good pleasure of God our Saviour.

<span id="iii.xxv-p35"></span>4.  To return to my original
startingpoint.  This was my field, when it was small and poor, unworthy
not only of God, Who has been, and is cultivating the whole world with
the fair seeds and doctrines of piety, but, apparently, even of any poor
and needy man of slender means.  Nay it did not deserve to be called a
field, requiring neither barn nor threshing-floor, and not even worthy
of the sickle; with neither heap nor sheaves, or small and untimely
sheaves, like those on the housetop, which do not fill the hand of the
reaper, nor call forth a blessing from them which go by. <span
id="fr_4305"></span>[4306](#fn_4305)   Such was my field, such my
harvest; great and well-eared and fat in the eyes of Him Who beholdeth
hidden things, and becoming such a husbandman, its abundance springing
from the valleys of souls well tilled with the Word:  unrecognized
however in public, and not collected together, but gathered in
fragments, as an ear gleaned in the stubble, <span
id="fr_4306"></span>[4307](#fn_4306) as gleaning-grapes in the vintage,
where there is no cluster left.  I think I may add, only too
appropriately, I found Israel like a figtree in the wilderness, <span
id="fr_4307"></span>[4308](#fn_4307) and like one or two ripe grapes in
an unripe cluster, preserved as a blessing from the Lord, <span
id="fr_4308"></span>[4309](#fn_4308) and a consecrated firstfruit,
though small as yet and scanty, and not filling the mouth of the eater: 
and as an ensign on a hill, <span id="fr_4309"></span>[4310](#fn_4309)
and as a beacon on a mountain, or any other solitary thing visible only
to few.  Such was its former poverty and dejection.

<span id="iii.xxv-p41"></span>5.  But since God, Who maketh poor and
maketh rich, Who killeth and maketh alive; <span
id="fr_4310"></span>[4311](#fn_4310) Who maketh and transformeth all
things; Who turneth night into day, <span
id="fr_4311"></span>[4312](#fn_4311) winter into spring, storm into
calm, drought into abundance of rain; and often for the sake of the
prayers <span id="fr_4312"></span>[4313](#fn_4312) of one righteous
man <span id="fr_4313"></span>[4314](#fn_4313) sorely persecuted; Who
lifteth up the meek on high, and bringeth the ungodly down to the
ground; <span id="fr_4314"></span>[4315](#fn_4314) since God said to
Himself, I have surely seen the affliction of Israel; <span
id="fr_4315"></span>[4316](#fn_4315) and they shall no longer be further
vexed with clay and brick-making; and when He spake He visited, and in
His visitation He saved, and led forth His people with a mighty hand and
outstretched arm, <span id="fr_4316"></span>[4317](#fn_4316) by the hand
of Moses and Aaron, <span id="fr_4317"></span>[4318](#fn_4317) His
chosen—what is the result, and what wonders have been wrought?  Those
which books and monuments contain.  For besides all the wonders by the
way, and that mighty roar, to speak most concisely, Joseph came into
Egypt alone, <span id="fr_4318"></span>[4319](#fn_4318) and soon after
six hundred thousand depart from Egypt. <span
id="fr_4319"></span>[4320](#fn_4319)   What more marvellous than this? 
What greater proof of the generosity of God, when from men without means
He wills to supply the means for public affairs?  And the land of
promise is distributed through one who was hated, and he who was
sold <span id="fr_4320"></span>[4321](#fn_4320) dispossesses nations,
and is himself made a great nation, and that small offshoot becomes a
luxuriant vine, <span id="fr_4321"></span>[4322](#fn_4321) so great that
it reaches to the river, and is stretched out to the sea, <span
id="fr_4322"></span>[4323](#fn_4322) and spreads from border to border,
and hides the mountains with the height of its glory and is exalted
above the cedars, even the cedars of God, whatever we are to take these
mountains and cedars to be.

<span id="iii.xxv-p55"></span>6.  Such then was once this flock, and
such it is now, so healthy and well grown, and if it be not yet in
perfection, it is advancing towards it by constant increase, and I
pro<span id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span
id="iii.xxv-Page_388"></span>phesy that it will advance.  This is
foretold me by the Holy Spirit, if I have any prophetic instinct and
insight into the future.  And from what has preceded I am able to be
confident, and recognize this by reasoning, being the nursling of
reason.  For it was much more improbable that, from that condition, it
should reach its present development, than that, as it now is, it should
attain to the height of renown.  For ever since it began to be gathered
together, by Him Who quickeneth the dead, <span
id="fr_4323"></span>[4324](#fn_4323) bone to its bone, joint to joint,
and the Spirit of life and regeneration was given to it in their
dryness, <span id="fr_4324"></span>[4325](#fn_4324) its entire
resurrection has been, I know well, sure to be fulfilled:  so that the
rebellious should not exalt themselves, <span
id="fr_4325"></span>[4326](#fn_4325) and that those who grasp at a
shadow, or at a dream when one awaketh, <span
id="fr_4326"></span>[4327](#fn_4326) or at the dispersing breezes, or at
the traces of a ship in the water, <span
id="fr_4327"></span>[4328](#fn_4327) should not think that they have
anything.  Howl, firtree, for the cedar is fallen! <span
id="fr_4328"></span>[4329](#fn_4328)   Let them be instructed by the
misfortunes of others, and learn that the poor shall not alway be
forgotten, <span id="fr_4329"></span>[4330](#fn_4329) and that the Deity
will not refrain, as Habakkuk says, from striking through the heads of
the mighty ones <span id="fr_4330"></span>[4331](#fn_4330) in His
fury—the Deity, Who has been struck through and impiously divided into
Ruler and Ruled, in order to insult the Deity in the highest degree by
degrading It, and oppress a creature by equality with Deity.

<span id="iii.xxv-p64"></span>7.  I seem indeed to hear that voice, from
Him Who gathers together those who are broken, and welcomes the
oppressed:  Enlarge thy cords, break forth on the right hand and on the
left, drive in thy stakes, spare not thy curtains. <span
id="fr_4331"></span>[4332](#fn_4331)   I have given thee up, and I will
help thee.  In a little wrath I smote thee, but with everlasting mercy I
will glorify thee. <span id="fr_4332"></span>[4333](#fn_4332)   The
measure of His kindness exceeds the measure of His discipline.  The
former things were owing to our wickedness, the present things to the
adorable Trinity:  the former for our cleansing, the present for My
glory, Who will glorify them that glorify Me, <span
id="fr_4333"></span>[4334](#fn_4333) and I will move to jealousy them
that move Me to jealousy.  Behold this is sealed up with Me, <span
id="fr_4334"></span>[4335](#fn_4334) and this is the indissoluble law of
recompense.  But thou didst surround thyself with walls and tablets and
richly set stones, and long porticos and galleries, and didst shine and
sparkle with gold, which thou didst, in part pour forth like water, in
part treasure up like sand; not knowing that better is faith, with no
other roof but the sky to cover it, than impiety rolling in wealth, and
that three gathered together in the Name of the Lord <span
id="fr_4335"></span>[4336](#fn_4335) count for more with God than tens
of thousands of those who deny the Godhead.  Would you prefer the whole
of the Canaanites to Abraham alone? <span
id="fr_4336"></span>[4337](#fn_4336) or the men of Sodom to Lot? <span
id="fr_4337"></span>[4338](#fn_4337) or the Midianites to Moses, <span
id="fr_4338"></span>[4339](#fn_4338) when each of these was a pilgrim
and a stranger?  How do the three hundred men with Gideon, who bravely
lapped, <span id="fr_4339"></span>[4340](#fn_4339) compare with the
thousands who were put to flight?  Or the servants of Abraham, who
scarcely exceeded them in number, with the many kings and the army of
tens of thousands whom, few as they were, they overtook and
defeated? <span id="fr_4340"></span>[4341](#fn_4340)   Or how do you
understand the passage that though the number of the children of Israel
be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved? <span
id="fr_4341"></span>[4342](#fn_4341)   And again, I have left me seven
thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal? <span
id="fr_4342"></span>[4343](#fn_4342)   This is not the case; it is not? 
God has not taken pleasure in numbers.

<span id="iii.xxv-p77"></span>8.  Thou countest tens of thousands, God
counts those who are in a state of salvation; thou countest the dust
which is without number, I the vessels of election.  For nothing is so
magnificent in God’s sight as pure doctrine, and a soul perfect in all
the dogmas of the truth.—For there is nothing worthy of Him Who made all
things, of Him by Whom are all things, and for Whom are all
things, <span id="fr_4343"></span>[4344](#fn_4343) so that it can be
given or offered to God:  not merely the handiwork or means of any
individual, but even if we wished to honour Him, by uniting together all
the property and handiwork of all mankind.  Do not I fill heaven and
earth? <span id="fr_4344"></span>[4345](#fn_4344) saith the Lord! and
what house will ye build Me? or what is the place of My rest? <span
id="fr_4345"></span>[4346](#fn_4345)   But, since man must needs fall
short of what is worthy, I ask of you, as approaching it most nearly,
piety, the wealth which is common to all and equal in My eyes, wherein
the poorest may, if he be nobleminded, surpass the most illustrious. 
For this kind of glory depends upon purpose, not upon affluence.  These
things be well assured, I will accept at your hands. <span
id="fr_4346"></span>[4347](#fn_4346)   To tread <span
id="fr_4347"></span>[4348](#fn_4347) My courts ye shall not proceed, but
the feet of the meek <span id="fr_4348"></span>[4349](#fn_4348) shall
tread them, who have duly and sincerely acknowledged Me, and My
only-begotten Word, and the Holy Spirit.  How long will ye inherit My
holy Mountain? <span id="fr_4349"></span>[4350](#fn_4349)   How long
<span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="iii.xxv-Page_389"></span>shall My ark be among the heathen? <span
id="fr_4350"></span>[4351](#fn_4350)   Now for a little longer ye
indulge yourselves in that which belongs to others, and gratify your
desires.  For as ye have devised to reject Me, so will I also reject
you, <span id="fr_4351"></span>[4352](#fn_4351) saith the Lord Almighty.

<span id="iii.xxv-p87"></span>9.  This I seemed to hear Him say, and to
see Him do, and besides, to hear Him shouting to His people, which once
were few and scattered and miserable, and have now become many, and
compact enough and enviable, Go through <span
id="fr_4352"></span>[4353](#fn_4352) My gates <span
id="fr_4353"></span>[4354](#fn_4353) and be ye enlarged.  Must you
always be in trouble and dwell in tents, while those who vex you rejoice
exceedingly?  And to the presiding Angels, for I believe, as John
teaches me in his Revelation, that each Church has its guardian, <span
id="fr_4354"></span>[4355](#fn_4354) Prepare ye the way of My people,
and cast away the stones from the way, <span
id="fr_4355"></span>[4356](#fn_4355) that there may be no stumblingblock
or hindrance for the people <span id="fr_4356"></span>[4357](#fn_4356)
in the divine road and entrance, now, to the temples made with
hands, <span id="fr_4357"></span>[4358](#fn_4357) but soon after, to
Jerusalem above, <span id="fr_4358"></span>[4359](#fn_4358) and the Holy
of holies there, <span id="fr_4359"></span>[4360](#fn_4359) which will,
I know, be the end of suffering and struggle to those who here bravely
travel on the way.  Among whom are ye also called to be Saints, <span
id="fr_4360"></span>[4361](#fn_4360) a people of possession, a royal
priesthood, <span id="fr_4361"></span>[4362](#fn_4361) the most
excellent portion of the Lord, a whole river from a drop, a heavenly
lamp from a spark, a tree from a grain of mustard seed, <span
id="fr_4362"></span>[4363](#fn_4362) on which the birds come and lodge.

<span id="iii.xxv-p99"></span>10.  These we present to you, dear
shepherds, these we offer to you, with these we welcome our friends, and
guests, and fellow pilgrims.  We have nothing fairer or more splendid to
offer to you, for we have selected the greatest of all our possessions,
that you may see that, strangers as we are, we are not in want, but
though poor are making many rich. <span
id="fr_4363"></span>[4364](#fn_4363)   If these things are small and
unworthy of notice, I would fain learn what is greater and of more
account.  For, if it be no great thing to have established and
strengthened with wholesome doctrines a city which is the eye of the
universe, in its exceeding strength by sea and land, which is, as it
were, the link between the Eastern and Western shores, in which the
extremities of the world from every side meet together, and from which,
as the common mart of the faith, they take their rise, a city borne
hither and thither on the eddying currents of so many tongues, it will
be long ere anything be considered great or worthy of esteem.  But if it
be indeed a subject for praise, allow to us some glory on this account,
since we have contributed in some portion to these results which ye see.

<span id="iii.xxv-p101"></span>11.  Lift up thine eyes round about, and
see, <span id="fr_4364"></span>[4365](#fn_4364) thou critic of my
words!  See the crown which has been platted in return for the hirelings
of Ephraim <span id="fr_4365"></span>[4366](#fn_4365) and the crown of
insolence; see the assembly of the presbyters, honoured for years and
wisdom, the fair order of the deacons, who are not far from the same
Spirit, the good conduct of the readers, the people’s eagerness for
teaching, both of men and women, who are equally renowned for virtue: 
the men, whether philosophers or simple folk, being alike wise in divine
things, whether rulers or ruled, being all in this respect duly under
rule; whether soldiers or nobles, students or men of letters, being all
soldiers <span id="fr_4366"></span>[4367](#fn_4366) of God, though in
all other respects meek, ready to fight for the Spirit, all reverencing
the assembly above, to which we obtain an entrance, not by the mere
letter, but by the quickening Spirit, all in very deed being men of
reason, and worshippers of Him Who is in truth the Word:  the women, if
married, being united by a Divine rather than by a carnal bond; if
unwedded and free, being entirely dedicated to God; whether young or
old, some honourably advancing towards old age, others eagerly striving
to remain immortal, being renewed by the best of hopes.

<span id="iii.xxv-p105"></span>12.  To those who platted this crown—that
which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, <span
id="fr_4367"></span>[4368](#fn_4367) nevertheless I will say it—I also
have given assistance.  Some of them are the result of my words, not of
those which we have uttered at random, but of those which we have
loved—nor again of those which are meretricious, though the language and
manners of the harlot have been slanderously attributed to me, but of
those which are most grave.  Some of them are the offspring and fruit of
my Spirit, as the Spirit can beget those who rise superior to the body. 
To this I have no doubt that those who are kindly among you, nay all of
you, will testify, since I have been the husbandman of all:  and my sole
reward is your confession.  For we neither have, nor have had, any other
object.  For virtue, that it may remain virtue, is without reward, its
eyes fixed alone on that which is good.

<span id="iii.xxv-p107"></span>13.  Would you have me say something
still more venturesome?  Do you see the tongues of the enemy made
gentle, and those <span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="iii.xxv-Page_390"></span>who made war upon the Godhead against me
tranquillised?  This also is the result of our Spirit, of our
husbandry.  For we are not undisciplined in our exercise of discipline,
nor do we hurl insults, as many do, who assail not the argument but the
speaker, and sometimes strive by their invective to hide the weakness of
their reasoning; as the cuttlefish are said to cast forth ink before
them, in order to escape from their pursuers, or themselves to hunt
others when unperceived.  But we show that our warfare is in behalf of
Christ by fighting as Christ, the peaceable and meek, <span
id="fr_4368"></span>[4369](#fn_4368) Who has borne our infirmities,
fought. <span id="fr_4369"></span>[4370](#fn_4369)   Though peaceable,
we do not injure the word of truth, by yielding a jot, to gain a
reputation for reasonableness; for we do not pursue that which is good
by means of ill:  and we are peaceable by the legitimate character of
our warfare, confined as it is to our own limits, and the rules of the
Spirit.  Upon these points, this is my decision, and I lay down the law
for all stewards of souls and dispensers of the Word:  neither to
exasperate others by their harshness, nor to render them arrogant by
submissiveness:  but to be of good words in treating of the Word, and in
neither direction to overstep the mean.

<span id="iii.xxv-p110"></span>14.  But you are perhaps longing for me
to give an exposition of the faith, in so far as I am able.  For I shall
myself be sanctified by the effort of memory, and the people also will
be benefited, by its special delight in such discussions, and you will
fully acknowledge it—unless we are the objects of groundless envy, as
the rivals, in the manifestation of the truth, of those whom we do not
excel.  For as, of deep waters, some in the depths are utterly hidden,
some foam against any obstruction, and hesitate a while before breaking
(as they promise to our ears), some do actually break; so also, of those
who are professors of the Divine philosophy—setting aside the utterly
misguided—some keep their piety entirely secret and hidden within
themselves, some are not far from the birth pangs, avoiding impiety, yet
not speaking out their piety, either from cautious reserve in their
teaching, or under pressure of fear, being themselves sound, as they
say, in mind, but not making sound their people, as if they had been
entrusted with the government of their own souls, but not of those of
others; while there are some who make public their treasure, unable to
restrain themselves from giving birth to their piety, and not
considering that to be salvation which saves themselves alone, without
bestowing upon others the overflow of their blessings.  Among these
would I range myself, and all who by my side have nobly dared to confess
the truth.

<span id="iii.xxv-p111"></span>15.  One concise proclamation of our
teaching, an inscription intelligible to all, is this people, which so
sincerely worships the Trinity, that it would sooner sever anyone from
this life, than sever one of the three from the Godhead:  of one mind,
of equal zeal, and united to one another, to us and to the Trinity by
unity of doctrine.  Briefly to run over its details:  That which is
without beginning, and is the beginning, and is with the beginning, is
one God.  For the nature of that which is without beginning does not
consist in being without beginning or being unbegotten, for the nature
of anything lies, not in what it is not but in what it is.  It is the
assertion of what is, not the denial of what is not.  And the Beginning
is not, because it is a beginning, separated from that which has no
beginning.  For its beginning is not its nature, any more than the being
without beginning is the nature of the other.  For these are the
accompaniments of the nature, not the nature itself.  That again which
is with that which has no beginning, and with the beginning, is not
anything else than what they are.  Now, the name of that which has no
beginning is the Father, and of the Beginning the Son, and of that which
is with the Beginning, the Holy Ghost, and the three have one
Nature—God.  And the union is the Father from Whom and to Whom the order
of Persons runs its course, not so as to be confounded, but so as to be
possessed, without distinction of time, of will, or of power.  For these
things in our case produce a plurality of individuals, since each of
them is separate both from every other quality, and from every other
individual possession of the same quality.  But to Those who have a
simple nature, and whose essence is the same, the term One belongs in
its highest sense.

<span id="iii.xxv-p112"></span>16.  Let us then bid farewell to all
contentious shiftings and balancings of the truth on either side,
neither, like the Sabellians, assailing the Trinity in the interest of
the Unity, and so destroying the distinction by a wicked confusion; nor,
like the Arians, assailing the Unity in the interest of the Trinity, and
by an impious distinction overthrowing the Oneness.  For our object is
not to exchange one evil for another, but to ensure our attainment of
that which is good.  These are the playthings of the Wicked One, <span
id="page_391">p. 391</span> <span id="iii.xxv-Page_391"></span>who is
ever swaying our fortunes towards the evil.  But we, walking along the
royal road which lies between the two extremes, which is the seat of the
virtues, as the authorities say, believe in the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost, of one Substance and glory; in Whom also baptism has its
perfection, both nominally and really (thou knowest who hast been
initiated!); being a denial of atheism and a confession of Godhead; and
thus we are regenerated, acknowledging the Unity in the Essence and in
the undivided worship, and the Trinity in the Hypostases or Persons
(which term some prefer.)  And let not those who are contentious on
these points utter their scandalous taunts, as if our faith depended on
terms and not on realities.  For what do you mean who assert the three
Hypostases?  Do you imply three Essences by the term?  I am assured that
you would loudly shout against those who do so.  For you teach that the
Essence of the Three is One and the same.  What do you mean, who assert
the Three Persons?  Do you imagine a single compound sort of being, with
three faces, <span id="fr_4370"></span>[4371](#fn_4370) or of an
entirely human form?  Perish the thought!  You too will loudly reply
that he who thinks thus, will never see the face of God, whatever it may
be.  What is the meaning of the Hypostases of the one party, of the
Persons of the other, to ask this further question?  That They are
three, Who are distinguished not by natures, but by properties. <span
id="fr_4371"></span>[4372](#fn_4371)   Excellent.  How could men agree
and harmonize better than you do, even if there be a difference between
the syllables you use?  You see what a reconciler I am, bringing you
back from the letter to the sense, as we do with the Old and New
Testaments.

<span id="iii.xxv-p115"></span>17.  But, to resume:  let us speak of the
Unbegotten, the Begotten, and the Proceeding, if anyone likes to create
names:  for we shall have no fear of bodily conceptions attaching to
Those who are not embodied, as the calumniators of the Godhead think. 
For the creature must be called God’s, and this is for us a great thing,
but God never.  Otherwise I shall admit that God is a creature, if I
become God, in the strict sense of the term.  For this is the truth.  If
God, He is not a creature; for the creature ranks with us who are not
Gods.  And if a creature, he is not God, for he had a beginning in
time.  And there was a time when he who had a beginning was not.  And
that of which non-existence was its prior condition, has not being in
the strict sense of the term.  And how can that, which strictly has not
being, be God?  Not one single one, then, of the Three is a creature,
nor, what is worse, came into being for my sake; for in that case he
would be not only a creature, but inferior in honour to us.  For, if I
am for the glory of God, and he is for my sake, as the tongs for the
waggon, the saw for the door, I am his superior in causality.  For in
whatever degree God is superior to creatures, in the same degree is he,
who came into being for my sake, inferior to me who exist for God’s
sake.

<span id="iii.xxv-p116"></span>18.  Moreover, the Moabites and Ammonites
must not even be allowed to enter <span
id="fr_4372"></span>[4373](#fn_4372) into the Church of God, I mean
those sophistical, mischievous arguments which enquire curiously into
the generation and inexpressible procession of God, and rashly set
themselves in array against the Godhead:  as if it were necessary that
those things which it is beyond the power of language to set forth, must
either be accessible to them alone, or else have no existence because
they have not comprehended them.  We however, following the Divine
Scriptures, and removing out of the way of the blind the stumbling
blocks contained in them, will cling to salvation, daring any and every
thing rather than arrogance against God.  As for the evidences, we leave
them to others, since they have been set forth by many, and by ourselves
also with no little care.  And indeed, it would be a very shameful thing
for me at this time to be gathering together proofs for what has all
along been believed.  For it is not the best order of things, first to
teach and then to learn, even in matters which are small and of no
consequence, and much more in those which are Divine and of such great
importance.  Nor, again, is it proper to the present occasion to explain
and disentangle the difficulties of Scripture, a task requiring fuller
and more careful consideration than our present purpose will allow. 
Such then, to sum up, is our teaching.  I have entered into these
details, with no intention of contending against the adversaries:  for I
have already often, even if it be imperfectly, fought out the question
with them:  but in order that I might exhibit to you the character of my
teaching, that you might see whether I have not a share in the defence
of your own, and do not take my stand on the same side, and opposed to
the same enemies as yourselves.

<span id="iii.xxv-p118"></span><span id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span
id="iii.xxv-Page_392"></span>19.  You have now, my friends, heard the
defence of my presence here:  if it be deserving of praise, thanks are
due for it to God, and to you who called me; if it has fallen below your
expectation, I give thanks even on this behalf.  For I am assured that
it has not been altogether deserving of censure, and am confident that
you also admit this.  Have we at all made a gain <span
id="fr_4373"></span>[4374](#fn_4373) of this people?  Have we consulted
at all our own interests, as I see is most often the case?  Have we
caused any vexation to the Church?  To others possibly, with whose idea
that they had gained judgment against us by default, we have joined
issue in our argument; but in no wise, as far as I am aware, to you.  I
have taken no ox of yours, <span id="fr_4374"></span>[4375](#fn_4374)
says the great Samuel, in his contention against Israel on the subject
of the king, nor any propitiation for your souls, the Lord is witness
among you, nor this, nor that, proceeding at greater length, that I may
not count up every particular; but I have kept the priesthood pure and
unalloyed.  And if I have loved power, or the height of a throne, or to
tread Kings’ courts, may I never possess any distinction, or if I gain
it, may I be hurled from it.

<span id="iii.xxv-p121"></span>20.  What then do I mean?  I am no
proficient in virtue without reward, having not attained to so high a
degree of virtue.  Give me the reward of my labours.  What reward?  Not
that which some, prone to any suspicion would suppose, but that which it
is safe for me to seek.  Give me a respite from my long labours; give
honour to my foreign service; elect another in my place, the one who is
being eagerly sought on your behalf, someone who is clean of hands,
someone who is not unskilled in voice, someone who is able to gratify
you on all points, and share with you the ecclesiastical cares; for this
is especially the time for such.  But behold, I pray you, the condition
of this body, so drained by time, by disease, by toil.  What need have
you of a timid and unmanly old man, who is, so to speak, dying day by
day, not only in body, but even in powers of mind, who finds it
difficult to enter into these details before you?  Disobey not the voice
of your teacher:  for indeed you have never yet disobeyed it.  I am
weary of being charged with my gentleness.  I am weary of being assailed
in words and in envy by enemies, and by our own.  Some aim at my breast,
and are less successful in their effort, for an open enemy can be
guarded against.  Others lie in wait for my back, and give greater pain,
for the unsuspected blow is the more fatal.  If again I have been a
pilot, I have been one of the most skilful; the sea has been boisterous
around us, boiling about the ship, and there has been considerable
uproar among the passengers, who have always been fighting about
something or another, and roaring against one another and the waves. 
What a struggle I have had, seated at the helm, contending alike with
the sea and the passengers, to bring the vessel safe to land through
this double storm?  Had they in every way supported me, safety would
have been hardly won, and when they were opposed to me, how has it been
possible to avoid making shipwreck?

<span id="iii.xxv-p122"></span>21.  What more need be said?  But how can
I bear this holy war?  For there has been said to be a holy, as well as
a Persian, war. <span id="fr_4375"></span>[4376](#fn_4375)   How shall I
unite and join together the hostile occupants of sees, and hostile
pastors, and the people broken up along with, and opposed to them, as if
by some chasms caused by earthquakes between neighbouring and adjoining
places; or as, in pestilential diseases, befalls servants and members of
the family, when the sickness readily attacks in succession one after
another; and besides the very quarters of the globe are affected by the
spirit of faction, so that East and West are arrayed on opposite sides,
and bid fair to be severed in opinion no less than in position.  How
long are parties to be mine and yours, the old and the new, the more
rational and the more spiritual, the more noble and the more ignoble,
the more and the less numerous?  I am ashamed of my old age, when, after
being saved by Christ, I am called by the name of others.

<span id="iii.xxv-p124"></span>22. <span
id="fr_4376"></span>[4377](#fn_4376)   I cannot bear your horse races
and theatres, and this rage for rivalry in expense and party spirit.  We
unharness, and harness ourselves on the other side, we neigh against
each other, we almost beat the air, as they do, and fling the dust
towards heaven, like those which are excited; and under other masks
satisfy our own rivalry, and become evil arbiters of emulation, and
senseless judges of affairs.  To-day sharing the same thrones and
opinions, if our leaders thus carry us along; to-morrow hostile alike in
position and opinion, if the wind blows in the contrary direction.  Amid
the variations of friendship and hatred, our names also vary:  and what
is most <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="iii.xxv-Page_393"></span>terrible, we are not ashamed to set forth
contrary doctrines to the same audience; nor are we constant to the same
objects, being rendered different at different times by our
contentiousness.  They are like the ebb and flow of some narrow
strait. <span id="fr_4377"></span>[4378](#fn_4377)   For as when the
children are at play in the midst of the market place, it would be most
disgraceful and unbecoming for us to leave our household business, and
join them; for children’s toys are not becoming for old age:  so, when
others are contending, even if I am better informed than the majority, I
could not allow myself to be one of them, rather than, as I now do,
enjoy the freedom of obscurity.  For, besides all this, my feeling is
that I do not, on most points, agree with the majority, and cannot bear
to walk in the same way.  Rash and stupid though it may be, such is my
feeling.  That which is pleasant to others causes pain to me, and I am
pleased with what is painful to others.  So that I should not be
surprised if I were even imprisoned as a disagreeable man, and thought
by most men to be out of my senses, as is said to have been the case
with one of the Greek philosophers, whose moderation exposed him to the
charge of madness, because he laughed at everything, since he saw that
the objects of the eager pursuit of the majority were ridiculous; or
even be thought full of new wine as were in later days the disciples of
Christ, because they spoke with tongues, <span
id="fr_4378"></span>[4379](#fn_4378) since men knew not that it was the
power of the Spirit, and not a distraction of mind.

<span id="iii.xxv-p128"></span>23.  Now, consider the charges laid
against us.  You have been ruler of the church, it is said, for so long,
and favoured by the course of time, and the influence of the sovereign,
a most important matter.  What change have we been able to notice?  How
many men have in days gone by used us outrageously?  What sufferings
have we failed to undergo?  Ill-usage?  Threats?  Banishment?  Plunder? 
Confiscation?  The burning <span id="fr_4379"></span>[4380](#fn_4379) of
priests at sea?  The desecration of temples by the blood of the saints,
till, instead of temples, they became charnel-houses?  The public
slaughter of aged Bishops, to speak more accurately, of Patriarchs?  The
denial of access to every place in the case of the godly alone?  In fact
any kind of suffering which could be mentioned?  And for which of these
have we requited the wrongdoers?  For the wheel of fortune gave us the
power of rightly treating those who so treated us, and our persecutors
ought to have received a lesson.  Apart from all other things, speaking
only of our experiences, not to mention your own, have we not been
persecuted, maltreated, driven from churches, houses, and, most terrible
of all, even from the deserts?  Have we not had to endure an enraged
people, insolent governors, the disregard of Emperors and their
decrees?  What was the result?  We became stronger, and our persecutors
took to flight.  That was actually the case.  The power to requite them
seemed to me a sufficient vengeance on those who had wronged us.  These
men thought otherwise; for they are exceedingly exact and just in
requiting:  and accordingly they demand <span
id="fr_4380"></span>[4381](#fn_4380) what the state of things permits. 
What governor, they say, has been fined?  What populace chastised?  What
ringleaders of the populace?  What fear of ourselves have we been able
to inspire for the future?

<span id="iii.xxv-p131"></span>24.  Perhaps <span
id="fr_4381"></span>[4382](#fn_4381) we may be reproached, as we have
been before, with the exquisite character of our table, the splendour of
our apparel, the officers who precede us, our haughtiness to those who
meet us.  I was not aware that we ought to rival the consuls, the
governors, the most illustrious generals, who have no opportunity of
lavishing their incomes; or that our belly ought to hunger for the
enjoyment of the goods of the poor, and to expend their necessaries on
superfluities, and belch forth over the altars.  I did not know that we
ought to ride on splendid horses, and drive in magnificent carriages,
and be preceded by a procession and surrounded by applause, and have
everyone make way for us, as if we were wild beasts, and open out a
passage so that our approach might be seen afar.  If these sufferings
have been endured, they have now passed away:  Forgive me this
wrong. <span id="fr_4382"></span>[4383](#fn_4382)   Elect another who
will please the majority:  and give me my desert, my country life, and
my God, Whom alone I may have to please, and shall please by my simple
life.  It is a painful thing to be deprived of speeches and conferences,
and public gatherings, and applause like that which now lends wings to
my thoughts, and relatives, and friends and honours, and the beauty and
grandeur of the city, and its brilliancy which dazzles those who look at
the surface without investigating the inner nature of things; but yet
not so painful as being clamoured against and besmirched amid public
disturbances and agitations, which trim their sails to the popular
breeze.  For they seek not for priests, but for orators, not <span
id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span id="iii.xxv-Page_394"></span>for
stewards of souls, but for treasurers of money, not for pure offerers of
the sacrifice, but for powerful patrons.  I will say a word in their
defence:  we have thus trained them, by becoming all things to all
men, <span id="fr_4383"></span>[4384](#fn_4383) whether to save or
destroy all, I know not.

<span id="iii.xxv-p135"></span>25.  What say you?  Are you persuaded,
have you been overcome by my words?  Or must I use stronger terms in
order to persuade you?  Yea by the Trinity Itself, Whom you and I alike
worship, by our common hope, and for the sake of the unity of this
people, grant me this favour; dismiss me with your prayers; let this be
the proclamation of my contest; give me my certificate of retirement, as
sovereigns do to their soldiers; and, if you will, with a favourable
testimony, that I may enjoy the honour of it; if not, just as you
please; this will make no difference to me, until God sees what my case
really is.  What successor then shall we elect?  God will provide
Himself <span id="fr_4384"></span>[4385](#fn_4384) a shepherd for the
office, as He once provided a lamb for a burnt-offering.  I only make
this further request,—let him be one who is the object of envy, not the
object of pity; not one who yields everything to all, but one who can on
some points offer resistance for the sake of what is best:  for though
the one is most pleasant, the other is most profitable.  So do you
prepare for me your addresses of dismissal:  I will now bid you
farewell.

<span id="iii.xxv-p137"></span>26.  Farewell my Anastasia, <span
id="fr_4385"></span>[4386](#fn_4385) whose name is redolent of piety: 
for thou hast raised up for us the doctrine which was in contempt: 
farewell, scene of our common victory, modern Shiloh, <span
id="fr_4386"></span>[4387](#fn_4386) where the tabernacle was first
fixed, after being carried about in its wanderings for forty years in
the wilderness.  Farewell likewise, grand and renowned temple, our new
inheritance, whose greatness is now due to the Word, which once wast a
Jebus, <span id="fr_4387"></span>[4388](#fn_4387) and hast now been made
by us a Jerusalem.  Farewell, all ye others, inferior only to this in
beauty, scattered through the various parts of the city, like so many
links, uniting together each your own neighbourhood, which have been
filled with worshippers of whose existence we had despaired, not by me,
in my weakness, but by the grace which was with me. <span
id="fr_4388"></span>[4389](#fn_4388)   Farewell, ye Apostles, <span
id="fr_4389"></span>[4390](#fn_4389) noble settlers here, my masters in
the strife; if I have not often kept festival with you, it has been
possibly due to the Satan <span id="fr_4390"></span>[4391](#fn_4390)
which I, like S. Paul, <span id="fr_4391"></span>[4392](#fn_4391) who
was one of you, carry about in my body for my own profit, and which is
the cause of my now leaving you.  Farewell, my throne, envied and
perilous height; farewell assembly of high priests, honoured by the
dignity and age of its priests, and all ye others ministers of God round
the holy table, drawing nigh to the God Who draws nigh to you. <span
id="fr_4392"></span>[4393](#fn_4392)   Farewell, choirs of Nazarites,
harmonies of the Psalter, night-long stations, venerable virgins,
decorous matrons, gatherings of widows and orphans, and ye eyes of the
poor, turned towards God and towards me.  Farewell, hospitable and
Christ-loved dwellings, helpers of my infirmity.  Farewell, ye lovers of
my discourses, in your eagerness and concourse, ye pencils seen and
unseen, and thou balustrade, pressed upon by those who thrust themselves
forward to hear the word.  Farewell, Emperors, and palace, and ministers
and household of the Emperor, whether faithful or not to him, I know
not, but for the most part, unfaithful to God.  Clap your hands, shout
aloud, extol your orator to the skies.  This pestilent and garrulous
tongue has ceased to speak to you.  Though it will not utterly cease to
speak:  for it will fight with hand and ink:  but for the present we
have ceased to speak.

<span id="iii.xxv-p146"></span>27.  Farewell, mighty Christ-loving
city.  I will testify to the truth, though thy zeal be not according to
knowledge. <span id="fr_4393"></span>[4394](#fn_4393)   Our separation
renders us more kindly.  Approach the truth:  be converted at this late
hour.  Honour God more than you have been wont to do.  It is no disgrace
to change, while it is fatal to cling to evil.  Farewell, East and West,
for whom and against whom I have had to fight; He is witness, Who will
give you peace, if but a few would imitate my retirement.  For those who
resign their thrones will not also lose God, but will have the seat on
high, which is far more exalted and secure.  Last of all, and most of
all, I will cry,—farewell ye Angels, guardians of this church, and of my
presence and pilgrimage, since our affairs are in the hands of God. 
Farewell, O Trinity, my meditation, and my glory.  Mayest Thou be
preserved by those who are here, and preserve them, my people:  for they
are mine, even if I have my place assigned elsewhere; and may I learn
that Thou art ever extolled and glorified in word and conduct.  <span
id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span id="iii.xxv-Page_395"></span>My
children, keep, I pray you, that which is committed to your trust. <span
id="fr_4394"></span>[4395](#fn_4394)   Remember my stonings. <span
id="fr_4395"></span>[4396](#fn_4395)   The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4277"></span>[386:4278](2070068.htm#fr_4277) <span
id="iii.xxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p5"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007), [Rom.
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4278"></span>[386:4279](2070068.htm#fr_4278) <span
id="iii.xxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p6"></span> S. [Matt. xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4279"></span>[386:4280](2070068.htm#fr_4279) <span
id="iii.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p7"></span> [Gal. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4280"></span>[386:4281](2070068.htm#fr_4280) <span
id="iii.xxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p8"></span> [2 Tim. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4281"></span>[386:4282](2070068.htm#fr_4281) <span
id="iii.xxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p9"></span> [Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4282"></span>[386:4283](2070068.htm#fr_4282) <span
id="iii.xxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p10"></span> [Gal. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4283"></span>[386:4284](2070068.htm#fr_4283) <span
id="iii.xxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p11"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#032)<span id="iii.xxv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4284"></span>[386:4285](2070068.htm#fr_4284) <span
id="iii.xxv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p12"></span> [Gal. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4285"></span>[386:4286](2070068.htm#fr_4285) <span
id="iii.xxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p14"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4286"></span>[386:4287](2070068.htm#fr_4286) <span
id="iii.xxv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p15"></span> *On behalf of*, i.e., the Christians of
Constantinople, whose Pastor he had been, who were present at the time
in the church.

<span id="fn_4287"></span>[386:4288](2070068.htm#fr_4287) <span
id="iii.xxv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p16"></span> [1 Thess. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019)<span id="iii.xxv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4288"></span>[386:4289](2070068.htm#fr_4288) <span
id="iii.xxv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p17"></span> [Heb. xi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#038)<span id="iii.xxv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4289"></span>[386:4290](2070068.htm#fr_4289) <span
id="iii.xxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p18"></span> [Ezek.
31:0](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#000), [Ezek.
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#000)<span id="iii.xxv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4290"></span>[386:4291](2070068.htm#fr_4290) <span
id="iii.xxv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p19"></span> [Ezek.
34.6](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4291"></span>[386:4292](2070068.htm#fr_4291) <span
id="iii.xxv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p20"></span> [Exod. x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021)<span id="iii.xxv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4292"></span>[386:4293](2070068.htm#fr_4292) <span
id="iii.xxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p22"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4293"></span>[386:4294](2070068.htm#fr_4293) <span
id="iii.xxv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p23"></span> [Isa.
26.13](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxv-p23.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_4294"></span>[386:4295](2070068.htm#fr_4294) <span
id="iii.xxv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p24"></span> [Jer. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4295"></span>[386:4296](2070068.htm#fr_4295) <span
id="iii.xxv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p25"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
63:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#019)<span id="iii.xxv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4296"></span>[386:4297](2070068.htm#fr_4296) <span
id="iii.xxv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p26"></span> *Nebuchadnezzar*, i.e., Julian.

<span id="fn_4297"></span>[386:4298](2070068.htm#fr_4297) <span
id="iii.xxv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p27"></span> [Jer. li.
34](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#034)<span id="iii.xxv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4298"></span>[386:4299](2070068.htm#fr_4298) <span
id="iii.xxv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p28"></span> [Ps. lv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxv-p28.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_4299"></span>[387:4300](2070068.htm#fr_4299) <span
id="iii.xxv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p29"></span> [Ps. xciv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4300"></span>[387:4301](2070068.htm#fr_4300) <span
id="iii.xxv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p30"></span> [Psa.
94.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4301"></span>[387:4302](2070068.htm#fr_4301) <span
id="iii.xxv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p31"></span> *The second*, i.e. Valens.

<span id="fn_4302"></span>[387:4303](2070068.htm#fr_4302) <span
id="iii.xxv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p32"></span> [Joel i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#019)<span id="iii.xxv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4303"></span>[387:4304](2070068.htm#fr_4303) <span
id="iii.xxv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p33"></span> [Joel
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4304"></span>[387:4305](2070068.htm#fr_4304) <span
id="iii.xxv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p34"></span> [Ps. lxvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4305"></span>[387:4306](2070068.htm#fr_4305) <span
id="iii.xxv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p36"></span> [Psa.
129.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxv-p36.1"></span>
sqq.

<span id="fn_4306"></span>[387:4307](2070068.htm#fr_4306) <span
id="iii.xxv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p37"></span> [Mic. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p37.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_4307"></span>[387:4308](2070068.htm#fr_4307) <span
id="iii.xxv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p38"></span> [Hos. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxv-p38.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_4308"></span>[387:4309](2070068.htm#fr_4308) <span
id="iii.xxv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p39"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4309"></span>[387:4310](2070068.htm#fr_4309) <span
id="iii.xxv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p40"></span> [Isa.
30.17](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4310"></span>[387:4311](2070068.htm#fr_4310) <span
id="iii.xxv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p42"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxv-p42.1"></span> sqq.

<span id="fn_4311"></span>[387:4312](2070068.htm#fr_4311) <span
id="iii.xxv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p43"></span> [Amos v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4312"></span>[387:4313](2070068.htm#fr_4312) <span
id="iii.xxv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p44"></span> [1 Kings xviii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042)<span id="iii.xxv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4313"></span>[387:4314](2070068.htm#fr_4313) <span
id="iii.xxv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p45"></span> S. [Jas.
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4314"></span>[387:4315](2070068.htm#fr_4314) <span
id="iii.xxv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p46"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxv-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4315"></span>[387:4316](2070068.htm#fr_4315) <span
id="iii.xxv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p47"></span> [Exod. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4316"></span>[387:4317](2070068.htm#fr_4316) <span
id="iii.xxv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p48"></span> [Ps. cxxxvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4317"></span>[387:4318](2070068.htm#fr_4317) <span
id="iii.xxv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p49"></span> [Psa.
77.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4318"></span>[387:4319](2070068.htm#fr_4318) <span
id="iii.xxv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p50"></span> [Gen. xxxvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4319"></span>[387:4320](2070068.htm#fr_4319) <span
id="iii.xxv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p51"></span> [Exod. xii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)<span id="iii.xxv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4320"></span>[387:4321](2070068.htm#fr_4320) <span
id="iii.xxv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p52"></span> [Gen. xlix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxv-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4321"></span>[387:4322](2070068.htm#fr_4321) <span
id="iii.xxv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p53"></span> [Hos. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4322"></span>[387:4323](2070068.htm#fr_4322) <span
id="iii.xxv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p54"></span> [Ps. lxxx.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxv-p54.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_4323"></span>[388:4324](2070068.htm#fr_4323) <span
id="iii.xxv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p56"></span> [Rom. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4324"></span>[388:4325](2070068.htm#fr_4324) <span
id="iii.xxv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p57"></span> [Ezek.
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#007),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4325"></span>[388:4326](2070068.htm#fr_4325) <span
id="iii.xxv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p58"></span> [Ps. lxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxv-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4326"></span>[388:4327](2070068.htm#fr_4326) <span
id="iii.xxv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p59"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4327"></span>[388:4328](2070068.htm#fr_4327) <span
id="iii.xxv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p60"></span> [Wisd. v.
9](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxv-p60.1"></span> sqq.

<span id="fn_4328"></span>[388:4329](2070068.htm#fr_4328) <span
id="iii.xxv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p61"></span> [Zech. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxv-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4329"></span>[388:4330](2070068.htm#fr_4329) <span
id="iii.xxv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p62"></span> [Ps. ix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018)<span id="iii.xxv-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4330"></span>[388:4331](2070068.htm#fr_4330) <span
id="iii.xxv-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p63"></span> [Hab. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxv-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4331"></span>[388:4332](2070068.htm#fr_4331) <span
id="iii.xxv-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p65"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxv-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4332"></span>[388:4333](2070068.htm#fr_4332) <span
id="iii.xxv-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p66"></span> [Isa.
54.8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxv-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4333"></span>[388:4334](2070068.htm#fr_4333) <span
id="iii.xxv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p67"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)<span id="iii.xxv-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4334"></span>[388:4335](2070068.htm#fr_4334) <span
id="iii.xxv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p68"></span> [Deut.
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034)<span id="iii.xxv-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4335"></span>[388:4336](2070068.htm#fr_4335) <span
id="iii.xxv-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p69"></span> S. [Matt. xviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxv-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4336"></span>[388:4337](2070068.htm#fr_4336) <span
id="iii.xxv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p70"></span> [Gen.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006), [Gen.
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxv-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4337"></span>[388:4338](2070068.htm#fr_4337) <span
id="iii.xxv-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p71"></span> [Gen.
19.1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4338"></span>[388:4339](2070068.htm#fr_4338) <span
id="iii.xxv-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p72"></span> [Exod. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxv-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4339"></span>[388:4340](2070068.htm#fr_4339) <span
id="iii.xxv-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p73"></span> [Judg. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxv-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4340"></span>[388:4341](2070068.htm#fr_4340) <span
id="iii.xxv-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p74"></span> [Gen. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxv-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4341"></span>[388:4342](2070068.htm#fr_4341) <span
id="iii.xxv-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p75"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022), [Rom.
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027)<span id="iii.xxv-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4342"></span>[388:4343](2070068.htm#fr_4342) <span
id="iii.xxv-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p76"></span> [1 Kings
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018), [Rom.
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxv-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4343"></span>[388:4344](2070068.htm#fr_4343) <span
id="iii.xxv-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p78"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxv-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4344"></span>[388:4345](2070068.htm#fr_4344) <span
id="iii.xxv-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p79"></span> [Jer. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxv-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4345"></span>[388:4346](2070068.htm#fr_4345) <span
id="iii.xxv-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p80"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4346"></span>[388:4347](2070068.htm#fr_4346) <span
id="iii.xxv-p80.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p81"></span> [Isa.
1.12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxv-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4347"></span>[388:4348](2070068.htm#fr_4347) <span
id="iii.xxv-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p82"></span> *To tread*, etc.  The Arians for a time
had been in possession of the churches of Constantinople.

<span id="fn_4348"></span>[388:4349](2070068.htm#fr_4348) <span
id="iii.xxv-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p83"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxv-p83.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_4349"></span>[388:4350](2070068.htm#fr_4349) <span
id="iii.xxv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p84"></span> [Isa.
57:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013), [Isa.
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxv-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4350"></span>[389:4351](2070068.htm#fr_4350) <span
id="iii.xxv-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p85"></span> [1 Sam. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4351"></span>[389:4352](2070068.htm#fr_4351) <span
id="iii.xxv-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p86"></span> [Hos. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxv-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4352"></span>[389:4353](2070068.htm#fr_4352) <span
id="iii.xxv-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p88"></span> *Go through*, etc.  This passage refers
to the restoration of the churches to the orthodox by Theodosius, Jan.
10, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.xxv-p88.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381.

<span id="fn_4353"></span>[389:4354](2070068.htm#fr_4353) <span
id="iii.xxv-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p89"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxv-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4354"></span>[389:4355](2070068.htm#fr_4354) <span
id="iii.xxv-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p90"></span> [Rev. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4355"></span>[389:4356](2070068.htm#fr_4355) <span
id="iii.xxv-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p91"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4356"></span>[389:4357](2070068.htm#fr_4356) <span
id="iii.xxv-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p92"></span> [Isa.
57.14](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4357"></span>[389:4358](2070068.htm#fr_4357) <span
id="iii.xxv-p92.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p93"></span> [Acts vii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#048)<span id="iii.xxv-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4358"></span>[389:4359](2070068.htm#fr_4358) <span
id="iii.xxv-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p94"></span> [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="iii.xxv-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4359"></span>[389:4360](2070068.htm#fr_4359) <span
id="iii.xxv-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p95"></span> [Heb.
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#003),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxv-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4360"></span>[389:4361](2070068.htm#fr_4360) <span
id="iii.xxv-p95.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p96"></span> [Rom. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxv-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4361"></span>[389:4362](2070068.htm#fr_4361) <span
id="iii.xxv-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p97"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxv-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4362"></span>[389:4363](2070068.htm#fr_4362) <span
id="iii.xxv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p98"></span> S. [Matt. xiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#021)<span id="iii.xxv-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4363"></span>[389:4364](2070068.htm#fr_4363) <span
id="iii.xxv-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p100"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxv-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4364"></span>[389:4365](2070068.htm#fr_4364) <span
id="iii.xxv-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p102"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxv-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4365"></span>[389:4366](2070068.htm#fr_4365) <span
id="iii.xxv-p102.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p103"></span> [Isa.
28.1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p103.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_4366"></span>[389:4367](2070068.htm#fr_4366) <span
id="iii.xxv-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p104"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxv-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4367"></span>[389:4368](2070068.htm#fr_4367) <span
id="iii.xxv-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p106"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxv-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4368"></span>[390:4369](2070068.htm#fr_4368) <span
id="iii.xxv-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p108"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="iii.xxv-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4369"></span>[390:4370](2070068.htm#fr_4369) <span
id="iii.xxv-p108.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p109"></span> [Matt.
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017), [Isa.
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxv-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4370"></span>[391:4371](2070068.htm#fr_4370) <span
id="iii.xxv-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p113"></span> *With three faces* (or masks).  A play
upon the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxv-p113.1"></span>πρόσωπον</span> which is used in theology in
the sense of Person.

<span id="fn_4371"></span>[391:4372](2070068.htm#fr_4371) <span
id="iii.xxv-p113.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p114"></span> *Properties*.  Cf. xliii. 30, note.

<span id="fn_4372"></span>[391:4373](2070068.htm#fr_4372) <span
id="iii.xxv-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p117"></span> [Deut. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxv-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4373"></span>[392:4374](2070068.htm#fr_4373) <span
id="iii.xxv-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p119"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#017)<span id="iii.xxv-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4374"></span>[392:4375](2070068.htm#fr_4374) <span
id="iii.xxv-p119.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p120"></span> [1 Kings xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxv-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4375"></span>[392:4376](2070068.htm#fr_4375) <span
id="iii.xxv-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p123"></span> *A Holy War*.  That against the Phocians
to avenge their sacrilege at Delphi.

<span id="fn_4376"></span>[392:4377](2070068.htm#fr_4376) <span
id="iii.xxv-p124.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p125"></span> § 22 is a comparison of Ecclesiastical
partisanship to the emulation and party spirit connected with the horse
races in the amphitheatre.

<span id="fn_4377"></span>[393:4378](2070068.htm#fr_4377) <span
id="iii.xxv-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p126"></span> *Narrow strait*, lit. Euripus.

<span id="fn_4378"></span>[393:4379](2070068.htm#fr_4378) <span
id="iii.xxv-p126.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p127"></span> [Acts ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxv-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4379"></span>[393:4380](2070068.htm#fr_4379) <span
id="iii.xxv-p128.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p129"></span> *The burning,* etc., cf. This was by
order of Valens.

<span id="fn_4380"></span>[393:4381](2070068.htm#fr_4380) <span
id="iii.xxv-p129.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p130"></span> *Demand*.  After all these persecutions,
some thought S. Gregory ought to have used his influence with Theodosius
to requite or punish the former persecutors of the orthodox.

<span id="fn_4381"></span>[393:4382](2070068.htm#fr_4381) <span
id="iii.xxv-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p132"></span> *Perhaps*, an ironical passage.

<span id="fn_4382"></span>[393:4383](2070068.htm#fr_4382) <span
id="iii.xxv-p132.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p133"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxv-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4383"></span>[394:4384](2070068.htm#fr_4383) <span
id="iii.xxv-p133.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p134"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxv-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4384"></span>[394:4385](2070068.htm#fr_4384) <span
id="iii.xxv-p135.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p136"></span> [Gen. xxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxv-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4385"></span>[394:4386](2070068.htm#fr_4385) <span
id="iii.xxv-p137.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p138"></span> *Anastasia*.  The little church “of the
Resurrection” in which the orthodox Christians worshipped with S.
Gregory at first on his arrival, while the churches of the city were
held by the heretics.

<span id="fn_4386"></span>[394:4387](2070068.htm#fr_4386) <span
id="iii.xxv-p138.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p139"></span> [Josh. xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxv-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4387"></span>[394:4388](2070068.htm#fr_4387) <span
id="iii.xxv-p139.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p140"></span> [1 Chron. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxv-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4388"></span>[394:4389](2070068.htm#fr_4388) <span
id="iii.xxv-p140.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p141"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxv-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4389"></span>[394:4390](2070068.htm#fr_4389) <span
id="iii.xxv-p141.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p142"></span> *Apostles*.  The Church of the Holy
Apostles, to which Constantius translated the relics of SS. Andrew, Luke
and Timothy.

<span id="fn_4390"></span>[394:4391](2070068.htm#fr_4390) <span
id="iii.xxv-p142.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p143"></span> *Satan, i.e.,* “thorn in the flesh, a
messenger of Satan”—in S. Gregory’s case serious ill health.

<span id="fn_4391"></span>[394:4392](2070068.htm#fr_4391) <span
id="iii.xxv-p143.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p144"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxv-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4392"></span>[394:4393](2070068.htm#fr_4392) <span
id="iii.xxv-p144.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p145"></span> S. [James iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxv-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4393"></span>[394:4394](2070068.htm#fr_4393) <span
id="iii.xxv-p146.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p147"></span> [Rom. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxv-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4394"></span>[395:4395](2070068.htm#fr_4394) <span
id="iii.xxv-p147.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p148"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxv-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4395"></span>[395:4396](2070068.htm#fr_4395) <span
id="iii.xxv-p148.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p149"></span> [Col. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018)<span id="iii.xxv-p149.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Cæsarea in
Cappadocia.](2070069)
