[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070110)  [Next](2070112.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Ep. LXXII.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>(When S. Gregory was consecrated Bishop
of Nyssa the Imperial Throne was occupied by Valens, an ardent Arian,
whose mind was bent on the destruction of the Nicene Faith.  He
appointed, with this object, one Demosthenes, a former clerk of the
Imperial Kitchen, to be Vicar of the civil Diocese of Pontus.  An old
quarrel with Basil had made this man unfriendly to Gregory, and after
persecuting him in various small ways for some time he procured, <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 275, the
summoning of a Synod to enquire into some allegations of irregularity in
his consecration, and to try Gregory on some frivolous charges of
malversation of Church funds.  Gregory was unable to attend this Synod,
which met at Ancyra, on account of an attack of pleurisy; and another
was summoned to meet at Nyssa itself.  Gregory however refused to
appear, and was deposed as contumacious.  Thereupon Valens banished him,
and he seems to have fallen into very low spirits, almost into
despondency at the apparent triumph of the heretical party.  The three
letters which follow throw some light upon his state at this time.  They
were written in answer to letters of his now lost, and their object was
to comfort him in his trouble and to encourage him to take heart again
in the hope of a good day coming.  This more cheerful tone was justified
by the event, for on the death of Valens, <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span> 378, the exiled Bishops were
restored by Gratian, and Gregory was replaced in his Episcopal Throne,
to the great joy of the faithful of his Diocese.)

<span id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>Do not let your troubles distress you
too much.  For the less we grieve over things, the less grievous they
are.  It is nothing strange that the heretics have thawed, and are
taking courage from the springtime, and creeping out of their holes, as
you write.  They will hiss for a short time, I know, and then will hide
themselves again, overcome both by the truth and the times, and all the
more so the more we commit the whole matter to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXIII](2070112.md)
