[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070021)  [Next](2070023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p1"></span> <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="ii.x-Page_33"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.x-p1.1"></span>Lecture VI.</span>

<span id="ii.x-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.x-p2.1"></span>Concerning the Unity of God <span
id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818) .  On the Article, I Believe in One
God.  Also Concerning Heresies.</span>

<span id="ii.x-p4"></span><span id="ii.x-p4.1"></span><span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p4.2"></span>[Isa.
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#017)<span
id="ii.x-p4.3"></span></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p4.4"></span>. (Sept.)</span>

<span id="ii.x-p5"></span>Sanctify yourselves unto Me, O islands. 
Israel is saved by the Lord with an everlasting salvation; they shall
not be ashamed, neither shall they be confounded for ever, &c.

<span id="ii.x-p6"></span>1.  *Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ* <span id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819) .  Blessed also be
His Only-begotten Son <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820) .  For
with the thought of *God* let the thought of *Father* at once be joined,
that the ascription of glory to the Father and the Son may be made
indivisible.  For the Father hath not one glory, and the Son another,
but one and the same, since He is the Father’s Only-begotten Son; and
when the Father is glorified, the Son also shares the glory with Him,
because the glory of the Son flows from His Father’s honour:  and again,
when the Son is glorified, the Father of so great a blessing is highly
honoured.

<span id="ii.x-p10"></span>2.  Now though the mind is most rapid in its
thoughts, yet the tongue needs words, and a long recital of intermediary
speech.  For the eye embraces at once a multitude of the ‘starry quire;’
but when any one wishes to describe them one by one, which is the
Morning-star, and which, the Evening-star, and which each one of them,
he has need of many words.  In like manner again the mind in the
briefest moment compasses earth and sea and all the bounds of the
universe; but what it conceives in an instant, it uses many words to
describe <span id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821) .  Yet forcible as is
the example I have mentioned, still it is after all weak and
inadequate.  For of God we speak not all we ought (for that is known to
Him only), but so much as the capacity of human nature has received, and
so much as our weakness can bear.  For we explain not what God is but
candidly confess that we have not exact knowledge concerning Him.  For
in what concerns God to confess our ignorance is the best
knowledge <span id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822) .  Therefore magnify
the Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name together <span
id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823) ,—all of us in common, for one alone
is powerless; nay rather, even if we be all united together, we shall
yet not do it as we ought.  I mean not you only who are here present,
but even if all the nurslings of the whole Church throughout the world,
both that which now is and that which shall be, should meet together,
they would not be able worthily to sing the praises of their Shepherd.

<span id="ii.x-p14"></span>3.  A great and honourable man was Abra<span
id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="ii.x-Page_34"></span>ham, but only
great in comparison with men; and when he came before God, then speaking
the truth candidly he saith, *I am earth and ashes* <span
id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824) .  He did not say ‘earth,’ and then
cease, lest he should call himself by the name of that great element;
but he added *‘and ashes,’* that he might represent his perishable and
frail nature.  Is there anything, he saith, smaller or lighter than
ashes?  For take, saith he, the comparison of ashes to a house, of a
house to a city, a city to a province, a province to the Roman Empire,
and the Roman Empire to the whole earth and all its bounds, and the
whole earth to the heaven in which it is embosomed;—the earth, which
bears the same proportion to the heaven as the centre to the whole
circumference of a wheel, for the earth is no more than this in
comparison with the heaven <span id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825) : 
consider then that this first heaven which is seen is less than the
second, and the second than the third, for so far Scripture has named
them, not that they are only so many, but because it was expedient for
us to know so many only.  And when in thought thou hast surveyed all the
heavens, not yet will even the heavens be able to praise God as He is,
nay, not if they should resound with a voice louder than thunder.  But
if these great vaults of the heavens cannot worthily sing God’s praise,
when shall *‘earth and ashes,’* the smallest and least of things
existing, be able to send up a worthy hymn of praise to God, or worthily
to speak of God, *that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and holdeth
the inhabitants thereof as grasshoppers* <span
id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826) .

<span id="ii.x-p18"></span>4.  If any man attempt to speak of God, let
him first describe the bounds of the earth.  Thou dwellest on the earth,
and the limit of this earth which is thy dwelling thou knowest not:  how
then shalt thou be able to form a worthy thought of its Creator?  Thou
beholdest the stars, but their Maker thou beholdest not:  count these
which are visible, and then describe Him who is invisible, *Who telleth
the number of the stars, and calleth them all by their names* <span
id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) .  Violent rains lately came pouring
down upon us, and nearly destroyed us:  number the drops in this city
alone:  nay, I say not in the city, but number the drops on thine own
house for one single hour, if thou canst:  but thou canst not.  Learn
then thine own weakness; learn from this instance the mightiness of
God:  for *He hath numbered the drops of rain* <span
id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) , which have been poured down on all
the earth, not only now but in all time.  The sun is a work of God,
which, great though it be, is but a spot in comparison with the whole
heaven; first gaze stedfastly upon the sun, and then curiously scan the
Lord of the sun.  *Seek not the things that are too deep for thee,
neither search out the things that are above thy strength:  what is
commanded thee, think thereupon* <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829)
.

<span id="ii.x-p22"></span>5.  But some one will say, If the Divine
substance is incomprehensible, why then dost thou discourse of these
things?  So then, because I cannot drink up all the river, am I not even
to take in moderation what is expedient for me?  Because with eyes so
constituted as mine I cannot take in all the sun, am I not even to look
upon him enough to satisfy my wants?  Or again, because I have entered
into a great garden, and cannot eat all the supply of fruits, wouldst
thou have me go away altogether hungry?  I praise and glorify Him that
made us; for it is a divine command which saith, *Let every breath
praise the Lord* <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) .  I am
attempting now to glorify the Lord, but not to describe Him, knowing
nevertheless that I shall fall short of glorifying Him worthily, yet
deeming it a work of piety even to attempt it at all.  For the Lord
Jesus encourageth my weakness, by saying, *No man hath seen God at any
time* <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) .

<span id="ii.x-p25"></span>6.  What then, some man will say, is it not
written, *The little ones’ Angels do always behold the face of My Father
which is in heaven* <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) ?  Yes, but
the Angels see God not as He is, but as far as they themselves are
capable.  For it is Jesus Himself who saith, *Not that any man hath seen
the Father, save He which is of God, He hath seen the Father* <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833) .  The Angels therefore behold as much
as they can bear, and Archangels as much as they are able; and Thrones
and Dominions more than the former, but yet less than His worthiness: 
for with the Son the Holy Ghost alone can rightly behold Him:  for *He
searcheth all things, and knoweth even the deep things of God* <span
id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) :  as indeed the Only-begotten Son
also, with the Holy Ghost, knoweth the Father fully:  For *neither*,
saith He, *knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the
Son will reveal Him* <span id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) .  For He
fully beholdeth, and, according as each can bear, revealeth God through
the Spirit:  since the Only-begotten Son together with the Holy Ghost is
a partaker of the Father’s Godhead.  <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>
<span id="ii.x-Page_35"></span>He, who <span
id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) was begotten knoweth Him who begat;
and He Who begat knoweth Him who is begotten.  Since Angels then are
ignorant (for to each according to his own capacity doth the
Only-begotten reveal Him through the Holy Ghost, as we have said), let
no man be ashamed to confess his ignorance.  I am speaking now, as all
do on occasion:  but how we speak, we cannot tell:  how then can I
declare Him who hath given us speech?  I who have a soul, and cannot
tell its distinctive properties, how shall I be able to describe its
Giver?

<span id="ii.x-p31"></span>7.  For devotion it suffices us simply to
know that we have a God; a God who is One, a living <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) , an ever-living God; always like unto
Himself <span id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) ; who has no Father,
none mightier than Himself, no successor to thrust Him out from His
kingdom:  Who in name is manifold, in power infinite, in substance
uniform <span id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) .  For though He is
called Good, and Just, and Almighty and Sabaoth <span
id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) , He is not on that account diverse
and various; but being one and the same, He sends forth countless
operations of His Godhead, not exceeding here and deficient there, but
being in all things like unto Himself.  Not great in loving-kindness
only, and little in wisdom, but with wisdom and loving-kindness in equal
power:  not seeing in part, and in part devoid of sight; but being all
eye, and all ear, and all mind <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841)
:  not like us perceiving in part and in part not knowing; for such a
statement were blasphemous, and unworthy of the Divine substance.  He
foreknoweth the things that be; He is Holy, and Almighty, and excelleth
all in goodness, and majesty, and wisdom:  of Whom we can declare
neither beginning, nor form, nor shape.  For *ye have neither heard His
voice at any time, nor seen His shape* <span
id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) , saith Holy Scripture.  Wherefore
Moses saith also to the Israelites:  *And take ye good heed to your own
souls, for ye saw no similitude* <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843)
.  For if it is wholly impossible to imagine His likeness, how shall
thought come near His substance?

<span id="ii.x-p39"></span>8.  There have been many imaginations by many
persons, and all have failed.  Some have thought that God is fire;
others that He is, as it were, a man with wings, because of a true text
ill understood, *Thou shalt hide me under the shadow of Thy wings* <span
id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) .  They forgot that our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Only-begotten, speaks in like manner concerning Himself to
Jerusalem, *How often would I have gathered thy children together even
as a hen doth gather her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not* <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) .  For whereas God’s
protecting power was conceived as wings, they failing to understand this
sank down to the level of things human, and supposed that the
Unsearchable exists in the likeness of man.  Some again dared to say
that He has seven eyes, because it is written, *seven eyes of the Lord
looking upon the whole earth* <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) . 
For if He has but seven eyes surrounding Him in part, His seeing is
therefore partial and not perfect:  but to say this of God is
blasphemous; for we must believe that God is in all things perfect,
according to our Saviour’s word, which saith, *Your Father in heaven is
perfect* <span id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) :  perfect in sight,
perfect in power, perfect in greatness, perfect in foreknowledge,
perfect in goodness, perfect in justice, perfect in loving-kindness: 
not circumscribed in any space, but the Creator of all space, existing
in all, and circumscribed by none <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) .  *Heaven is His throne*, but higher
is He that sitteth thereon:  *and earth is His footstool* <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) , but His power reacheth unto things
under the earth.

<span id="ii.x-p46"></span>9.  One He is, everywhere present, beholding
all things, perceiving all things, creating all things through Christ: 
*For all things were made by Him, and without Him was not anything
made* <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850) .  A fountain of every
good, abundant and unfailing, a river of blessings, an eternal light of
never-failing splendour, an insuperable power condescending to our
infirmities:  whose very Name we dare not hear <span
id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) .  *Wilt thou find a footstep of the
Lord?* saith Job, *or hast thou attained unto the least things which the
Almighty hath made* <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) ?  If the
least of His works are incomprehensible, shall He be <span
id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="ii.x-Page_36"></span>comprehended
who made them all?  *Eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared
for them that love Him* <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) .  If
the things which God hath prepared are incomprehensible to our thoughts,
how can we comprehend with our mind Himself who hath prepared them?  *O
the depth of the riches, and wisdom, and knowledge of God!  How
unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding out* <span
id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) ! saith the Apostle.  If His judgments
and His ways are incomprehensible, can He Himself be comprehended?

<span id="ii.x-p52"></span>10.  God then being thus great, and yet
greater, (for even were I to change my whole substance into tongue, I
could not speak His excellence:  nay more, not even if all Angels should
assemble, could they ever speak His worth), God being therefore so great
in goodness and majesty, man hath yet dared to say to a stone that he
hath graven, *Thou art my God* <span id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855)
!  O monstrous blindness, that from majesty so great came down so low! 
The tree which was planted by God, and nourished by the rain, and
afterwards burnt and turned into ashes by the fire,—this is addressed as
God, and the true God is despised.  But the wickedness of idolatry grew
yet more prodigal, and cat, and dog, and wolf <span
id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856) were worshipped instead of God:  the
man-eating lion <span id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857) also was
worshipped instead of God, the most loving friend of man.  The snake and
the serpent <span id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) , counterfeit of him
who thrust us out of Paradise, were worshipped, and He who planted
Paradise was despised.  And I am ashamed to say, and yet do say it, even
onions <span id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859) were worshipped among
some.  Wine was given *to make glad the heart of man* <span
id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860) :  and Dionysus (Bacchus) was
worshipped instead of God.  God made corn by saying, *Let the earth
bring forth grass, yielding seed after his kind and after his
likeness* <span id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861) , *that bread may
strengthen man’s heart* <span id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862) :  why
then was Demeter (Ceres) worshipped?  Fire cometh forth from striking
stones together even to this day:  how then was Hephæstus (Vulcan) the
creator of fire?

<span id="ii.x-p67"></span>11.  Whence came the polytheistic error of
the Greeks <span id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863) ?  God has no body: 
whence then the adulteries alleged among those who are by them called
gods?  I say nothing of the transformations of Zeus into a swan:  I am
ashamed to speak of his transformations into a bull:  for bellowings are
unworthy of a god.  The god of the Greeks has been found an adulterer,
yet are they not ashamed:  for if he is an adulterer let him not be
called a god.  They tell also of deaths <span
id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864) , and falls <span
id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865) , and thunder-strokes <span
id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866) of their gods.  Seest thou from how
great a height and how low they have fallen?  Was it without reason then
that the Son of God came down from heaven? or was it that He might heal
so great a wound?  Was it without reason that the Son came? or was it in
order that the Father might be acknowledged?  Thou hast learned what
moved the Only-begotten to come down from the throne at God’s right
hand.  The Father was despised, the Son must needs correct the error: 
for He <span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p85.1"></span>Through</span>
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p85.2"></span>Whom</span> <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p85.3"></span>All</span> <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p85.4"></span>Things</span> <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p85.5"></span>Were</span> <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p85.6"></span>Made</span> must bring them all
as offerings to the Lord of all.  The wound must be healed:  for what
could be worse than this disease, that a stone should be worshipped
instead of God?

<span id="ii.x-p86"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.x-p86.1"></span>Of Heresies.</span>

<span id="ii.x-p87"></span>12.  And not among the heathen only did the
devil make these assaults; for many of those who are falsely called
Christians, and wrongfully addressed by the sweet name of Christ, have
ere now impiously dared to banish God from His own creation.  I mean the
brood of heretics, those most ungodly men <span id="page_37">p.
37</span> <span id="ii.x-Page_37"></span>of evil name, pretending to be
friends of Christ but utterly hating Him.  For he who blasphemes the
Father of the Christ is an enemy of the Son.  These men have dared to
speak of two Godheads, one good and one evil <span
id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867) !  O monstrous blindness!  If a
Godhead, then assuredly good.  But if not good, why called a Godhead? 
For if goodness is an attribute of God; if loving-kindness, beneficence,
almighty power, are proper to God, then of two things one, either in
calling Him God let the name and operation be united; or if they would
rob Him of His operations, let them not give Him the bare name.

<span id="ii.x-p89"></span>13.  Heretics have dared to say that there
are two Gods, and of good and evil two sources, and these unbegotten. 
If both are unbegotten it is certain that they are also equal, and both
mighty.  How then doth the light destroy the darkness?  And do they ever
exist together, or are they separated?  Together they cannot be; *for
what fellowship hath light with darkness?* saith the Apostle <span
id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868) .  But if they are far from each
other, it is certain that they hold also each his own place; and if they
hold their own separate places, we are certainly in the realm of one
God, and certainly worship one God.  For thus we must conclude, even if
we assent to their folly, that we must worship one God.  Let us examine
also what they say of the good God.  Hath He power or no power?  If He
hath power, how did evil arise against His will?  And how doth the evil
substance intrude, if He be not willing?  For if He knows but cannot
hinder it, they charge Him with want of power; but if He has the power,
yet hinders not, they accuse Him of treachery.  Mark too their want of
sense.  At one time they say that the Evil One hath no communion with
the good God in the creation of the world; but at another time they say
that he hath the fourth part only.  Also they say that the good God is
the Father of Christ; but Christ they call this sun.  If, therefore
according to them, the world was made by the Evil One, and the sun is in
the world, how is the Son of the Good an unwilling slave in the kingdom
of the Evil?  We bemire ourselves in speaking of these things, but we do
it lest any of those present should from ignorance fall into the mire of
the heretics.  I know that I have defiled my own mouth and the ears of
my listeners:  yet it is expedient.  For it is much better to hear
absurdities charged against others, than to fall into them from
ignorance:  far better that thou know the mire and hate it, than
unawares fall into it.  For the godless system of the heresies is a road
with many branches, and whenever a man has strayed from the one straight
way, then he falls down precipices again and again.

<span id="ii.x-p91"></span>14.  The inventor of all heresy was Simon
Magus <span id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869) :  that Simon, who in the
Acts of the Apostles thought to purchase with money the unsaleable grace
of the Spirit, and heard the words, *Thou hast neither part nor lot in
this matter* <span id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) , and the rest: 
concerning whom also it is written, *They went out from us, but they
were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have remained
with us* <span id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) .  This man, after he
had been cast out by the Apostles, came to Rome, and gaining over one
Helena a harlot <span id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872) , was the first
that dared with blasphemous mouth to say that it was himself who
appeared on Mount Sinai as the Father, and afterwards appeared among the
Jews, not in real flesh but in seeming <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) , as Christ Jesus, and afterwards as
the Holy Spirit whom Christ promised to send as the Paraclete <span
id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874) .  And he so deceived the City of Rome
that Claudius set up his statue, and wrote beneath it, in the language
of the Romans, “Simoni Deo Sancto,” which being interpreted signifies,
“To Simon the Holy God <span id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875) .”

<span id="ii.x-p106"></span><span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="ii.x-Page_38"></span>15.  As the delusion was extending, Peter and
Paul, a noble pair, chief rulers of the Church, arrived and set the
error right <span id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876) ; and when the
supposed god Simon wished to shew himself off, they straightway shewed
him as a corpse.  For Simon promised to rise aloft to heaven, and came
riding in a dæmons’ chariot on the air; but the servants of God fell on
their knees, and having shewn that agreement of which Jesus spake, that
*If two of you shall agree concerning anything that they shall ask, it
shall be done unto them* <span id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877) , they
launched the weapon of their concord in prayer against Magus, and struck
him down to the earth.  And marvellous though it was, yet no marvel. 
For Peter was there, who carrieth the keys of heaven <span
id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) :  and nothing wonderful, for Paul was
there <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) , who was *caught up to
the third heaven*, and *into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words,
which it is not lawful far a man to utter* <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) .  These brought the supposed God down
from the sky to earth, thence to be taken down to the regions below the
earth.  In this man first the serpent of wickedness appeared; but when
one head had been cut off, the root of wickedness was found again with
many heads.

<span id="ii.x-p113"></span>16.  For Cerinthus <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) *made havoc of the Church*, and
Menander <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) , and Carpocrates <span
id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) , Ebionites <span
id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) also, and Marcion <span
id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) , that mouthpiece of ungodliness.  For
he who proclaimed different gods, one the Good, the other the Just,
contradicts the Son when He says, *O righteous Father* <span
id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) .  And he who says again that the
Father is one, and the maker of the world another, opposes the Son when
He says, *If then God so clothes the grass of the field which to-day is,
and to-morrow is cast into the furnace of fire* <span
id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887) ; and, *Who maketh His sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the
unjust* <span id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) .  Here again is a
second inventor of more mischief, this Marcion.  For being confuted by
the testimonies from the Old Testament which are quoted in the New, he
was the first who dared to cut those testimonies out <span
id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) , and leave the preaching of the word
of faith without witness, thus effacing the true God:  and sought to
undermine the Church’s faith, as if there were no heralds of it.

<span id="ii.x-p123"></span>17.  He again was succeeded by another,
Basilides, of evil name, and dangerous character, a preacher of
impurities <span id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) .  The contest of
wickedness was aided also by Valentinus <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) , a preacher of thirty gods.  The
Greeks tell of but few:  and the man who was called—but more truly was
not—a Christian extended the delusion to full thirty.  He says, too,
that Bythus the Abyss (for it became him as being an abyss of wickedness
to begin his teaching from the Abyss) begat Silence, and of Silence
begat the Word.  This Bythus was worse than the Zeus of the Greeks, who
was united to his sister:  for Silence was said to be the child of
Bythus.  Dost thou see the absurdity invested with a show of
Christianity?  Wait a little, and thou wilt be shocked at his impiety;
for he asserts that of this Bythus were begotten eight Æons; and of
them, ten; and of them, other twelve, male and female.  But whence is
the proof of these things?  See their silliness from their
fabrications.  Whence hast thou the proof of the thirty Æons?  Because,
saith he, it is written, that *Jesus was baptized*, <span
id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span id="ii.x-Page_39"></span>*being thirty
years old* <span id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) .  But even if He was
baptized when thirty years old, what sort of demonstration is this from
the thirty years?  Are there then five gods, because He brake five
loaves among five thousand?  Or because he had twelve Disciples, must
there also be twelve gods?

<span id="ii.x-p127"></span>18.  And even this is still little compared
with the impieties which follow.  For the last of the deities being, as
he dares to speak, both male and female, this, he says, is Wisdom <span
id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) .  What impiety!  For *the Wisdom of
God* <span id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) is Christ His Only-begotten
Son:  and he by his doctrine degraded the Wisdom of God into a female
element, and one of thirty, and the last fabrication.  He also says that
Wisdom attempted to behold the first God, and not bearing His brightness
fell from heaven, and was cast out of her thirtieth place.  Then she
groaned, and of her groans begat the Devil <span
id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) , and as she wept over her fall made
of her tears the sea.  Mark the impiety.  For of Wisdom how is the Devil
begotten, and of prudence wickedness, or of light darkness?  He says too
that the Devil begat others, some of whom created the world:  and that
the Christ came down in order to make mankind revolt from the Maker of
the world.

<span id="ii.x-p132"></span>19.  But hear whom they say Christ Jesus to
be, that thou mayest detest them yet more.  For they say that after
Wisdom had been cast down, in order that the number of the thirty might
not be incomplete, the nine and twenty Æons contributed each a little
part, and formed the Christ <span id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) : 
and they say that He also is both male and female <span
id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) .  Can anything be more impious than
this?  Anything more wretched?  I am describing their delusion to thee,
in order that thou mayest hate them the more.  Shun, therefore, their
impiety, and *do not even give greeting to* <span
id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) a man of this kind, lest thou have
*fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness* <span
id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) :  neither make curious inquiries, nor
be willing to enter into conversation with them.

<span id="ii.x-p138"></span>20.  Hate all heretics, but especially him
who is rightly named after mania <span id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900)
, who arose not long ago in the reign of Probus <span
id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901) .  For the delusion began full seventy
years ago <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902) , and there are men
still living who saw him with their very eyes.  But hate him not for
this, that he lived a short time ago; but because of his impious
doctrines hate thou the worker of wickedness, the receptacle of all
filth, who gathered up the mire of every heresy <span
id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903) .  For aspiring to become pre-eminent
among wicked men, he took the doctrines of all, and having combined them
into one heresy filled with blasphemies and all iniquity, he makes havoc
of the Church, or rather of those outside the Church, roaming about like
a lion and devouring.  Heed not their fair speech, nor their supposed
humility:  for they are serpents, *a generation of vipers* <span
id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904) .  Judas too *said Hail! Master* <span
id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905) , even while he was betraying Him. 
Heed not their kisses, but beware of their venom.

<span id="ii.x-p145"></span>21.  Now, lest I seem to accuse him without
reason, let me make a digression to tell who this Manes is, and in part
what he teaches:  for all time would fail to describe adequately the
whole of his foul teaching.  But *for help in time of need* <span
id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906) , store up in thy memory what I have
said to former hearers, and will repeat to those now present, that they
who know not may learn, and they who know may be reminded.  Manes is not
of Christian origin, God forbid! nor was he like Simon cast out of the
Church, neither himself nor the teachers who were before him.  For he
steals other men’s wickedness, and makes their wickedness his own:  but
how and in what manner thou must hear.

<span id="ii.x-p147"></span>22.  There was in Egypt one Scythianus <span
id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907) , a <span id="page_40">p. 40</span>
<span id="ii.x-Page_40"></span>Saracen <span
id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908) by birth, having nothing in common
either with Judaism or with Christianity.  This man, who dwelt at
Alexandria and imitated the life of Aristotle <span
id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909) , composed four books <span
id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910) , one called a Gospel which had not
the acts of Christ, but the mere name only, and one other called the
book of Chapters, and a third of Mysteries, and a fourth, which they
circulate now, the Treasure <span id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911) . 
This man had a disciple, Terebinthus by name.  But when Scythianus
purposed to come into Judæa, and make havoc of the land, the Lord smote
him with a deadly disease, and stayed the pestilence <span
id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912) .

<span id="ii.x-p154"></span>23.  But Terebinthus, his disciple in this
wicked error, inherited his money and books and heresy <span
id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913) , and came to Palestine, and becoming
known and condemned in Judæa <span id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914) he
resolved to pass into Persia:  but lest he should be recognised there
also by his name he changed it and called himself Buddas <span
id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915) .  However, he found adversaries there
also in the priests of Mithras <span id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916)
:  and being confuted in the discussion of many arguments and
controversies, and at last hard pressed, he took refuge with a certain
widow.  Then having gone up on the housetop, and summoned the dæmons of
the air, whom the Manichees to this day invoke over their abominable
ceremony of the fig <span id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917) , he was
smitten of God, and cast down from the housetop, and expired:  and so
the second beast was cut off.

<span id="ii.x-p160"></span>24.  The books, however, which were the
records of his impiety, remained; and both these and his money the widow
inherited.  And having neither kinsman nor any other friend, she
determined to buy with the money a boy named Cubricus <span
id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918) :  him she adopted and educated as a
son in the learning of the Persians, and thus sharpened an evil weapon
against mankind.  So Cubricus, the vile slave, grew up in the midst of
philosophers, and on the death of the widow inherited both the books and
the money.  Then, lest the name of slavery might be a reproach, instead
of Cubricus he called himself Manes, which in the language of the
Persians signifies discourse <span id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) . 
For as he thought himself something of a disputant, he surnamed himself
Manes, as it were an excellent master of discourse.  But though he
contrived for himself an honourable title according to the language of
the Persians, yet the providence of God caused him to become a
self-accuser even against his will, that through thinking to honour
himself in Persia, he might proclaim himself among the Greeks by name a
maniac.

<span id="ii.x-p163"></span>25.  He dared too to say that he was the
Paraclete, though it is written, *But whosoever shall blaspheme against
the Holy Ghost, hath no forgiveness* <span
id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920) .  He committed blasphemy therefore by
saying that he was the Holy Ghost:  let him that communicates with those
heretics see with whom he is enrolling himself.  The slave shook the
world, since *by three things the earth is shaken, and the fourth it
cannot bear,—if a slave became a king* <span
id="fr_921"></span>[922](#fn_921) .  Having come into public he now
began to promise things above man’s power.  The son of the King of the
Persians was sick, and a multitude of physicians were in attendance: 
but Manes promised, as if he were a godly man, to cure him by prayer. 
With the departure of the physicians, the life of the child departed: 
and the man’s impiety was detected.  So the would-be philosopher was a
prisoner, being cast into prison not for reproving the king in the cause
of truth, not for destroying the idols, but for promising to save and
lying, or rather, if the truth must be told, for committing murder.  For
the child who might have been saved by medical treatment, was murdered
by this man’s driving away the physicians, and killing him by want of
treatment.

<span id="ii.x-p166"></span>26.  Now as there are very many wicked
things which I tell thee of him, remember first his blasphemy, secondly
his slavery (not that slavery is a disgrace, but that his pretending to
be free-born, when he was a slave, was wicked), thirdly, the falsehood
of his promise, fourthly, the murder of the child, and fifthly, <span
id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span id="ii.x-Page_41"></span>the disgrace of
the imprisonment.  And there was not only the disgrace of the prison,
but also the flight from prison.  For he who called himself the
Paraclete and champion of the truth, ran away:  he was no successor of
Jesus, who readily went to the Cross, but this man was the reverse, a
runaway.  Moreover, the King of the Persians ordered the keepers of the
prison to be executed:  so Manes was the cause of the child’s death
through his vain boasting, and of the gaolers’ death through his
flight.  Ought then he, who shared the guilt of murder, to be
worshipped?  Ought he not to have followed the example of Jesus, and
said, *If ye seek Me, let these go their way* <span
id="fr_922"></span>[923](#fn_922) ?  Ought he not to have said, like
Jonas, *Take me, and cast me into the sea:  for this storm is because of
me* <span id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923) ?

<span id="ii.x-p169"></span>27.  He escapes from the prison, and comes
into Mesopotamia:  but there Bishop Archelaus, a shield of
righteousness, encounters him <span id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924) : 
and having accused him before philosophers as judges, and having
assembled an audience of Gentiles, lest if Christians gave judgment, the
judges might be thought to shew favour,—Tell us what thou preachest,
said Archelaus to Manes.  And he, whose *mouth was as an open
sepulchre* <span id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925) , began first with
blasphemy against the Maker of all things, saying, The God of the Old
Testament is the author of evils, as He says of Himself, *I am a
consuming fire* <span id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926) .  But the wise
Archelaus undermined his blasphemous argument by saying, “If the God of
the Old Testament, as thou sayest, calls Himself a fire, whose Son is He
who saith, *I came to send fire on the earth* <span
id="fr_927"></span>[928](#fn_927) ?  If thou findest fault with Him who
saith, The Lord killeth, and maketh alive <span
id="fr_928"></span>[929](#fn_928) , why dost thou honour Peter, who
raised up Tabitha, but struck Sapphira dead?  If again thou findest
fault, because He prepared fire, wherefore dost thou not find fault with
Him who saith, *Depart from Me into everlasting fire* <span
id="fr_929"></span>[930](#fn_929) ?  If thou findest fault with Him who
saith, *I am God that make peace, and create evil* <span
id="fr_930"></span>[931](#fn_930) , explain how Jesus saith, I came not
to send peace but a sword <span id="fr_931"></span>[932](#fn_931) . 
Since both speak alike, of two things one, either both are good, because
of their agreement, or if Jesus is blameless in so speaking. why blamest
thou Him that saith the like in the Old Testament?”

<span id="ii.x-p178"></span>28.  Then Manes answers him:  “And what sort
of God causes blindness?  For it is Paul who saith, *In whom the God of
this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the
light of the Gospel should shine unto them* <span
id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932) .”  But Archelaus made a good retort,
saying, “Read a little before:  *But if our Gospel is veiled, it is
veiled in them that are perishing* <span
id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933) .  Seest thou that in them that are
perishing it is veiled?  For it is not right *to give the things which
are holy unto the dogs* <span id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934) . 
Again, Is it only the God of the Old Testament that hath blinded the
minds of them that believe not?  Hath not Jesus Himself said, *For this
cause speak I unto them in parables, that seeing they may not see* <span
id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935) ?  Was it from hating them that He
wished them not to see?  Or because of their unworthiness, since *their
eyes they had closed* <span id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936) .  For
where there is wilful wickedness, there is also a withholding of grace: 
*for to him that hath shall be given; but from him that hath not shall
be taken even that which he seemeth to have* <span
id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937) .

<span id="ii.x-p185"></span>29.  “But if some are right in their
interpretation, we must say as follows <span
id="fr_938"></span>[939](#fn_938) (for it is no unworthy expression)—If
indeed He blinded the thoughts of them that believe not he blinded them
for a good purpose, that they might look with new sight on what is
good.  For he said not, He blinded their soul, but, *the thoughts of
them that believe not* <span id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939) .  And
the meaning is something of this kind:  ‘Blind the lewd thoughts of the
lewd, and the man is saved:  blind the grasping and rapacious thought of
the robber, and the man is saved.’  But wilt thou not understand it
thus?  Then there is yet another interpretation.  The sun also blinds
those whose sight is dim:  and they whose eyes are diseased are hurt by
the light and blinded.  Not that the sun’s nature is to blind, but that
the substance of the eyes is incapable of seeing.  In like manner
unbelievers being diseased in their heart cannot look upon the radiance
of the Godhead.  Nor hath he said, *‘He hath blinded their thoughts*,
that they should not hear the Gospel:’  but, *that the light of the
glory of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ should not shine unto
them*.  For to hear the Gospel is permitted to all:  but the glory of
the Gospel is reserved for Christ’s <span id="page_42">p. 42</span>
<span id="ii.x-Page_42"></span>true children only.  Therefore the Lord
spoke in parables to those who could not hear <span
id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940) :  but to the Disciples he explained
the parables in private <span id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941) :  for
the brightness of the glory is for those who have been enlightened, the
blinding for them that believe not.”  These mysteries, which the Church
now explains to thee who art passing out of the class of Catechumens, it
is not the custom to explain to heathen.  For to a heathen we do not
explain the mysteries concerning Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, nor before
Catechumens do we speak plainly of the mysteries:  but many things we
often speak in a veiled way, that the believers who know may understand,
and they who know not may get no hurt <span
id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942) .

<span id="ii.x-p191"></span>30.  By such and many other arguments the
serpent was overthrown:  thus did Archelaus wrestle with Manes and threw
him.  Again, he who had fled from prison flees from this place also: 
and having run away from his antagonist, he comes to a very poor
village, like the serpent in Paradise when he left Adam and came to
Eve.  But the good shepherd Archelaus taking forethought for his sheep,
when he heard of his flight, straightway hastened with all speed in
search of the wolf.  And when Manes suddenly saw his adversary, he
rushed out and fled:  it was however his last flight.  For the officers
of the King of Persia searched everywhere, and caught the fugitive:  and
the sentence, which he ought to have received in the presence of
Archelaus, is passed upon him by the king’s officers.  This Manes, whom
his own disciples worship, is arrested and brought before the king.  The
king reproached him with his falsehood and his flight:  poured scorn
upon his slavish condition, avenged the murder of his child, and
condemned him also for the murder of the gaolers:  he commands him to be
flayed after the Persian fashion.  And while the rest of his body was
given over for food of wild beasts, his skin, the receptacle of his vile
mind, was hung up before the gates like a sack <span
id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943) .  He that called himself the
Paraclete and professed to know the future, knew not his own flight and
capture.

<span id="ii.x-p193"></span>31.  This man has had three disciples,
Thomas, and Baddas, and Hermas.  Let none read the Gospel according to
Thomas <span id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944) :  for it is the work not
of one of the twelve Apostles, but of one of the three wicked disciples
of Manes.  Let none associate with the soul-destroying Manicheans, who
by decoctions of chaff counterfeit the sad look of fasting, who speak
evil of the Creator of meats, and greedily devour the daintiest, who
teach that the man who plucks up this or that herb is changed into it. 
For if he who crops herbs or any vegetable is changed into the same,
into how many will husbandmen and the tribe of gardeners be
changed <span id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945) ?  The gardener, as we
see, has used his sickle against so many:  into which then is he
changed?  Verily their doctrines are ridiculous, and fraught with their
own condemnation and shame!  The same man, being the shepherd of a
flock, both sacrifices a sheep and kills a wolf.  Into what then is he
changed?  Many men both net fishes and lime birds:  into which then are
they transformed?

<span id="ii.x-p196"></span>32.  Let those children of sloth, the
Manicheans, make answer; who without labouring themselves eat up the
labourers’ fruits:  who welcome with smiling faces those who bring them
their food, and return curses instead of blessings.  For when a simple
person brings them anything, “Stand outside a while,” saith he, “and I
will bless thee.”  Then having taken the bread into his hands (as those
who have repented and left them have confessed), “I did not make thee,”
says the Manichee to the bread:  and sends up curses against the Most
High; and curses him that made it, and so eats what was made <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946) .  If thou hatest the food, why didst
thou look with smiling countenance on him that brought it to thee?  If
thou art thankful to the bringer, why dost thou utter thy blasphemy to
God, who created and made it?  So again he says, “I sowed thee not:  may
he be sown who sowed thee!  I reaped thee not with a sickle:  may he be
reaped who reaped thee!  I baked thee not with fire:  may he be baked
who baked thee!”  A fine return for the kindness!

<span id="ii.x-p198"></span>33.  These are great faults, but still small
in comparison with the rest.  Their Baptism I dare not describe before
men and women <span id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947) .  I dare not say
what they distribute to their wretched communicants <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948) ….Truly we pollute <span
id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span id="ii.x-Page_43"></span>our mouth in
speaking of these things.  Are the heathen more detestable than these? 
Are the Samaritans more wretched?  Are Jews more impious?  Are
fornicators more impure <span id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949) ?  But
the Manichee sets these offerings in the midst of the altar as he
considers it <span id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950) .  And dost thou, O
man, receive instruction from such a mouth?  On meeting this man dost
thou greet him at all with a kiss?  To say nothing of his other impiety,
dost thou not flee from the defilement, and from men worse than
profligates, more detestable than any prostitute?

<span id="ii.x-p203"></span>34.  Of these things the Church admonishes
and teaches thee, and touches mire, that thou mayest not be bemired: 
she tells of the wounds, that thou mayest not be wounded.  But for thee
it is enough merely to know them:  abstain from learning by experience. 
God thunders, and we all tremble; and they blaspheme.  God lightens, and
we all bow down to the earth; and they have their blasphemous sayings
about the heavens <span id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951) .  These
things are written in the books of the Manichees.  These things we
ourselves have read, because we could not believe those who told of
them:  yes, for the sake of your salvation we have closely inquired into
their perdition.

<span id="ii.x-p205"></span>35.  But may the Lord deliver us from such
delusion:  and may there be given to you a hatred against the serpent,
that as they lie in wait for the heel, so you may trample on their
head.  Remember ye what I say.  What agreement can there be between our
state and theirs?  *What communion hath light with darkness* <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952) ?  What hath the majesty of the Church
to do with the abomination of the Manichees?  Here is order, here is
discipline <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953) , here is majesty,
here is purity:  here even *to look upon a woman to lust after
her* <span id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954) is condemnation.  Here is
marriage with sanctity <span id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955) , here
steadfast continence, here virginity in honour like unto the Angels: 
here partaking of food with thanksgiving, here gratitude to the Creator
of the world.  Here the Father of Christ is worshipped:  here are taught
fear and trembling before Him who sends the rain:  here we ascribe glory
to Him who makes the thunder and the lightning.

<span id="ii.x-p210"></span>36.  Make thou thy fold with the sheep: 
flee from the wolves:  depart not from the Church.  Hate those also who
have ever been suspected in such matters:  and unless in time thou
perceive their repentance, do not rashly trust thyself among them.  The
truth of the Unity of God has been delivered to thee:  learn to
distinguish the pastures of doctrine.  Be an approved banker <span
id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956) , *holding fast that which is good,
abstaining from every form of evil* <span
id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957) .  Or if thou hast ever been such as
they, recognise and hate thy delusion.  For there is a way of salvation,
if thou reject the vomit, if thou from thy heart detest it, if thou
depart from them, not with thy lips only, but with thy soul also:  if
thou worship the Father of Christ, the God of the Law and the Prophets,
if thou acknowledge the Good and the Just to be one and the same
God. <span id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958)   And may He preserve you
all, guarding you from falling or stumbling, stablished in the Faith, in
Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom be glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_818"></span>[33:819](2070022.htm#fr_818) <span
id="ii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p3.1"></span>Περὶ Θεοῦ Μοναρχίας</span>.  The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p3.2"></span>μοναρχία</span>, as used by
Plato (*Polit*. 291 C), Aristotle (*Polit*. III. xiv. 11.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p3.3"></span>εἶδος μοναρχίας
βασιλικῆς</span>), Philo Judæus (*de Circumcisione*, § 2; *de
Monarchia*, Titul.), means “sole government.”  Compare Tertullian (*adv.
Praxean*. c. iii.):  “If I have gained any knowledge of either language,
I am sure that <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p3.4"></span>Μοναρχία</span> has no other meaning than ‘single
and individual rule.’”  Athanasius (*de Decretis Nicænæ Synodi*, § 26)
has preserved part of an Epistle of Dionysius, Bishop of Rome (259–269,
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p3.5"></span>a.d</span>.), against the
Sabellians:  “It will be natural for me now to speak against those who
divide, and cut into pieces, and destroy that most sacred doctrine of
the Church of God, the Monarchia, making it, as it were, three powers
and divided hypostases, and three Godheads;” (*ibid*.):  “It is the
doctrine of the presumptuous Marcion to sever and divide the Monarchia
into three origins (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p3.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p3.7"></span>ρχάς</span>).”  We see here the sense which <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p3.8"></span>Μοναρχία</span> had acquired
in  Christian Theology:  it meant the “Unity of God,” as the one
principle and origin of all things.  “By the Monarchy is meant the
doctrine that the Second and Third Persons in the Ever-blessed Trinity
are ever to be referred in our thoughts to the First, as the Fountain of
Godhead” (Newman, Athanas. *de Decretis Nic*. *Syn*. § 26, note h). 
Justin Martyr (Euseb. *H.E*. IV. 18), and Irenæus (*ibid*. V. 20), had
each written a treatise <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p3.9"></span>περὶ Μοναρχίας</span>.  On the history of
Monarchianism see, in this Series, Athanasius, *Prolegomena*, p. xxiii.
*sqq*.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[33:820](2070022.htm#fr_819) <span
id="ii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p7"></span> [2 Cor. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003)<span id="ii.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[33:821](2070022.htm#fr_820) <span
id="ii.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p8"></span> This clause is omitted in some <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p8.1"></span>mss.</span>  Various forms of the
Doxology were adopted in Cyril’s time by various parties in the Church. 
Thus Theodoret (*Hist. Eccles*. II. c. 19) relates that Leontius, Bishop
of Antioch, <span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p8.2"></span>a.d.</span>
348–357, observing that the Clergy and the Congregation were divided
into two parties, the one using the form “and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost,” the other “through the Son, in the Holy Ghost,” used to
repeat the Doxology silently, so that those who were near could hear
only “world without end.”

<span id="ii.x-p9"></span>The form which was regarded as the most
orthodox, and adopted in the Liturgies ran thus:  “Glory to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to the ages of
the ages.”  See Suicer’s Thesaurus, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p9.1"></span>Δοξολογία</span>.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[33:822](2070022.htm#fr_821) <span
id="ii.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p11"></span> Irenæus II. xxviii. 4:  “But since God is
all mind, all reason, all active Spirit, all light, and always exists as
one and the same, such conditions and divisions (of operation) cannot
fittingly be ascribed to Him.  For our tongue, as being made of flesh,
is not able to minister to the rapidity of man’s sense, because that is
of a spiritual nature; for which reason our speech is restrained
(*suffocatur*) within us, and is not at once expressed as it has been
conceived in the mind but is uttered by successive efforts, just as the
tongue is able to serve it.”

<span id="fn_822"></span>[33:823](2070022.htm#fr_822) <span
id="ii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p12"></span> Tertullian, *Apologeticus*, § 17:  “That
which is infinite is known only to itself.  This it is which gives some
notion of God, while yet beyond all our conceptions—our very incapacity
of fully grasping Him affords us the idea of what He really is.  He is
presented to our minds in His transcendent greatness, as at once known
and unknown.”  Cf. Phil. Jud. *de Monarch*. i. 4:  Hooker, *Eccles.
Pol*. I. ii. 3:  “Whom although to know be life, and joy to make mention
of His name; yet our soundest knowledge is to know that we know Him not
as He is, neither can know Him.”

<span id="fn_823"></span>[33:824](2070022.htm#fr_823) <span
id="ii.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p13"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#003)<span id="ii.x-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[34:825](2070022.htm#fr_824) <span
id="ii.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p15"></span> [Gen. xviii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027)<span id="ii.x-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[34:826](2070022.htm#fr_825) <span
id="ii.x-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p16"></span> The opinion of Aristarchus of Samos, as
stated by Archimedes (*Arenarius*, p. 320, Oxon), was that the sphere of
the fixed stars was so large, that it bore to the earth’s orbit the same
proportion as a sphere to its centre, or more correctly (as Archimedes
explains) the same proportion as the earth’s orbit round the sun to the
earth itself.  Compare Cat. xv. 24.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[34:827](2070022.htm#fr_826) <span
id="ii.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p17"></span> [Is. xl.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)<span id="ii.x-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[34:828](2070022.htm#fr_827) <span
id="ii.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p19"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004)<span id="ii.x-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[34:829](2070022.htm#fr_828) <span
id="ii.x-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p20"></span> [Job xxxvi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#027)<span id="ii.x-p20.1"></span>: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p20.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p20.3"></span>ριθμηταὶ δὲ αὐτῷ σταγόνες
ὑετοῦ</span>.  <span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p20.4"></span>R.V.</span>
*For He draweth up the drops of water*.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[34:830](2070022.htm#fr_829) <span
id="ii.x-p20.5"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p21"></span> [Sir.
3:21](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#022)<span id="ii.x-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[34:831](2070022.htm#fr_830) <span
id="ii.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p23"></span> [Ps. cl.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#006)<span id="ii.x-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[34:832](2070022.htm#fr_831) <span
id="ii.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p24"></span> [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="ii.x-p24.1"></span>.  They
are the Evangelist’s own words.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[34:833](2070022.htm#fr_832) <span
id="ii.x-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p26"></span> [Matt. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="ii.x-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[34:834](2070022.htm#fr_833) <span
id="ii.x-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p27"></span> [John vi.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span id="ii.x-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[34:835](2070022.htm#fr_834) <span
id="ii.x-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p28"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span id="ii.x-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[34:836](2070022.htm#fr_835) <span
id="ii.x-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p29"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="ii.x-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[35:837](2070022.htm#fr_836) <span
id="ii.x-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p30"></span> The Benedictine and earlier printed texts
read <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p30.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p30.2"></span>γεννηθεὶς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p30.3"></span>\[ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p30.4"></span>παθῶς πρὸ τῶν χρόνων
αἰωνίων\]</span>:  but the words in brackets are not found in the best
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p30.5"></span>mss.</span>  The false
grammar betrays a spurious insertion, which also interrupts the sense. 
On the meaning of the phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p30.6"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p30.7"></span>γεννηθεὶς ἀπαθῶς</span>, see note on vii. 5: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p30.8"></span>οὐ πάθει πατὴρ
γενόμενος</span>.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[35:838](2070022.htm#fr_837) <span
id="ii.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p32"></span> Gr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p32.1"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p32.2"></span>ντα, ἀεὶ ὄντα</span>.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[35:839](2070022.htm#fr_838) <span
id="ii.x-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p33"></span> Iren. II. xiii. 3:  “He is altogether like
and equal to Himself; since He is all sense, and all spirit, and all
feeling, and all thought, and all reason, and all hearing, and all ear,
and all eye, and all light, and all a fount of every good,—even as the
religious and pious are wont to speak of God.”

<span id="fn_839"></span>[35:840](2070022.htm#fr_839) <span
id="ii.x-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p34.1"></span>μονοειδῆ</span>.  A Platonic word.  *Phædo*, 80
B:  <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p34.2"></span>τῷ μὲν θείω καὶ
ἀθανάτῳ καὶ νοητῷ καὶ μονοειδεῖ καὶ ἀδιαλύτῳ καὶ ἀεὶ ὡσαύτως κατὰ τὰ
αὐτὰ ἔχοντι ἑαυτῷ ὁμοιότατον εἶναι ψυχήν</span>.  See Index,
“Hypostasis.”

<span id="fn_840"></span>[35:841](2070022.htm#fr_840) <span
id="ii.x-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p35"></span> Iren. II. xxxv. 3:  “If any object that in
the Hebrew language different expressions occur, such as Sabaoth, Elöe,
Adonai, and all other such terms, striving to prove from these that
there are different powers and Gods, let them learn that all expressions
of this kind are titles and announcements of one and the same Being.”

<span id="fn_841"></span>[35:842](2070022.htm#fr_841) <span
id="ii.x-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p36"></span> See the passages of Irenæus quoted above, §
2 note 4, and § 7 note 3.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[35:843](2070022.htm#fr_842) <span
id="ii.x-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p37"></span> [John v.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#037)<span id="ii.x-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[35:844](2070022.htm#fr_843) <span
id="ii.x-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p38"></span> [Deut. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015)<span id="ii.x-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[35:845](2070022.htm#fr_844) <span
id="ii.x-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p40"></span> [Ps. xvii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)<span id="ii.x-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[35:846](2070022.htm#fr_845) <span
id="ii.x-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p41"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="ii.x-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[35:847](2070022.htm#fr_846) <span
id="ii.x-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p42"></span> [Zech. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010)<span id="ii.x-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[35:848](2070022.htm#fr_847) <span
id="ii.x-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p43"></span> [Matt. v.
48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048)<span id="ii.x-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[35:849](2070022.htm#fr_848) <span
id="ii.x-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p44"></span> Philo Judæus (*Leg. Alleg*. I. 14. p. 52). 
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p44.1"></span>Θεοῦ γὰρ οὐδὲ ὁ σύμπας
κόσμος ἀξίον ἂν εἴη χωρίον καὶ ἐνδιαίτημα, ἐπεὶ αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ
τήπος</span>.  So Sir Isaac Newton, at the end of the Principia, asserts
that God by His eternal and infinite existence constitutes Time and
Space:  “Non est duratio vel spatium, sed durat et adest, et existendo
semper et ubique spatium et durationem constituit.”

<span id="fn_849"></span>[35:850](2070022.htm#fr_849) <span
id="ii.x-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p45"></span> [Is. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span id="ii.x-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[35:851](2070022.htm#fr_850) <span
id="ii.x-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p47"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.x-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[35:852](2070022.htm#fr_851) <span
id="ii.x-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p48"></span> The sacred name (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p48.1"></span>הוהי</span>) was not pronounced, but Adonai was
substituted.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[35:853](2070022.htm#fr_852) <span
id="ii.x-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p49"></span> [Job xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007)<span id="ii.x-p49.1"></span>
(R.V.):  *Canst thou by searching find out God?  Canst thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection?*  Cyril seems to have understood <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p49.2"></span>τὰ ἔσχατα</span> as “the
least,” not as “the utmost.”

<span id="fn_853"></span>[36:854](2070022.htm#fr_853) <span
id="ii.x-p49.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p50"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="ii.x-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[36:855](2070022.htm#fr_854) <span
id="ii.x-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p51"></span> [Rom. xi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span id="ii.x-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[36:856](2070022.htm#fr_855) <span
id="ii.x-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p53"></span> [Is. xliv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017)<span id="ii.x-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[36:857](2070022.htm#fr_856) <span
id="ii.x-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p54"></span> The cat was sacred to the goddess Pasht,
called by the Greeks Bubastis, and identified by Herodotus (ii. 137)
with Artemis or Diana.  Cats were embalmed after death, and their
mummies are found at various places, but especially at Bubastis
(*Herod*. ii. 67).

<span id="ii.x-p55"></span>“The Dogs are interred in the cities to which
they belong, in sacred burial-places” (*Herod*. ii. 67), but chiefly at
Cynopolis (“City of Dogs”) where the dog-headed deity Anubis was
worshipped.

<span id="ii.x-p56"></span>Mummies of wolves are found in chambers
excavated in the rocks at Lycopolis, where Osiris was worshipped under
the symbol of a wolf.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[36:858](2070022.htm#fr_857) <span
id="ii.x-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p57"></span> The lion was held sacred at Leontopolis
(Strabo, xvii. p. 812).

<span id="fn_858"></span>[36:859](2070022.htm#fr_858) <span
id="ii.x-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p58"></span> “In the neighbourhood of Thebes there are
sacred serpents perfectly harmless to man.  These they bury in the
temple of Zeus, the god to whom they are sacred.”  (*Herod*. ii. 74.)

<span id="ii.x-p59"></span>At Epidaurus in Argolis the serpent was held
sacred as the symbol of Æsculapius.  Clement of Alexandria (*Exhort*. c.
ii.) gives a fuller list of animals worshipped by various nations. 
Compare also *Clement. Recogn*. V. 20.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[36:860](2070022.htm#fr_859) <span
id="ii.x-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p60"></span> Juvenal *Sat*. xv. 7.

<span id="ii.x-p61"></span>Illic aeluros, hic piscem fluminis, illic

<span id="ii.x-p62"></span>Oppida tota canem venerantur, nemo Dianam.

<span id="ii.x-p63"></span>Possum et caepe nefas violare et frangere
morsu.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[36:861](2070022.htm#fr_860) <span
id="ii.x-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p64"></span> [Ps. civ.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#015)<span id="ii.x-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[36:862](2070022.htm#fr_861) <span
id="ii.x-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p65"></span> [Gen. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011)<span id="ii.x-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[36:863](2070022.htm#fr_862) <span
id="ii.x-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p66"></span> [Ps. civ.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#015)<span id="ii.x-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[36:864](2070022.htm#fr_863) <span
id="ii.x-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p68"></span> The early Creeds of the Eastern Churches,
like that which Eusebius of Cæsarea proposed at Nicæa, expressly declare
the unity of God, in opposition both to the heathen Polytheism, and to
the various heresies which introduced two or more Gods.  See below in
this Lecture, §§ 12–18; and compare Athan. (*contra Gentes*, § 6,
*sqq*.)

<span id="fn_864"></span>[36:865](2070022.htm#fr_864) <span
id="ii.x-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p69"></span> Clement of Alexandria (*Exhort*. cap. ii. §
37), quotes a passage from a hymn of Callimachus, implying the death of
Zeus:

<span id="ii.x-p70"></span>“For even thy tomb, O king,

<span id="ii.x-p71"></span>The Cretans fashioned.”

<span id="ii.x-p72"></span>Adonis, or “Thammuz yearly wounded,” was said
to live and die in alternate years.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[36:866](2070022.htm#fr_865) <span
id="ii.x-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p73"></span> By the word “falls” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p73.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p73.2"></span>ποπτώσεις</span>) Cyril
evidently refers to the story of Hephæstus, or Vulcan, to which Milton
alludes (*Paradise Lost*, I. 740):—

<span id="ii.x-p74"></span>“Men call’d him Mulciber, and how he fell

<span id="ii.x-p75"></span>From heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove

<span id="ii.x-p76"></span>Sheer o’er the crystal battlements:  from
morn

<span id="ii.x-p77"></span>To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,

<span id="ii.x-p78"></span>A summer’s day.”

<span id="fn_866"></span>[36:867](2070022.htm#fr_866) <span
id="ii.x-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p79"></span> The “thunder-strokes” refer to “Titan
heaven’s first-born, With his enormous brood” (*Par. Lost*, I. 510). 
Cf. Virgil, *Æn*. vi. 580:—

<span id="ii.x-p80"></span>“Hic genus antiquum Terræ, Titania pubes,

<span id="ii.x-p81"></span>Fulmine dejecti fundo volvuntur in imo.”

<span id="ii.x-p82"></span>Ibid. *v*. 585:—

<span id="ii.x-p83"></span>“Vidi et crudeles dantem Salmonea pœnas,

<span id="ii.x-p84"></span>Dum flammas Jovis et sonitus imitatur
Olympi.”

<span id="ii.x-p85"></span>Clem. Alex. (*Exhort*. II. § 37):—“Æsculapius
lies struck with lightning in the regions of Cynosuris.”  Cf. Virg.
*Æn*. vii. 770 *ss*.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[37:868](2070022.htm#fr_867) <span
id="ii.x-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p88"></span> The theory of two Gods, one good and the
other evil, was held by Cerdo, and Marcion (Hippolytus, *Refut. omnium
Hær.* VII. cap. 17:  Irenæus, III. xxv. 3, quoted in note on Cat. iv.
4).  The Manichees also held that the Creator of the world was distinct
from the Supreme God (Alexander Lycop. *de Manichæorum Sententiis*, cap.
iii.).

<span id="fn_868"></span>[37:869](2070022.htm#fr_868) <span
id="ii.x-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p90"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span id="ii.x-p90.1"></span>. 
Cyril’s description applies especially to the heresy of Manes.  See §
36, note 3, at the end of this Lecture; also Cat. xi. 21. and Cat. xv.
3.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[37:870](2070022.htm#fr_869) <span
id="ii.x-p91.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p92"></span> So Irenæus (I. xxiii. 2) says that “from
this Simon of Samaria all kinds of heresies derive their origin.”

<span id="fn_870"></span>[37:871](2070022.htm#fr_870) <span
id="ii.x-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p93"></span> [Acts viii.
18-21](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018)<span id="ii.x-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[37:872](2070022.htm#fr_871) <span
id="ii.x-p93.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p94"></span> [1 John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="ii.x-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[37:873](2070022.htm#fr_872) <span
id="ii.x-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p95"></span> Irenæus (I. xxiii. 2):  “Having purchased
from Tyre, a city of Phœnicia, a certain harlot named Helena, he used to
carry her about with him, declaring that this woman was the first
conception of his mind, the mother of all, by whom in the beginning he
conceived in his mind the creation of Angels and Archangels.”

<span id="fn_873"></span>[37:874](2070022.htm#fr_873) <span
id="ii.x-p95.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p96"></span> Cf. Epiphan. (*Hæres*. p. 55, B):  “He said
that he was the Son and had not really suffered, but only in appearance
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p96.1"></span>δοκήσει</span>).”

<span id="fn_874"></span>[37:875](2070022.htm#fr_874) <span
id="ii.x-p96.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p97"></span> Irenæus (I. xxiii. 1):  “He taught that it
was himself who appeared among the Jews as the Son, and descended in
Samaria as the Father, but came to other nations as the Holy Spirit.”

<span id="ii.x-p98"></span>Cyril here departs from his authority by
substituting Mount Sinai for Samaria, and thereby falls into error. 
Simon had first appeared in Samaria, being a native of Gitton:  moreover
in claiming to be the Father he meant to set himself far above the
inferior Deity who had given the Law on Sinai, saying that he was “the
highest of all Powers, that is the Father who is over all.”

<span id="fn_875"></span>[37:876](2070022.htm#fr_875) <span
id="ii.x-p98.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p99"></span> “Justin Martyr in his first Apology,
addressed to Antoninus Pius, writes thus (c. 26):  ‘There was one Simon
a Samaritan, of the village called Gitton, who in the reign of Claudius
Cæsar, and in your royal city of Rome, did mighty feats of magic by the
art of dæmons working in him.  He was considered a god, and as a god was
honoured among you with a statue, which statue was set up in the river
Tiber between the two bridges, and bears this inscription in Latin:

<span id="ii.x-p100"></span>*Simoni Deo Sancto*;

<span id="ii.x-p101"></span>which is,

<span id="ii.x-p102"></span>To Simon the holy God.

<span id="ii.x-p103"></span>“The substance of this story is repeated by
Irenæus (*adv. Hær*. I. xxiii. 1), and by Tertullian (*Apol*. c. 13),
who reproaches the Romans for installing Simon Magus in their Pantheon,
and giving him a statue and the title ‘Holy God.’

<span id="ii.x-p104"></span>“In <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p104.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1574, a stone, which had formed the
base of a statue, was dug up on the site described by Justin, the Island
in the Tiber, bearing an inscription—‘Semoni Sanco Deo Fidio Sacrum,
&c.’  Hence it has been supposed that Justin mistook a statue of the
Sabine God, ‘Semo Sancus,’ for one of Simon Magus.  See the notes in
Otto’s Justin Martyr, and Stieren’s Irenæus.

<span id="ii.x-p105"></span>“On the other hand Tillemont (*Memoires*, t.
ii. p. 482) maintains that Justin in an Apology addressed to the emperor
and written in Rome itself cannot reasonably be supposed to have fallen
into so manifest an error.  Whichever view we take of Justin’s accuracy
concerning the inscription and the statue, there is nothing improbable
in his statement that Simon Magus was at Rome in the reign of
Claudius.”  (Extracted by permission from the Speaker’s Commentary,
*Introduction to the Epistle to the Romans*, p. 4.)

<span id="fn_876"></span>[38:877](2070022.htm#fr_876) <span
id="ii.x-p106.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p107"></span> “Justin says not one word about St. Peter’s
alleged visit to Rome, and his encounter with Simon Magus.”  But
“Eusebius in his *Ecclesiastical History* (c. <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p107.1"></span>a.d.</span> 325), quotes Justin Martyr’s story
about Simon Magus (*E. H.* ii. c. 13), and then, without referring to
any authority, goes on to assert (c. 14) that ‘immediately in the same
reign of Claudius divine Providence led Peter the great Apostle to Rome
to encounter this great destroyer of life,’ and that he thus brought the
light of the Gospel from the East to the West’ (*ibidem*).

<span id="ii.x-p108"></span>Eusebius probably borrowed this story “from
the strange fictions of the *Clementine Recognitions* and *Homilies*,
and *Apostolic Constitutions*.”  See *Recogn*. III. 63–65; *Hom*. I. 15,
III. 58; *Apost. Constit*. VI. 7, 8, 9.  Cyril’s account of Simon’s
death is taken from the same untrustworthy sources.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[38:878](2070022.htm#fr_877) <span
id="ii.x-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p109"></span> [Matt. xviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019)<span id="ii.x-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[38:879](2070022.htm#fr_878) <span
id="ii.x-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p110"></span> [Matt.
16.19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="ii.x-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[38:880](2070022.htm#fr_879) <span
id="ii.x-p110.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p111"></span> It is certain that S. Paul was not at Rome
at this time.  This story of Simon Magus and his ‘fiery car’ is told,
with variations, by Arnobius (*adv. Gentes*, II. 12), and in *Apost.
Constit.* VI. 9.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[38:881](2070022.htm#fr_880) <span
id="ii.x-p111.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p112"></span> [2 Cor.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="ii.x-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[38:882](2070022.htm#fr_881) <span
id="ii.x-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p114"></span> Cerinthus taught that the world was not
made by the supreme God, but by a separate Power ignorant of Him.  See
Irenæus, *Hær*. I. xxvi., Euseb. *E.H.* iii. 28, with the notes in this
Series.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[38:883](2070022.htm#fr_882) <span
id="ii.x-p114.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p115"></span> Menander is first mentioned by Justin M.
(*Apolog*. I. cap. 26):  “Menander, also a Samaritan, of the town
Capparetæa, a disciple of Simon, and inspired by devils, we know to have
deceived many while he was in Antioch by his magical art.  He persuaded
those who adhered to him that they should never die.”  Irenæus (I.
xxiii. 5) adds that Menander announced himself as the Saviour sent by
the Invisibles, and taught that the world was created by Angels.  See
also Tertullian (*de Animâ*, cap. 50.)

<span id="fn_883"></span>[38:884](2070022.htm#fr_883) <span
id="ii.x-p115.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p116"></span> Carpocrates, a Platonic philosopher, who
taught at Alexandria (125 <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p116.1"></span>a.d.</span> *circ*.), held that the world and
all things in it were made by Angels far inferior to the unbegotten
(unknown) Father (Iren. I. xxv. 1; Tertullian, *Adv. Hær.* cap. 3).

<span id="fn_884"></span>[38:885](2070022.htm#fr_884) <span
id="ii.x-p116.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p117"></span> Irenæus, I. 26:  “Those who are called
Ebionites agree that the world was made by God; but their opinions with
respect to the Lord are like those of Cerinthus and Carpocrates.”

<span id="fn_885"></span>[38:886](2070022.htm#fr_885) <span
id="ii.x-p117.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p118"></span> On Marcion, see note 5, on Cat. iv. 4.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[38:887](2070022.htm#fr_886) <span
id="ii.x-p118.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p119"></span> [John xvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#025)<span id="ii.x-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[38:888](2070022.htm#fr_887) <span
id="ii.x-p119.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p120"></span> [Luke xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#028)<span id="ii.x-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[38:889](2070022.htm#fr_888) <span
id="ii.x-p120.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p121"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="ii.x-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[38:890](2070022.htm#fr_889) <span
id="ii.x-p121.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p122"></span> Marcion accepted only St. Luke’s Gospel,
and mutilated that (Tertullian, *Adv. Marcion*. iv. 2).  He thus got rid
of the testimony of the Apostles and eye-witnesses, Matthew and John,
and represented the Law and the Gospel as contradictory revelations of
two different Gods.  For this Cyril calls him ‘a second inventor of
mischief,’ Simon Magus (§ 14) being the first.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[38:891](2070022.htm#fr_890) <span
id="ii.x-p123.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p124"></span> Basilides was earlier than Marcion, being
the founder of a Gnostic sect at Alexandria in the reign of Hadrian
(<span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p124.1"></span>a.d.</span> 117–138). 
His doctrines are described by Irenæus (I. xxvii. 3–7), and very fully
by Hippolytus (*Refut. omn. Hær*. VII. 2–15).  The charge of teaching
licentiousness attaches rather to the later followers of Basilides than
to himself or his son Isidorus (Clem. Alex. *Stromat*. III. cap. 1). 
Basilides wrote a Commentary on the Gospel in 24 books (*Exegetica*), of
which the 23rd is quoted by Clement of Alexandria (*Stromat*. IV. cap.
12), and against which Agrippa Castor wrote a refutation.  Origen
(*Hom*. I. *in Lucam*.) says that Basilides wrote a Gospel bearing his
own name.  See Routh, *Rell. Sacr*. I. p. 85; V. p. 106:  Westcott,
*History of Canon of N.T.* iv. § 3.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[38:892](2070022.htm#fr_891) <span
id="ii.x-p124.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p125"></span> “The doctrines of Valentinus are described
fully by Irenæus (I. cap. i.) from whom S. Cyril takes this account. 
Valentinus, and Basilides, and Bardesanes, and Harmonious, and those of
their company admit Christ’s conception and birth of the Virgin, but say
that God the Word received no addition from the Virgin, but made a sort
of passage through her, as through a tube, and made use of a phantom in
appearing to men.”  (Theodoret, *Epist*. 145.)

<span id="fn_892"></span>[39:893](2070022.htm#fr_892) <span
id="ii.x-p125.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p126"></span> [Luke iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023)<span id="ii.x-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[39:894](2070022.htm#fr_893) <span
id="ii.x-p127.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p128"></span> Irenæus I. ii. 2.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[39:895](2070022.htm#fr_894) <span
id="ii.x-p128.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p129"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="ii.x-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[39:896](2070022.htm#fr_895) <span
id="ii.x-p129.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p130"></span> Irenæus, l. c., and Hippolytus, who gives
an elaborate account of the doctrines of Valentinus (L. VI. capp.
xvi.–xxxii.), both represent Sophia, “Wisdom,” as giving birth not to
Satan, but to a shapeless abortion, which was the origin of matter. 
According to Irenæus (I. iv. 2), Achamoth, the enthymesis of Sophia,
gave birth to the Demiurge, and “from her tears all that is of a liquid
nature was formed.”

<span id="ii.x-p131"></span>In Tertullian’s Treatise *against the
Valentinians* chap. xxii., Achamoth is said as by Cyril to have given
birth to Satan:  but in chap. xxiii. Satan seems to be identified (or
interchanged) with the Demiurge.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[39:897](2070022.htm#fr_896) <span
id="ii.x-p132.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p133"></span> The account in Irenæus (I. ii. 6) is rather
different:  “The whole Pleroma of the Æons, with one design and desire,
and with the concurrence of the Christ and the Holy Spirit, their Father
also setting the seal of His approval on their conduct, brought together
whatever each one had in himself of the greatest beauty and
preciousness; and uniting all these contributions so as skilfully to
blend the whole, they produced, to the honour and glory of Bythus, a
being of most perfect beauty, the very star of the Pleroma, and its
perfect fruit, namely Jesus.”

<span id="ii.x-p134"></span>Tertullian, *Against the Valentinians*,
chap. 12, gives a sarcastic description of this strange doctrine,
deriving his facts (chap. 5) from Justin, Miltiades, “Irenæus, that very
exact inquirer into all doctrines,” and Proculus.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[39:898](2070022.htm#fr_897) <span
id="ii.x-p134.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p135"></span> This statement does not agree with Irenæus
(I. vii. 1), who says that the Valentinians represented the Saviour,
that is Jesus, as becoming the bridegroom of Achamoth or Sophia.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[39:899](2070022.htm#fr_898) <span
id="ii.x-p135.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p136"></span> [2 John.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011)<span id="ii.x-p136.1"></span>: 
“Neither bid him God speed” (<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p136.2"></span>A.V</span>.):  “give him no greeting” (<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p136.3"></span>R.V.</span>).

<span id="fn_899"></span>[39:900](2070022.htm#fr_899) <span
id="ii.x-p136.4"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p137"></span> [Ephes. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011)<span id="ii.x-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[39:901](2070022.htm#fr_900) <span
id="ii.x-p138.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p139"></span> Eusebius in his brief notice of the
Manichean heresy (*Hist. Eccles*. vii. 31) plays, like S. Cyril, upon
the name Manes as well suited to a madman.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[39:902](2070022.htm#fr_901) <span
id="ii.x-p139.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p140"></span> Marcus Aurelius Probus, Emperor <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p140.1"></span>a.d.</span> 276–282, from being
an obscure Illyrian soldier came to be universally esteemed the best and
noblest of the Roman Emperors.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[39:903](2070022.htm#fr_902) <span
id="ii.x-p140.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p141"></span> Routh (*<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p141.1"></span>R.S</span>*<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p141.2"></span>. V.</span> p. 12) comes to the conclusion that
the famous disputation between Manes and Archelaus took place between
July and December, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p141.3"></span>a.d.</span> 277.  Accordingly these Lectures,
being “full 70 years” later, could not have been delivered before the
Spring of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p141.4"></span>a.d.</span>
348.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[39:904](2070022.htm#fr_903) <span
id="ii.x-p141.5"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p142"></span> Leo the Great (*Serm*. xv. cap. 4) speaks
of the madness of the later Manichees as including all errors and
impieties:  “all profanity of Paganism, all blindness of the carnal
Jews, the illicit secrets of the magic art, the sacrilege and blasphemy
of all heresies, flowed together in that sect as into a sort of
cess-pool of all filth.”  Leo summoned those whom they called the
“elect,” both men and women, before an assembly of Bishops and
Presbyters, and obtained from these witnesses a full account of the
execrable practices of the sect, in which, as he declares, “their law is
lying, their religion the devil, their sacrifice obscenity.”

<span id="fn_904"></span>[39:905](2070022.htm#fr_904) <span
id="ii.x-p142.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p143"></span> [Matt. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)<span id="ii.x-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[39:906](2070022.htm#fr_905) <span
id="ii.x-p143.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p144"></span> [Matt.
26.49](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#049)<span id="ii.x-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[39:907](2070022.htm#fr_906) <span
id="ii.x-p145.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p146"></span> [Heb. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016)<span id="ii.x-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[39:908](2070022.htm#fr_907) <span
id="ii.x-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p148"></span> Cyril takes his account of Manes from the
“*Acta Archelai et Manetis Disputationis,*” of which Routh has edited
the Latin translation together with the Fragments of the Greek preserved
by Cyril in this Lecture and by Epiphanius.  There is an English
translation of the whole in Clark’s “Ante-Nicene Christian Library.”

<span id="fn_908"></span>[40:909](2070022.htm#fr_908) <span
id="ii.x-p148.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p149"></span> The Saracens are mentioned by both Pliny
and Ptolemy.  See *Dict. of Greek and Roman Geography.*

<span id="fn_909"></span>[40:910](2070022.htm#fr_909) <span
id="ii.x-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p150"></span> There is no mention of Aristotle in the
*Acta Archelai*, but Scythianus is stated (cap. li.) to have founded the
sect in the time of the Apostles, and to have derived his duality of
Gods from Pythagoras, and to have learned the wisdom of the Egyptians.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[40:911](2070022.htm#fr_910) <span
id="ii.x-p150.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p151"></span> These four books are stated by Archelaus
(*Acta*, cap. lii.), to have been written for Manes by his disciple
Terebinthus.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[40:912](2070022.htm#fr_911) <span
id="ii.x-p151.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p152"></span> In allusion to this name the history of the
Disputation is called (*Acta*, cap. i.) “The true Treasure.”

<span id="fn_912"></span>[40:913](2070022.htm#fr_912) <span
id="ii.x-p152.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p153"></span> The true reading of this sentence, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p153.1"></span>προαιρούμενον τὸν
Σκυθιανόν</span>, instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p153.2"></span>τὸν πρόειρῃμένον Σκ</span>., has been restored
by Cleopas from the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p153.3"></span>ms.</span> in the Archiepiscopal library at
Jerusalem.  This reading agrees with the statement in *Acta Archel*.
cap. li.:  “Scythianus thought of making an excursion into Judæa, with
the purpose of meeting all those who had a reputation there as teachers;
but it came to pass that he suddenly departed this life, without having
been able to make any progress.”

<span id="fn_913"></span>[40:914](2070022.htm#fr_913) <span
id="ii.x-p154.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p155"></span> This statement agrees with the reading of
the Vatican <span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p155.1"></span>ms.</span> of
the *Acta Archelai*, “omnibus quæcunque ejus fuerunt congregratis.”

<span id="fn_914"></span>[40:915](2070022.htm#fr_914) <span
id="ii.x-p155.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p156"></span> In the *Acta* there is no mention of
Palestine, but only that he “set out for Babylonia, a province which is
now held by the Persians.”

<span id="fn_915"></span>[40:916](2070022.htm#fr_915) <span
id="ii.x-p156.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p157"></span> Clem. Alex. (*Strom*. i. 15):  “Some also
of the Indians obey the precepts of Boutta, and honour him as a god for
his extraordinary sanctity.”

<span id="fn_916"></span>[40:917](2070022.htm#fr_916) <span
id="ii.x-p157.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p158"></span> Cf. *Acta Arch*. cap. lii.:  “A certain
Parcus, however, a prophet, and Labdacus, son of Mithras, charged him
with falsehood.”  On the name Parcus and Labdacus, see *Dict. Chr.
Biogr.*, “Barcabbas,” and on the Magian worship of the Sun-god Mithras,
see Rawlinson (*Herodot*. Vol. I. p. 426).

<span id="fn_917"></span>[40:918](2070022.htm#fr_917) <span
id="ii.x-p158.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p159"></span> See below, § 33.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[40:919](2070022.htm#fr_918) <span
id="ii.x-p160.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p161"></span> Cf. *Acta Arch*. cap. liii. “A boy about
seven years old, named Corbicius.”

<span id="fn_919"></span>[40:920](2070022.htm#fr_919) <span
id="ii.x-p161.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p162"></span> See a different account in *Dict. Chr.
Biogr.*, “Manes.”

<span id="fn_920"></span>[40:921](2070022.htm#fr_920) <span
id="ii.x-p163.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p164"></span> [Mark iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029)<span id="ii.x-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[40:922](2070022.htm#fr_921) <span
id="ii.x-p164.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p165"></span> [Prov.
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#022)<span id="ii.x-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[41:923](2070022.htm#fr_922) <span
id="ii.x-p166.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p167"></span> [John xviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#008)<span id="ii.x-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[41:924](2070022.htm#fr_923) <span
id="ii.x-p167.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p168"></span> [Jonah i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#012)<span id="ii.x-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[41:925](2070022.htm#fr_924) <span
id="ii.x-p169.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p170"></span> The account of the discussion in this and
the two following chapters is not now found in the Latin Version of the
“Disputation,” but is regarded by Dr. Routh as having been derived by
Cyril from some different copies of the Greek.  The last paragraph of §
29, “These mysteries, &c.,” is evidently a caution addressed to the
hearers by Cyril himself (Routh, *Rell. Sac*. V. 199).

<span id="fn_925"></span>[41:926](2070022.htm#fr_925) <span
id="ii.x-p170.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p171"></span> [Ps. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009)<span id="ii.x-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[41:927](2070022.htm#fr_926) <span
id="ii.x-p171.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p172"></span> [Deut. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)<span id="ii.x-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[41:928](2070022.htm#fr_927) <span
id="ii.x-p172.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p173"></span> [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span id="ii.x-p173.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[41:929](2070022.htm#fr_928) <span
id="ii.x-p173.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p174"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)<span id="ii.x-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[41:930](2070022.htm#fr_929) <span
id="ii.x-p174.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p175"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="ii.x-p175.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[41:931](2070022.htm#fr_930) <span
id="ii.x-p175.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p176"></span> [Is. xlv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007)<span id="ii.x-p176.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[41:932](2070022.htm#fr_931) <span
id="ii.x-p176.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p177"></span> [Matt. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)<span id="ii.x-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[41:933](2070022.htm#fr_932) <span
id="ii.x-p178.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p179"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="ii.x-p179.1"></span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p179.2"></span>νοήματα</span>, “thoughts.”

<span id="fn_933"></span>[41:934](2070022.htm#fr_933) <span
id="ii.x-p179.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p180"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003)<span id="ii.x-p180.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[41:935](2070022.htm#fr_934) <span
id="ii.x-p180.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p181"></span> [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="ii.x-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[41:936](2070022.htm#fr_935) <span
id="ii.x-p181.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p182"></span> [Matt. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span id="ii.x-p182.1"></span>. 
Both A.V. and R.V. follow the better reading:  “because seeing they see
not, &c.”

<span id="fn_936"></span>[41:937](2070022.htm#fr_936) <span
id="ii.x-p182.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p183"></span> [Matt. xiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015)<span id="ii.x-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[41:938](2070022.htm#fr_937) <span
id="ii.x-p183.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p184"></span> [Matt.
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029), [Luke
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018)<span id="ii.x-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[41:939](2070022.htm#fr_938) <span
id="ii.x-p185.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p186"></span> Instead of the reading of the Benedictine
and earlier editions, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p186.1"></span>εἰ δὲ δεῖ καὶ ὥς τινες ἐξηγοῦνται τοῦτο
εἰπεῖν</span>, the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p186.2"></span>mss.</span> Roe and Casaubon combine <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p186.3"></span>δει και ως</span> into the
one word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p186.4"></span>δικαιως</span>, which is probably the right
reading.  Something, however, is still wanted to complete the
construction, and Petrus Siculus (*circ.* <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x-p186.5"></span>a.d.</span> 870) who quotes the passage in his
*History of the Manichees*, boldly conjectures <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p186.6"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p186.7"></span>στι καὶ οὕτως εἰπεῖν</span>.  A simpler
emendation would be—<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p186.8"></span>εἰ
δὲ δικαίως τινὲς ἐξηγοῦνται, δεῖ τουτο εἰπεῖν</span>—which both
completes the construction and explains the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p186.9"></span>δεῖ καὶ ὡς</span>.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[41:940](2070022.htm#fr_939) <span
id="ii.x-p186.10"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p187"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p187.1"></span>νοήματα</span>, [2 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="ii.x-p187.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[42:941](2070022.htm#fr_940) <span
id="ii.x-p187.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p188"></span> [Matt. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span id="ii.x-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[42:942](2070022.htm#fr_941) <span
id="ii.x-p188.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p189"></span> [Mark iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#034)<span id="ii.x-p189.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[42:943](2070022.htm#fr_942) <span
id="ii.x-p189.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p190"></span> See the note at the end of Procatechesis.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[42:944](2070022.htm#fr_943) <span
id="ii.x-p191.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p192"></span> Disput. § 55.  Compare the account of Manes
in Socrates, Eccles. Hist. I. 22, in this series.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[42:945](2070022.htm#fr_944) <span
id="ii.x-p193.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p194"></span> The Gospel of Thomas, an account of the
Childhood of Jesus, is extant in three forms, two in Greek and one in
Latin:  these are all translated in Clark’s Ante-Nicene Library.  The
work is wrongly attributed by Cyril to a disciple of Manes, being
mentioned long before Hippolytus (*Refutation of all Heresies*, V. 2)
and by Origen (*Hom. I. in Lucam*):  “There is extant also the Gospel
according to Thomas.”

<span id="fn_945"></span>[42:946](2070022.htm#fr_945) <span
id="ii.x-p194.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p195"></span> In the Disputation, § 9, Turbo describes
these transformations:  “Reapers must be transformed into hay, or beans,
or barley, or corn, or vegetables, that they may be reaped and cut. 
Again if any one eats bread, he must become bread, and be eaten.  If one
kills a chicken, he will be a chicken himself.  If one kills a mouse, he
also will be a mouse.”

<span id="fn_946"></span>[42:947](2070022.htm#fr_946) <span
id="ii.x-p196.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p197"></span> See Turbo’s confession, Disput. § 9:  “And
when they are going to eat bread, they first pray, speaking thus to the
bread:  ‘I neither reaped thee, nor ground thee, nor kneaded thee, nor
cast thee into the oven:  but another did these things and brought thee
to me, and I am not to blame for eating thee.’  And when he has said
this to himself, he says to the Catechumen, ‘I have prayed for thee,’
and so he goes away.”

<span id="fn_947"></span>[42:948](2070022.htm#fr_947) <span
id="ii.x-p198.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p199"></span> On the rites of Baptism and Eucharist
employed by the Manichees, see Dict. Chr. Biogr., *Manicheans.*

<span id="fn_948"></span>[42:949](2070022.htm#fr_948) <span
id="ii.x-p199.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p200"></span> The original runs:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p200.1"></span>Οὐ τολμῶ εἰπεῖν, τίνι
ἐμβάπτοντες τὴν ἰσχάδα, διδόασι τοῖς ἀθλίοις. διὰ συσσήμων δὲ μόνον
δηλούσθω. ἄνδρες γὰρ τὰ ἐν τοῖς ἐνυπνιασμοῖς ἐνθυμείσθωσιν, καὶ γυναῖκες
τὰ ἐν ἀφέδροις.  Μιαίνομεν ἀληθας τὸ στόμα κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[43:950](2070022.htm#fr_949) <span
id="ii.x-p200.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p201"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p201.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p201.2"></span>Ο</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p201.3"></span>μὲν γὰρ πορνεύσας, πρὸς μίαν ὥραν δ ἐπιθυμίαν
τελεῖ τὴν πρᾶξιν· καταγινώσκων δὲ τῆς πράξεως ὡς μιανθεὶς οἶδε λουτροῦ
ἐπιδεόμενος, καὶ γινώσκει τῆς πρὰξεως τὸ μυσαρόν.  ῾Ο δὲ Μανιχαῖος
θυσιαστηρίου μέσον, οὗ νομίζει, τίθησι ταῦτα, καὶ μιαίνει καὶ τὸ στόμα
καὶ τὴν γλῶτταν. παρὰ τοιούτου στόματος, ἄνθρωπε κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[43:951](2070022.htm#fr_950) <span
id="ii.x-p201.4"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p202"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p202.1"></span>οὗ νομίζει</span>.  The Manichees boasted of
their superiority to the Pagans in not worshipping God with altars,
temples, images, victims, or incense (August. *contra Faustum* XX. cap.
15).  Yet they used the names, as Augustine affirms (*l. c.* cap. 18): 
“Nevertheless I wish you would tell me why you call all those things
which you approve in your own case by these names, temple, altar,
sacrifice.”

<span id="fn_951"></span>[43:952](2070022.htm#fr_951) <span
id="ii.x-p203.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p204"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p204.1"></span>Κᾀκεῖνοι περὶ οὐρανῶν τὰς δυσφήμους ἔχουσι
γλώσσας. ᾽Ιησοῦς λέγει περὶ τοῦ πατρὸς αὐτοῦ, ῞Οστις τὸν ἥλιον αὐτοῦ
ἀνατέλλει ἐπὶ δικαίους καὶ ἀδίκους, καὶ βρέχει ἐπὶ πονηροὺς καὶ ἀγαθούς.
κᾀκεῖνοι λέγουσιν, ὅτι οἱ ὑετοὶ ἐξ ἐρωτικῆς μανίας γίνονται, καὶ τολμῶσι
λέγειν, ὅτι ἐστί τις παρθένος ἐν οὐρανῷ εὐειδὴς μετὰ νεανίσκου εὐειδοῦς,
καὶ κατὰ τὴν τῶν καμηλῶν ἢ λύκων καιρὸν, τοὺς τῆς αἰσχρᾶς ἐπιθυμίας
καιροὺς ἔχειν, καὶ κατὰ τὴν τοῦ χειμῶνος καιρὸν, μανιωδῶς αὐτὸν
ἐπιτρέχειν τῇ παρθένῳ, καὶ τὴν μὲν φεύγειν φασί, τὸν δὲ ἐπιτρέχειν, εἶτα
ἐπιτρέχοντα ἱδροῦν, ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν ἱδρώτων αὐτοῦ εἶναι τὸν ὑετόν.  Ταῦτα
γέγραπται ἐν τοῖς τῶν Μανιχαίων βιβλίοις· ταῦτα ἡμεῖς ἀνέγνωμεν,
κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[43:953](2070022.htm#fr_952) <span
id="ii.x-p205.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p206"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span id="ii.x-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[43:954](2070022.htm#fr_953) <span
id="ii.x-p206.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p207"></span> Gr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p207.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p207.2"></span>πιστήμη</span>.  See note on Introductory Lect.
§ 4.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[43:955](2070022.htm#fr_954) <span
id="ii.x-p207.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p208"></span> [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="ii.x-p208.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[43:956](2070022.htm#fr_955) <span
id="ii.x-p208.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p209"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p209.1"></span>σεμνότατος</span> is the reading of the chief
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.x-p209.2"></span>mss.</span>  But the
printed editions have <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p209.3"></span>σεμνότητος</span>, comparing it with such
phrases as <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.x-p209.4"></span>στόμα
ἀθεότητος</span> (vi. 15), and <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p209.5"></span>μετάνοια τῆς σωτηρίας</span> (xiv. 17).

<span id="fn_956"></span>[43:957](2070022.htm#fr_956) <span
id="ii.x-p210.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p211"></span> This saying is quoted three times in the
Clementine Homilies as spoken by our Lord.  See Hom. II. § 51; III. §
50; XVIII. § 20:  “Every man who wishes to be saved must become, as the
Teacher said, a judge of the books written to try us.  For thus He
spake:  *Become experienced bankers*.  Now the need of bankers arises
from the circumstance that the spurious is mixed up with the genuine.”

<span id="ii.x-p212"></span>On the same saying, quoted as Scripture in
the Apostolic Constitutions (II. § 36), Cotelerius suggests that in oral
tradition, or in some Apocryphal book, the proverb was said to come from
the Old Testament, and was added by some transcriber as a gloss in the
margin of [Matt. 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027), [Luke
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#023)<span id="ii.x-p212.1"></span>. 
Dionysius of Alexandria, Epist. VII., speaks of “the Apostolic word,
which thus urges all who are endowed with greater virtue, ‘Be ye
skillful money-changers,’” referring apparently as here to [1 Thess.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022)<span id="ii.x-p212.2"></span>,
“try all things, &c.”  (See Euseb. *E.H.* VII. ch. 6 in this series: 
Suicer. *Thesaurus*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x-p212.3"></span>Τραπεζίτης</span>:  and Resch. (*Agrapha*, pp.
233–239.)

<span id="fn_957"></span>[43:958](2070022.htm#fr_957) <span
id="ii.x-p212.4"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p213"></span> [1 Thess.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022)<span id="ii.x-p213.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[43:959](2070022.htm#fr_958) <span
id="ii.x-p213.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p214"></span> Compare § 13 of this Lecture, where Cyril
seems to refer especially to the heresy of Manes, as described in the
*Disputatio Archelai*, cap. 6:  “If you are desirous of being instructed
in the faith of Manes, hear it briefly from me.  That man worships two
gods, unbegotten, self-originate, eternal, opposed one to the other. 
The one he represents as good, and the other as evil, naming the one
Light, and the other Darkness.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Father.](2070023)
