[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070066)  [Next](2070068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="iii.xxiv-Page_378"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Oration XLI.</span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>On Pentecost.</span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p3"></span>*<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>It</span>* *is uncertain to what year the
following Oration belongs.  It was, however, certainly delivered at
Constantinople; the Benedictine Editors think in the year 381, in which
case the day would be May 16.  An indication tending to establish this
date is found in c. 14, in the expression of apprehension of personal
danger to himself for his boldness in setting forth the true faith.  In
fact, in the earlier part of this year, after the Emperor Theodosius had
put him in possession of the Patriarchal Throne, vacant by the expulsion
and deposition of the Arian Demophilus, he had narrowly escaped
assassination at the hands of the Arians.*

<span id="iii.xxiv-p4"></span>The Oration deals again with the subject
of the Fifth Theological Oration, the question of the Deity of the Holy
Ghost, but proceeds to establish the point by quite a different set of
arguments from those adopted in the former discourse, none of whose
points are here repeated.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p5"></span>The Preacher begins by commenting on the
various ways in which Festivals are kept by Jews, by Heathen and by
Christians.  Then he remarked on the mystical significance of the number
Seven, which he illustrates by several instances; and next proceeds with
his principal Subject.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p6"></span>God the Holy Ghost, he says, completes the
work of Christ.  Those who regard Him as a Created Being, as did the
followers of Macedonius, are thereby guilty of blasphemy and impiety. 
The true Faith recognizes Him as God; and this belief is necessary to
salvation; yet some reserve must be employed in applying that Name to
Him.  We must indeed insist on the recognition of His possession of all
the attributes of Godhead; and we must at any rate bear with those who,
like the Orator himself, also give Him the Name of God, which he hopes
all his hearers will receive from the Holy Ghost grace to do.  Then he
proceeds to shew from Holy Scripture that in fact all the Attributes of
Deity do belong to the Holy Spirit; and that His distinctive Personal
Mark is that He is neither Unbegotten like the Father, nor Begotten like
the Son.  He does not touch on the question of the double Procession.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p7"></span>It would seem from some expressions in c.
8 that this Discourse was not delivered to his usual audience, but to an
Assembly of “Religious.”

<span id="iii.xxiv-p8"></span>The Title of the Oration varies in
different <span class="sc"><span id="iii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> 
Thus some have it “Of The Same On Pentecost,” to which one adds “And On
The Holy Spirit;” and another puts it “Of The Same, a Homily on
Pentecost.”  The printed Editions before the Benedictine have “On The
Holy Pentecost.”

<span id="iii.xxiv-p9"></span>I.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>Let</span> us reason a little about the
Festival, that we may keep it spiritually.  For different persons have
different ways of keeping Festival; but to the worshipper of the Word a
discourse seems best; and of discourses, that which is best adapted to
the occasion.  And of all beautiful things none gives so much joy to the
lover of the beautiful, as that the lover of festivals should keep them
spiritually.  Let us look into the matter thus.  The Jew keeps festival
as well as we, but only in the letter.  For while following after the
bodily Law, he has not attained to the spiritual Law.  The Greek too
keeps festival, but only in the body, and in honour of his own gods and
demons, some of whom are creators of passion by their own admission, and
others were honoured out of passion.  Therefore even their manner of
keeping festival is passionate, as though their very sin were an honour
to God, in Whom their passion takes refuge as a thing to be proud
of. <span id="fr_4204"></span>[4205](#fn_4204)   We too keep festival,
but we keep it as is pleasing to the Spirit.  And it is pleasing to Him
that we should keep it by discharging some duty, either of action or
speech.  This then is our manner of keeping festival, to treasure up in
our soul some of those things which are permanent and will cleave to it,
not of those which will forsake us and be destroyed, and which only
tickle our senses for a little while; whereas they are for the most
part, in my judgment at least, harmful and ruinous.  For sufficient unto
the body is the evil thereof.  What need has that fire of further fuel,
or that beast of more plentiful food, to make it more uncontrollable,
and too violent for reason?

<span id="iii.xxiv-p11"></span>II.  Wherefore we must keep the feast
spiritually.  And this is the beginning of our discourse; for we must
speak, even if our speech do seem a little too discursive; and we must
be diligent for the sake of those who love <span id="page_379">p.
379</span> <span id="iii.xxiv-Page_379"></span>learning, that we may as
it were mix up some seasoning with our solemn festival.  The children of
the Hebrews do honour to the number Seven, according to the legislation
of Moses (as did the Pythagoreans in later days to the number Four, by
which indeed they were in the habit of swearing <span
id="fr_4205"></span>[4206](#fn_4205) as the Simonians and
Marcionites <span id="fr_4206"></span>[4207](#fn_4206) do by the number
Eight and the number Thirty, inasmuch as they have given names to and
reverence a system of Æons of these numbers); I cannot say by what rules
of analogy, or in consequence of what power of this number; anyhow they
do honour to it.  One thing indeed is evident, that God, having in six
days created matter, and given it form, and having arranged it in all
kinds of shapes and mixtures, and having made this present visible
world, on the seventh day rested from all His works, as is shewn by the
very name of the Sabbath, which in Hebrew means Rest.  If there be,
however, any more lofty reason than this, let others discuss it.  But
this honour which they pay to it is not confined to days alone, but also
extends to years.  That belonging to days the Sabbath proves, because it
is continually observed among them; and in accordance with this the
removal of leaven is for that number of days. <span
id="fr_4207"></span>[4208](#fn_4207)   And that belonging to years is
shewn by the seventh year, the year of Release; <span
id="fr_4208"></span>[4209](#fn_4208) and it consists not only of
Hebdomads, but of Hebdomads of Hebdomads, alike in days and years.  The
Hebdomads of days give birth to Pentecost, a day called holy among them;
and those of years to what they call the Jubilee, which also has a
release of land, and a manumission of slaves, and a release of
possessions bought.  For this nation consecrates to God, not only the
firstfruits of offspring, or of firstborn, but also those of days and
years.  Thus the veneration paid to the number Seven gave rise also to
the veneration of Pentecost.  For seven being multiplied by seven
generates fifty all but one day, which we borrow from the world to come,
at once the Eighth and the first, or rather one and indestructible.  For
the present sabbatism of our souls can find its cessation there, that a
portion may be given to seven and also to eight <span
id="fr_4209"></span>[4210](#fn_4209) (so some of our predecessors have
interpreted this passage of Solomon).

<span id="iii.xxiv-p18"></span>III.  As to the honour paid to Seven
there are many testimonies, but we will be content with a few out of the
many.  For instance, seven precious spirits are named; for I think
Isaiah <span id="fr_4210"></span>[4211](#fn_4210) loves to call the
activities of the Spirit spirits; and the Oracles of the Lord are
purified seven times according to David, <span
id="fr_4211"></span>[4212](#fn_4211) and the just is delivered from six
troubles and in the seventh is not smitten. <span
id="fr_4212"></span>[4213](#fn_4212)   But the sinner is pardoned not
seven times, but seventy times seven. <span
id="fr_4213"></span>[4214](#fn_4213)   And we may see it by the contrary
also (for the punishment of wickedness is to be praised), Cain being
avenged seven times, that is, punishment being exacted from him for his
fratricide, and Lamech seventy times seven, <span
id="fr_4214"></span>[4215](#fn_4214) because he was a murderer after the
law and the condemnation. <span id="fr_4215"></span>[4216](#fn_4215)  
And wicked neighbours <span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="iii.xxiv-Page_380"></span>receive sevenfold into their bosom; <span
id="fr_4216"></span>[4217](#fn_4216) and the House of Wisdom rests on
seven pillars <span id="fr_4217"></span>[4218](#fn_4217) and the Stone
of Zerubbabel is adorned with seven eyes; <span
id="fr_4218"></span>[4219](#fn_4218) and God is praised seven times a
day. <span id="fr_4219"></span>[4220](#fn_4219)   And again the barren
beareth seven, <span id="fr_4220"></span>[4221](#fn_4220) the perfect
number, she who is contrasted with her who is imperfect in her
children. <span id="fr_4221"></span>[4222](#fn_4221)

<span id="iii.xxiv-p31"></span>IV.  And if we must also look at ancient
history, I perceive that Enoch, <span
id="fr_4222"></span>[4223](#fn_4222) the seventh among our ancestors,
was honoured by translation.  I perceive also that the twenty-first,
Abraham, <span id="fr_4223"></span>[4224](#fn_4223) was given the glory
of the Patriarchate, by the addition of a greater mystery.  For the
Hebdomad thrice repeated brings out this number.  And one who is very
bold might venture even to come to the New Adam, my God and Lord Jesus
Christ, Who is counted the Seventy-seventh from the old Adam who fell
under sin, in the backward genealogy according to Luke. <span
id="fr_4224"></span>[4225](#fn_4224)   And I think of the seven trumpets
of Jesus, the son of Nave, and the same number of circuits and days and
priests, by which the walls of Jericho were shaken down. <span
id="fr_4225"></span>[4226](#fn_4225)   And so too the seven compassings
of the City; in the same way as there is a mystery in the threefold
breathings of Elias, the Prophet, by which he breathed life into the son
of the Sareptan widow, <span id="fr_4226"></span>[4227](#fn_4226) and
the same number of his floodings of the wood, <span
id="fr_4227"></span>[4228](#fn_4227) when he consumed the sacrifice with
fire sent from God, and condemned the prophets of shame who could not do
the like at his challenge.  And the sevenfold looking for the cloud
imposed upon the young servant; and Elissæus stretching himself that
number of times upon the child of the Shunammite, by which stretching
the breath of life was restored. <span
id="fr_4228"></span>[4229](#fn_4228)   To the same doctrine belongs, I
think (if I may omit the seven-stemmed and seven-lamped candlestick of
the Temple <span id="fr_4229"></span>[4230](#fn_4229) ) that the
ceremony of the Priests’ consecration lasted seven days; <span
id="fr_4230"></span>[4231](#fn_4230) and seven that of the purifying of
a leper, <span id="fr_4231"></span>[4232](#fn_4231) and that of the
Dedication of the Temple <span id="fr_4232"></span>[4233](#fn_4232) the
same number, and that in the seventieth year the people returned from
the Captivity; <span id="fr_4233"></span>[4234](#fn_4233) that whatever
is in Units may appear also in Decads, and the mystery of the Hebdomad
be reverenced in a more perfect number.  But why do I speak of the
distant past?  Jesus Himself who is pure perfection, could in the desert
and with five loaves feed five thousand, and again with seven loaves
four thousand.  And the leavings after they were satisfied were in the
first case twelve baskets full, and in the other seven baskets; <span
id="fr_4234"></span>[4235](#fn_4234) neither, I imagine, without a
reason or unworthy of the Spirit.  And if you read for yourself you may
take note of many numbers which contain a meaning deeper than appears on
the surface.  But to come to an instance which is most useful to us on
the present occasion, not that for these reasons or others very similar
or yet more divine, the Hebrews honour the Day of Pentecost, and we also
honour it; just as there are other rites of the Hebrews which we
observe…they were typically observed by them, and by us they are
sacramentally reinstated.  And now having said so much by way of preface
about the Day, let us proceed to what we have to say further.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p45"></span>V.  We are keeping the feast of Pentecost
and of the Coming of the Spirit, and the appointed time of the Promise,
and the fulfilment of our hope.  And how great, how august, is the
Mystery.  The dispensations of the Body of Christ are ended; or rather,
what belongs to His Bodily Advent (for I hesitate to say the
Dispensation of His Body, as long as no discourse persuades me that it
is better to have put off the body <span
id="fr_4235"></span>[4236](#fn_4235) ), and that of the Spirit is
beginning.  And what were the things pertaining to the Christ?  The
Virgin, the Birth, the Manger, the Swaddling, the Angels glorifying Him,
the Shepherds running to Him, the course of the Star, the Magi
worshipping Him and bringing Gifts, Herod’s <span id="page_381">p.
381</span> <span id="iii.xxiv-Page_381"></span>murder of the children,
the Flight of Jesus into Egypt, the Return from Egypt, the Circumcision,
the Baptism, the Witness from Heaven, the Temptation, the Stoning for
our sake (because He had to be given as an Example to us of enduring
affliction for the Word), the Betrayal, the Nailing, the Burial, the
Resurrection, the Ascension; and of these even now He suffers many
dishonours at the hands of the enemies of Christ; and He bears them, for
He is longsuffering.  But from those who love Him He receives all that
is honourable.  And He defers, as in the former case His wrath, so in
ours His kindness; in their case perhaps to give them the grace of
repentance, and in ours to test our love; whether we do not faint in our
tribulations <span id="fr_4236"></span>[4237](#fn_4236) and conflicts
for the true Religion, as was from of old the order of His Divine
Economy, and of his unsearchable judgments, with which He orders wisely
all that concerns us.  Such are the mysteries of Christ.  And what
follows we shall see to be more glorious; and may we too be seen.  As to
the things of the Spirit, may the Spirit be with me, and grant me speech
as much as I desire; or if not that, yet as is in due proportion to the
season.  Anyhow He will be with me as my Lord; not in servile guise, nor
awaiting a command, as some think. <span
id="fr_4237"></span>[4238](#fn_4237)   For He bloweth where He wills and
on whom He wills, and to what extent He wills. <span
id="fr_4238"></span>[4239](#fn_4238)   Thus we are inspired both to
think and to speak of the Spirit.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p50"></span>VI.  They who reduce the Holy Spirit to
the rank of a creature are blasphemers and wicked servants, and worst of
the wicked.  For it is the part of wicked servants to despise Lordship,
and to rebel against dominion, and to make That which is free their
fellow-servant.  But they who deem Him God are inspired by God <span
id="fr_4239"></span>[4240](#fn_4239) and are illustrious in their mind;
and they who go further and *call* Him so, if to well disposed hearers
are exalted; if to the low, are not reserved enough, for they commit
pearls to clay, and the noise of thunder to weak ears, and the sun to
feeble eyes, and solid food to those who are still using milk; <span
id="fr_4240"></span>[4241](#fn_4240) whereas they ought to lead them
little by little up to what lies beyond them, and to bring them up to
the higher truth; adding light to light, and supplying truth upon
truth.  Therefore we will leave the more mature discourse, for which the
time has not yet come, and will speak with them as follows.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p53"></span>VII.  If, my friends, you will not
acknowledge the Holy Spirit to be uncreated, nor yet eternal; clearly
such a state of mind is due to the contrary spirit—forgive me, if in my
zeal I speak somewhat over boldly.  If, however, you are sound enough to
escape this evident impiety, and to place outside of slavery Him Who
gives freedom to yourselves, then see for yourselves with the help of
the Holy Ghost and of us what follows.  For I am persuaded that you are
to some extent partakers of Him, so that I will go into the question
with you as kindred souls.  Either shew me some mean between lordship
and servitude, that I may there place the rank of the Spirit; or, if you
shrink from imputing servitude to Him, there is no doubt of the rank in
which you must place the object of your search.  But you are
dissatisfied with the syllables, and you stumble at the word, and it is
to you a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence; <span
id="fr_4241"></span>[4242](#fn_4241) for so is Christ to some minds.  It
is only human after all.  Let us meet one another in a spiritual manner;
let us be full rather of brotherly than of self love.  Grant us the
Power of the Godhead, and we will give up to you the use of the Name. 
Confess the Nature in other words for which you have greater reverence,
and we will heal you as infirm people, filching from you some matters in
which you delight.  For it is shameful, yes, shameful and utterly
illogical, when you are sound in soul, to draw petty distinctions about
the sound, and to hide the Treasure, as if you envied it to others, or
were afraid lest you should sanctify your own tongue too.  But it is
even more shameful for us to be in the state of which we accuse you,
and, while condemning your petty distinctions of words to make petty
distinctions of letters.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p55"></span>VIII.  Confess, my friends, the Trinity
to be of One Godhead; or if you will, of One Nature; and we will pray
the Spirit to give you this word God.  He will give it to you, I well
know, inasmuch as He has already granted you the first portion and the
second; <span id="fr_4242"></span>[4243](#fn_4242) and especially <span
id="page_382">p. 382</span> <span id="iii.xxiv-Page_382"></span>if that
about which we are contending is some spiritual cowardice, and not the
devil’s objection.  Yet more clearly and concisely, let me say, do not
you call us to account for our loftier word (for envy has nothing to do
with this ascent), and we will not find fault with what you have been
able to attain, until by another road you are brought up to the same
resting place.  For we are not seeking victory, but to gain brethren, by
whose separation from us we are torn.  This we concede to you in whom we
do find something of vital truth, who are sound as to the Son.  We
admire your life, but we do not altogether approve your doctrine.  Ye
who have the things of the Spirit, receive Himself in addition, that ye
may not only strive, but strive lawfully, <span
id="fr_4243"></span>[4244](#fn_4243) which is the condition of your
crown.  May this reward of your conversation be granted you, that you
may confess the Spirit perfectly and proclaim with us, aye and before
us, all that is His due.  Yes, and I will venture even more on your
behalf; I will even utter the Apostle’s wish.  So much do I cling to
you, and so much do I revere your array, and the colour of your
continence, and those sacred assemblies, and the august Virginity, and
purification, and the Psalmody that lasts all night <span
id="fr_4244"></span>[4245](#fn_4244) and your love of the poor, and of
the brethren, and of strangers, that I could consent to be Anathema from
Christ, and even to suffer something as one condemned, if only you might
stand beside us, and we might glorify the Trinity together.  For of the
others why should I speak, seeing they are clearly dead (and it is the
part of Christ alone to raise them, Who quickeneth the dead by His own
Power), and are unhappily separated in place as they are bound together
by their doctrine; and who quarrel among themselves as much as a pair of
squinting eyes in looking at the same object, and differ with one
another, not in sight but in position—if indeed we may charge them only
with squinting, and not with utter blindness.  And now that I have to
some extent laid down your position, come, let us return again to the
subject of the Spirit, and I think you will follow me now.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p59"></span>IX.  The Holy Ghost, then, always
existed, and exists, and always will exist.  He neither had a beginning,
nor will He have an end; but He was everlastingly ranged with and
numbered with the Father and the Son.  For it was not ever fitting that
either the Son should be wanting to the Father, or the Spirit to the
Son.  For then Deity would be shorn of Its Glory in its greatest
respect, for It would seem to have arrived at the consummation of
perfection as if by an afterthought.  Therefore He was ever being
partaken, but not partaking; perfecting, not being perfected;
sanctifying, not being sanctified; deifying, not being deified; Himself
ever the same with Himself, and with Those with Whom He is ranged;
invisible, eternal, incomprehensible, unchangeable, without quality,
without quantity, without form, impalpable, self-moving, eternally
moving, with free-will, self-powerful, All-powerful (even though all
that is of the Spirit is referable to the First Cause, just as is all
that is of the Only-begotten); Life and Lifegiver; Light and Lightgiver;
absolute Good, and Spring of Goodness; the Right, the Princely Spirit;
the Lord, the Sender, the Separator; Builder of His own Temple; leading,
working as He wills; distributing His own Gifts; the Spirit of Adoption,
of Truth, of Wisdom, of Understanding, of Knowledge, of Godliness, of
Counsel, of Fear (which are ascribed to Him <span
id="fr_4245"></span>[4246](#fn_4245) ) by Whom the Father is known and
the Son is glorified; and by Whom *alone* He is known; one class, one
service, worship, power, perfection, sanctification.  Why make a long
discourse of it?  All that the Father hath the Son hath also, except the
being Unbegotten; and all that the Son hath the Spirit hath also, except
the Generation.  And these two matters do not divide the Substance, as I
understand it, but rather are divisions within the Substance. <span
id="fr_4246"></span>[4247](#fn_4246)

<span id="iii.xxiv-p62"></span>X.  Are you labouring to bring forth
objections?  Well, so am I to get on with my discourse.  Honour the Day
of the Spirit; restrain your tongue if you can a little.  It is the time
to speak of other tongues—reverence them or fear them, when you see that
they are of fire.  To-day let us teach dogmatically; to-morrow we may
discuss.  To-day let us keep the feast; to-morrow will be time enough to
behave ourselves unseemly—the first mystically, the second theatrically;
the one in the Churches, the other in the marketplace; the one among the
sober, the other among the drunken; the one as befits those who
vehemently desire, the other, as among those who <span id="page_383">p.
383</span> <span id="iii.xxiv-Page_383"></span>make a joke of the
Spirit.  Having then put an end to the element that is foreign to us,
let us now thoroughly furnish our own friends.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p63"></span>XI.  He wrought first in the heavenly and
angelic powers, and such as are first after God and around God.  For
from no other source flows their perfection and their brightness, and
the difficulty or impossibility of moving them to sin, but from the Holy
Ghost.  And next, in the Patriarchs and Prophets, of whom the former saw
Visions of God, or knew Him, and the latter also foreknew the future,
having their master part moulded by the Spirit, and being associated
with events that were yet future as if present, for such is the power of
the Spirit.  And next in the Disciples of Christ (for I omit to mention
Christ Himself, in Whom He dwelt, not as energizing, but as accompanying
His Equal), and that in three ways, as they were able to receive Him,
and on three occasions; before Christ was glorified by the Passion, and
after He was glorified by the Resurrection; and after His Ascension, or
Restoration, or whatever we ought to call it, to Heaven.  Now the first
of these manifests Him—the healing of the sick and casting out of evil
spirits, which could not be apart from the Spirit; and so does that
breathing upon them after the Resurrection, which was clearly a divine
inspiration; and so too the present distribution of the fiery tongues,
which we are now commemorating.  But the first manifested Him
indistinctly, the second more expressly, this present one more
perfectly, since He is no longer present only in energy, but as we may
say, substantially, associating with us, and dwelling in us.  For it was
fitting that as the Son had lived with us in bodily form—so the Spirit
too should appear in bodily form; and that after Christ had returned to
His own place, He should have come down to us—*Coming* because He is the
Lord; *Sent*, because He is not a rival God.  For such words no less
manifest the Unanimity than they mark the separate Individuality.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p64"></span>XII.  And therefore He came after Christ,
that a Comforter should not be lacking unto us; but *Another* Comforter,
that you might acknowledge His co-equality.  For this word Another marks
an Alter Ego, a name of equal Lordship, not of inequality.  For Another
is not said, I know, of different kinds, but of things consubstantial. 
And He came in the form of Tongues because of His close relation to the
Word.  And they were of Fire, perhaps because of His purifying Power
(for our Scripture knows of a purifying fire, as any one who wishes can
find out), or else because of His Substance.  For our God is a consuming
Fire, and a Fire <span id="fr_4247"></span>[4248](#fn_4247) burning up
the ungodly; <span id="fr_4248"></span>[4249](#fn_4248) though you may
again pick a quarrel over these words, being brought into difficulty by
the Consubstantiality.  And the tongues were cloven, because of the
diversity of Gifts; and they sat to signify His Royalty and Rest among
the Saints, and because the Cherubim are the Throne of God.  And it took
place in an Upper Chamber (I hope I am not seeming to any one over
tedious), because those who should receive it were to ascend and be
raised above the earth; for also certain upper chambers <span
id="fr_4249"></span>[4250](#fn_4249) are covered with Divine
Waters, <span id="fr_4250"></span>[4251](#fn_4250) by which the praise
of God are sung.  And Jesus Himself in an Upper Chamber gave the
Communion of the Sacrament to those who were being initiated into the
higher Mysteries, that thereby might be shewn on the one hand that God
must come down to us, as I know He did of old to Moses; and on the other
that we must go up to Him, and that so there should come to pass a
Communion of God with men, by a coalescing of the dignity.  For as long
as either remains on its own footing, the One in His Glory <span
id="fr_4251"></span>[4252](#fn_4251) the other in his lowliness, so long
the Goodness of God cannot mingle with us, and His lovingkindness is
incommunicable, and there is a great gulf between, which cannot be
crossed; and which separates not only the Rich Man from Lazarus and
Abraham’s Bosom which he longs for, but also the created and changing
natures from that which is eternal and immutable.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p70"></span>XIII.  This was proclaimed by the
Prophets in such passages as the following:—The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me; <span id="fr_4252"></span>[4253](#fn_4252) and, There shall
rest upon Him Seven Spirits; and The Spirit of the Lord descended and
led them; <span id="fr_4253"></span>[4254](#fn_4253) and The spirit of
Knowledge filling Bezaleel, <span id="fr_4254"></span>[4255](#fn_4254)
the Master-builder of the Tabernacle; and, The Spirit provoking to
anger; <span id="fr_4255"></span>[4256](#fn_4255) and the Spirit
carrying away Elias in a chariot, <span
id="fr_4256"></span>[4257](#fn_4256) and sought in double measure by
Elissæus; and David led and strengthened by the Good and Princely
Spirit. <span id="fr_4257"></span>[4258](#fn_4257)   And He was promised
by the mouth of Joel first, who said, And it shall be in the last days
that I will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh (that is, upon all that
believe), and upon your sons and upon your daughters, <span
id="fr_4258"></span>[4259](#fn_4258) and <span id="page_384">p.
384</span> <span id="iii.xxiv-Page_384"></span>the rest; and then
afterwards by Jesus, being glorified by Him, and giving back glory to
Him, as He was glorified by and glorified the Father. <span
id="fr_4259"></span>[4260](#fn_4259)   And how abundant was this
Promise.  He shall abide for ever, and shall remain with you, whether
now with those who in the sphere of time are worthy, or hereafter with
those who are counted worthy of that world, when we have kept Him
altogether by our life here, and not rejected Him in so far as we sin.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p79"></span>XIV.  This Spirit shares with the Son in
working both the Creation and the Resurrection, as you may be shewn by
this Scripture; By the Word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all
the power of them by the breath of His Mouth; <span
id="fr_4260"></span>[4261](#fn_4260) and this, The Spirit of God that
made me, and the Breath of the Almighty that teacheth me; <span
id="fr_4261"></span>[4262](#fn_4261) and again, Thou shalt send forth
Thy Spirit and they shall be created, and Thou shalt renew the face of
the earth. <span id="fr_4262"></span>[4263](#fn_4262)   And He is the
Author of spiritual regeneration.  Here is your proof:—None can see or
enter into the Kingdom, except he be born again of the Spirit, <span
id="fr_4263"></span>[4264](#fn_4263) and be cleansed from the first
birth, which is a mystery of the night, by a remoulding of the day and
of the Light, by which every one singly is created anew.  This Spirit,
for He is most wise and most loving, <span
id="fr_4264"></span>[4265](#fn_4264) if He takes possession of a
shepherd makes him a Psalmist, subduing evil spirits by his song, <span
id="fr_4265"></span>[4266](#fn_4265) and proclaims him King; if he
possess a goatherd and scraper <span
id="fr_4266"></span>[4267](#fn_4266) of sycamore fruit, <span
id="fr_4267"></span>[4268](#fn_4267) He makes him a Prophet.  Call to
mind David and Amos.  If He possess a goodly youth, He makes him a Judge
of Elders, <span id="fr_4268"></span>[4269](#fn_4268) even beyond his
years, as Daniel testifies, who conquered the lions in their den. <span
id="fr_4269"></span>[4270](#fn_4269)   If He takes possession of
Fishermen, He makes them catch the whole world in the nets of Christ,
taking them up in the meshes of the Word.  Look at Peter and Andrew and
the Sons of Thunder, thundering the things of the Spirit.  If of
Publicans, He makes gain of them for discipleship, and makes them
merchants of souls; witness Matthew, yesterday a Publican, today an
Evangelist.  If of zealous persecutors, He changes the current of their
zeal, and makes them Pauls instead of Sauls, and as full of piety as He
found them of wickedness.  And He is the Spirit of Meekness, and yet is
provoked by those who sin.  Let us therefore make proof of Him as
gentle, not as wrathful, by confessing His Dignity; and let us not
desire to see Him implacably wrathful.  He too it is who has made me
today a bold herald to you;—if without rest to myself, God be thanked;
but if with risk, thanks to Him nevertheless; in the one case, that He
may spare those that hate us; in the other, that He may consecrate us,
in receiving this reward of our preaching of the Gospel, to be made
perfect by blood.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p90"></span>XV.  They spoke with strange tongues, and
not those of their native land; and the wonder was great, a language
spoken by those who had not learnt it.  And the sign is to them that
believe not, <span id="fr_4270"></span>[4271](#fn_4270) and not to them
that believe, that it may be an accusation of the unbelievers, as it is
written, With other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this
people, and not even so will they listen to Me <span
id="fr_4271"></span>[4272](#fn_4271) saith the Lord.  But they heard. 
Here stop a little and raise a question, how you are to divide the
words.  For the expression has an ambiguity, which is to be determined
by the punctuation.  Did they each hear in their own dialect <span
id="fr_4272"></span>[4273](#fn_4272) so that if I may so say, one sound
was uttered, but many were heard; the air being thus beaten and, so to
speak, sounds being produced more clear than the original sound; or are
we to put the stop after “they Heard,” and then to add “them speaking in
their own languages” to what follows, so that it would be speaking in
languages their own to the hearers, which would be foreign to the
speakers?  I prefer to put it this latter way; for on the other plan the
miracle would be rather of the hearers than of the speakers; whereas in
this it would be on the speakers’ side; and it was they who were
reproached for drunkenness, evidently because they by the Spirit wrought
a miracle in the matter of the tongues.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p94"></span>XVI.  But as the old Confusion of tongues
was laudable, when men who were of one language in wickedness and
impiety, even as some now venture to be, were building the Tower; <span
id="fr_4273"></span>[4274](#fn_4273) for by the confusion of their
language the unity of their intention was broken up, and their
undertaking destroyed; so much more worthy of praise is the present
miraculous one.  For being poured from One Spirit upon many men, it
brings them again into harmony.  And there is a diversity of Gifts,
which stands in need of yet another Gift to <span id="page_385">p.
385</span> <span id="iii.xxiv-Page_385"></span>discern which is the
best, where all are praiseworthy.  And that division also might be
called noble of which David says, Drown O Lord and divide their
tongues. <span id="fr_4274"></span>[4275](#fn_4274)   Why?  Because they
loved all words of drowning, the deceitful tongue. <span
id="fr_4275"></span>[4276](#fn_4275)   Where he all but expressly
arraigns the tongues of the present day <span
id="fr_4276"></span>[4277](#fn_4276) which sever the Godhead.  Thus much
upon this point.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p99"></span>XVII.  Next, since it was to inhabitants
of Jerusalem, most devout Jews, Parthians, Medes, and Elamites,
Egyptians, and Libyans, Cretans too, and Arabians, and Mesopotamians,
and my own Cappadocians, that the tongues spake, and to Jews (if any one
prefer so to understand it), out of every nation under heaven thither
collected; it is worth while to see who these were and of what
captivity.  For the captivity in Egypt and Babylon was circumscribed,
and moreover had long since been brought to an end by the Return; and
that under the Romans, which was exacted for their audacity against our
Saviour, was not yet come to pass, though it was in the near future.  It
remains then to understand it of the captivity under Antiochus, which
happened not so very long before this time.  But if any does not accept
this explanation, as being too elaborate, seeing that this captivity was
neither ancient nor widespread over the world, and is looking for a more
reliable—perhaps the best way to take it would be as follows.  The
nation was removed many times, as Esdras related; and some of the Tribes
were recovered, and some were left behind; of whom probably (dispersed
as they were among the nations) some would have been present and shared
the miracle.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p100"></span>XVIII.  These questions have been
examined before by the studious, and perhaps not without occasion; and
whatever else any one may contribute at the present day, he will be
joined with us.  But now it is our duty to dissolve this Assembly, for
enough has been said.  But the Festival is never to be put an end to;
but kept now indeed with our bodies; but a little later on altogether
spiritually there, where we shall see the reasons of these things more
purely and clearly, in the Word Himself, and God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, the True Festival and Rejoicing of the Saved—to Whom be the
glory and the worship, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, now and for
ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4204"></span>[378:4205](2070067.htm#fr_4204) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p10"></span> They deify bad passions, and then act as
if the gratification of them were an honour to the gods in whom they
have personified them.

<span id="fn_4205"></span>[379:4206](2070067.htm#fr_4205) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p12"></span> The followers of Pythagoras swore by
their master, who taught them the mystic properties of the number Four,
which he called the Fountain of the Universe, because all things were
made of four elements.

<span id="fn_4206"></span>[379:4207](2070067.htm#fr_4206) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p13"></span> The Simonians and Marcionites were two
Gnostic sects, the one deriving its name from Simon Magus, the other
from Marcion of Sinope.  Simon, of whom we read in the [Acts
8](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#000)<span id="iii.xxiv-p13.1"></span>, is
generally regarded by the Fathers as the precursor of the Gnostic
Heresies.  He maintained a system of Emanations from God, of which he
claimed to be himself the chief.  In his teaching the first cause of all
things was an Ineffable Existence or Non-existence, which he sometimes
called Silence and sometimes Fire, from which the Universe was generated
by a series of six Emanations called Roots, which he arranged in pairs,
male and female; and these six contained among them the whole Essence of
his first Principle Silence.  These Roots with Simon himself and his
consort Helena, make up the Ogdoad referred to in the text.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p14"></span>Marcion was a native of Sinope in Pontus,
and flourished about the middle of the Second Century.  His system of
teaching was mainly rationalistic, and did not recognize (Dr. Mansel
tells us, “Gnostic Heresies,” p. 203) any theory of Emanations as
connecting links between God and the world; for from his point of view
the Supreme God was not, even indirectly, the Author of the world.  It
would seem that S. Gregory is confusing Marcion with Valentinus, and
Egyptian heresiarch who flourished about the same time.  In his theory
we first find a system of “Æons,” divided into an Ogdoad, a Decad, and a
Dodecad.  Or he may mean Marcus, a follower of Valentinus, and founder
of the subordinate sect of the Marcosians.

<span id="fn_4207"></span>[379:4208](2070067.htm#fr_4207) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p15"></span> [Exod. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4208"></span>[379:4209](2070067.htm#fr_4208) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p16"></span> [Exod.
21.2](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4209"></span>[379:4210](2070067.htm#fr_4209) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p17"></span> [Eccles. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxiv-p17.1"></span>. 
S. Gregory himself (Or. xviii. “in laudem Patris,” c. 20) comments upon
this passage as enjoining liberal almsgiving.  S. Ambrose (in Luc. vi.)
has a mystical interpretation somewhat resembling that here referred
to:  but I cannot find a predecessor of Gregory on the verse.  Some
later commentators, according to Cornelius and Lapide, take the Seven of
the poor in this life, and the Eight of the souls in Purgatory,
following a common interpretation of these numbers.

<span id="fn_4210"></span>[379:4211](2070067.htm#fr_4210) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p19"></span> [Isa. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4211"></span>[379:4212](2070067.htm#fr_4211) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p20"></span> [Ps. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxiv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4212"></span>[379:4213](2070067.htm#fr_4212) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p21"></span> [Job v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019)<span id="iii.xxiv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4213"></span>[379:4214](2070067.htm#fr_4213) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p22"></span> [Matt. xviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxiv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4214"></span>[379:4215](2070067.htm#fr_4214) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p23"></span> [Gen. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4215"></span>[379:4216](2070067.htm#fr_4215) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p24"></span> It will be worth while, says Nicetas, to
add S. John Chrysostom’s account of the sevenfold punishment which was
inflicted on Cain.  The number Seven he says (Hom. in [Gen. xix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxiv-p24.1"></span>, p.
168 c.) is often used in Holy Scripture in the sense of multitude, as
e.g., in such places, as, “The barren hath borne seven,” and the like. 
So here; the greatness of the crime is implied, and that it is not a
simple and single crime, but seven sins; and those of such a sort that
every one of them must be avenged by a very severe punishment.  First,
that he envied his brother when he saw that God loved him, a sin which
without any other added to it was sufficient to be deadly.  The next was
that this sin was against a brother.  The third that he compassed a
deceit.  The fourth that he perpetrated a murder.  The fifth that it was
his brother that he slew.  The sixth that he was the first man to commit
a murder.  The seventh that he lied to God.  You have followed these
steps with your mind, or do you desire that I should repeat the
enumeration in a fuller way, to make you understand how each of these
sins would be visited with a very severe penalty, even if it stood
alone.  Who would judge a man worthy of pardon who envies another simply
because he enjoys the favour and love of God?  Here then is one very
great and inexpiable sin.  And this is shewn to be even more atrocious
when he who is envied is a brother, and has done him no wrong.  Further,
he contrived a deceit, bringing his brother out by a trick into the
field, without reverence for nature herself.  The fourth crime is the
murder which he committed.  The fifth is that it was his brother whom he
put to death; his brother, I say, that came out of the same womb. 
Sixthly, he was the first inventor of murder.  Seventhly, when
questioned by God he did not hesitate to lie.  And therefore because he
dared to lay hands on his brother, he draws upon himself severe
punishments.  He then proceeds to shew how Lamech’s crime was worse than
Cain’s, and is therefore said to be punished seventy times; that is, in
manifold ways.  Lamech slew a man and a young man, and this, after the
law against murder had been given; that is, after God had punished
Cain.  Cain’s punishment he says was sevenfold, corresponding to his
seven sins:—1. Cursed is the ground for thy sake.  2. Thou shalt till
the ground; i.e., thou shalt never rest from the toils of husbandry.  3.
It shall not yield unto thee its strength; 4. thy labours shall be
barren, and 5. “sighing and trembling” shalt thou be.  And the sixth is
from the lips of Cain himself:—“If Thou castest me out from the earth,”
i.e., from all earthly conveniences, “from Thy face shall I be hid.” 
And God put a mark upon Cain; this is the seventh punishment—a mark of
infamy declaring his guilt and shame to all that should see him.  Others
according to the same authority (and Bishop Wordsworth adopts the
explanation) explains it thus.  From Cain to the Deluge are seven
generations, and then the world was punished because sin had spread far
and wide.  But Lamech’s sin could not be cured by the Deluge, but only
by Him Who taketh away the sin of the world.  Then count all the
generations from Adam to Christ, and according to the Genealogy in Luke,
you will find that our Lord was born in the seventieth generation.  This
is S. Jerome’s explanation.

<span id="fn_4216"></span>[380:4217](2070067.htm#fr_4216) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p25"></span> [Ps. lxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxiv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4217"></span>[380:4218](2070067.htm#fr_4217) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p26"></span> [Prov.
9:0](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#000), [Prov.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#000)<span id="iii.xxiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4218"></span>[380:4219](2070067.htm#fr_4218) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p27"></span> [Zech. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4219"></span>[380:4220](2070067.htm#fr_4219) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p28"></span> [Ps. cxix.
164](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#164)<span id="iii.xxiv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4220"></span>[380:4221](2070067.htm#fr_4220) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p29"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxiv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4221"></span>[380:4222](2070067.htm#fr_4221) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p30"></span> Peninnah who had “many” children is
called Imperfect in her children, because Many is an indefinite word;
where Hannah’s one child Samuel was so perfect a man that he was as it
were seven to his mother.  For Seven is mystically, as Six or Ten is
arithmetically, the perfect number.  (Six because it is the sum of its
own factors, 1, 2, 3; Ten, because it is the basis of numeration; Seven
because it is the number of Creation; for God rested on the Sabbath
Day.).

<span id="fn_4222"></span>[380:4223](2070067.htm#fr_4222) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p32"></span> [Jude
14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4223"></span>[380:4224](2070067.htm#fr_4223) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p33"></span> [Gen. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxiv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4224"></span>[380:4225](2070067.htm#fr_4224) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p34"></span> [Luke iii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#034)<span id="iii.xxiv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4225"></span>[380:4226](2070067.htm#fr_4225) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p35"></span> [Josh. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiv-p35.1"></span>.
&c.

<span id="fn_4226"></span>[380:4227](2070067.htm#fr_4226) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p36"></span> [1 Kings xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#021)<span id="iii.xxiv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4227"></span>[380:4228](2070067.htm#fr_4227) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p37"></span> [1 Kings
18.33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#033)<span
id="iii.xxiv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4228"></span>[380:4229](2070067.htm#fr_4228) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p38"></span> [2 Kings iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#025)<span id="iii.xxiv-p38.1"></span>,
where the <span class="sc"><span id="iii.xxiv-p38.2"></span>LXX</span>.
has “he contracted himself upon the child until seven times, and the
child opened his eyes;” saying nothing about the sneezing of the child,
which the Hebrew and Vulgate mention, while they omit the number in the
case of Elisha’s similar action.  S. Bernard has a curious explanation
of the seven sneezes of the child (in Cant. xvi).

<span id="fn_4229"></span>[380:4230](2070067.htm#fr_4229) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p39"></span> [Exod.
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#032),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037)<span id="iii.xxiv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4230"></span>[380:4231](2070067.htm#fr_4230) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p40"></span> [Levit. viii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#033)<span id="iii.xxiv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4231"></span>[380:4232](2070067.htm#fr_4231) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p41"></span> [Lev.
14.8](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxiv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4232"></span>[380:4233](2070067.htm#fr_4232) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p42"></span> [1 Kings viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxiv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4233"></span>[380:4234](2070067.htm#fr_4233) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p43"></span> [2 Chron. xxxvi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#032)<span id="iii.xxiv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4234"></span>[380:4235](2070067.htm#fr_4234) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p44"></span> Different words are used here as in the
New Testament for Baskets.  The second implies a larger size; it is the
word used for the “basket” in which St. Paul was let down from the wall
of Damascus, [Acts ix. 25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#025)<span
id="iii.xxiv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4235"></span>[380:4236](2070067.htm#fr_4235) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p46"></span> S. Gregory makes this explanation
because there were certain heretics who taught that our Lord at His
Ascension laid aside His Humanity.  It is said that this was held by
certain Manichæans, who based their idea on [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiv-p46.1"></span>,
where the <span class="sc"><span id="iii.xxiv-p46.2"></span>LXX.</span>
and Vulgate read, “He hath set His Tabernacle in the Sun.”

<span id="fn_4236"></span>[381:4237](2070067.htm#fr_4236) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p47"></span> [Ephes. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#013)<span id="iii.xxiv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4237"></span>[381:4238](2070067.htm#fr_4237) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p48"></span> The reference is to the Macedonians or
Pneumatomachi, followers of Macedonius, Patriarch of Constantinople, who
had passed from extreme or Anomœan Arianism to Semi-Arianism, and was
forcibly intruded on the See by order of Constantius in 343, but was
afterwards deposed.  After his deposition he broached the heresy known
by his name, denying the Deity of the Holy Ghost; some of its adherents,
with Macedonius himself, maintaining Him to be a mere creature; others
stopping short of this; and others calling Him a creature and servant of
the Son.  The heresy was formally condemned in the Ecumenical Council of
Constantinople in 381.

<span id="fn_4238"></span>[381:4239](2070067.htm#fr_4238) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p49"></span> [John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxiv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4239"></span>[381:4240](2070067.htm#fr_4239) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p51"></span> S. Gregory here commends the practice of
reserve in respect of the Deity of the Holy Ghost.  To *believe* it is
necessary to salvation, he would say; but in view of the prevailing
ignorance it is well to be careful before whom we give Him the Name of
God.  But he demands that his hearers should give to the Holy Ghost all
the Attributes of Godhead, and should bear with those who, like himself,
gave Him also the Name, as he prays that they all may have grace to do
(Bénoît).

<span id="fn_4240"></span>[381:4241](2070067.htm#fr_4240) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p52"></span> [Heb. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxiv-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4241"></span>[381:4242](2070067.htm#fr_4241) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p54"></span> [Isa.
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014), [Rom.
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033), [1 Pet.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008)<span id="iii.xxiv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4242"></span>[381:4243](2070067.htm#fr_4242) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p56"></span> i.e., inasmuch as He has granted you a
right faith in the Consubstantiality and Unity of the Trinity, I am sure
He will in time grant you the grace also to call Him by the Name of God.

<span id="fn_4243"></span>[382:4244](2070067.htm#fr_4243) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p57"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxiv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4244"></span>[382:4245](2070067.htm#fr_4244) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p58"></span> The Constantinopolitan followers of
Macedonius at the period were noted for their strict asceticism.  The
attempt to revive the Night Office among the secular Clergy of the
Diocese brought great odium on S. John Chrysostom a few years later.

<span id="fn_4245"></span>[382:4246](2070067.htm#fr_4245) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p60"></span> i.e., by Isaiah.

<span id="fn_4246"></span>[382:4247](2070067.htm#fr_4246) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p61"></span> [Job
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004), [Ps.
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010), [Ps.
36:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#000), [Ps.
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007), [Ps.
42:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#000), [Isa.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001), [Isa.
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016), [Mal.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006), [Wis.
1:2](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#002), [John
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014), [John
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#024), [John
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026), [John
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014), [John
15:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#000), [Acts
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002), [Rom.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017), [Rom.
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016), Rom. 19:0, [1 Cor.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010), [1 Cor.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019), [1 Cor.
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#002), [2 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001), [2 Cor.
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#000), [2 Cor.
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004), [2 Thess.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#005), [1 Tim.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010), [Heb.
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiv-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4247"></span>[383:4248](2070067.htm#fr_4247) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p65"></span> [Heb. xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxiv-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4248"></span>[383:4249](2070067.htm#fr_4248) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p66"></span> [Deut. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)<span id="iii.xxiv-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4249"></span>[383:4250](2070067.htm#fr_4249) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p67"></span> [Ps. civ.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiv-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4250"></span>[383:4251](2070067.htm#fr_4250) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p68"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiv-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4251"></span>[383:4252](2070067.htm#fr_4251) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxiv-p69.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xxiv-p69.2"></span>πὶ περιοπῆς</span>; Billius renders “In
specula sua,” “On His watch tower,” and the meaning is admissible, but
the context seems rather to point to the passive sense of Majesty or
Glory.  The word is not in the Lexicon, and Suicer does not notice it;
but the corresponding adjective has *only* the passive sense.  Specula,
however, is used in the sense of Eminence, but apparently only
geographically.

<span id="fn_4252"></span>[383:4253](2070067.htm#fr_4252) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p71"></span> [Isa. lxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span id="iii.xxiv-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4253"></span>[383:4254](2070067.htm#fr_4253) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p72"></span> [Isa.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002), [Isa.
63:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#014)<span
id="iii.xxiv-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4254"></span>[383:4255](2070067.htm#fr_4254) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p73"></span> [Exod. xxxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiv-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4255"></span>[383:4256](2070067.htm#fr_4255) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p74"></span> [Isa. lxiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxiv-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4256"></span>[383:4257](2070067.htm#fr_4256) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p75"></span> [2 Kings ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiv-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4257"></span>[383:4258](2070067.htm#fr_4257) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p76"></span> [Ps.
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012), [Ps.
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xxiv-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4258"></span>[383:4259](2070067.htm#fr_4258) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p77"></span> [Joel ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="iii.xxiv-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4259"></span>[384:4260](2070067.htm#fr_4259) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p78"></span> [John xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="iii.xxiv-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4260"></span>[384:4261](2070067.htm#fr_4260) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p80"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxiv-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4261"></span>[384:4262](2070067.htm#fr_4261) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p80.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p81"></span> [Job xxxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiv-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4262"></span>[384:4263](2070067.htm#fr_4262) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p82"></span> [Ps. civ.
30](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#030)<span id="iii.xxiv-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4263"></span>[384:4264](2070067.htm#fr_4263) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p83"></span> [John iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)<span id="iii.xxiv-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4264"></span>[384:4265](2070067.htm#fr_4264) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p84"></span> [Wisd. i.
6](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxiv-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4265"></span>[384:4266](2070067.htm#fr_4265) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p85"></span> [1 Sam. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#023)<span id="iii.xxiv-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4266"></span>[384:4267](2070067.htm#fr_4266) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p86"></span> The Hebrew word means “a cultivator of
sycamores.”  The <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxiv-p86.1"></span>LXX</span>. rendering is due to the process
of maturing the fruit, which grows on the stem of the trunk, and is made
to mature by puncturing it with an iron instrument, when after three
days the fruit is fit to eat.  The Hebrew word occurs only this once in
the Bible; Aquila renders it by “Looking for;” Symmachus by “propping
with stakes.”

<span id="fn_4267"></span>[384:4268](2070067.htm#fr_4267) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p87"></span> [Amos vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014)<span id="iii.xxiv-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4268"></span>[384:4269](2070067.htm#fr_4268) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p88"></span> Susannah.

<span id="fn_4269"></span>[384:4270](2070067.htm#fr_4269) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p89"></span> [Dan. vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxiv-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4270"></span>[384:4271](2070067.htm#fr_4270) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p91"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022)<span id="iii.xxiv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4271"></span>[384:4272](2070067.htm#fr_4271) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p92"></span> [Isa. xxviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxiv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4272"></span>[384:4273](2070067.htm#fr_4272) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p92.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p93"></span> The actual order of the words in the
Greek of [Acts ii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#006)<span
id="iii.xxiv-p93.1"></span> is, They heard each individual in his own
dialect them speaking; so that the position of the comma affects the
meaning.

<span id="fn_4273"></span>[384:4274](2070067.htm#fr_4273) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p95"></span> [Gen. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007)<span id="iii.xxiv-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4274"></span>[385:4275](2070067.htm#fr_4274) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p95.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p96"></span> [Ps. lv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxiv-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4275"></span>[385:4276](2070067.htm#fr_4275) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p97"></span> [Psa.
52.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiv-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4276"></span>[385:4277](2070067.htm#fr_4276) <span
id="iii.xxiv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p98"></span> Arians, Macedonians, and kindred sects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty
Bishops.](2070068)
