[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070094)  [Next](2070096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Ep. XLVI.  To Basil.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p2"></span>(The new Archbishop seems not to have
been satisfied with the reasons given in Gregory’s last letter; so the
latter writes again.)

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p3"></span>How can any affairs of yours be mere
grape-gleanings to me, O dear and sacred friend?

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p4"></span>“What a word has escaped the fence of
your teeth,” or how could you dare to say such a thing, if I too may be
somewhat daring?  How could your mind set it going, or your ink write
it, or your paper receive it, O lectures and Athens and virtues and
literary labours!  You almost make me write a tragedy by what you have
written.  Do you not know me or yourself, you eye of the world, and
great voice and trumpet and palace of learning?  Your affairs trifles to
Gregory?  What then on earth could any one admire, if Gregory admire not
you?  There is one spring among the seasons, one sun among the stars,
and one heaven that embraces all things; and so your voice is unique
among all things, if I am capable of judging such things, and not
deceived by my affection—and this I do not think to be the case.  But if
it is because I do not value you according to your worth that you blame
me, you must also blame all mankind; for no one else has or will
sufficiently admire you, unless it be yourself, and your own eloquence,
at least if it were possible to praise oneself, and if such were the
custom of our speech.  But if you are accusing me of despising you, why
not rather of being mad?  Or are you vexed because I am acting like a
philosopher?  Give me leave to say that this and this alone is higher
than even your conversation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLVII](2070096.md)
