[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070179)  [Next](2070181.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.ix.x-p1.1"></span>Ep. CXLIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.x-p2"></span>What does much experience, and
experience of good do for men?  It teaches kindness, and inclines them
to those who entreat them.  There is no such education in pity as the
previous reception of goodness.  This has happened to myself among
others.  I have learned compassion by the things which I have suffered. 
And do you see my greatness of soul when I myself need your gentleness
in my own affairs?  I intercede for others, and do not fear lest I
should exhaust all your kindness on other men’s concerns.  I am writing
thus on behalf of the Presbyter Leontius—or, if I may so describe him,
the ex-Presbyter.  If he has suffered sufficiently for what he has done,
let us stop there, lest excess become injustice.  And if there is still
any balance of punishment due, and the consequences of his crime have
not yet equalled his offence, yet remit it for our sake and God’s, and
that of the sanctuary, and the general assembly of the priests, among
whom he was once numbered, even though he has now shewn himself unworthy
of them, both by what he has done and by what he has suffered.  If I can
prevail with you it will be best; but if not, I will bring to you a more
powerful intercessor, her who is the partner both of your rule and of
your good fame.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXLIV](2070181.md)
