[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070009)  [Next](2070011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—Effects of Baptism and of
Chrism.</span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p2"></span>§ 1.  *Baptism*.  When we try to
ascertain the exact relation between Baptism and the Unction or Chrism
which immediately followed, we find that Cyril’s teaching on the subject
has been understood in very different senses.  By some he is thought to
regard the Unction as being merely an accessory rite of the one great
Sacrament of Baptism; to others he seems to draw a clear distinction
between them, assigning to each its proper grace and efficacy.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p3"></span>The former view is stated by the Oxford
editor, Milles, in his note on the words:  “And in like manner to you
also, after you had come up from the pool of the sacred waters, there
was given an unction, a figure (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p3.2"></span>ντίτυπον</span> ) of that with which Christ
was anointed; and that is the Holy Ghost <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) .”  “It is evident,” says Milles,
“from his words here, that the Chrism of which Cyril treats in this
Lecture is not to be referred to the Unction which is administered by
the Romanists in Confirmation.  For every one sees that by Unction in
this passage a ceremony of Baptism is indicated.  The ancients employed
two Unctions in Baptism, the first before the immersion in the water, of
which he spoke in the preceding Lecture; the second immediately upon
ascending from the water, of which he speaks in this Lecture.”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p5"></span>This opinion is elaborately discussed by
the Benedictine editor, Touttée, *Dissertatio* iii. c. 7, who argues
that the Unction described by Cyril is a Sacrament distinct from
Baptism, that it has for its proper grace the gift of the Holy Spirit,
and further that this gift is not conferred in Baptism.  Of these
assertions the first and second appear to represent Cyril’s view
correctly:  the last is an exaggeration and a mistake, the tendency of
which is to identify the Chrism of the Eastern Church with that which is
used in Confirmation by the Roman Church, and to exalt the rite of
Confirmation as a proper Sacrament distinct from Baptism, and even
superior to it.  A view differing in some respects from both of these
has been recently put forward by a learned and devout writer of our own
Church, who has fully discussed the teaching of Cyril and other Eastern
Fathers, and gives the result of his investigation in the following
“Summary <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) :”  “For very many
centuries the Christians of the East have never been forced to define to
themselves at all clearly the position of a person baptized but
unconfirmed.  Their mode of administering Confirmation (*Chrism*?) by
the hands of the baptizing Presbyter—though among the Greeks and some
others with chrism prepared by the Bishop—relieves them from the
necessity which weighs upon us Westerns, of teaching Christian children
what their status is between the two rites.  Confirmation (*Chrism*?) is
for them, far more than it has been for a long while in the West, a
factor in Baptism.  Only <span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span> <span
id="ii.iii.vi-Page_xxxix"></span>a more or less conscious desire not to
fall behind Western teachers in honouring the perfecting Unction can
have led their later authorities to treat that Unction as a sacrament
numerically distinct from Baptism.  To all the early doctors of the East
the two things are one, and Baptism culminates in the Unction.  The
tendency among Oriental Christians was, not to attribute to Baptism in
our modern sense the gift of the Holy Ghost, but rather to consider
Baptism by itself as a bare rite, benefiting the body alone, and
dependent for its spiritual efficacy upon other actions, after and
before.  Not that this tendency has its full way.  The Greek Fathers may
be said certainly on the whole to trace the forgiveness of sins, the
preparatory cleansing, to the baptismal Laver; the gift of the Holy
Ghost, for the ordinary purposes of Christian living, they trace, like
S. Chrysostom, to that act which comes “ immediately after Baptism, and
before the Mysteries.”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p7"></span>When we come to inquire how far these
several theories agree with the teaching of Cyril himself, we must in
the outset put aside altogether the name *Confirmation*:  for as applied
to the Unction used in the Eastern Church it is only confusing and
misleading.  In the early ages of the Church *Confirmation* was not
known even by name.  In the Latin Church “neither Tertullian, Cyprian,
Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, nor any of the Latin Fathers, makes mention
of *Confirmation* in this sense.  Nor have the Greeks any word to answer
to this Latin term <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) .”  So far,
therefore, Milles appears to be perfectly right in refusing to connect
the Chrism of which Cyril treats with the Unction used in Confirmation
by the Roman Church.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p9"></span>We may add that in Cyril’s account of
Chrism it is wholly unconnected with Confirmation, both in its symbolic
reference and in its outward form.  Chrism, he says, is the antitype of
the Unction of Christ by the Holy Ghost at His Baptism:  Confirmation is
universally admitted to have been a following of the Apostles in their
laying on of hands.  But in that Apostolic rite there was no unction,
and in Chrism there was no such laying on of hands.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p10"></span>In several passages Cyril clearly
distinguishes the outward form of Baptism from the spiritual grace.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p11"></span>“If thy body be here, but not thy mind,
it profiteth thee nothing.  Even Simon Magus once came to the Laver:  he
was baptized, but was not enlightened; and though he dipped his body in
water, he enlightened not his heart with the Spirit:  his body went down
and came up, but his soul was not buried with Christ, nor raised with
Him <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p13"></span>It is impossible here to regard “the
Spirit” as referring to the grace of Unction:  for (1) Baptism was not
accompanied by Unction in the time of the Apostles, and (2) we should
thus make a false antithesis between the outward part of the one rite
(“he dipped his body in water”), and the *inward* part of the other. 
Here, therefore, Cyril attributes enlightenment of the heart by the
Spirit to Baptism apart from Unction, and at the same time lays stress
upon the difference between the worthy and unworthy recipient of the
outward form.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p14"></span>The importance of this difference is
further enforced throughout the next two sections, and at the close of §
4 the distinction between the outward sign and inward grace of Baptism,
strictly so called, is again asserted, “though the water will receive
thee, the Spirit will not accept thee.”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p15"></span>“Some might suppose,” it is said, “from
these words that Cyril thought of water and the Spirit as the sign and
the thing signified in Baptism respectively, and a passage in a later
Lecture upon the subject of the Sacrament (of Baptism) at first confirms
that impression <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p17"></span>To suppose that Cyril had any other
thought in the former passage, seems to me impossible for any ordinary
reader, and the later passage, not only at first, but more fully the
longer it is considered, confirms that impression beyond all doubt.  The
whole quotation, including Cat. iii. §§ 3, 4, is too long to repeat
here, but may be read in its proper place.  <span id="page_xl">p.
xl</span> <span id="ii.iii.vi-Page_xl"></span>It will be sufficient to
give the passages which are of chief importance in the question before
us, according to Canon Mason’s translation.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p18"></span>Cat. iii. § 3.  “Do not attend to the
laver as mere water, but to the spiritual grace given along with the
water”…“the mere water, receiving the invocation of the Holy Ghost, and
of Christ, and of the Father, acquires a power of sanctity.  For since
man is a two-fold being composed of soul and body, the cleansing element
also is two-fold, the incorporeal for the incorporeal, the bodily for
the body.  And the water cleanses the body, but the Spirit seals the
soul, in order that having our hearts sprinkled by the Spirit, and our
bodies washed with pure water, we may draw nigh to God.  When,
therefore, you are about to go down into the water do not pay attention
to the mere nature of the water, but expect salvation by the operation
of the Holy Ghost.  For without both it is impossible for thee to be
perfected.”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p19"></span>No words could state more clearly the
distinction between the outward sign and the inward grace of Baptism,
and the absolute necessity for both.  There is no possible reference to
Unction, but “the operation of the Holy Ghost” in cleansing and sealing
the soul is unmistakably connected with Baptism as “the grace given with
the water” (<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p19.1"></span>μετὰ
τοῦ ὕδατος</span>), and below, as “the seal by water” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p19.2"></span>τὴν δι᾽ ὕδατος
σφραγῖδα</span>), the latter phrase shewing that Baptism by water is the
*signum efficax* of the grace in question.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p20"></span>Cyril then quotes our Lord’s words,
*Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God*, and explains them thus:  “On the one hand he who is
being baptized (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p20.1"></span>βαπτιζόμενος</span>) with the water, but has
not had the Spirit vouchsafed to him (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p20.2"></span>καταξιωθείς</span>), has not the grace in
perfection:  on the other hand, even if a man be distinguished for
virtue in his deeds, but does not receive the seal bestowed by means of
water (<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p20.3"></span>τὴν δι᾽
ὕδατος σφραγῖδα</span>), he shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven.”  Canon Mason, whose translation I have followed, finds here a
reference both to Baptism and to Unction as “the first baptismal act and
the second,” and in support of this interpretation gives a second and
more emphatic version:  “He who is in course of being baptized with the
water, but has not yet had the Spirit vouchsafed to him, has not the
grace in perfection.”  This introduction of the word “*yet*,” in order
to represent a distinction between two separate acts, is not justified
either by the reading of the older editions (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p20.4"></span>οὐδὲ τῷ ὕδατι βαπτιζόμενος μὴ καταξιωθεὶς δὲ
τοῦ Πνεύματος</span>), nor by that of Codices Monac. Roe, Casaub.
adopted by Reischl (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p20.5"></span>οὔτε ὁ βεβαπτισμένος κ.τ.λ</span>.), nor by
the Benedictine text (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p20.6"></span>οὔτε ὁ βαπτιζόμενος κ.τ.λ</span>.).  The
obvious meaning of the passage, with either reading, is that “the man
who in Baptism did not receive the Holy Spirit, has not the grace (of
Baptism) complete.”  The Benedictine Editor in his elaborate argument
for regarding Chrism as a distinct sacrament <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) ”, does not even refer to this
passage.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p22"></span>A statement which is important in this
connexion is found in *Mystag*. ii. § 6:  “Let no one then suppose that
Baptism is the grace of remission of sins only, or further of adoption,
as the Baptism of John conferred only remission of sins; but as we know
full well that it cleanses from sins and procures a gift of the Holy
Spirit, so also it is a counterpart (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p22.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p22.2"></span>ντίτυπον</span>) of the sufferings of
Christ.”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p23"></span>Here besides “the remission of sins,
which no man receiveth without the Holy Spirit <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) ,” we find “a gift of the Holy Ghost,”
and the fellowship of Christ’s Passion distinctly attributed to Baptism.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p25"></span>If the “adoption” mentioned at the
beginning of this passage were identical (as Touttée thinks) with the
“gift of the Holy Ghost,” it would by no means follow that Cyril here
means to include Unction in Baptism.  For the grace which beyond all
others is exclusively attached to Baptism, and not to Unction, is the
new birth, and this is “the new birth into freedom <span
id="page_xli">p. xli</span> <span id="ii.iii.vi-Page_xli"></span>and
*adoption* <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) .”  In fact Cyril’s
teaching on this point is in strict accordance with that of St. Paul in
[Gal. iv. 4-6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span
id="ii.iii.vi-p26.1"></span>, that we first *receive the adoption of
sons* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p26.2"></span>υἱοθεσίαν</span>), and then “*because ye are
sons, God sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying,
Abba, Father*.”  So again in [Rom.
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016)<span id="ii.iii.vi-p26.3"></span>,
he says, “*Ye received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father.  The Spirit Himself beareth witness with our spirit that we are
the children of God*.”  In both passages St. Paul clearly distinguishes
two things, “the adoption” itself, and the witness of it by “the Spirit
of adoption.”  Cf. Bengel on v. 4:  “Prius *adoptionem*, deinde
*Spiritum adoptionis* accepimus;” and on v. 6:  “*Filiorum statum*
sequitur inhabitatio Spiritus Sancti, non hanc ille.”  The adoption
itself belongs to Baptism strictly so called, in which we are made
children of God and joint heirs with Christ (cf. Cat. iii. 15):  the
witness of the indwelling Spirit of adoption is the special grace
ascribed to Chrism in the Eastern Church, and to Confirmation in the
Western.  There are many other passages in which Cyril ascribes to
Baptism itself, as distinct from Chrism, a gift of the Spirit, such as
the following:  “But He trieth the soul:  He casteth not His pearls
before the swine:  if thou dissemble, men will baptize thee now, but the
Spirit will not baptize thee <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p28"></span>“The Lord, preventing us according to
His loving-kindness, has granted repentance at Baptism, in order that we
may cast off the chief—nay, rather the whole burden of our sins, and
having received the seal by the Holy Ghost, may be made heirs of eternal
life <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p30"></span>Again, after speaking of “the invocation
of grace having sealed the soul,” he adds:  “Having gone down dead in
sins, thou comest up quickened in righteousness.  For if thou hast been
*united with the likeness of the Saviour’s death*, thou shalt also be
deemed worthy of His Resurrection <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) .”  The benefits ascribed to Baptism
in these several passages without any allusion to Chrism, are brought
together with rhetorical effect in the Introductory Lecture, § 16: 
“Great is the Baptism that lies before you; a ransom to captives, a
remission of offences, a death of sin, a new birth of the soul, a
garment of light, a holy indissoluble seal, a chariot to heaven, the
delight of Paradise, a welcome into the kingdom, the gift of adoption.”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p32"></span>From such language it is clear beyond
question that in Cyril of Jerusalem, not to speak of other Oriental
Fathers, the tendency is not “to consider Baptism by itself as a bare
rite, benefiting the body alone, and dependent for its spiritual
efficacy upon other actions after and before,” but as depending on the
power of the Holy Ghost, and the sincerity of repentance and faith in
man.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p33"></span>If further proof were needed, a glance
at the Index under the word “Baptism” will shew the extraordinary
richness, variety, and precision of Cyril’s teaching, as to the gifts of
the Holy Ghost conferred therein.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p34"></span>§ 2.  *Chrism*.  When spiritual
blessings so many and so great have been ascribed to Baptism, in what
light, it may be asked, does Cyril regard the Unction which follows? 
Does he treat it as being merely an additional ceremony subordinate to
Baptism, or as having for its own proper grace some special gift of the
Holy Ghost?  We find no answer to this question in the earlier course of
Lectures <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) .  But that Chrism was
not regarded by Cyril as a mere accessory to Baptism, as Milles
thought <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) , may be safely inferred
from the fact that in announcing the subjects of his Mystagogic
Lectures, he mentions first Baptism, then “the seal of the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost,” and then “the Mysteries at the altar of the New
Covenant <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) :”  and this inference
is fully confirmed by his language elsewhere:  “Ye have heard enough of
Baptism, and Chrism, and partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) .”  A mere additional <span
id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.vi-Page_xlii"></span>ceremony of Baptism could not have been
so independently placed between the two sacraments, and, as it were, in
the same rank with them.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p39"></span>The importance thus attached to Chrism
is further shewn in the fact that Cyril uses the very same language in
reference to the consecration of the ointment of Chrism and of the water
of Baptism, and of the Eucharistic elements.  “The bread and wine of the
Eucharist before the Invocation of the Holy and Adorable Trinity are
simple (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p39.1"></span>λιτός</span>) bread and wine, but after the
Invocation the Bread becomes the Body and the Wine the Blood of
Christ <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) .”  Regard not the Laver
as simple (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p40.1"></span>λιτῷ</span>) water, but rather regard the
spiritual grace that is given with the water <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) .”  “The simple water having received
the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, and of Christ, and of the Father,
acquires a new power of holiness <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266)
.”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p43"></span>“But see thou suppose not this to be
plain (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p43.1"></span>ψιλόν</span>) ointment.  For as the Bread of
the Eucharist, after the Invocation of the Holy Ghost is no longer
simple (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p43.2"></span>λιτός</span>) bread, but the Body of Christ;
so also this holy ointment is no longer plain (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p43.3"></span>ψιλόν</span>) ointment, nor, as one might
say, common, after Invocation, but Christ’s gift of grace (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p43.4"></span>χάρισμα</span>), and is
made effectual to impart the Holy Ghost by the presence of His own
Godhead <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p45"></span>The spiritual benefits which Cyril
ascribes to the Unction are set forth in the same Lecture.  “This holy
thing is a spiritual safeguard of the body, and salvation of the soul”
(§ 7):  it sanctifies all the organs of sense:  “the body is anointed
with the visible ointment, and the soul is sanctified by the Holy and
Life-giving Spirit” (§ 3).  After being anointed the Christian is now
entitled to that name in its fullest sense <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) ; he is clothed with the whole armour
of the Holy Ghost, that he may stand against the power of the
adversary:  he may say, “*I can do all things in Christ who
strengtheneth me*” (§ 4).

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p47"></span>In regard to the supposed identity of
Chrism and Confirmation, it is important to notice carefully how Cyril
speaks of the laying on of hands in the only passage where he mentions
it <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) .

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p49"></span>He first illustrates the freedom of the
Spirit, and His independence of human agency, by the gift of prophecy to
the seventy elders, including Eldad and Medad:  he then refers to the
gift of the spirit of wisdom to Joshua by the laying on of Moses’
hands <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) , and adds, “Thou seest
everywhere the figure (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p50.2"></span>τύπον</span>) in the Old Testament, and in
the New the same.  In Moses’ time the Spirit was given by laying on of
hands (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p50.3"></span>χειροθεσίᾳ</span> ), and Peter gives the
Spirit by laying on of hands <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) : 
and upon thee also, who art to be baptized, the grace is about to come;
but the manner (<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p51.2"></span>τὸ
πῶς</span>) I tell thee not, for I do not forestall the time.”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p52"></span>From this passage it has been inferred
(i) that Cyril alludes to a gift of the Spirit by laying on of hands in
immediate connexion with Baptism and Unction <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) , and (2) that he refers this gift of
the Spirit not to Baptism itself, but to the laying on of hands, or to
the Unction as a figure that answers to it <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) .

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p55"></span>(1)  The first of these inferences is
opposed to the fact that Cyril neither mentions the laying on of hands
as part of the actual ceremonial in Baptism or Unction, nor as the
analogous rite in the old Testament, but on the contrary expressly
says <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) that the symbol (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p56.1"></span>τὸ σύμβολον</span>) of
this holy Chrism in the Old Testament lies in the consecration of Aaron
to be High Priest, when Moses, “after the washing in water anointed him,
and he was called ‘*anointed*,’ evidently from this figurative unction
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p56.2"></span>τοῦ χρίσματος
δηλαδὴ τοῦ τυπικοῦ</span>).”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p57"></span>(2)  In support of the second inference
the argument offered is as follows:  “That the Spirit was to come upon
them in the course of their Baptism is here again clearly stated; but
that Cyril did not intend them to suppose that Baptism itself would
convey the gift is equally clear.  Again and again in earlier Lectures,
as well as in the words actually before us, Cyril has taught them to
expect the gift in Baptism; if therefore the immersion itself were to be
the means of <span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.vi-Page_xliii"></span>receiving it, *he has already told them
his secret*.  Yet now he says that he will not tell them ‘how’ they are
to receive it.  That remains for a future occasion <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) .”  The mistake, as I venture to
consider it, lies in the words which I have marked with italics.  For of
the mysteries which were to be concealed from the unbaptized (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p58.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p58.2"></span>μύητοι</span>) the first
was *the manner of administering Baptism* itself, and the second, the
unction of Chrism; and in the preceding Lectures Cyril has no more told
the secret of the one than of the other.  “Baptism, the Eucharist, and
the oil of Chrism, were things that the uninitiated (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p58.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p58.4"></span>μύητοι</span>) were not
allowed to look upon <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) .”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p60"></span>“We bless,” says S. Basil <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) , “both the water of Baptism and the
oil of the Chrism, and moreover the baptized (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p61.1"></span>βαπτιζόμενον</span>) himself.  From what
written commands?  Is it not from a secret (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.vi-p61.2"></span>σιωπωμένης</span>) and mystical tradition? 
Again, the very anointing with the oil, what word of Scripture taught
that?  And the dipping the man thrice, whence came it?  And all the
other accompaniments of Baptism, the renunciation of Satan and his
angels, from what Scripture came they?  Come they not from this
unpublished and secret teaching, which our fathers guarded in a silence
with which no prying curiosity might meddle, having been well taught to
preserve the sanctity of the mysteries by silence?  For how could it
have been right to publish in writing the doctrine of these mysteries,
which the unbaptized are not even allowed to look upon?”

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p62"></span>As these secret ceremonies of Baptism
and Unction are revealed by Cyril only in the Mystagogic Lectures, the
supposed reason for saying, that in Cat. xvi. 26, the promised gift of
the Spirit refers not to Baptism but only to Unction, at once falls to
the ground.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p63"></span>The true state of the case is well
expressed by Bingham <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) , “Though
the ancients acquainted the Catechumens with the doctrine of Baptism so
far as to make them understand the spiritual nature and design of it,
yet they never admitted them to the sight of the actual ceremony, nor so
much as to hear any plain discourse about the manner of its
administration, till they were fitted and prepared for the actual
reception of it,”—or rather, till they actually received it.

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p65"></span>There is in fact no reason to exalt the
benefits of Unction, or Confirmation, by robbing Baptism of its proper
grace.  “It was this Unction, as the completion of Baptism, to which 
they ascribed the power of making every Christian in some sense partaker
of a royal priesthood.  To it they also ascribed the noble effects of
confirming the soul with the strength of all spiritual graces on God’s
part, as well as the confirmation of the profession and covenant made on
man’s part <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) .”  We may well be
satisfied that the doctrine of the early Church has been so fully
retained in essential points in our own Office of Confirmation,
recalling as it does by the ratification of the baptismal vows the
immediate connexion of the ancient Unction with Baptism, and in its
Prayers invoking the same gifts of the Holy Spirit,—“Strengthen them, we
beseech Thee, O Lord, with the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily
increase in them Thy manifold gifts of grace; the spirit of wisdom and
understanding; the spirit of counsel and ghostly strength; the spirit of
knowledge and true godliness, and fill them, O Lord, with the spirit of
Thy holy fear, now and for ever.  Amen.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_249"></span>[xxxviii:250](2070010.htm#fr_249) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p4"></span> *Mystag*. iii. § 1.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[xxxviii:251](2070010.htm#fr_250) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p6"></span> A. J. Mason, D.D., *The Relation of
Confirmation to Baptism*, p. 389.  Though I find myself compelled to
differ widely from my friend Canon Mason in the interpretation of
Cyril’s teaching on this subject, I cannot refrain from expressing my
sincere admiration of the tone and purpose of his treatise, and of the
learning and research which it exhibits.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[xxxix:252](2070010.htm#fr_251) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p8"></span> Suicer, *Thesaurus*, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>Χρίσμα</span>.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[xxxix:253](2070010.htm#fr_252) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p12"></span> *Procat*. § 2.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[xxxix:254](2070010.htm#fr_253) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p16"></span> Mason, *ubi supr*., p. 337.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[xl:255](2070010.htm#fr_254) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p20.7"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p21"></span> *Dissert*. iii. c. 8.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[xl:256](2070010.htm#fr_255) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p24"></span> Hooker, *E.P*.V. lxvi. § 6.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[xli:257](2070010.htm#fr_256) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p26"></span> Cat. i. 2.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[xli:258](2070010.htm#fr_257) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p26.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p27"></span> Ib. xvii. § 36.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[xli:259](2070010.htm#fr_258) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p29"></span> Ib. iv. 37.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[xli:260](2070010.htm#fr_259) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p31"></span> Ib. iii. § 12.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[xli:261](2070010.htm#fr_260) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p35"></span> Upon the supposed allusion to Chrism in
Cat. xvi. § 26, see below, p. xxxiv.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[xli:262](2070010.htm#fr_261) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p36"></span> Note on *Mystag*. iii. § 1.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[xli:263](2070010.htm#fr_262) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p37"></span> Cat. xviii. § 33.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[xli:264](2070010.htm#fr_263) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p38"></span> *Mystag*. v. § 1.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[xlii:265](2070010.htm#fr_264) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p40"></span> *Mystag*. i. § 7.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[xlii:266](2070010.htm#fr_265) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p41"></span> Cat. iii. § 3.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[xlii:267](2070010.htm#fr_266) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p42"></span> *Ibidem*.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[xlii:268](2070010.htm#fr_267) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p43.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p44"></span> *Mystag*. iii. 3.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[xlii:269](2070010.htm#fr_268) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p46"></span> Ib. iii. § 1.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[xlii:270](2070010.htm#fr_269) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p48"></span> Cat. xvi. §§ 25, 26.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[xlii:271](2070010.htm#fr_270) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p50"></span> [Deut. xxxiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#009)<span id="ii.iii.vi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[xlii:272](2070010.htm#fr_271) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p50.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p51"></span> [Acts viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017)<span id="ii.iii.vi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[xlii:273](2070010.htm#fr_272) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p53"></span> Touttée.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[xlii:274](2070010.htm#fr_273) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p54"></span> Mason, p. 341, with note.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[xlii:275](2070010.htm#fr_274) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p56"></span> *Mystag*. iii. 6.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[xliii:276](2070010.htm#fr_275) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p58"></span> Mason, p. 341.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[xliii:277](2070010.htm#fr_276) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p58.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p59"></span> Basil, *apud* Bingham, X. 5, § 4.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[xliii:278](2070010.htm#fr_277) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p61"></span> *De Spiritu S*. c. xxvii.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[xliii:279](2070010.htm#fr_278) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p64"></span> *Ant*. X. v. § 4.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[xliii:280](2070010.htm#fr_279) <span
id="ii.iii.vi-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.vi-p66"></span> Bingh. XII. iii. § 3.  Cf. *Apost.
Const*. III. c. 17.  “This Baptism therefore is into the death of
Jesus:  the water is instead of the burial, and the oil instead of the
Holy Ghost; the seal instead of the Cross; *the ointment is the
confirmation of the Confession*.”  VII. 22:  “that the anointing with
oil may be the participation of the Holy Spirit, and the water the
symbol of the death, and the ointment the seal of the covenants.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eucharistic Doctrine.](2070011)
