[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070177)  [Next](2070179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.ix.viii-p1.1"></span>Ep. CXLI.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.viii-p2"></span>(The people of Nazianzus had in some
way incurred the loss of civic rights; and the Order for the forfeiture
of the title of City had been signed by Olympius.  This led to something
like a revolt on the part of a certain number of the younger citizens: 
and this Olympius determined to punish by the total destruction of the
place.  S. Gregory was again prevented by sickness from appearing in
person before the Governor:  but he pleaded the cause of his native city
(using its official Latin name of Diocæsarea) in the following letters
so successfully as to induce Olympius to pardon the outbreak.)

<span id="iv.iv.ix.viii-p3"></span>Again an opportunity for kindness: 
and again I am bold enough to commit to a letter my entreaty about so
important a matter.  My illness makes me thus bold, for it does not even
allow me to go out, and it does not permit me to make a fitting entrance
to you.  What then is my Embassy?  Pray receive it from me gently and
kindly.  The death of a single man, who to-day is and to-morrow will not
be and will not return to us is of course a dreadful thing.  But it is
much more dreadful for a City to die, which Kings founded, and time
compacted, and a long series of years has preserved.  I speak of
Diocæsarea, once a City, a City no longer, unless you grant it mercy. 
Think that this place now falls at your feet by me:  let it have a
voice, and be clothed in mourning and cut off its hair as in a tragedy,
and let it speak to you in such words as these:

<span id="iv.iv.ix.viii-p4"></span>Give a hand to me that lie in the
dust:  help the strengthless:  do not add the weight of your hand to
time, nor destroy what the Persians have left me.  It is more honourable
to you to raise up cities than to destroy those that are distressed.  Be
my founder, either by adding to what I possess, or by preserving me as I
am.  Do not suffer that up to the time of your administration I should
be a City, and after you should be so no longer:  do not give occasion
to after times to speak evil of you, that you received me numbered among
cities, and left me an uninhabited spot, which was once a city, only
recognizable by mountains and precipices and woods.

<span id="iv.iv.ix.viii-p5"></span>This let the City of my imagination
do and say to your mercy.  But deign to receive an exhortation from me
as your friend:  certainly chastise those who have rebelled against the
Edict of your authority.  On this behalf I am not bold to say anything,
although this piece of audacity was not, they say, of universal design,
but was only the unreasoning anger of a few young men.  But dismiss the
greater part of your anger, and use a larger reasoning.  They were
grieved for their Mother’s being put to death; they could not endure to
be called citizens, and yet to be without political rights:  they were
mad:  they committed an offence against the law:  they threw away their
own safety:  the unexpectedness of the calamity deprived them of
reason.  Is it really necessary that for this the city should cease to
be a city?  Surely not.  Most excellent, do not write the order for this
to be done.  Rather respect the supplication of all citizens and
statesmen and men of rank—for remember the calamity will touch all
alike—even if the greatness of your authority keeps them silent, sighing
as it were in secret.  Respect also my gray hair:  for it would be
dreadful to me, after having had a great city, now to have none at all,
and that after your government the Temple which we have raised to God,
and our love for its adornment, is to become a dwelling for beasts.  It
is not a terrible thing if some statues were thrown down—though in
itself it would be so—but I would not have you think that I am speaking
of this, when all my care is for more important things:  but it is
dreadful if an ancient city is to be destroyed with them—one which has
<span id="page_480">p. 480</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ix.viii-Page_480"></span>splendidly endured, as I, who am
honoured by you, and am supposed to have some influence, have lived to
see.  But this is enough upon such a subject, for I shall not, if I
speak at greater length, find anything stronger than your own reasons,
by which this nation is governed—and may more and greater ones be
governed by them too, and that in greater commands.  This however it was
needful that Your Magnanimity should know about those who have fallen
before your feet, that they are altogether wretched and despairing, and
have not shared in any disorder with those who have broken the law, as I
am certified by many who were then present.  Therefore deliberate what
you may think expedient, both for your own reputation in this world, and
your hopes in the next.  We will bear what you determine—not indeed
without grief—but we will bear it:  for what else can we do?  If the
worse determination prevail, we shall be indignant, and shall shed a
tear over our City that has ceased to be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXLII](2070179.md)
