[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070175)  [Next](2070177) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iv.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>Ep. CXXXI.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix.vi-p2"></span>(In 382 Gregory was summoned to a Synod
at Constantinople; he wrote to Procopius, the Prefectus Urbi, and
declined to go, on the ground of his great dislike to Episcopal Synods,
from which, he said, he had never known any good to result.  However he
seems to have received a more urgent summons through Icarius and
Olympius.  His reply to Icarius has been lost; that to Olympius is as
follows.)

<span id="iv.iv.ix.vi-p3"></span>It is more serious to me than my
illness, that no one will believe that I am ill, but that so long a
journey is enjoined upon me, and I am pushed into the midst of troubles
from which I rejoiced to have withdrawn, and almost thought that I ought
to be grateful for this to my bodily affliction.  For quiet and freedom
from affairs is more precious than the splendour of a busy life.  I
wrote this yesterday to the Most Illustrious Icarius, from whom I
received the same summons:  and I now beg your Magnanimity also to write
this for me, for you are a very trustworthy witness of my ill health. 
Another proof of my inability is the loss which I have now suffered in
having been unable even to come and enjoy your society, who are so kind
a Governor, and so admirable for virtue that even the preludes of your
term of office are more honourable than the good fame which others can
earn by the end of theirs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXL](2070177)
