[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070046)  [Next](2070048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Introduction to Oration II.</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv-p2.1"></span>It</span> is generally agreed that this oration
was not intended for oral delivery.  Its object was to explain and
defend S. Gregory’s recent conduct, which had been severely criticised
by his friends at Nazianzus.  He had been recalled by his father
probably during the year <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv-p2.2"></span>a.d</span>. 361 from Pontus, where he had spent
several years in monastic seclusion with his friend S. Basil.  His
father, not content with his son’s presence at home as a support for his
declining years, and feeling assured of his fitness for the sacred
office, had proceeded, with the loudly expressed approval of the
congregation, in spite of Gregory’s reluctance, to ordain him to the
priesthood on Christmas Day <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv-p2.3"></span>a.d.</span> 361.  S. Gregory, even after the
lapse of many years, speaks of his ordination as an act of tyranny, and
at the time, stung almost to madness, as an ox by a gadfly, rushed away
again to Pontus, to bury in its congenial solitude, consoled by an
intimate friend’s deep sympathy, his wounded feelings.  Before long the
sense of duty reasserted itself, and he returned to his post at his
father’s side before Easter <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv-p2.4"></span>a.d.</span> 362.  On Easter day he delivered his
first Oration before a congregation whose scantiness marked the
displeasure with which the people of Nazianzus had viewed his conduct. 
Accordingly he set himself to supply them in this Oration with a full
explanation of the motives which had led to his retirement.  At the same
time, as the secondary title of the Oration shows, he has supplied an
exposition of the obligations and dignity of the Priestly Office which
has been drawn upon by all later writers on the subject.  S. Chrysostom
in his well-known treatise, S. Gregory the Great in his Pastoral Care,
and Bossuet in his panegyric on S. Paul, have done little more than
summarise the material or develop the considerations contained in this
eloquent and elaborate dissertation.

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="iii.iv-p3.1"></span>Oration II.</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv-p4.1"></span>In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His
Return, After His Ordination to the Priesthood, with an Exposition of
the Character of the Priestly Office.</span>

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span>1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv-p5.1"></span>I have</span> been defeated, and own my defeat. 
I subjected myself to the Lord, and <span id="page_205">p. 205</span>
<span id="iii.iv-Page_205"></span>prayed unto Him. <span
id="fr_2543"></span>[2544](#fn_2543)   Let the most blessed David supply
my exordium, or rather let Him Who spoke in David, and even now yet
speaks through him.  For indeed the very best order of beginning every
speech and action, is to begin from God, <span
id="fr_2544"></span>[2545](#fn_2544) and to end in God.  As to the
cause, either of my original revolt and cowardice, in which I got me
away far off, and remained <span id="fr_2545"></span>[2546](#fn_2545)
away from you for a time, which perhaps seemed long to those who missed
me; or of the present gentleness and change of mind, in which I have
given myself up again to you, men may think and speak in different ways,
according to the hatred or love they bear me, on the one side refusing
to acquit me of the charges alleged, on the other giving me a hearty
welcome.  For nothing is so pleasant to men as talking of other people’s
business, especially under the influence of affection or hatred, which
often almost entirely blinds us to the truth.  I will, however, myself,
unabashed, set forth the truth, and arbitrate with justice between the
two parties, which accuse or gallantly defend us, by, on the one side,
accusing myself, on the other, undertaking my own defence.

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span>2.  Accordingly, that my speech may proceed
in due order, I apply myself to the question which arose first, that of
cowardice.  For I cannot endure that any of those who watch with
interest the success, or the contrary, of my efforts, should be put to
confusion on my account, since it has pleased God that our affairs
should be of some consequence to Christians, so I will by my defence
relieve, if there be any such, those who have already suffered; for it
is well, as far as possible, and as reason allows, to shrink from
causing, through our sin or suspicion, any offence or stumbling-block to
the community:  inasmuch as we know how inevitably even those who offend
one of the little ones <span id="fr_2546"></span>[2547](#fn_2546) will
incur the severest punishment at the hands of Him who cannot lie.

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span>3.  For my present position is due, my good
people, not to inexperience and ignorance, nay indeed, that I may boast
myself a little, <span id="fr_2547"></span>[2548](#fn_2547) neither is
it due to contempt for the divine laws and ordinances.  Now, just as in
the body there is <span id="fr_2548"></span>[2549](#fn_2548) one
member <span id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549) which rules and, so to
say, presides, while another is ruled over and subject; so too in the
churches, God has ordained, according either to a law of equality, which
admits of an order of merit, or to one of providence, by which He has
knit all together, that those for whom such treatment is beneficial,
should be subject to pastoral care and rule, and be guided by word and
deed in the path of duty; while others should be pastors and
teachers, <span id="fr_2550"></span>[2551](#fn_2550) for the perfecting
of the church, those, I mean, who surpass the majority in virtue and
nearness to God, performing the functions of the soul in the body, and
of the intellect in the soul; in order that both may be so united and
compacted together, that, although one is lacking and another is
pre-eminent, they may, like the members of our bodies, be so combined
and knit together by the harmony of the Spirit, as to form one perfect
body, <span id="fr_2551"></span>[2552](#fn_2551) really worthy of Christ
Himself, our Head. <span id="fr_2552"></span>[2553](#fn_2552)

<span id="iii.iv-p18"></span>4.  I am aware then that anarchy <span
id="fr_2553"></span>[2554](#fn_2553) and disorder cannot be more
advantageous than order and rule, either to other creatures or to men;
nay, this is true of men in the highest possible degree, because the
interests at stake in their case are greater; since it is a great
thing <span id="fr_2554"></span>[2555](#fn_2554) for them, even if they
fail of their highest purpose—to be free from sin—to attain at least to
that which is second best, restoration from sin.  Since this seems right
and just, it is, I take it, equally wrong and disorderly that all should
wish to rule, and that no one should accept <span
id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555) it.  For if all men were to shirk
this office, whether it must be called a ministry or a leadership, the
fair fulness <span id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556) of the Church
would be halting in the highest degree, and in fact cease to be fair. 
And further, where, and by whom would God be worshipped among us in
those mystic and elevating rites which are our greatest and most
precious privilege, if there were neither king, nor governor, nor
priesthood, nor sacrifice, <span id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557)
nor all those highest offices to the loss of which, for their great
sins, men were of old condemned in consequence of their disobedience?

<span id="iii.iv-p24"></span>5.  Nor indeed is it strange or
inconsistent for the majority of those who are devoted to the study of
divine things, to ascend to rule from being ruled, nor does it overstep
the limits laid down by philosophy, <span
id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558) or involve disgrace; <span
id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_206"></span>any more
than for an excellent sailor to become a lookout-man, and for a
lookout-man, who has successfully kept watch over the winds, to be
entrusted with the helm; or, if you will, for a brave soldier to be made
a captain, and a good captain to become a general, and have committed to
him the conduct of the whole campaign.  Nor again, as perhaps some of
those absurd and tiresome people may suppose, who judge of others’
feelings by their own, was I ashamed of the rank of this grade from my
desire for a higher.  I was not so ignorant either of its divine
greatness or human low estate, as to think it no great thing for a
created nature, to approach in however slight degree to God, Who alone
is most glorious and illustrious, and surpasses in purity every nature,
material and immaterial alike.

<span id="iii.iv-p26"></span>6.  What then were my feelings, and what
was the reason of my disobedience?  For to most men I did not at the
time seem consistent with myself, or to be such as they had known me,
but to have undergone some deterioration, and to exhibit greater
resistance and self-will than was right.  And the causes of this you
have long been desirous to hear.  First, and most important, I was
astounded at the unexpectedness of what had occurred, as people are
terrified by sudden noises; and, losing the control of my reasoning
faculties, my self-respect, which had hitherto controlled me, gave way. 
In the next place, there came over me an eager longing <span
id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559) for the blessings of calm and
retirement, of which I had from the first been enamoured to a higher
degree, I imagine, than any other student of letters, and which amidst
the greatest and most threatening dangers I had promised to God, and of
which I had also had so much experience, that I was then upon its
threshold, my longing having in consequence been greatly kindled, so
that I could not submit to be thrust into the midst of a life of turmoil
by an arbitrary act of oppression, and to be torn away by force from the
holy sanctuary of such a life as this.

<span id="iii.iv-p28"></span>7.  For nothing seemed to me so desirable
as to close the doors of my senses, and, escaping from the flesh and the
world, collected within myself, having no further connection than was
absolutely necessary with human affairs, and speaking to myself and to
God, <span id="fr_2560"></span>[2561](#fn_2560) to live superior to
visible things, ever preserving in myself the divine impressions pure
and unmixed with the erring tokens of this lower world, and both being,
and constantly growing more and more to be, a real unspotted mirror of
God and divine things, as light is added to light, and what was still
dark grew clearer, enjoying already by hope the blessings of the world
to come, roaming about with the angels, even now being above the earth
by having forsaken it, and stationed on high by the Spirit.  If any of
you has been possessed by this longing, he knows what I mean and will
sympathise with my feelings at that time.  For, perhaps, I ought not to
expect to persuade most people by what I say, since they are unhappily
disposed to laugh at such things, either from their own thoughtlessness,
or from the influence of men unworthy of the promise, who have bestowed
upon that which is good an evil name, calling philosophy nonsense, aided
by envy and the evil tendencies of the mob, who are ever inclined to
grow worse:  so that they are constantly occupied with one of two sins,
either the commission of evil, or the discrediting of good.

<span id="iii.iv-p30"></span>8.  I was influenced besides by another
feeling, whether base or noble I do not know, but I will speak out to
you all my secrets.  I was ashamed of all those others, who, without
being better than ordinary people, nay, it is a great thing if they be
not worse, with unwashen hands, <span
id="fr_2561"></span>[2562](#fn_2561) as the saying runs, and uninitiated
souls, intrude into the most sacred offices; and, before becoming worthy
to approach the temples, they lay claim to the sanctuary, <span
id="fr_2562"></span>[2563](#fn_2562) and they push and thrust around the
holy table, as if they thought this order to be a means of livelihood,
instead of a pattern of virtue, or an absolute authority, instead of a
ministry of which we must give account.  In fact they are almost more in
number than those whom they govern; pitiable as regards piety, <span
id="fr_2563"></span>[2564](#fn_2563) and unfortunate in their dignity;
so that, it seems to me, they will not, as time and this evil alike
progress, have any one left to rule, when all are teachers, instead of,
as the promise says, taught of God, <span
id="fr_2564"></span>[2565](#fn_2564) and all prophesy, <span
id="fr_2565"></span>[2566](#fn_2565) so that even “Saul is among the
prophets,” <span id="fr_2566"></span>[2567](#fn_2566) according to the
ancient history and proverb.  For at no time, either now or in former
days, amid the rise and fall of various developments, has there ever
been such <span id="page_207">p. 207</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_207"></span>an abundance, as now exists among
Christians, of disgrace and abuses of this kind.  And, if to stay this
current is beyond our powers, at any rate it is not the least important
duty of religion to testify the hatred and shame we feel for it.

<span id="iii.iv-p37"></span>9.  Lastly, there is a matter more serious
than any which I have mentioned, for I am now coming to the finale <span
id="fr_2567"></span>[2568](#fn_2567) of the question:  and I will not
deceive you; for that would not be lawful in regard to topics of such
moment.  I did not, nor do I now, think myself qualified to rule a flock
or herd, or to have authority over the souls of men.  For in their case
it is sufficient to render the herd or flock as stout and fat as
possible; and with this object the neatherd and shepherd will look for
well watered and rich pastures, and will drive his charge from pasture
to pasture, and allow them to rest, or arouse, or recall them, sometimes
with his staff, most often with his pipe; and with the exception of
occasional struggles with wolves, or attention to the sickly, most of
his time will be devoted to the oak and the shade and his pipes, while
he reclines on the beautiful grass, and beside the cool water, and
shakes down his couch in a breezy spot, and ever and anon sings a love
ditty, with his cup by his side, and talks to his bullocks or his flock,
the fattest of which supply his banquets or his pay.  But no one ever
has thought of the virtue of flocks or herds; for indeed of what virtue
are they capable?  Or who has regarded their advantage as more important
than his own pleasure?

<span id="iii.iv-p39"></span>10.  But in the case of man, hard as it is
for him to learn how to submit to rule, it seems far harder to know how
to rule over men, and hardest of all, with this rule of ours, which
leads them by the divine law, and to God, for its risk is, in the eyes
of a thoughtful man, proportionate to its height and dignity.  For,
first of all, he must, like silver or gold, though in general
circulation in all kinds of seasons and affairs, never ring false or
alloyed, or give token of any inferior matter, needing further
refinement in the fire; <span id="fr_2568"></span>[2569](#fn_2568) or
else, the wider his rule, the greater evil he will be.  Since the injury
which extends to many is greater than that which is confined to a single
individual.

<span id="iii.iv-p41"></span>11.  For it is not so easy to dye deeply a
piece of cloth, or to impregnate with odours, foul or the reverse,
whatever comes near to them; nor is it so easy for the fatal vapour,
which is rightly called a pestilence, to infect the air, and through the
air to gain access to living being, as it is for the vice of a superior
to take most speedy possession of his subjects, and that with far
greater facility than virtue its opposite.  For it is in this that
wickedness especially has the advantage over goodness, and most
distressing it is to me to perceive it, that vice is something
attractive and ready at hand, and that nothing is so easy as to become
evil, even without any one to lead us on to it; while the attainment of
virtue is rare and difficult, even where there is much to attract and
encourage us.  And it is this, I think, which the most blessed Haggai
had before his eyes, in his wonderful and most true figure: <span
id="fr_2569"></span>[2570](#fn_2569) —“Ask the priests concerning the
law, saying:  If holy flesh borne in a garment touch meat or drink or
vessel, will it sanctify what is in contact with it?  And when they said
No; ask again if any of these things touch what is unclean, does it not
at once partake of the pollution?  For they will surely tell you that it
does partake of it, and does not continue clean in spite of the
contact.”

<span id="iii.iv-p43"></span>12.  What does he mean by this?  As I take
it, that goodness can with difficulty gain a hold upon human nature,
like fire upon green wood; while most men are ready and disposed to join
in evil, like stubble, <span id="fr_2570"></span>[2571](#fn_2570) I
mean, ready for a spark and a wind, which is easily kindled and consumed
from its dryness.  For more quickly would any one take part in evil with
slight inducement to its full extent, than in good which is fully set
before him to a slight degree.  For indeed a little wormwood most
quickly imparts its bitterness to honey; while not even double the
quantity of honey can impart its sweetness to wormwood:  and the
withdrawal of a small pebble would draw headlong a whole river, though
it would be difficult for the strongest dam to restrain or stay its
course.

<span id="iii.iv-p45"></span>13.  This then is the first point in what
we have said, which it is right for us to guard against, viz.:  being
found to be bad painters <span id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571) of
the charms of virtue, and still more, if not, perhaps, models for poor
painters, poor models for the people, or barely escaping the proverb,
that we undertake to heal others <span
id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572) while ourselves are full of sores.

<span id="iii.iv-p48"></span>14.  In the second place, although a man
has kept himself pure from sin, even in a very high degree; I do not
know that even this is sufficient for one who is to instruct others in
virtue.  For he who has received this charge, not only needs to be free
from evil, for evil is, <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_208"></span>in the eyes of most of those under his care,
most disgraceful, but also to be eminent in good, according to the
command, “Depart from evil and do good.” <span
id="fr_2573"></span>[2574](#fn_2573)   And he must not only wipe out the
traces of vice from his soul, but also inscribe better ones, so as to
outstrip men further in virtue than he is superior to them in dignity. 
He should know no limits in goodness or spiritual progress, and should
dwell upon the loss of what is still beyond him, rather than the gain of
what he has attained, and consider that which is beneath his feet a step
to that which comes next:  and not think it a great gain to excel
ordinary people, but a loss to fall short of what we ought to be:  and
to measure his success by the commandment and not by his neighbours,
whether they be evil, or to some extent proficient in virtue:  and to
weigh virtue in no small scales, inasmuch as it is due to the Most High,
“from Whom are all things, and to Whom are all things.” <span
id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574)

<span id="iii.iv-p51"></span>15.  Nor must he suppose that the same
things are suitable to all, just as all have not the same stature, nor
are the features of the face, nor the nature of animals, nor the
qualities of soil, nor the beauty and size of the stars, in all cases
the same:  but he must consider base conduct a fault in a private
individual, and deserving of chastisement under the hard rule of the
law; while in the case of a ruler or leader it is a fault not to attain
to the highest possible excellence, and always make progress in
goodness, if indeed he is, by his high degree of virtue, to draw his
people to an ordinary degree, not by the force of authority, but by the
influence of persuasion.  For what is involuntary apart from its being
the result of oppression, is neither meritorious nor durable.  For what
is forced, like a plant <span id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575)
violently drawn aside by our hands, when set free, returns to what it
was before, but that which is the result of choice is both most
legitimate and enduring, for it is preserved by the bond of good will. 
And so our law and our lawgiver enjoin upon us most strictly that we
should “tend the flock not by constraint but willingly.” <span
id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576)

<span id="iii.iv-p54"></span>16.  But granted that a man is free from
vice, and has reached the greatest heights of virtue:  I do not see what
knowledge or power would justify him in venturing upon this office.  For
the guiding of man, the most variable and manifold of creatures, seems
to me in very deed to be the art of arts <span
id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577) and science of sciences.  Any one
may recognize this, by comparing the work of the physician of souls with
the treatment of the body; and noticing that, laborious as the latter
is, ours is more laborious, and of more consequence, from the nature of
its subject matter, the power of its science, and the object of its
exercise.  The one labours about bodies, and perishable failing matter,
which absolutely must be dissolved and undergo its fate, <span
id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578) even if upon this occasion by the
aid of art it can surmount the disturbance within itself, being
dissolved by disease or time in submission to the law of nature, since
it cannot rise above its own limitations.

<span id="iii.iv-p57"></span>17.  The other is concerned with the soul,
which comes from God and is divine, and partakes of the heavenly
nobility, and presses on to it, even if it be bound to an inferior
nature.  Perhaps indeed there are other reasons also for this, which
only God, Who bound them together, and those who are instructed by God
in such mysteries, can know, but as far as I, and men like myself can
perceive, there are two:  one, that it may inherit the glory above by
means of a struggle and wrestling <span
id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579) with things below, being tried as
gold in the fire <span id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580) by things
here, and gain the objects of our hope as a prize of virtue, and not
merely as the gift of God.  This, indeed, was the will of Supreme
Goodness, to make the good even our own, not only because sown in our
nature, but because cultivated by our own choice, and by the motions of
our will, <span id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581) free to act in
either direction.  The second reason is, that it may draw to itself and
raise to heaven the lower nature, by gradually freeing it from its
grossness, in order that the soul may be to the body what God is to the
soul, itself leading on the matter which ministers to it, and uniting
it, as its fellow-servant, to God.

<span id="iii.iv-p61"></span>18.  Place and time and age and season and
the like are the subjects of a physician’s scrutiny; he will prescribe
medicines and diet, and guard against things injurious, that the desires
of the sick may not be a hindrance to his art.  Sometimes, and in
certain cases, he will make use of the cautery or the knife or the
severer remedies; but none of these, laborious and hard as they may
seem, is so difficult as the diagnosis and cure of our habits, passions,
lives, wills, and whatever else is within us, by banishing from our
compound nature everything brutal and fierce, and introducing and
establishing in their stead what is gentle and dear <span
id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_209"></span>to God,
and arbitrating fairly between soul and body; not allowing the superior
to be overpowered by the inferior, which would be the greatest
injustice; but subjecting to the ruling and leading power that which
naturally takes the second place:  as indeed the divine law enjoins,
which is most excellently imposed on His whole creation, whether visible
or beyond our ken.

<span id="iii.iv-p62"></span>19.  This further point does not escape me,
that the nature of all these objects of the watchfulness of the
physician remains the same, and does not evolve out of itself any crafty
opposition, or contrivance hostile to the appliances of his art, nay, it
is rather the treatment which modifies its subject matter, <span
id="fr_2582"></span>[2583](#fn_2582) except where some slight
insubordination occurs on the part of the patient, which it is not
difficult to prevent or restrain.  But in our case, human prudence and
selfishness, and the want of training and inclination to yield ready
submission are a very great obstacle to advance in virtue, amounting
almost to an armed resistance to those who are wishful to help us.  And
the very eagerness with which we should lay bare our sickness to our
spiritual physicians, we employ in avoiding this treatment, <span
id="fr_2583"></span>[2584](#fn_2583) and shew our bravery by struggling
against what is for our own interest, our skill in shunning what is for
our health.

<span id="iii.iv-p65"></span>20.  For we either hide away our sin,
cloaking it over in the depth of our soul, like some festering and
malignant disease, as if by escaping the notice of men we could escape
the mighty eye of God and justice.  Or else we allege excuses in our
sins, <span id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584) by devising pleas in
defence of our falls, or tightly closing our ears, like the deaf adder
that stoppeth her ears, we are obstinate in refusing to hear the voice
of the charmer, and be treated with the medicines of wisdom, <span
id="fr_2585"></span>[2586](#fn_2585) by which spiritual sickness is
healed.  Or, lastly, those of us who are most daring and self-willed
shamelessly brazen out our sin before those who would heal it, marching
with bared head, as the saying is, into all kinds of transgression.  O
what madness, if there be no term more fitting for this state of mind! 
Those whom we ought to love as our benefactors we keep off, as if they
were our enemies, hating those who reprove in the gates, and abhorring
the righteous word; <span id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586) and we
think that we shall succeed in the war that we are waging against those
who are well disposed to us by doing ourselves all the harm we can, like
men who imagine they are consuming the flesh of others when they are
really fastening upon their own.

<span id="iii.iv-p69"></span>21.  For these reasons I allege that our
office as physicians far exceeds in toilsomeness, and consequently in
worth, that which is confined to the body; and further, because the
latter is mainly concerned with the surface, and only in a slight degree
investigates the causes which are deeply hidden.  But the whole of our
treatment and exertion is concerned with the hidden man of the
heart, <span id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587) and our warfare is
directed against that adversary and foe within us, who uses ourselves as
his weapons against ourselves, and, most fearful of all, hands us over
to the death of sin.  In opposition then, to these foes we are in need
of great and perfect faith, and of still greater co-operation on the
part of God, and, as I am persuaded, of no slight countermanoeuvring on
our own part, which must manifest itself both in word and deed, if
ourselves, the most precious possession we have, are to be duly tended
and cleansed and made as deserving as possible.

<span id="iii.iv-p71"></span>22.  To turn however to the ends in view in
each of these forms of healing, for this point is still left to be
considered, the one preserves, if it already exists, the health and good
habit of the flesh, or if absent, recalls it; though it is not yet clear
whether or not these will be for the advantage of those who possess
them, since their opposites very often confer a greater benefit on those
who have them, just as poverty and wealth, renown or disgrace, a low or
brilliant position, and all other circumstances, which are naturally
indifferent, and do not incline in one direction more than in another,
produce a good or bad effect according to the will of, and the manner in
which they are used by the persons who experience them.  But the scope
of our art is to provide the soul with wings, to rescue it from the
world and give it to God, and to watch over that which is in His
image, <span id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588) if it abides, to take
it by the hand, if it is in danger, or restore it, if ruined, to make
Christ to dwell in the heart <span id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589)
by the Spirit:  and, in short, to deify, and bestow heavenly bliss upon,
one who belongs to the heavenly host.

<span id="iii.iv-p74"></span>23.  This is the wish of our
schoolmaster <span id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590) the law, of the
prophets who intervened between Christ and the law, of Christ who is the
fulfiller and end <span id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591) of the
spiritual law; of the emptied Godhead, <span
id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592) of the assumed flesh, <span
id="fr_2593"></span>[2594](#fn_2593) of the novel union between God and
man, one consisting <span id="fr_2594"></span>[2595](#fn_2594) of two,
and both in one.  This is <span id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_210"></span>why God was united <span
id="fr_2595"></span>[2596](#fn_2595) to the flesh by means of the
soul, <span id="fr_2596"></span>[2597](#fn_2596) and natures so separate
were knit together by the affinity to each of the element which mediated
between them:  so all became one for the sake of all, and for the sake
of one, our progenitor, the soul because of the soul which was
disobedient, the flesh because of the flesh which co-operated with it
and shared in its condemnation, Christ, Who was superior to, and beyond
the reach of, sin, because of Adam, who became subject to sin.

<span id="iii.iv-p82"></span>24.  This is why the new was substituted
for the old, <span id="fr_2597"></span>[2598](#fn_2597) why He Who
suffered was for suffering recalled to life, why each property of His,
Who was above us, was interchanged with each of ours, why the new
mystery took place of the dispensation, due to loving kindness which
deals with him who fell through disobedience.  This is the reason for
the generation and the virgin, for the manger and Bethlehem; the
generation on behalf of the creation, <span
id="fr_2598"></span>[2599](#fn_2598) the virgin on behalf of the
woman, <span id="fr_2599"></span>[2600](#fn_2599) Bethlehem <span
id="fr_2600"></span>[2601](#fn_2600) because of Eden, the manger because
of the garden, small and visible things on behalf of great and hidden
things.  This is why the angels <span
id="fr_2601"></span>[2602](#fn_2601) glorified first the heavenly, then
the earthly, <span id="fr_2602"></span>[2603](#fn_2602) why the
shepherds saw the glory over the Lamb and the Shepherd, why the star led
the Magi to worship and offer gifts, <span
id="fr_2603"></span>[2604](#fn_2603) in order that idolatry might be
destroyed.  This is why Jesus was baptized, <span
id="fr_2604"></span>[2605](#fn_2604) and received testimony from above,
and fasted, <span id="fr_2605"></span>[2606](#fn_2605) and was tempted,
and overcame him who had overcome.  This is why devils were cast
out, <span id="fr_2606"></span>[2607](#fn_2606) and diseases healed, and
the mighty preaching was entrusted to, and successfully proclaimed by
men of low estate.

<span id="iii.iv-p93"></span>25.  This is why the heathen rage and the
peoples imagine vain things; <span id="fr_2607"></span>[2608](#fn_2607)
why tree <span id="fr_2608"></span>[2609](#fn_2608) is set over against
tree, <span id="fr_2609"></span>[2610](#fn_2609) hands against hand, the
one stretched out in self indulgence, <span
id="fr_2610"></span>[2611](#fn_2610) the others in generosity; the one
unrestrained, the others fixed by nails, <span
id="fr_2611"></span>[2612](#fn_2611) the one expelling Adam, the other
reconciling the ends of the earth.  This is the reason of the lifting up
to atone for the fall, and of the gall for the tasting, and of the
thorny crown for the dominion of evil, and of death for death, and of
darkness for the sake of light, and of burial for the return to the
ground, and of resurrection for the sake of resurrection. <span
id="fr_2612"></span>[2613](#fn_2612)   All these are a training from God
for us, and a healing for our weakness, restoring the old Adam to the
place whence he fell, and conducting us to the tree of life, <span
id="fr_2613"></span>[2614](#fn_2613) from which the tree of knowledge
estranged us, when partaken of unseasonably, and improperly.

<span id="iii.iv-p101"></span>26.  Of this healing we, who are set over
others, are the ministers and fellow-labourers; <span
id="fr_2614"></span>[2615](#fn_2614) for whom it is a great thing to
recognise and heal their own passions and sicknesses:  or rather, not
really a great thing, only the viciousness of most of those who belong
to this order has made me say so:  but a much greater thing is the power
to heal and skilfully cleanse those of others, to the advantage both of
those who are in want of healing and of those whose charge it is to
heal.

<span id="iii.iv-p103"></span>27.  Again, the healers of our bodies will
have their labours and vigils and cares, of which we are aware; and will
reap a harvest of pain for themselves from the distresses of others, as
one of their wise men <span id="fr_2615"></span>[2616](#fn_2615) said;
and will provide for the use of those who need them, both the results of
their own labours and investigations, and what they have been able to
borrow from others:  and they consider none, even of the minutest
details, which they discover, or which elude their search, as having
other than an important influence upon health or danger.  And what is
the object of all this?  That a man may live some days longer on the
earth, though he is possibly not a good man, but one of the most
depraved, for whom it had perhaps been better, because of his badness,
to have died long ago, in order to be set free from vice, the most
serious of sicknesses.  But, suppose he is a good man, how long will he
be able to live?  Forever?  Or what will he gain from life here, from
which it is the greatest of blessings, if a man be sane and sensible, to
seek to be set free?

<span id="iii.iv-p105"></span>28.  But we, upon whose efforts is staked
the salvation of a soul, a being blessed and immortal, and destined for
undying chastisement or praise, for its vice or virtue,—what a struggle
ought ours to be, and how great skill do we require to treat, or get men
treated properly, and to change their life, and give up the clay to the
spirit.  For men and women, young <span id="page_211">p. 211</span>
<span id="iii.iv-Page_211"></span>and old, rich and poor, the sanguine
and despondent, the sick and whole, rulers and ruled, the wise and
ignorant, the cowardly and courageous, the wrathful and meek, the
successful and failing, do not require the same instruction and
encouragement.

<span id="iii.iv-p106"></span>29.  And if you examine more closely, how
great is the distinction between the married and the unmarried, and
among the latter between hermits and those who <span
id="fr_2616"></span>[2617](#fn_2616) live together in community, between
those who are proficient and advanced in contemplation and those who
barely hold on the straight course, between townsfolk again and rustics,
between the simple and the designing, between men of business and men of
leisure, between those who have met with reverses and those who are
prosperous and ignorant of misfortune.  For these classes differ
sometimes more widely from each other in their desires and passion than
in their physical characteristics; or, if you will, in the mixtures and
blendings of the elements of which we are composed, and, therefore, to
regulate them is no easy task.

<span id="iii.iv-p108"></span>30.  As then the same medicine and the
same food are not in every case administered to men’s bodies, but a
difference is made according to their degree of health or infirmity; so
also are souls treated with varying instruction and guidance.  To this
treatment witness is borne by those who have had experience of it.  Some
are led by doctrine, others trained by example; some need the spur,
others the curb; some are sluggish and hard to rouse to the good, and
must be stirred up by being smitten with the word; others are
immoderately fervent in spirit, with impulses difficult to restrain,
like thoroughbred colts, who run wide of the turning post, and to
improve them the word must have a restraining and checking influence.

<span id="iii.iv-p109"></span>31.  Some are benefited by praise, others
by blame, both being applied in season; while if out of season, or
unreasonable, they are injurious; some are set right by encouragement,
others by rebuke; some, when taken to task in public, others, when
privately corrected.  For some are wont to despise private admonitions,
but are recalled to their senses by the condemnation of a number of
people, while others, who would grow reckless under reproof openly
given, accept rebuke because it is in secret, and yield obedience in
return for sympathy.

<span id="iii.iv-p110"></span>32.  Upon some it is needful to keep a
close watch, even in the minutest details, because if they think they
are unperceived (as they would contrive to be), they are puffed up with
the idea of their own wisdom.  Of others it is better to take no notice,
but seeing not to see, and hearing not to hear them, according to the
proverb, that we may not drive them to despair, under the depressing
influence of repeated reproofs, and at last to utter recklessness, when
they have lost the sense of self-respect, the source of
persuasiveness. <span id="fr_2617"></span>[2618](#fn_2617)   In some
cases we must even be angry, without feeling angry, or treat them with a
disdain we do not feel, or manifest despair, though we do not really
despair of them, according to the needs of their nature.  Others again
we must treat with condescension <span
id="fr_2618"></span>[2619](#fn_2618) and lowliness, aiding them readily
to conceive a hope of better things.  Some it is often more advantageous
to conquer—by others to be overcome, and to praise or deprecate, in one
case wealth and power, in another poverty and failure.

<span id="iii.iv-p113"></span>33.  For our treatment does not correspond
with virtue and vice, one of which is most excellent and beneficial at
all times and in all cases, and the other most evil and harmful; and,
instead of one and the same of our medicines invariably proving either
most wholesome or most dangerous in the same cases—be it severity or
gentleness, or any of the others which we have enumerated—in some cases
it proves good and useful, in others again it has the contrary effect,
according, I suppose, as time and circumstance and the disposition of
the patient admit.  Now to set before you the distinction between all
these things, and give you a perfectly exact view of them, so that you
may in brief comprehend the medical art, is quite impossible, even for
one in the highest degree qualified by care and skill:  but actual
experience and practice are requisite to form <span
id="fr_2619"></span>[2620](#fn_2619) a medical system and a medical man.

<span id="iii.iv-p115"></span>34.  This, however, I take to be generally
admitted—that just as it is not safe for those who walk on a lofty tight
rope to lean to either side, for even though the inclination seems
slight, it has no slight consequences, but <span id="page_212">p.
212</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_212"></span>their safety depends upon
their perfect balance:  so in the case of one of us, if he leans to
either side, whether from vice or ignorance, no slight danger of a fall
into sin is incurred, both for himself and those who are led by him. 
But we must really walk in the King’s highway, <span
id="fr_2620"></span>[2621](#fn_2620) and take care not to turn aside
from it either to the right hand or to the left, <span
id="fr_2621"></span>[2622](#fn_2621) as the Proverbs say.  For such is
the case with our passions, and such in this matter is the task of the
good shepherd, if he is to know properly the souls of his flock, and to
guide them according to the methods of a pastoral care which is right
and just, and worthy of our true Shepherd.

<span id="iii.iv-p118"></span>35.  In regard to the distribution of the
word, to mention last the first of our duties, of that divine and
exalted word, which everyone now is ready to discourse upon; if anyone
else boldly undertakes it and supposes it within the power of every
man’s intellect, I am amazed at his intelligence, not to say his folly. 
To me indeed it seems no slight task, and one requiring no little
spiritual power, to give in due season <span
id="fr_2622"></span>[2623](#fn_2622) to each his portion of the word,
and to regulate with judgment the truth of our opinions, which are
concerned with such subjects as the world or worlds, <span
id="fr_2623"></span>[2624](#fn_2623) matter, soul, mind, intelligent
natures, better or worse, providence which holds together and guides the
universe, and seems in our experience of it to be governed according to
some principle, but one which is at variance with those of earth and of
men.

<span id="iii.iv-p121"></span>36.  Again, they are concerned with our
original constitution, and final restoration, the types of the truth,
the covenants, the first and second coming of Christ, His incarnation,
sufferings and dissolution, <span id="fr_2624"></span>[2625](#fn_2624)
with the resurrection, the last day, the judgment and recompense,
whether sad or glorious; I, to crown all, with what we are to think of
the original <span id="fr_2625"></span>[2626](#fn_2625) and blessed
Trinity.  Now this involves a very great risk to those who are charged
with the illumination <span id="fr_2626"></span>[2627](#fn_2626) of
others, if they are to avoid contracting <span
id="fr_2627"></span>[2628](#fn_2627) their doctrine to a single Person,
from fear of polytheism, and so leave us empty terms, if we suppose the
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit to be one and the same Person
only:  or, on the other hand, severing It into three, either foreign and
diverse, or disordered and unprincipled, and, so to say, opposed
divinities, thus falling from the opposite side into an equally
dangerous error:  like some distorted plant if bent far back in the
opposite direction.

<span id="iii.iv-p126"></span>37.  For, amid the three infirmities in
regard to theology, atheism, Judaism, and polytheism, one of which is
patronised by Sabellius the Libyan, another by Arius of Alexandria, and
the third by some of the ultra-orthodox among us, what is my position,
can I avoid whatever in these three is noxious, and remain within the
limits of piety; neither being led astray by the new analysis and
synthesis into the atheism <span id="fr_2628"></span>[2629](#fn_2628) of
Sabellius, to assert not so much that all are one as that each is
nothing, for things which are transferred and pass into each other cease
to be that which each one of them is, of that we have an unnaturally
compound deity, like those mythical creatures, the subject of a
picturesque imagination:  nor again, by alleging a plurality of severed
natures, according to the well named madness <span
id="fr_2629"></span>[2630](#fn_2629) of Arius, becoming involved in a
Jewish poverty, and introducing envy into the divine nature, by limiting
the Godhead to the Unbegotten One alone, as if afraid that our God would
perish, if He were the Father of a real God of equal nature:  nor again,
by arraying three principles in opposition to, or in alliance with, each
other, introducing the Gentile plurality of principles from which we
have escaped?

<span id="iii.iv-p129"></span>38.  It is necessary neither to be so
devoted to the Father, as to rob Him of His Fatherhood, for whose Father
would He be, if the Son were separated and estranged from Him, by being
ranked with the creation, (for an alien being, or one which is combined
and confounded with his father, and, for the sense is the same, throws
him into confusion, is not a son); nor to be so devoted to Christ, as to
neglect to preserve both His Sonship, (for whose son would He be, if His
origin were not referred to the Father?) and the rank of the Father as
origin, inasmuch as He is the Father and Generator; for He would be the
origin of petty and unworthy beings, or rather the term would be used in
a petty and unworthy sense, if He were not the origin of Godhead and
goodness, which are contemplated in the Son and the Spirit:  the former
being the Son and the Word, the latter the proceeding and indissoluble
Spirit.  For both the Unity of the Godhead must be preserved, and the
Trinity <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_213"></span>of Persons confessed, each with His own
property.

<span id="iii.iv-p130"></span>39.  A suitable and worthy comprehension
and exposition of this subject demands a discussion of greater length
than the present occasion, or even our life, as I suppose, allows, and,
what is more, both now and at all times, the aid of the Spirit, by Whom
alone we are able to perceive, to expound, or to embrace, the truth in
regard to God.  For the pure alone can grasp Him Who is pure and of the
same disposition as himself; and I have now briefly dwelt upon the
subject, to show how difficult it is to discuss such important
questions, especially before a large audience, composed of every age and
condition, and needing like an instrument of many strings, to be played
upon in various ways; or to find any form of words able to edify them
all, and illuminate them with the light of knowledge.  For it is not
only that there are three sources from which danger springs,
understanding, speech, and hearing, so that failure in one, if not in
all, is infallibly certain; for either the mind is not illuminated, or
the language is feeble, or the hearing, not having been cleansed, fails
to comprehend, and accordingly, in one or all respects, the truth must
be maimed:  but further, what makes the instruction of those who profess
to teach any other subject so easy and acceptable—viz. the piety <span
id="fr_2630"></span>[2631](#fn_2630) of the audience—on this subject
involves difficulty and danger.

<span id="iii.iv-p132"></span>40.  For having undertaken to contend on
behalf of God, the Supreme Being, and of salvation, and of the primary
hope <span id="fr_2631"></span>[2632](#fn_2631) of us all, the more
fervent they are in the faith, the more hostile are they to what is
said, supposing that a submissive spirit indicates, not piety, but
treason to the truth, and therefore they would sacrifice anything rather
than their private convictions, and the accustomed doctrines in which
they have been educated.  I am now referring to those who are moderate
and not utterly depraved in disposition, who, if they have erred in
regard to the truth, have erred from piety, who have zeal, though not
according to knowledge, <span id="fr_2632"></span>[2633](#fn_2632) who
will possibly be of the number of those not excessively condemned, and
not beaten with many stripes, <span id="fr_2633"></span>[2634](#fn_2633)
because it is not through vice or depravity that they have failed to do
the will of their Lord; and these perchance would be persuaded and
forsake the pious opinion which is the cause of their hostility, if some
reason either from their own minds, or from others, were to take hold of
them, and at a critical moment, like iron from flint, strike fire from a
mind which is pregnant and worthy of the light, for thus a little spark
would quickly kindle the torch of truth within it.

<span id="iii.iv-p136"></span>41.  But what is to be said of those who,
from vain glory or arrogance, speak unrighteousness against the most
High, <span id="fr_2634"></span>[2635](#fn_2634) arming themselves with
the insolence of Jannes and Jambres, <span
id="fr_2635"></span>[2636](#fn_2635) not against Moses, but against the
truth, and rising in opposition to sound doctrine?  Or of the third
class, who through ignorance and, its consequence, temerity, rush
headlong against every form of doctrine in swinish fashion, and trample
under foot the fair pearls <span id="fr_2636"></span>[2637](#fn_2636) of
the truth?

<span id="iii.iv-p140"></span>42.  What again of those who come with no
private idea, or form of words, better or worse, in regard to God, but
listen to all kinds of doctrines and teachers, with the intention of
selecting from all what is best and safest, in reliance upon no better
judges of the truth than themselves?  They are, in consequence, borne
and turned about hither and thither by one plausible idea after another,
and, after being deluged and trodden down by all kinds of
doctrine, <span id="fr_2637"></span>[2638](#fn_2637) and having rung the
changes on a long succession of teachers and formulæ, which they throw
to the winds as readily as dust, their ears and minds at last are
wearied out, and, O what folly! they become equally disgusted with all
forms of doctrine, and assume the wretched character of deriding and
despising our faith as unstable and unsound; passing in their ignorance
from the teachers to the doctrine:  as if anyone whose eyes were
diseased, or whose ears had been injured, were to complain of the sun
for being dim and not shining, or of sounds for being inharmonious and
feeble.

<span id="iii.iv-p142"></span>43.  Accordingly, to impress the truth
upon a soul when it is still fresh, like wax not yet subjected to the
seal, is an easier task than inscribing pious doctrine on the top of
inscriptions—I mean wrong doctrines and dogmas <span
id="fr_2638"></span>[2639](#fn_2638) —with the result that the former
are confused and thrown into disorder by the latter.  It is better
indeed to tread a road which is smooth and well trodden than one which
is untrodden and rough, or to plough land which has often been <span
id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_214"></span>cleft and
broken up by the plough:  but a soul to be written upon should be free
from the inscription of harmful doctrines, or the deeply cut marks of
vice:  otherwise the pious inscriber would have a twofold task, the
erasure of the former impressions and the substitution of others which
are more excellent, and more worthy to abide.  So numerous are they
whose wickedness is shown, not only by yielding to their passions, but
even by their utterances, and so numerous the forms and characters of
wickedness, and so considerable the task of one who has been intrusted
with this office of educating and taking charge of souls.  Indeed I have
omitted the majority of the details, lest my speech should be
unnecessarily burdensome.

<span id="iii.iv-p144"></span>44.  If anyone were to undertake to tame
and train an animal of many forms and shapes, compounded of many animals
of various sizes and degrees of tameness and wildness, his principal
task, involving a considerable struggle, would be the government of so
extraordinary and heterogeneous a nature, since each of the animals of
which it is compounded would, according to its nature or habit, be
differently affected with joy, pleasure or dislike, by the same words,
or food, or stroking with the hand, or whistling, or other modes of
treatment.  And what must the master of such an animal do, but show
himself manifold and various in his knowledge, and apply to each a
treatment suitable for it, so as successfully to lead and preserve the
beast?  And since the common body of the church is composed of many
different characters and minds, like a single animal compounded of
discordant parts, it is absolutely necessary that its ruler should be at
once simple in his uprightness in all respects, and as far as possible
manifold and varied in his treatment of individuals, and in dealing with
all in an appropriate and suitable manner.

<span id="iii.iv-p145"></span>45.  For some need to be fed with the
milk <span id="fr_2639"></span>[2640](#fn_2639) of the most simple and
elementary doctrines, viz., those who are in habit babes and, so to say,
new-made, and unable to bear the manly food of the word:  nay, if it
were presented to them beyond their strength, they would probably be
overwhelmed and oppressed, owing to the inability of their mind, as is
the case with our material bodies, <span
id="fr_2640"></span>[2641](#fn_2640) to digest and appropriate what is
offered to it, and so would lose even their original power.  Others
require the wisdom which is spoken among the perfect, <span
id="fr_2641"></span>[2642](#fn_2641) and the higher and more solid food,
since their senses have been sufficiently exercised to discern <span
id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642) truth and falsehood, and if they
were made to drink milk, and fed on the vegetable diet of
invalids, <span id="fr_2643"></span>[2644](#fn_2643) they would be
annoyed.  And with good reason, for they would not be strengthened <span
id="fr_2644"></span>[2645](#fn_2644) according to Christ, nor make that
laudable increase, which the Word produces in one who is rightly fed, by
making him a perfect man, and bringing him to the measure of spiritual
stature. <span id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645)

<span id="iii.iv-p153"></span>46.  And who is sufficient for these
things?  For we are not as the many, able to corrupt <span
id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646) the word of truth, and mix the
wine, <span id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647) which maketh glad the
heart of man, <span id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648) with water,
mix, that is, our doctrine with what is common and cheap, and debased,
and stale, and tasteless, in order to turn the adulteration to our
profit, and accommodate ourselves to those who meet us, and curry favor
with everyone, becoming ventriloquists <span
id="fr_2649"></span>[2650](#fn_2649) and chatterers, who serve their own
pleasures by words uttered from the earth, and sinking into the earth,
and, to gain the special good will of the multitude, injuring in the
highest degree, nay, ruining ourselves, and shedding the innocent blood
of simpler souls, which will be required at our hands. <span
id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650)

<span id="iii.iv-p159"></span>47.  Besides, we are aware that it is
better to offer our own reins to others more skilful than ourselves,
than, while inexperienced, to guide the course of others, and rather to
give a kindly hearing than stir an untrained tongue; and after a
discussion of these points with advisers who are, I fancy, of no mean
worth, and, at any rate, wish us well, we preferred to learn those
canons of speech and action which we did not know, rather than undertake
to teach them in our ignorance.  For it is delightful to have the
reasoning <span id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651) of the aged come to
one even until the depth of old age, able, as it is, to aid a soul new
to piety.  Accordingly, to undertake the training of others before being
sufficiently trained oneself, and to learn, as men say, the potter’s art
on a wine-jar, that is, to practise ourselves in piety at the expense of
others’ souls seems to me to be excessive folly or excessive
rashness—folly, if we are not even aware of our own ignorance; rashness,
if in spite of this knowledge we venture on the task.

<span id="iii.iv-p161"></span>48.  Nay, the wiser of the Hebrews tell us
that there was of old among the Hebrews a most excellent and
praiseworthy law, <span id="fr_2652"></span>[2653](#fn_2652) that every
<span id="page_215">p. 215</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_215"></span>age
was not entrusted with the whole of Scripture, inasmuch as this would
not be the more profitable course, since the whole of it is not at once
intelligible to everyone, and its more recondite parts would, by their
apparent meaning, do a very great injury to most people.  Some portions
therefore, whose exterior <span id="fr_2653"></span>[2654](#fn_2653) is
unexceptionable, are from the first permitted and common to all; while
others are only entrusted to those who have attained their twenty-fifth
year, viz., such as hide their mystical beauty under a mean-looking
cloak, to be the reward of diligence and an illustrious life; flashing
forth and presenting itself only to those whose mind has been purified,
on the ground that this age alone <span
id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654) can be superior to the body, and
properly rise from the letter to the spirit.

<span id="iii.iv-p165"></span>49.  Among us, however, there is no
boundary line between giving and receiving instruction, like the stones
of old between the tribes within and beyond the Jordan:  nor is a
certain part entrusted to some, another to others; nor any rule for
degrees <span id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655) of experience; but
the matter has been so disturbed and thrown into confusion, that most of
us, not to say all, almost before we have lost our childish curls and
lisp, before we have entered the house of God, before we know even the
names of the Sacred Books, before we have learnt the character and
authors of the Old and New Testaments:  (for my present point is not our
want of cleansing from the mire and marks of spiritual shame which our
viciousness has contracted) if, I say, we have furnished ourselves with
two or three expressions of pious authors, and that by hearsay, not by
study; if we have had a brief experience of David, or clad ourselves
properly in a cloaklet, or are wearing at least a philosopher’s girdle,
or have girt about us some form and appearance of piety—phew! how we
take the chair and show our spirit!  Samuel was holy even in his
swaddling-clothes: <span id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656)   we are
at once wise teachers, of high estimation in Divine things, the first of
scribes and lawyers; we ordain ourselves men of heaven and seek to be
called Rabbi by men; <span id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657) the
letter is nowhere, everything is to be understood spiritually, and our
dreams are utter drivel, and we should be annoyed if we were not lauded
to excess.  This is the case with the better and more simple of us: 
what of those who are more spiritual and noble? <span
id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658)   After frequently condemning us,
as men of no account, they have forsaken us, and abhor fellowship with
impious people such as we are.

<span id="iii.iv-p170"></span>50.  Now, if we were to speak gently to
one of them, advancing, as follows, step by step in argument:  “Tell me,
my good sir, do you call dancing anything, and flute-playing?”
“Certainly,” they would say.  “What then of wisdom and being wise, which
we venture to define as a knowledge of things divine and human?”  This
also they will admit.  “Are then these accomplishments better than and
superior to wisdom, or wisdom by far better than these?”  “Better even
than all things,” I know well that they will say.  Up to this point they
are judicious.  “Well, dancing and flute-playing require to be taught
and learnt, a process which takes time, and much toil in the sweat of
the brow, and sometimes the payment of fees, and entreaties for
initiation, and long absence from home, and all else which must be done
and borne for the acquisition of experience:  but as for wisdom, which
is chief of all things, and holds in her embrace everything which is
good, so that even God himself prefers this title to all the names which
He is called; are we to suppose that it is a matter of such slight
consequence, and so accessible, that we need but wish, and we would be
wise?”  “It would be utter folly to do so.”  If we, or any learned and
prudent man, were to say this to them, and try by degrees to cleanse
them from their error, it would be sowing upon rocks, <span
id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659) and speaking to ears of men who
will not hear: <span id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660)   so far are
they from being even wise enough to perceive their own ignorance.  And
we may rightly, in my opinion, apply to them the saying of Solomon: 
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, <span
id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661) a man wise in his own
conceit; <span id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662) and a still greater
evil is to charge with the instruction of others a man who is not even
aware of his own ignorance.

<span id="iii.iv-p175"></span>51.  This is a state of mind which
demands, in special degree, our tears and groans, and has often stirred
my pity, from the conviction that imagination robs us in great measure
of reality, and that vain glory is a great hindrance to men’s attainment
of virtue.  To heal and stay this disease needs a Peter or Paul, those
great disciples of Christ, who in addition to guidance in word and deed,
received their grace, <span id="fr_2663"></span>[2664](#fn_2663) and
<span id="page_216">p. 216</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_216"></span>became all things to all men, that they
might gain all. <span id="fr_2664"></span>[2665](#fn_2664)   But for
other men like ourselves, it is a great thing to be rightly guided and
led by those who have been charged with the correction and setting right
of things such as these.

<span id="iii.iv-p178"></span>52.  Since, however, I have mentioned
Paul, and men like him, I will, with your permission, pass by all others
who have been foremost as lawgivers, prophets, or leaders, or in any
similar office—for instance, Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Elijah, Elisha, the
Judges, Samuel, David, the company of Prophets, John, the Twelve
Apostles, and their successors, who with many toils and labors exercised
their authority, each in his own time; all these I pass by, to set forth
Paul as the witness to my assertions, and for us to consider by his
example how important a matter is the care of souls, and whether it
requires slight attention and little judgment.  But that we may
recognize and perceive this, let us hear what Paul himself says of Paul.

<span id="iii.iv-p179"></span>53.  I say nothing of his labours, his
watchings, his sufferings in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness,
his assailants from without, his adversaries within. <span
id="fr_2665"></span>[2666](#fn_2665)   I pass over the persecutions,
councils, prisons, bonds, accusers, tribunals, the daily and hourly
deaths, the basket, the stonings, beatings with rods, the travelling
about, the perils by land and sea, the deep, the shipwrecks, the perils
of rivers, perils of robbers, perils from his countrymen, perils among
false brethren, the living by his own hands, the gospel without
charge, <span id="fr_2666"></span>[2667](#fn_2666) the being a spectacle
to both angels and men, <span id="fr_2667"></span>[2668](#fn_2667) set
in the midst between God and men to champion His cause, <span
id="fr_2668"></span>[2669](#fn_2668) and to unite them to Him, and make
them His own peculiar people, <span id="fr_2669"></span>[2670](#fn_2669)
beside those things that are without. <span
id="fr_2670"></span>[2671](#fn_2670)   For who could worthily detail
these matters, the daily pressure, <span
id="fr_2671"></span>[2672](#fn_2671) the individual solicitude, the care
of all the churches, the universal sympathy, and brotherly love?  Did
anyone stumble, Paul also was weak; did another suffer scandal, it was
Paul who was on fire.

<span id="iii.iv-p187"></span>54.  What of the laboriousness of his
teaching?  The manifold character of his ministry?  His loving
kindness?  And on the other hand his strictness?  And the combination
and blending of the two; in such wise that his gentleness should not
enervate, nor his severity exasperate?  He gives laws for slaves and
masters, <span id="fr_2672"></span>[2673](#fn_2672) rulers and
ruled, <span id="fr_2673"></span>[2674](#fn_2673) husbands and
wives, <span id="fr_2674"></span>[2675](#fn_2674) parents and
children, <span id="fr_2675"></span>[2676](#fn_2675) marriage and
celibacy, <span id="fr_2676"></span>[2677](#fn_2676) self-discipline and
indulgence, <span id="fr_2677"></span>[2678](#fn_2677) wisdom and
ignorance, <span id="fr_2678"></span>[2679](#fn_2678) circumcision and
uncircumcision, <span id="fr_2679"></span>[2680](#fn_2679) Christ and
the world, the flesh and the spirit. <span
id="fr_2680"></span>[2681](#fn_2680)   On behalf of some he gives
thanks, others he upbraids.  Some he names his joy and crown, <span
id="fr_2681"></span>[2682](#fn_2681) others he charges with folly. <span
id="fr_2682"></span>[2683](#fn_2682)   Some who hold a straight course
he accompanies, sharing in their zeal; others he checks, who are going
wrong.  At one time he excommunicates, <span
id="fr_2683"></span>[2684](#fn_2683) at another he confirms his
love; <span id="fr_2684"></span>[2685](#fn_2684) at one time he grieves,
at another rejoices; at one time he feeds with milk, at another he
handles mysteries; <span id="fr_2685"></span>[2686](#fn_2685) at one
time he condescends, at another he raises to his own level; at one time
he threatens a rod, <span id="fr_2686"></span>[2687](#fn_2686) at
another he offers the spirit of meekness; at one time he is haughty
toward the lofty, at another lowly toward the lowly.  Now he is least of
the apostles, <span id="fr_2687"></span>[2688](#fn_2687) now he offers a
proof of Christ speaking in him; <span
id="fr_2688"></span>[2689](#fn_2688) now he longs for departure and is
being poured forth as a libation, <span
id="fr_2689"></span>[2690](#fn_2689) now he thinks it more necessary for
their sakes to abide in the flesh.  For he seeks not his own interests,
but those of his children, <span id="fr_2690"></span>[2691](#fn_2690)
whom he has begotten in Christ by the gospel. <span
id="fr_2691"></span>[2692](#fn_2691)   This is the aim of all his
spiritual authority, in everything to neglect his own in comparison with
the advantage of others.

<span id="iii.iv-p208"></span>55.  He glories in his infirmities and
distresses.  He takes pleasure in the dying of Jesus, <span
id="fr_2692"></span>[2693](#fn_2692) as if it were a kind of ornament. 
He is lofty in carnal things, <span id="fr_2693"></span>[2694](#fn_2693)
he rejoices in things spiritual; he is not rude in knowledge, <span
id="fr_2694"></span>[2695](#fn_2694) and claims to see in a mirror,
darkly. <span id="fr_2695"></span>[2696](#fn_2695)   He is bold in
spirit, and buffets his body, <span id="fr_2696"></span>[2697](#fn_2696)
throwing it as an antagonist.  What is the lesson and instruction he
would thus impress upon us?  Not to be proud of earthly things, or
puffed up by knowledge, or excite the flesh against the spirit.  He
fights for all, prays for all, is jealous for all, is kindled on behalf
of all, whether without law, or under the law; a preacher of the
Gentiles, <span id="fr_2697"></span>[2698](#fn_2697) a patron of the
Jews.  He even was exceedingly bold on behalf of his brethren according
to the flesh, <span id="fr_2698"></span>[2699](#fn_2698) if I may myself
be bold enough to say so, in his loving prayer that they might in his
stead be brought to Christ.  What magnanimity! what fervor of spirit! 
He imitates Christ, who became a curse for us, <span
id="fr_2699"></span>[2700](#fn_2699) who took our infirmities and bore
our sicknesses; <span id="fr_2700"></span>[2701](#fn_2700) or, to use
more measured terms, he is <span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_217"></span>ready, next to Christ, to suffer anything,
even as one of the ungodly, for them, if only they be saved.

<span id="iii.iv-p218"></span>56.  Why should I enter into detail?  He
lived not to himself, but to Christ and his preaching.  He crucified the
world to himself, <span id="fr_2701"></span>[2702](#fn_2701) and being
crucified to the world and the things which are seen, he thought all
things little, <span id="fr_2702"></span>[2703](#fn_2702) and too small
to be desired; even though from Jerusalem and round about unto
Illyricum <span id="fr_2703"></span>[2704](#fn_2703) he had fully
preached the Gospel, even though he had been prematurely caught up to
the third heaven, and had a vision of Paradise, and had heard
unspeakable words. <span id="fr_2704"></span>[2705](#fn_2704)   Such was
Paul, and everyone of like spirit with him.  But we fear that, in
comparison with them, we may be foolish princes of Zoan, <span
id="fr_2705"></span>[2706](#fn_2705) or extortioners, who exact the
fruits of the ground, or falsely bless the people: <span
id="fr_2706"></span>[2707](#fn_2706)   and further make themselves
happy, and confuse the way of your feet, <span
id="fr_2707"></span>[2708](#fn_2707) or mockers ruling over you, or
children in authority, <span id="fr_2708"></span>[2709](#fn_2708)
immature in mind, not even having bread and clothing enough to be rulers
over any; <span id="fr_2709"></span>[2710](#fn_2709) or prophets
teaching lies, <span id="fr_2710"></span>[2711](#fn_2710) or rebellious
princes, <span id="fr_2711"></span>[2712](#fn_2711) deserving to share
the reproach of their elders for the straitness of the famine, <span
id="fr_2712"></span>[2713](#fn_2712) or priests very far from speaking
comfortably <span id="fr_2713"></span>[2714](#fn_2713) to Jerusalem,
according to the reproaches and protests urged by Isaiah, who was purged
by the Seraphim with a live coal. <span
id="fr_2714"></span>[2715](#fn_2714)

<span id="iii.iv-p233"></span>57.  Is the undertaking then so serious
and laborious to a sensitive and sad heart—a very rottenness to the
bones <span id="fr_2715"></span>[2716](#fn_2715) of a sensible man: 
while the danger is slight, and a fall not worth consideration?  Nay the
blessed Hosea inspires me with serious alarm, where he says that to us
priests and rulers pertaineth the judgment, <span
id="fr_2716"></span>[2717](#fn_2716) because we have been a snare to the
watchtower; and as a net spread upon Tabor, which has been firmly fixed
by the hunters of men’s souls, and he threatens to cut off the wicked
prophets, <span id="fr_2717"></span>[2718](#fn_2717) and devour their
judges with fire, and to cease for a while from anointing a king and
princes, <span id="fr_2718"></span>[2719](#fn_2718) because they ruled
for themselves, and not by Him. <span
id="fr_2719"></span>[2720](#fn_2719)

<span id="iii.iv-p239"></span>58.  Hence again the divine Micah, unable
to brook the building of Zion with blood, however you interpret the
phrase, and of Jerusalem with iniquity, while the heads thereof judge
for reward, and the priests teach for hire, and the prophets divine for
money—what does he say will be the result of this?  Zion shall be plowed
as a field, and Jerusalem be as a lodge in a garden, and the mountain of
the house be reckoned as a glade in a thicket. <span
id="fr_2720"></span>[2721](#fn_2720)   He bewails also the scarcity of
the upright, there being scarcely a stalk or a gleaning grape left,
since both the prince asketh, and the judge curries favour, <span
id="fr_2721"></span>[2722](#fn_2721) so that his language is almost the
same as the mighty David’s:  Save me, O Lord, for the godly man
ceaseth: <span id="fr_2722"></span>[2723](#fn_2722)   and says that
therefore their blessings shall fail them, as if wasted by the moth.

<span id="iii.iv-p243"></span>59.  Joel again summons us to wailing, and
will have the ministers of the altar lament under the presence of
famine:  so far is he from allowing us to revel in the misfortunes of
others:  and, after sanctifying a fast, calling a solemn assembly, and
gathering the old men, the children, and those of tender age, <span
id="fr_2723"></span>[2724](#fn_2723) we ourselves must further haunt the
temple in sackcloth and ashes, <span
id="fr_2724"></span>[2725](#fn_2724) prostrated right humbly on the
ground, because the field is wasted, and the meat-offering and the
drink-offering is cut off from the house of the Lord, till we draw down
mercy by our humiliation.

<span id="iii.iv-p246"></span>60.  What of Habakkuk?  He utters more
heated words, and is impatient with God Himself, and cries down, as it
were our good Lord, because of the injustice of the judges.  O Lord, how
long shall I cry and Thou wilt not hear?  Shall I cry out unto Thee of
violence, and Thou wilt not save?  Why dost Thou show me toil and
labour, causing me to look upon perverseness and impiety?  Judgment has
been given against me, and the judge is a spoiler.  Therefore the law is
slacked, and judgment doth never go forth.  Then comes the denunciation,
and what follows upon it.  Behold, ye despisers, and regard, and wonder
marvellously, and vanish away, for I work a work. <span
id="fr_2725"></span>[2726](#fn_2725)   But why need I quote the whole of
the denunciation?  A little further on, however, for I think it best to
add this to what has been said, after upbraiding and lamenting many of
those who are in some respect unjust or depraved, he upbraids the
leaders and teachers of wickedness, stigmatising vice as a foul
disorder, and an intoxication and aberration of mind; charging them with
giving their neighbours drink in order to look upon the darkness of
their soul, <span id="fr_2726"></span>[2727](#fn_2726) and the dens of
creeping things and wild beasts, viz.:  the dwelling places of wicked
thoughts.  Such indeed they are, and such teachings do they discuss with
us.

<span id="iii.iv-p249"></span>61.  How can it be right to pass by
Malachi, who at one time brings bitter charges against the priests, and
reproaches them with despising <span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="iii.iv-Page_218"></span>the name of the Lord, <span
id="fr_2727"></span>[2728](#fn_2727) and explains wherein they did this,
by offering polluted bread upon the altar, and meat which is not
firstfruits, which they would not have offered to one of their
governors, or, if they had offered it, they would have been dishonoured;
yet offering these in fulfilment of a vow to the King of the universe,
to wit, the lame and the sick, and the deformed, which are utterly
profane and loathsome. <span id="fr_2728"></span>[2729](#fn_2728)  
Again he reminds them of the covenant of God, a covenant of life and
peace, with the sons of Levi, and that they should serve Him in fear,
and stand in awe of the manifestation of His Name.  The law of truth, he
says, was in his mouth, and unrighteousness was not found in his lips;
he walked with me uprightly in peace, and turned away many from
iniquity:  for the priest’s lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall
seek the law at his mouth.  And how honourable and at the same time how
fearful is the cause! for he is the messenger of the Lord
Almighty. <span id="fr_2729"></span>[2730](#fn_2729)   Although I pass
over the following imprecations, as strongly worded, <span
id="fr_2730"></span>[2731](#fn_2730) yet I am afraid of their truth. 
This however may be cited without offence, to our profit.  Is it right,
he says, to regard your sacrifice, and receive it with good will at your
hands, <span id="fr_2731"></span>[2732](#fn_2731) as if he were most
highly incensed, and rejecting their ministrations owing to their
wickedness.

<span id="iii.iv-p255"></span>62.  Whenever I remember Zechariah, I
shudder at the reaping-hook, <span id="fr_2732"></span>[2733](#fn_2732)
and likewise at his testimony against the priests, his hints in
reference to the celebrated Joshua, the high priest, whom he represents
as stripped of filthy and unbecoming garments and then clothed in rich
priestly apparel. <span id="fr_2733"></span>[2734](#fn_2733)   As for
the words and charges to Joshua which he puts into the angel’s mouth,
let them be treated with silent respect, as referring perhaps to a
greater <span id="fr_2734"></span>[2735](#fn_2734) and higher object
than those who are many priests: <span
id="fr_2735"></span>[2736](#fn_2735)   but even at his right hand stood
the devil, to resist him.  A fact, in my eyes, of no slight
significance, and demanding no slight fear and watchfulness.

<span id="iii.iv-p260"></span>63.  Who is so bold and adamantine of soul
as not to tremble and be abashed at the charges and reproaches
deliberately urged against the rest of the shepherds.  A voice, he says,
of the howling of the shepherds, for their glory is spoiled.  A voice of
the roaring of lions, <span id="fr_2736"></span>[2737](#fn_2736) for
this hath befallen them.  Does he not all but hear the wailing as if
close at hand, and himself wail with the afflicted.  A little further is
a more striking and impassioned strain.  Feed, he says, the flock of
slaughter, whose possessors slay them without repentance, and they that
sell them say, “Blessed be the Lord, for we are rich:”  and their own
shepherds are without feeling for them.  Therefore, I will no more pity
the inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord Almighty. <span
id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737)   And again:  Awake, O sword,
against the shepherds, and smite the shepherds, and scatter the sheep,
and I will turn My Hand upon the shepherds; <span
id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738) and, Mine anger is kindled against
the shepherds, and I will visit the lambs: <span
id="fr_2739"></span>[2740](#fn_2739)   adding to the threat those who
rule over the people.  So industriously does he apply himself to his
task that he cannot easily free himself from denunciations, and I am
afraid that, did I refer to the whole series, I should exhaust your
patience.  This must then suffice for Zechariah.

<span id="iii.iv-p265"></span>64.  Passing by the elders in the book of
Daniel; <span id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740) for it is better to
pass them by, together with the Lord’s righteous sentence and
declaration concerning them, that wickedness came from Babylon from
ancient judges, who seemed to govern the people; how are we affected by
Ezekiel, the beholder and expositor of the mighty mysteries and
visions?  By his injunction to the watchmen <span
id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741) not to keep silence concerning vice
and the sword impending over it, a course which would profit neither
themselves nor the sinners; but rather to keep watch and forewarn, and
thus benefit, at any rate those who gave warning, if not both those who
spoke and those who heard?

<span id="iii.iv-p268"></span>65.  What of his further invective against
the shepherds, Woe shall come upon woe, and rumour upon rumour, then
shall they seek a vision of the prophet, but the law shall perish from
the priest, and counsel from the ancients, <span
id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742) and again, in these terms, Son of
man, say unto her, thou art a land that is not watered, nor hath rain
come upon thee in the day of indignation:  whose princes in the midst of
her are like roaring lions, ravening the prey, devouring souls in their
might. <span id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743)   And a little further
on:  Her priests have violated My laws and profaned My holy things, they
have put no difference between the holy and profane, but all things were
alike to them, and they hid their eyes from My Sabbaths, and I was
profaned among them. <span id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744)   He
threatens that He will consume both the wall and them that daubed
it, <span id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745) that is, those who sin
and those who throw a cloak over them; as the evil <span
id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_219"></span>rulers and
priests have done, who caused the house of Israel to err according to
their own hearts which are estranged in their lusts. <span
id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746)

<span id="iii.iv-p274"></span>66.  I also refrain from entering into his
discussion of those who feed themselves, devour the milk, clothe
themselves with the wool, kill them that are fat, but feed not the
flock, strengthen not the diseased, nor bind up that which is broken,
nor bring again that which is driven away, nor seek that which is lost,
nor keep watch over that which is strong, but oppress them with rigour,
and destroy them with their pressure; <span
id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747) so that, because there was no
shepherd, the sheep were scattered over every plain and mountain, and
became meat for all the fowls and beasts, <span
id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748) because there was no one to seek
for them and bring them back.  What is the consequence?  As I live,
saith the Lord, because these things are so, and My flock became a
prey, <span id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749) behold I am against the
shepherds, and I will require My flock at their hands, and will gather
them and make them My own:  but the shepherds shall suffer such and such
things, as bad shepherds ought.

<span id="iii.iv-p278"></span>67.  However, to avoid unreasonably
prolonging my discourse, by an enumeration of all the prophets, and of
the words of them all, I will mention but one more, who was known before
he was formed, and sanctified from the womb, <span
id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750) Jeremiah:  and will pass over the
rest.  He longs for water over his head, and a fountain of tears for his
eyes, that he may adequately weep for Israel; <span
id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751) and no less does he bewail the
depravity of its rulers.

<span id="iii.iv-p281"></span>68.  God speaks to him in reproof of the
priests:  The priests said not, Where is the Lord, and they that handled
the law knew Me not; the pastors also transgressed against Me. <span
id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752)   Again He says to him:  The
pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord, and therefore
all their flock did not understand, and was scattered. <span
id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753)   Again, Many pastors have
destroyed My vineyard, and have polluted My pleasant portion, till it
was reduced to a trackless wilderness. <span
id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754)   He further inveighs against the
pastors again:  Woe be to the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep
of My pasture!  Therefore thus saith the Lord against them that feed My
people:  Ye have scattered My flock, and driven them away, and have not
visited them:  behold I will visit upon you the evil of your
doings. <span id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755)   Moreover he bids
the shepherds to howl, and the rams of the flock to lament, because the
days of their slaughter are accomplished. <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756)

<span id="iii.iv-p287"></span>69.  Why need I speak of the things of
ancient days?  Who can test himself by the rules and standards which
Paul laid down for bishops and presbyters, that they are to be
temperate, soberminded, not given to wine, no strikers, apt to teach,
blameless in all things, and beyond the reach of the wicked, <span
id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757) without finding considerable
deflection from the straight line of the rules?  What of the regulations
of Jesus for his disciples, when He sends them to preach? <span
id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758)   The main object of these is—not
to enter into particulars—that they should be of such virtue, so simple
and modest, and in a word, so heavenly, that the gospel should make its
way, no less by their character than by their preaching.

<span id="iii.iv-p290"></span>70.  I am alarmed by the reproaches of the
Pharisees, the conviction of the Scribes.  For it is disgraceful for us,
who ought greatly surpass them, as we are bidden, if we desire the
kingdom of heaven, to be found more deeply sunk in vice:  so that we
deserve to be called serpents, a generation of vipers, and blind guides,
who strain out a gnat and swallow a camel, or sepulchres foul within, in
spite of our external comeliness, or platters outwardly clean, and
everything else, which they are, or which is laid to their charge. <span
id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759)

<span id="iii.iv-p292"></span>71.  With these thoughts I am occupied
night and day:  they waste my marrow, and feed upon my flesh, and will
not allow me to be confident or to look up.  They depress my soul, and
abase my mind, and fetter my tongue, and make me consider, not the
position of a prelate, or the guidance and direction of others, which is
far beyond my powers; but how I myself am to escape the wrath to come,
and to scrape off from myself somewhat of the rust of vice.  A man must
himself be cleansed, before cleansing others:  himself become wise, that
he may make others wise; become light, and then give light:  draw near
to God, and so bring others near; be hallowed, then hallow them; be
possessed of hands to lead others by the hand, of wisdom to give advice.

<span id="iii.iv-p293"></span>72.  When will this be, say they who are
swift but not sure in every thing, readily building up, readily throwing
down.  When will the lamp be upon its stand, <span
id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760) and where is the talent? <span
id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761)   For so they call the grace. <span
id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762)   Those who speak thus are more
fervent in friendship than in reverence.  You ask me, you men of
exceeding courage, when these things shall be, and what account I give
of them?  Not even extreme old age would be too long a limit to <span
id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_220"></span>assign. 
For hoary hairs combined with prudence are better than inexperienced
youth, well-reasoned hesitation than inconsiderate haste, and a brief
reign than a long tyranny:  just as a small portion honourably won is
better than considerable possessions which are dishonourable and
uncertain, a little gold than a great weight of lead, a little light
than much darkness.

<span id="iii.iv-p297"></span>73.  But this speed, in its
untrustworthiness and excessive haste, is in danger of being like the
seeds which fell upon the rock, <span
id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763) and, because they had no depth of
earth, <span id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764) sprang up at once, but
could not bear even the first heat of the sun; or like the foundation
laid upon the sand, <span id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765) which
could not even make a slight resistance to the rain and the winds.  Woe
to thee, O city, whose king is a child, <span
id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766) says Solomon.  Be not hasty of
speech, <span id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767) says Solomon again,
asserting that hastiness of speech is less serious than heated action. 
And who, in spite of all this, demands haste rather than security and
utility?  Who can mould, as clay-figures are modelled in a single day,
the defender of the truth, who is to take his stand with Angels, and
give glory with Archangels, and cause the sacrifice to ascend to the
altar on high, and share the priesthood of Christ, and renew the
creature, and set forth the image, and create inhabitants for the world
above, aye and, greatest of all, be God, and make others to be God?

<span id="iii.iv-p303"></span>74.  I know Whose ministers we are, and
where we are placed, and whither we are guides.  I know the height of
God, and the weakness of man, and, on the contrary, his power.  Heaven
is high, and the earth deep; <span id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768)
and who of those who have been cast down by sin shall ascend? <span
id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769)   Who that is as yet surrounded by
the gloom here below, and by the grossness of the flesh can purely gaze
with his whole mind upon that whole mind, and amid unstable and visible
things hold intercourse with the stable and invisible?  For hardly may
one of those who have been most specially purged, behold here even an
image of the Good, as men see the sun in the water.  Who hath measured
the water with his hand, and the heaven with a span, and the whole earth
in a measure?  Who hath weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills
in a balance? <span id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770)   What is the
place of his rest? <span id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771) and to
whom shall he be likened? <span id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772)

<span id="iii.iv-p309"></span>75.  Who is it, Who made all things by His
Word, <span id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773) and formed man by His
Wisdom, and gathered into one things scattered abroad, and mingled dust
with spirit, and compounded an animal visible and invisible, temporal
and immortal, earthly and heavenly, able to attain to God but not to
comprehend Him, drawing near and yet afar off.  I said, I will be wise,
says Solomon, but she (i.e. Wisdom) was far from me beyond what
is: <span id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774)   and, Verily, he that
increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow. <span
id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775)   For the joy of what we have
discovered is no greater than the pain of what escapes us; a pain, I
imagine, like that felt by those who are dragged, while yet thirsty,
from the water, or are unable to retain what they think they hold, or
are suddenly left in the dark by a flash of lightning.

<span id="iii.iv-p313"></span>76.  This depressed and kept me humble,
and persuaded me that it was better to hear the voice of praise <span
id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776) than to be an expounder of truths
beyond my power; the majesty, and the height, and the dignity, and the
pure natures scarce able to contain the brightness of God, Whom the deep
covers, Whose secret place is darkness, <span
id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777) since He is the purest light, <span
id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778) which most men cannot approach
unto; Who is in all this universe, and again is beyond the universe; Who
is all goodness, <span id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779) and beyond
all goodness; Who enlightens the mind, and escapes the quickness and
height of the mind, ever retiring as much as He is apprehended, and by
His flight and stealing away when grasped, withdrawing to the things
above one who is enamoured of Him.

<span id="iii.iv-p318"></span>77.  Such and so great is the object of
our longing zeal, and such a man should he be, who prepares and conducts
souls to their espousals.  For myself, I feared to be cast, bound hand
and foot, <span id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780) from the
bride-chamber, for not having on a wedding-garment, and for having
rashly intruded among those who there sit at meat.  And yet I had been
invited from my youth, if I may speak of what most men know not, and had
been cast upon Him from the womb, <span
id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781) and presented by the promise of my
mother, afterwards confirmed in the hour of danger:  and my longing grew
up with it, and my reason agreed to it, and I gave as an offering my all
to Him Who had won me and saved me, my property, my fame, my health, my
very words, from which I only gained the advantage of being able to
despise them, and of having something in comparison of which I preferred
Christ.  And the words of God were made sweet as honeycombs <span
id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782) to me, and I cried after knowledge
and lifted up my voice for wisdom. <span
id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783)   There was moreover the moderation
of anger, the curbing of the tongue, the re<span id="page_221">p.
221</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_221"></span>straint of the eyes, the
discipline of the belly, and the trampling under foot of the glory which
clings to the earth.  I speak foolishly, <span
id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784) but it shall be said, in these
pursuits I was perhaps not inferior to many.

<span id="iii.iv-p324"></span>78.  One branch of philosophy is, however,
too high for me, the commission to guide and govern souls—and before I
have rightly learned to submit to a shepherd, or have had my soul duly
cleansed, the charge of caring for a flock:  especially in times like
these, when a man, seeing everyone else rushing hither and thither in
confusion, is content to flee from the melee and escape, in sheltered
retirement, from the storm and gloom of the wicked one:  when the
members are at war with one another, and the slight remains of love,
which once existed, have departed, and priest is a mere empty name,
since, as it is said, contempt <span
id="fr_2785"></span>[2786](#fn_2785) has been poured upon princes. <span
id="fr_2786"></span>[2787](#fn_2786)

<span id="iii.iv-p327"></span>79.  Would that it were merely empty!  And
now may their blasphemy fall upon the head of the ungodly!  All fear has
been banished from souls, shamelessness has taken its place, and
knowledge <span id="fr_2787"></span>[2788](#fn_2787) and the deep things
of the Spirit <span id="fr_2788"></span>[2789](#fn_2788) are at the
disposal of anyone who will; and we all become pious by simply
condemning the impiety of others; and we claim the services of ungodly
judges, <span id="fr_2789"></span>[2790](#fn_2789) and fling that which
is holy to the dogs, and cast pearls before swine, <span
id="fr_2790"></span>[2791](#fn_2790) by publishing divine things in the
hearing of profane souls, and, wretches that we are, carefully fulfil
the prayers of our enemies, and are not ashamed to go a whoring with our
own inventions. <span id="fr_2791"></span>[2792](#fn_2791)   Moabites
and Ammonites, who were not permitted even to enter the Church of the
Lord, <span id="fr_2792"></span>[2793](#fn_2792) frequent our most holy
rites.  We have opened to all not the gates of righteousness, <span
id="fr_2793"></span>[2794](#fn_2793) but, doors of railing and partizan
arrogance; and the first place among us is given, not to one who in the
fear of God refrains from even an idle word, but to him who can revile
his neighbour most fluently, whether explicitly, or by covert allusion;
who rolls beneath his tongue mischief and iniquity, or to speak more
accurately, the poison of asps. <span
id="fr_2794"></span>[2795](#fn_2794)

<span id="iii.iv-p336"></span>80.  We observe each other’s sins, not to
bewail them, but to make them subjects of reproach, not to heal them,
but to aggravate them, and excuse our own evil deeds by the wounds of
our neighbours.  Bad and good men are distinguished not according to
personal character, but by their disagreement or friendship with
ourselves.  We praise one day what we revile the next, denunciation at
the hands of others is a passport to our admiration; so magnanimous are
we in our viciousness, that everything is frankly forgiven to impiety.

<span id="iii.iv-p337"></span>81.  Everything has reverted to the
original state of things <span id="fr_2795"></span>[2796](#fn_2795)
before the world, with its present fair order and form, came into
being.  The general confusion and irregularity cry for some organising
hand and power.  Or, if you will, it is like a battle at night by the
faint light of the moon, when none can discern the faces of friends or
foes; or like a sea fight on the surge, with the driving winds, and
boiling foam, and dashing waves, and crashing vessels, with the thrusts
of poles, the pipes of boatswains, the groans of the fallen, while we
make our voices heard above the din, and not knowing what to do, and
having, alas! no opportunity for showing our valour, assail one another,
and fall by one another’s hands.

<span id="iii.iv-p339"></span>82.  Nor indeed is there any distinction
between the state of the people and that of the priesthood:  but it
seems to me to be a simple fulfilment of the ancient curse, “As with the
people so with the priest.” <span id="fr_2796"></span>[2797](#fn_2796)  
Nor again are the great and eminent men affected otherwise than the
majority; nay, they are openly at war with the priests, and their piety
is an aid to their powers of persuasion.  And indeed, provided that it
be on behalf of the faith, and of the highest and most important
questions, let them be thus disposed, and I blame them not; nay, to say
the truth, I go so far as to praise and congratulate them.  Yea! would
that I were one of those who contend and incur hatred for the truth’s
sake:  or rather, I can boast of being one of them.  For better is a
laudable war than a peace which severs a man from God:  and therefore it
is that the Spirit arms the gentle warrior, as one who is able to wage
war in a good cause.

<span id="iii.iv-p341"></span>83.  But at the present time there are
some who go to war even about small matters and to no purpose, and, with
great ignorance and audacity, accept, as an associate in their
ill-doing, anyone whoever he may be.  Then everyone makes the faith his
pretext, and this venerable name is dragged into their private
quarrels.  Consequently, as was probable, we are hated, even among the
Gentiles, and, what is harder still, we cannot say that this is without
just cause.  Nay, even the best of our own people are scandalized, while
this result is not surprising in the case of the multitude, <span
id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_222"></span>who are
ill-disposed to accept anything that is good.

<span id="iii.iv-p342"></span>84.  Sinners are planning upon our
backs; <span id="fr_2797"></span>[2798](#fn_2797) and what we devise
against each other, they turn against us all:  and we have become a new
spectacle, not to angels and men, <span
id="fr_2798"></span>[2799](#fn_2798) as says Paul, that bravest of
athletes, in his contest with principalities and powers, <span
id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799) but to almost all wicked men, and
at every time and place, in the public squares, at carousals, at
festivities, and times of sorrow.  Nay, we have already—I can scarcely
speak of it without tears—been represented on the stage, amid the
laughter of the most licentious, and the most popular of all dialogues
and scenes is the caricature of a Christian.

<span id="iii.iv-p346"></span>85.  These are the results of our
intestine warfare, and our extreme readiness to strive about goodness
and gentleness, and our inexpedient excess of love for God.  Wrestling,
or any other athletic contest, is only permitted according to fixed
laws, and the man will be shouted down and disgraced, and lose the
victory, who breaks the laws of wrestling, or acts unfairly in any other
contest, contrary to the rules laid down for the contest, however able
and skilful he may be; and shall anyone contend for Christ in an
unchristlike manner, and yet be pleasing to peace for having fought
unlawfully in her name.

<span id="iii.iv-p347"></span>86.  Yea, even now, when Christ is
invoked, the devils tremble, <span id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800)
and not even by our ill-doing has the power of this Name been
extinguished, while we are not ashamed to insult a cause and name so
venerable; shouting it, and having it shouted in return, almost in
public, and every day; for My Name is blasphemed among the Gentiles
because of you. <span id="fr_2801"></span>[2802](#fn_2801)

<span id="iii.iv-p350"></span>87.  Of external warfare I am not afraid,
nor of that wild beast, and fulness of evil, who has now arisen against
the churches, though he may threaten fire, sword, wild beasts,
precipices, chasms; though he may show himself more inhuman than all
previous madmen, and discover fresh tortures of greater severity.  I
have one remedy for them all, one road to victory; I will glory in
Christ <span id="fr_2802"></span>[2803](#fn_2802) namely, death for
Christ’s sake.

<span id="iii.iv-p352"></span>88.  For my own warfare, however, I am at
a loss what course to pursue, what alliance, what word of wisdom, what
grace to devise, with what panoply to arm myself, against the wiles of
the wicked one. <span id="fr_2803"></span>[2804](#fn_2803)   What Moses
is to conquer him by stretching out his hands upon the mount, <span
id="fr_2804"></span>[2805](#fn_2804) in order that the cross, thus
typified and prefigured, may prevail?  What Joshua, as his successor,
arrayed alongside the Captain of the Lord’s hosts? <span
id="fr_2805"></span>[2806](#fn_2805)   What David, either by harping, or
fighting with his sling, <span id="fr_2806"></span>[2807](#fn_2806) and
girded by God with strength unto the battle, <span
id="fr_2807"></span>[2808](#fn_2807) and with his fingers trained to
war? <span id="fr_2808"></span>[2809](#fn_2808)   What Samuel,
praying <span id="fr_2809"></span>[2810](#fn_2809) and sacrificing for
the people, and anointing as king one who can gain the victory?  What
Jeremiah, by writing lamentations for Israel, is fitly to lament these
things?

<span id="iii.iv-p360"></span>89.  Who will cry aloud, Spare Thy People,
O Lord, and give not Thine heritage to reproach, that the nations should
rule over them? <span id="fr_2810"></span>[2811](#fn_2810)   What Noah,
and Job, <span id="fr_2811"></span>[2812](#fn_2811) and Daniel, who are
reckoned together as men of prayer, will pray for us, that we may have a
slight respite from warfare, and recover ourselves, and recognize one
another for a while, and no longer, instead of united Israel, be
Judah <span id="fr_2812"></span>[2813](#fn_2812) and Israel, Rehoboam
and Jeroboam, Jerusalem and Samaria, in turn delivered up because of our
sins, and in turn lamented.

<span id="iii.iv-p364"></span>90.  For I own that I am too weak for this
warfare, and therefore turned my back, hiding my face in the rout, and
sat solitary, <span id="fr_2813"></span>[2814](#fn_2813) because I was
filled with bitterness <span id="fr_2814"></span>[2815](#fn_2814) and
sought to be silent, understanding that it is an evil time, <span
id="fr_2815"></span>[2816](#fn_2815) that the beloved had kicked, <span
id="fr_2816"></span>[2817](#fn_2816) that we were become backsliding
children, <span id="fr_2817"></span>[2818](#fn_2817) who are the
luxuriant vine, <span id="fr_2818"></span>[2819](#fn_2818) the true
vine, all fruitful, all beautiful, <span
id="fr_2819"></span>[2820](#fn_2819) springing up splendidly with
showers from on high. <span id="fr_2820"></span>[2821](#fn_2820)   For
the diadem of beauty, <span id="fr_2821"></span>[2822](#fn_2821) the
signet of glory, <span id="fr_2822"></span>[2823](#fn_2822) the crown of
magnificence <span id="fr_2823"></span>[2824](#fn_2823) has been changed
for me into shame; and if anyone, in face of these things, is daring and
courageous, he has my blessing on his daring and courage.

<span id="iii.iv-p376"></span>91.  I have said nothing yet of the
internal warfare within ourselves, and in our passions, in which we are
engaged night and day against the body of our humiliation, <span
id="fr_2824"></span>[2825](#fn_2824) either secretly or openly, and
against the tide which tosses and whirls us hither and thither, by the
aid of our senses and other sources of the pleasures of this life; and
against the miry clay <span id="fr_2825"></span>[2826](#fn_2825) in
which we have been fixed; and against the law of sin, <span
id="fr_2826"></span>[2827](#fn_2826) which wars against the law of the
spirit, and strives to destroy the royal image in us, and all the divine
emanation which has been bestowed upon us; so that it is difficult for
anyone, either by a long course of philosophic <span id="page_223">p.
223</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_223"></span>training, and gradual
separation of the noble and enlightened part of the soul from that which
is debased and yoked with darkness, or by the mercy of God, or by both
together, and by a constant practice of looking upward, to overcome the
depressing power of matter.  And before a man has, as far as possible,
gained this superiority, and sufficiently purified his mind, and far
surpassed his fellows in nearness to God, I do not think it safe for him
to be entrusted with the rule over souls, or the office of mediator (for
such, I take it, a priest is) between God and man.

<span id="iii.iv-p380"></span>92.  What is it that has induced this fear
in me, that, instead of supposing me to be needlessly afraid, you may
highly commend my foresight?  I hear from Moses himself, when God spake
to him, that, although many were bidden to come to the mount, one of
whom was even Aaron, with his two sons who were priests, and seventy
elders of the senate, the rest were ordered to worship afar off, and
Moses alone to draw near, and the people were not to go up with
him. <span id="fr_2827"></span>[2828](#fn_2827)   For it is not everyone
who may draw near to God, but only one who, like Moses, can bear the
glory of God.  Moreover, before this, when the law was first given, the
trumpet-blasts, and lightnings, and thunders, and darkness, and the
smoke of the whole mountain, <span id="fr_2828"></span>[2829](#fn_2828)
and the terrible threats that if even a beast touched the mountain it
should be stoned, <span id="fr_2829"></span>[2830](#fn_2829) and other
like alarms, kept back the rest of the people, for whom it was a great
privilege, after careful purification, merely to hear the voice of God. 
But Moses actually went up and entered into the cloud, <span
id="fr_2830"></span>[2831](#fn_2830) and was charged with the law, and
received the tables, which belong, for the multitude, to the letter,
but, for those who are above the multitude, to the spirit. <span
id="fr_2831"></span>[2832](#fn_2831)

<span id="iii.iv-p386"></span>93.  I hear again that Nadab and Abihu,
for having merely offered incense with strange fire, were with strange
fire destroyed, <span id="fr_2832"></span>[2833](#fn_2832) the
instrument of their impiety being used for their punishment, and their
destruction following at the very time and place of their sacrilege; and
not even their father Aaron, who was next to Moses in the favor of God,
could save them.  I know also of Eli the priest, and a little later of
Uzzah, the former made to pay the penalty for his sons’ transgression,
in daring to violate the sacrifices by an untimely exaction of the first
fruits of the cauldrons, although he did not condone their impiety, but
frequently rebuked them; <span id="fr_2833"></span>[2834](#fn_2833) the
other, because he only touched the ark, which was being thrown off the
cart by the ox, <span id="fr_2834"></span>[2835](#fn_2834) and though he
saved it, was himself destroyed, in God’s jealousy for the reverence due
to the ark.

<span id="iii.iv-p390"></span>94.  I know also that not even bodily
blemishes in either priests <span id="fr_2835"></span>[2836](#fn_2835)
or victims <span id="fr_2836"></span>[2837](#fn_2836) passed without
notice, but that it was required by the law that perfect sacrifices must
be offered by perfect men—a symbol, I take it, of integrity of soul.  It
was not lawful for everyone to touch the priestly vesture, or any of the
holy vessels; nor might the sacrifices themselves be consumed except by
the proper persons, and at the proper time and place; <span
id="fr_2837"></span>[2838](#fn_2837) nor might the anointing oil nor the
compounded incense <span id="fr_2838"></span>[2839](#fn_2838) be
imitated; nor might anyone enter the temple who was not in the most
minute particular pure in both soul and body; so far was the Holy of
holies removed from presumptuous access, that it might be entered by one
man only once a year; <span id="fr_2839"></span>[2840](#fn_2839) so far
were the veil, and the mercy-seat, and the ark, and the Cherubim, from
the general gaze and touch.

<span id="iii.iv-p396"></span>95.  Since then I knew these things, and
that no one is worthy of the mightiness of God, and the sacrifice, and
priesthood, who has not first presented himself to God, a living, holy
sacrifice, and set forth the reasonable, well-pleasing service, <span
id="fr_2840"></span>[2841](#fn_2840) and sacrificed to God the sacrifice
of praise and the contrite spirit, <span
id="fr_2841"></span>[2842](#fn_2841) which is the only sacrifice
required of us by the Giver of all; how could I dare to offer to Him the
external sacrifice, the antitype of the great mysteries, <span
id="fr_2842"></span>[2843](#fn_2842) or clothe myself with the garb and
name of priest, before my hands had been consecrated by holy works;
before my eyes had been accustomed to gaze safely upon created things,
with wonder only for the Creator, and without injury to the creature;
before my ear had been sufficiently opened to the instruction of the
Lord, and He had opened mine ear to hear <span
id="fr_2843"></span>[2844](#fn_2843) without heaviness, and had set a
golden earring with precious sardius, that is, a wise man’s word in an
obedient ear; <span id="fr_2844"></span>[2845](#fn_2844) before my mouth
had been opened to draw in the Spirit, <span
id="fr_2845"></span>[2846](#fn_2845) and opened wide to be filled <span
id="fr_2846"></span>[2847](#fn_2846) with the spirit of speaking
mysteries and doctrines; <span id="fr_2847"></span>[2848](#fn_2847) and
my lips bound, <span id="fr_2848"></span>[2849](#fn_2848) to use the
words of wisdom, by divine knowledge, and, as I would add, loosed in due
season:  before my tongue had been filled with exultation, and become an
instrument of Divine melody, awaking <span id="page_224">p. 224</span>
<span id="iii.iv-Page_224"></span>with glory, awaking right early, <span
id="fr_2849"></span>[2850](#fn_2849) and laboring till it cleave to my
jaws: <span id="fr_2850"></span>[2851](#fn_2850)   before my feet had
been set upon the rock, <span id="fr_2851"></span>[2852](#fn_2851) made
like hart’s feet, and my footsteps directed in a godly fashion so that
they should not well-nigh slip, <span
id="fr_2852"></span>[2853](#fn_2852) nor slip at all; before all my
members had become instruments of righteousness, <span
id="fr_2853"></span>[2854](#fn_2853) and all mortality had been put off,
and swallowed up of life, <span id="fr_2854"></span>[2855](#fn_2854) and
had yielded to the Spirit?

<span id="iii.iv-p412"></span>96.  Who is the man, whose heart has never
been made to burn, <span id="fr_2855"></span>[2856](#fn_2855) as the
Scriptures have been opened to him, with the pure words of God which
have been tried in a furnace; <span id="fr_2856"></span>[2857](#fn_2856)
who has not, by a triple <span id="fr_2857"></span>[2858](#fn_2857)
inscription <span id="fr_2858"></span>[2859](#fn_2858) of them upon the
breadth of his heart, attained the mind of Christ; <span
id="fr_2859"></span>[2860](#fn_2859) nor been admitted to the treasures
which to most men remain hidden, secret, and dark, to gaze upon the
riches therein? <span id="fr_2860"></span>[2861](#fn_2860) and become
able to enrich others, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. <span
id="fr_2861"></span>[2862](#fn_2861)

<span id="iii.iv-p420"></span>97.  Who is the man who has never beheld,
as our duty is to behold it, the fair beauty of the Lord, nor has
visited His temple, <span id="fr_2862"></span>[2863](#fn_2862) or
rather, become the temple of God, <span
id="fr_2863"></span>[2864](#fn_2863) and the habitation of Christ in the
Spirit? <span id="fr_2864"></span>[2865](#fn_2864)   Who is the man who
has never recognized the correlation and distinction between figures and
the truth, so that by withdrawing from the former and cleaving to the
latter, and by thus escaping from the oldness of the letter and serving
the newness of the spirit, <span id="fr_2865"></span>[2866](#fn_2865) he
may clean pass over to grace from the law, which finds its spiritual
fulfilment in the dissolution of the body. <span
id="fr_2866"></span>[2867](#fn_2866)

<span id="iii.iv-p426"></span>98.  Who is the man who has never, by
experience and contemplation, traversed the entire series of the
titles <span id="fr_2867"></span>[2868](#fn_2867) and powers of Christ,
both those more lofty ones which originally were His, and those more
lowly ones which He later assumed for our sake—viz.:  God, the Son, the
Image, the Word, the Wisdom, the Truth, the Light, the Life, the Power,
the Vapour, the Emanation, the Effulgence, the Maker, the King, the
Head, the Law, the Way, the Door, the Foundation, the Rock, the Pearl,
the Peace, the Righteousness, the Sanctification, the Redemption, the
Man, the Servant, the Shepherd, the Lamb, the High Priest, the Victim,
the Firstborn before creation, the Firstborn from the dead, the
Resurrection:  who is the man who hearkens, but pays no heed, to these
names so pregnant with reality, and has never yet held communion with,
nor been made partaker of, the Word, in any of the real relations
signified by each of these names which He bears?

<span id="iii.iv-p428"></span>99.  Who, in fine, is the man who,
although he has never applied himself to, nor learnt to speak, the
hidden wisdom of God in a mystery, <span
id="fr_2868"></span>[2869](#fn_2868) although he is still a babe, still
fed with milk, <span id="fr_2869"></span>[2870](#fn_2869) still of those
who are not numbered in Israel, <span
id="fr_2870"></span>[2871](#fn_2870) nor enrolled in the army of God,
although he is not yet able to take up the Cross of Christ like a man,
although he is possibly not yet one of the more honorable members, yet
will joyfully and eagerly accept his appointment as head of the fulness
of Christ? <span id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871)   No one, if he
will listen to my judgment and accept my advice!  This is of all things
most to be feared, this is the extremest of dangers in the eyes of
everyone who understands the magnitude of success, the utter ruin of
failure.

<span id="iii.iv-p433"></span>100.  Let others sail for merchandise, I
used to say, and cross the wide oceans, and constantly contend with
winds and waves, to gain great wealth, if so it should chance, and run
great risks in their eagerness for sailing and merchandise; but, for my
part, I greatly prefer to stay ashore and plough a short but pleasant
furrow, saluting at a respectful distance the sea and its gains, to live
as best I can upon a poor and scanty store of barley-bread, and drag my
life along in safety and calm, rather than expose myself to so long and
great a risk for the sake of great gains.

<span id="iii.iv-p434"></span>101.  For one in high estate, if he fail
to make further progress and to disseminate virtue still more widely,
and contents himself with slight results, incurs punishment, as having
spent a great light upon the illumination of a little house, or girt
round the limbs of a boy the full armor of a man.  On the contrary, a
man of low estate may with safety assume a light burden, and escape the
risk of the ridicule and increased danger which would attend him if he
attempted a task beyond his powers.  For, as we have heard, it is not
seemly for a man to build a tower, unless he has sufficient to finish
it. <span id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872)

<span id="iii.iv-p436"></span>102.  Such is the defence which I have
been able to make, perhaps at immoderate length, for my flight.  Such
are the reasons which, to my pain and possibly to yours, carried me away
from you, my friends and brothers; yet, as it seemed to me at the time,
with irresistible force.  My longing after you, and the sense of your
longing for me, have, more than any<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>
<span id="iii.iv-Page_225"></span>thing else, led to my return, for
nothing inclines us so strongly to love as mutual affection.

<span id="iii.iv-p437"></span>103.  In the next place there was my care,
my duty, the hoar hairs and weakness of my holy parents, who were more
greatly distressed on my account than by their advanced age—of this
Patriarch Abraham whose person is honored by me, and numbered among the
angels, and of Sarah, who travailed in my spiritual birth by instructing
me in the truth.  Now, I had specially pledged myself to become the stay
of their old age and the support of their weakness, a pledge which, to
the best of my power, I have fulfilled, even at the expense of
philosophy itself, the most precious of possessions and titles to me;
or, to speak more truly, although I made it the first object of my
philosophy to appear to be no philosopher, I could not bear that my
labor in consequence of a single purpose should be wasted, nor yet that
blessing should be lost, which one of the saints of old is said to have
stolen from his father, whom he deceived by the food which he offered to
him, and the hairy appearance he assumed, thus attaining a good object
by disgraceful trickery. <span id="fr_2873"></span>[2874](#fn_2873)  
These are the two causes of my submission and tractability.  Nor is it,
perchance, unreasonable that my arguments should yield and submit to
them both, for there is a time to be conquered, as I also think there is
for every purpose, <span id="fr_2874"></span>[2875](#fn_2874) and it is
better to be honorably overcome than to win a dangerous and lawless
victory.

<span id="iii.iv-p440"></span>104.  There is a third reason of the
highest importance which I will further mention, and then dismiss the
rest.  I remembered the days of old, <span
id="fr_2875"></span>[2876](#fn_2875) and, recurring to one of the
ancient histories, drew counsel for myself therefrom as to my present
conduct; for let us not suppose these events to have been recorded
without a purpose, nor that they are a mere assemblage of words and
deeds gathered together for the pastime of those who listen to them, as
a kind of bait for the ears, for the sole purpose of giving pleasure.
 Let us leave such jesting to the legends and the Greeks, who think but
little of the truth, and enchant ear and mind by the charm of their
fictions and the daintiness of their style.

<span id="iii.iv-p442"></span>105.  We however, who extend the accuracy
of the Spirit to the merest stroke and tittle, <span
id="fr_2876"></span>[2877](#fn_2876) will never admit the impious
assertion that even the smallest matters were dealt with haphazard by
those who have recorded them, and have thus been borne in mind down to
the present day:  on the contrary, their purpose has been to supply
memorials and instructions for our consideration under similar
circumstances, should such befall us, and that the examples of the past
might serve as rules and models, for our warning and imitation.

<span id="iii.iv-p444"></span>106.  What then is the story, and wherein
lies its application?  For, perhaps, it would not be amiss to relate it,
for the general security.  Jonah also was fleeing from the face of
God, <span id="fr_2877"></span>[2878](#fn_2877) or rather, thought that
he was fleeing:  but he was overtaken by the sea, and the storm, and the
lot, and the whale’s belly, and the three days’ entombment, the type of
a greater mystery.  He fled from having to announce the dread and awful
message to the Ninevites, and from being subsequently, if the city was
saved by repentance, convicted of falsehood:  not that he was displeased
at the salvation of the wicked, but he was ashamed of being made an
instrument of falsehood, and exceedingly zealous for the credit of
prophecy, which was in danger of being destroyed in his person, since
most men are unable to penetrate the depth of the Divine dispensation in
such cases.

<span id="iii.iv-p446"></span>107.  But, as I have learned from a
man <span id="fr_2878"></span>[2879](#fn_2878) skilled in these
subjects, and able to grasp the depth of the prophet, by means of a
reasonable explanation of what seems unreasonable in the history, it was
not this which caused Jonah to flee, and carried him to Joppa and again
from Joppa to Tarshish, when he entrusted his stolen self to the
sea: <span id="fr_2879"></span>[2880](#fn_2879)   for it was not likely
that such a prophet should be ignorant of the design of God, viz., to
bring about, by means of the threat, the escape of the Ninevites from
the threatened doom, according to His great wisdom, and unsearchable
judgments, and according to His ways which are beyond our tracing and
finding out; <span id="fr_2880"></span>[2881](#fn_2880) nor that, if he
knew this he would refuse to co-operate with God in the use of the means
which He designed for their salvation.  Besides, to imagine that Jonah
hoped to hide himself at sea, and escape by his flight the great eye of
God, is surely utterly absurd and stupid, and unworthy of credit, not
only in the case of a prophet, but <span id="page_226">p. 226</span>
<span id="iii.iv-Page_226"></span>even in the case of any sensible man,
who has only a slight perception of God, Whose power is over all.

<span id="iii.iv-p450"></span>108.  On the contrary, as my instructor
said, and as I am myself convinced, Jonah knew better than any one the
purpose of his message to the Ninevites, and that, in planning his
flight, although he changed his place, he did not escape from God.  Nor
is this possible for any one else, either by concealing himself in the
bosom of the earth, or in the depths of the sea, or by soaring on wings,
if there be any means of doing so, and rising into the air, or by
abiding in the lowest depths of hell, <span
id="fr_2881"></span>[2882](#fn_2881) or by enveloping himself in a thick
cloud, or by any other of the many devices for ensuring escape.  For God
alone of all things cannot be escaped from or contended with; if He
wills to seize and bring them under His hand, He outstrips the swift, He
outwits the wise, He overthrows the strong, He abases the lofty, He
subdues rashness, He represses power.

<span id="iii.iv-p452"></span>109.  Jonah then was not ignorant of the
mighty hand of God, with which he threatened other men, nor did he
imagine that he could utterly escape the Divine power; this we are not
to believe:  but when he saw the falling away of Israel, and perceived
the passing over of the grace of prophecy to the Gentiles—this was the
cause of his retirement from preaching and of his delay in fulfilling
the command; accordingly he left the watchtower of joy, for this is the
meaning of Joppa in Hebrew, I mean his former dignity and reputation,
and flung himself into the deep of sorrow:  and hence he is
tempest-tossed, and falls asleep, and is wrecked, and aroused from
sleep, and taken by lot, and confesses his flight, and is cast into sea,
and swallowed, but not destroyed, by the whale; but there he calls upon
God, and, marvellous as it is, on the third day he, like Christ, is
delivered:  but my treatment of this topic must stand over, and shall
shortly, if God permit, be more deliberately worked out. <span
id="fr_2882"></span>[2883](#fn_2882)

<span id="iii.iv-p454"></span>110.  Now however, to return to my
original point, the thought and question occurred to me, that although
he might possibly meet with some indulgence, if reluctant to prophesy,
for the cause which I mentioned—yet, in my own case, what could be said,
what defence could be made, if I longer remained restive, and rejected
the yoke of ministry, which, though I know not whether to call it light
or heavy, had at any rate been laid upon me.

<span id="iii.iv-p455"></span>111.  For if it be granted, and this alone
can be strongly asserted in such matters, that we are far too low to
perform the priest’s office before God, and that we can only be worthy
of the sanctuary after we have become worthy of the Church, <span
id="fr_2883"></span>[2884](#fn_2883) and worthy of the post of
president, after being worthy of the sanctuary, yet some one else may
perhaps refuse to acquit us on the charge of disobedience.  Now terrible
are the threatenings against disobedience, and terrible are the
penalties which ensue upon it; as indeed are those on the other side,
if, instead of being reluctant, and shrinking back, and concealing
ourselves as Saul did among his father’s stuff <span
id="fr_2884"></span>[2885](#fn_2884) —although called to rule but for a
short time—if, I say, we come forward readily, as though to a slight and
most easy task, whereas it is not safe even to resign it, nor to amend
by second thoughts our first.

<span id="iii.iv-p458"></span>112.  On this account I had much toilsome
consideration to discover my duty, being set in the midst betwixt two
fears, of which the one held me back, the other urged me on.  For a long
while I was at a loss between them, and after wavering from side to
side, and, like a current driven by inconstant winds, inclining first in
this direction, then in that, I at last yielded to the stronger, and the
fear of disobedience overcame me, and has carried me off.  Pray, mark
how accurately and justly I hold the balance between the fears, neither
desiring an office not given to me, nor rejecting it when given.  The
one course marks the rash, the other the disobedient, both the
undisciplined.  My position lies between those who are too bold, or too
timid; more timid than those who rush at every position, more bold than
those who avoid them all.  This is my judgment on the matter.

<span id="iii.iv-p459"></span>113.  Moreover, to distinguish still more
clearly between them, we have, against the fear of office, a possible
help in the law of obedience, inasmuch as God in His goodness rewards
our faith, and makes a perfect ruler of the man who has confidence in
Him, and places all his hopes in Him; but against the danger of
disobedience I know of nothing which can help us, and of no ground to
encourage our confidence.  For it is to be feared that we shall have to
hear these words concerning those who have been entrusted to us:  I will
require their souls at your hands; <span
id="fr_2885"></span>[2886](#fn_2885) <span id="page_227">p. 227</span>
<span id="iii.iv-Page_227"></span>and, Because ye have rejected me, and
not been leaders and rulers of my people, I also will reject you, that I
should not be king over you; <span id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886)
and, As ye refused to hearken to My voice, and turned a stubborn back,
and were disobedient, so shall it be when ye call upon Me, and I will
not regard nor give ear to your prayer. <span
id="fr_2887"></span>[2888](#fn_2887)   God forbid that these words
should come to us from the just Judge, for when we sing of His mercy we
must also by all means sing of His judgment. <span
id="fr_2888"></span>[2889](#fn_2888)

<span id="iii.iv-p464"></span>114.  I resort once again to history, and
on considering the men of best repute in ancient days, who were ever
preferred by grace to the office of ruler or prophet, I discover that
some readily complied with the call, others deprecated the gift, and
that neither those who drew back were blamed for timidity, nor those who
came forward for eagerness.  The former stood in awe of the greatness of
the ministry, the latter trustfully obeyed Him Who called them.  Aaron
was eager, but Moses resisted, <span
id="fr_2889"></span>[2890](#fn_2889) Isaiah readily submitted, but
Jeremiah was afraid of his youth, <span
id="fr_2890"></span>[2891](#fn_2890) and did not venture to prophesy
until he had received from God a promise and power beyond his
years. <span id="fr_2891"></span>[2892](#fn_2891)

<span id="iii.iv-p468"></span>115.  By these arguments I charmed myself,
and by degrees my soul relaxed and became ductile, like iron, and time
came to the aid of my arguments, and the testimonies of God, to which I
had entrusted my whole life, were my counsellors. <span
id="fr_2892"></span>[2893](#fn_2892)   Therefore I was not rebellious,
neither turned away back, <span id="fr_2893"></span>[2894](#fn_2893)
saith my Lord, when, instead of being called to rule, He was led, as a
sheep to the slaughter; <span id="fr_2894"></span>[2895](#fn_2894) but I
fell down and humbled myself under the mighty hand of God, <span
id="fr_2895"></span>[2896](#fn_2895) and asked pardon for my former
idleness and disobedience, if this is at all laid to my charge.  I held
my peace, <span id="fr_2896"></span>[2897](#fn_2896) but I will not hold
my peace for ever:  I withdrew for a little while, <span
id="fr_2897"></span>[2898](#fn_2897) till I had considered myself and
consoled my grief:  but now I am commissioned to exalt Him in the
congregation of the people, and praise Him in the seat of the
elders. <span id="fr_2898"></span>[2899](#fn_2898)   If my former
conduct deserved blame, my present action merits pardon.

<span id="iii.iv-p476"></span>116.  What further need is there of
words.  Here am I, my pastors and fellow-pastors, here am I, thou holy
flock, worthy of Christ, the Chief Shepherd, <span
id="fr_2899"></span>[2900](#fn_2899) here am I, my father, utterly
vanquished, and your subject according to the laws of Christ rather than
according to those of the land: <span
id="fr_2900"></span>[2901](#fn_2900)   here is my obedience, reward it
with your blessing.  Lead me with your prayers, guide me with your
words, establish me with your spirit.  The blessing of the father
establisheth the houses of children, <span
id="fr_2901"></span>[2902](#fn_2901) and would that both I and this
spiritual house may be established, the house which I have longed for,
which I pray may be my rest for ever, <span
id="fr_2902"></span>[2903](#fn_2902) when I have been passed on from the
church here to the church yonder, the general assembly of the firstborn,
who are written in heaven. <span id="fr_2903"></span>[2904](#fn_2903)

<span id="iii.iv-p482"></span>117.  Such is my defence:  its
reasonableness I have set forth:  and may the God of peace, <span
id="fr_2904"></span>[2905](#fn_2904) Who made both one, <span
id="fr_2905"></span>[2906](#fn_2905) and has restored us to each other,
Who setteth kings upon thrones, and raiseth up the poor out of the dust
and lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, <span
id="fr_2906"></span>[2907](#fn_2906) Who chose David His servant and
took him away from the sheepfolds, <span
id="fr_2907"></span>[2908](#fn_2907) though he was the least and
youngest of the sons of Jesse, <span
id="fr_2908"></span>[2909](#fn_2908) Who gave the word <span
id="fr_2909"></span>[2910](#fn_2909) to those who preach the gospel with
great power for the perfection of the gospel,—may He Himself hold me by
my right hand, and guide me with His counsel, and receive me with
glory, <span id="fr_2910"></span>[2911](#fn_2910) Who is a
Shepherd <span id="fr_2911"></span>[2912](#fn_2911) to shepherds and a
Guide to guides:  that we may feed His flock with knowledge, <span
id="fr_2912"></span>[2913](#fn_2912) not with the instruments of a
foolish shepherd, <span id="fr_2913"></span>[2914](#fn_2913) according
to the blessing, and not according to the curse pronounced against the
men of former days:  may He give strength and power unto his
people, <span id="fr_2914"></span>[2915](#fn_2914) and Himself present
to Himself <span id="fr_2915"></span>[2916](#fn_2915) His flock
resplendent and spotless and worthy of the fold on high, in the
habitation of them that rejoice, <span
id="fr_2916"></span>[2917](#fn_2916) in the splendour of the
saints, <span id="fr_2917"></span>[2918](#fn_2917) so that in His temple
everyone, both flock and shepherds together may say, Glory, <span
id="fr_2918"></span>[2919](#fn_2918) in Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom
be all glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2543"></span>[205:2544](2070047.htm#fr_2543) <span
id="iii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p6.1"></span> (LXX).

<span id="fn_2544"></span>[205:2545](2070047.htm#fr_2544) <span
id="iii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span> *Begin from God*.  Possibly an adaptation
of the exordium of Theocr. Idyll, xvii. 1.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p7.2"></span>κ Διὸς ἀρχώμεσθα, καὶ ἐις Δία λήγετε,
μοῖσαι</span>.  “Let Zeus inspire our opening strain, And Muses, end
your song in Zeus again.”  Cf. Demosth. Epist. 1.

<span id="fn_2545"></span>[205:2546](2070047.htm#fr_2545) <span
id="iii.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span> [Ps. lv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2546"></span>[205:2547](2070047.htm#fr_2546) <span
id="iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span> S. [Matt. xviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2547"></span>[205:2548](2070047.htm#fr_2547) <span
id="iii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2548"></span>[205:2549](2070047.htm#fr_2548) <span
id="iii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span> *One member*.  The Ben. editors object to
this translation (which is that of Rufinus, Billius and Gabriel) as
inconsistent with the following allusion to the relation of the *soul*
to the body.  It seems, however, more in harmony with the figure of S.
Paul, who compares the arrangement of the *members* of the body to the
hierarchy of the Church.

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[205:2550](2070047.htm#fr_2549) <span
id="iii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span> [Rom.
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#004), [1 Cor.
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2550"></span>[205:2551](2070047.htm#fr_2550) <span
id="iii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p15"></span> [Eph. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2551"></span>[205:2552](2070047.htm#fr_2551) <span
id="iii.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#020), [Eph.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2552"></span>[205:2553](2070047.htm#fr_2552) <span
id="iii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p17"></span> [Eph. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2553"></span>[205:2554](2070047.htm#fr_2553) <span
id="iii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p19"></span> *Anarchy, &c*.  Comp. Plato Legg. XII. 2.

<span id="fn_2554"></span>[205:2555](2070047.htm#fr_2554) <span
id="iii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p20"></span> *A great thing.*  The Ben. editors note
the obscurity of the original here.

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[205:2556](2070047.htm#fr_2555) <span
id="iii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p21"></span> *Accept*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p21.1"></span>δέχεσθαι</span>.  Many <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv-p21.2"></span>mss</span> have <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p21.3"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p21.4"></span>ρχεσθαι</span>, preserving the play upon the
word <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p21.5"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p21.6"></span>ρχειν</span>.  The latter
reading, the Ben. editors suggest, *may* have an active sense, as Hom.
Il. II. 345.

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[205:2557](2070047.htm#fr_2556) <span
id="iii.iv-p21.7"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p22"></span> [Eph. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[205:2558](2070047.htm#fr_2557) <span
id="iii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p23"></span> [Hos. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[205:2559](2070047.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="iii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p25"></span> *Philosophy*.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p25.1"></span>φιλοσοφία</span> is used by S. Greg. and other
Fathers in various senses, not always clearly distinguishable. 
Sometimes it refers to the ancient philosophical teachers and schools: 
sometimes to the Christian philosophy, which inculcates Divine truth,
and teaches the principles of a good and holy life:  sometimes to the
practice of these principles, either in regard to some special virtue,
*e.g.* patience, or, in general, in the lives of individual Christians,
and further, as involving the most careful and extensive reduction of
these principles to practice—the discipline of the monastic life.  Cf.
Suicer, in verb.

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[206:2560](2070047.htm#fr_2559) <span
id="iii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p27"></span> *Eager longing.*  Nearly all <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv-p27.1"></span>mss</span>. read “pity”—which
would have to be understood in the sense of “regretful affection.”

<span id="fn_2560"></span>[206:2561](2070047.htm#fr_2560) <span
id="iii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p29"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#028)<span id="iii.iv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2561"></span>[206:2562](2070047.htm#fr_2561) <span
id="iii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p31"></span> S. [Mark vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2562"></span>[206:2563](2070047.htm#fr_2562) <span
id="iii.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p32"></span> *The sanctuary*.  i.e. That which gave the
right to a place in the sanctuary,—the priesthood.  Billius wrongly
takes it of the episcopate.

<span id="fn_2563"></span>[206:2564](2070047.htm#fr_2563) <span
id="iii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p33"></span> *Piety*—for it is a mere external
pretence, deceiving themselves as well as others.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p33.1"></span>εἰσέβαια</span> here has
the double sense of piety and orthodoxy—the former being the more
prominent.

<span id="fn_2564"></span>[206:2565](2070047.htm#fr_2564) <span
id="iii.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p34"></span> [Isa.
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013), [John
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span id="iii.iv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2565"></span>[206:2566](2070047.htm#fr_2565) <span
id="iii.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p35"></span> [Num.
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#029), [1 Cor.
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2566"></span>[206:2567](2070047.htm#fr_2566) <span
id="iii.iv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p36"></span> [1 Sam.
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#011), [1 Sam.
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2567"></span>[207:2568](2070047.htm#fr_2567) <span
id="iii.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p38"></span> *The finale of the question*, or “the main
conclusion of my subject,” lit. “the colophon of my reason.”  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p38.1"></span>λόγος</span> cannot here
mean “of my speech,” for it has only just begun.

<span id="fn_2568"></span>[207:2569](2070047.htm#fr_2568) <span
id="iii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p40"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2569"></span>[207:2570](2070047.htm#fr_2569) <span
id="iii.iv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p42"></span> [Hagg. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p42.1"></span> *et
seq*.

<span id="fn_2570"></span>[207:2571](2070047.htm#fr_2570) <span
id="iii.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p44"></span> [Job
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#018), [Ps.
83:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#013), [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024), [Joel
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[207:2572](2070047.htm#fr_2571) <span
id="iii.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p46"></span> *Painters*, i.e. in our discourses;
*models* by our lives and examples.

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[207:2573](2070047.htm#fr_2572) <span
id="iii.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p47"></span> S. [Luke iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2573"></span>[208:2574](2070047.htm#fr_2573) <span
id="iii.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p49"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#027)<span id="iii.iv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[208:2575](2070047.htm#fr_2574) <span
id="iii.iv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p50"></span> [Rom. xi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#035)<span id="iii.iv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[208:2576](2070047.htm#fr_2575) <span
id="iii.iv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p52"></span> *A plant*.  Cf. Orat. vi. 8, xxiii. 1.  A
favourite figure of S. Gregory.

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[208:2577](2070047.htm#fr_2576) <span
id="iii.iv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p53"></span> [1 Pet. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[208:2578](2070047.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="iii.iv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p55"></span> *The art of arts*.  This is the original
of the frequently quoted commonplace, which in S. Gregory the Great’s
Pastoral Care, i. 1, takes the form “ars artium est regimen animarum.”

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[208:2579](2070047.htm#fr_2578) <span
id="iii.iv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p56"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[208:2580](2070047.htm#fr_2579) <span
id="iii.iv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p58"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[208:2581](2070047.htm#fr_2580) <span
id="iii.iv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p59"></span> [1 Pet. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[208:2582](2070047.htm#fr_2581) <span
id="iii.iv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p60"></span> *Our will*.  Clémencet compares S.
Bernard, de Gratia et Libero Arbitrio, xiv. 47 (tom. i. 1397, Gaume). 
Petavius, de Incarn., tom. v., p. 416, lib. IX., iii., 11, comments on
this passage in treating of free will.

<span id="fn_2582"></span>[209:2583](2070047.htm#fr_2582) <span
id="iii.iv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p63"></span> *Its subject matter*, i.e. the affection
of the sick body, which it is the object of medicine to change to its
opposite.  So Combefis.

<span id="fn_2583"></span>[209:2584](2070047.htm#fr_2583) <span
id="iii.iv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p64"></span> *This treatment*:  the treatment of the
spiritual physician.

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[209:2585](2070047.htm#fr_2584) <span
id="iii.iv-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p66"></span> [Ps. cxli.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p66.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2585"></span>[209:2586](2070047.htm#fr_2585) <span
id="iii.iv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p67"></span> [Ps.
58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p67.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[209:2587](2070047.htm#fr_2586) <span
id="iii.iv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p68"></span> [Amos v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[209:2588](2070047.htm#fr_2587) <span
id="iii.iv-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p70"></span> [1 Pet. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[209:2589](2070047.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="iii.iv-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p72"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="iii.iv-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[209:2590](2070047.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="iii.iv-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p73"></span> [Eph. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[209:2591](2070047.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="iii.iv-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p75"></span> [Gal. iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[209:2592](2070047.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="iii.iv-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p76"></span> [Heb. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[209:2593](2070047.htm#fr_2592) <span
id="iii.iv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p77"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2593"></span>[209:2594](2070047.htm#fr_2593) <span
id="iii.iv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p78"></span> [Heb. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2594"></span>[209:2595](2070047.htm#fr_2594) <span
id="iii.iv-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p79"></span> *One consisting*, &c.  “These words,” says
Gabriel, “are indeed a two-edged sword against the heretics, for one
clause mortally wounds Nestorius who separates the Divine from the Human
Nature—the other Eutyches, who empties the human into the Divine.”

<span id="fn_2595"></span>[210:2596](2070047.htm#fr_2595) <span
id="iii.iv-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p80"></span> *Was united*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p80.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p80.2"></span>νεκράθη</span>, lit., “was blended”—cf. Orat.
xxxviii. 13.  This and similar terms used by Gregory and his
contemporaries in an orthodox sense were laid aside by later Fathers, in
consequence of their having been perverted in favor of the Eutychian
heresy.

<span id="fn_2596"></span>[210:2597](2070047.htm#fr_2596) <span
id="iii.iv-p80.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p81"></span> *By means of the soul*, Cf. Orat. xxix.
19; xxxviii. 13; Epist. 101 (tom. 2, p. 90 A.):  Poem. Dogmat., x.,
55–61 (tom. 2, p. 256); Petavius de Incarn. IV. xiii. 2.

<span id="fn_2597"></span>[210:2598](2070047.htm#fr_2597) <span
id="iii.iv-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p83"></span> [Heb. viii.
8-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2598"></span>[210:2599](2070047.htm#fr_2598) <span
id="iii.iv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p84"></span> Lit. “of the formation”—the substantive
here corresponds to the verb in [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p84.1"></span>
(<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv-p84.2"></span>LXX</span>.).

<span id="fn_2599"></span>[210:2600](2070047.htm#fr_2599) <span
id="iii.iv-p84.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p85"></span> [Gen. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2600"></span>[210:2601](2070047.htm#fr_2600) <span
id="iii.iv-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p86"></span> S. [Luke ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2601"></span>[210:2602](2070047.htm#fr_2601) <span
id="iii.iv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p87"></span> S. [Luke ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2602"></span>[210:2603](2070047.htm#fr_2602) <span
id="iii.iv-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p88"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049)<span id="iii.iv-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2603"></span>[210:2604](2070047.htm#fr_2603) <span
id="iii.iv-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p89"></span> S. [Matt.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2604"></span>[210:2605](2070047.htm#fr_2604) <span
id="iii.iv-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p90"></span> S. [Matt.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2605"></span>[210:2606](2070047.htm#fr_2605) <span
id="iii.iv-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p91"></span> S. [Matt. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2606"></span>[210:2607](2070047.htm#fr_2606) <span
id="iii.iv-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p92"></span> S. [Matt.
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2607"></span>[210:2608](2070047.htm#fr_2607) <span
id="iii.iv-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p94"></span> [Ps. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2608"></span>[210:2609](2070047.htm#fr_2608) <span
id="iii.iv-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p95"></span> [Gen. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p95.1"></span>. 
*Why tree*, &c.  A striking contrast of the means of Redemption by the
Cross of Christ with the circumstances of the Fall.

<span id="fn_2609"></span>[210:2610](2070047.htm#fr_2609) <span
id="iii.iv-p95.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p96"></span> S. [John xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2610"></span>[210:2611](2070047.htm#fr_2610) <span
id="iii.iv-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p97"></span> [Gen. iii.
6-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2611"></span>[210:2612](2070047.htm#fr_2611) <span
id="iii.iv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p98"></span> S. [Matt. xxvii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035)<span id="iii.iv-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2612"></span>[210:2613](2070047.htm#fr_2612) <span
id="iii.iv-p98.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p99"></span> *For the sake of resurrection*.  One
translator carries on the contrast, and renders “to atone for the
insurrection,” sc. of Adam.  The preposition <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p99.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p99.2"></span>περ</span> seems decisive against this.

<span id="fn_2613"></span>[210:2614](2070047.htm#fr_2613) <span
id="iii.iv-p99.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p100"></span> [Rev.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007), [Rev.
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2614"></span>[210:2615](2070047.htm#fr_2614) <span
id="iii.iv-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p102"></span> [1 Cor.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009), [1 Cor.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001), [2 Cor.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2615"></span>[210:2616](2070047.htm#fr_2615) <span
id="iii.iv-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p104"></span> *One of their wise men*, the author of
the treatise <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p104.1"></span>περὶ
φυσῶν</span>, ascribed to Hippocrates.

<span id="fn_2616"></span>[211:2617](2070047.htm#fr_2616) <span
id="iii.iv-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p107"></span> *Those who*, &c. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p107.1"></span>μιγάδας</span>, cf. xxi.,
10, where <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p107.2"></span>μοναδικοὶ</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p107.3"></span>οἱ τῆς ἐρηυίας</span> are distinguished from
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p107.4"></span>μιγάδες</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p107.5"></span>οἱ τῆς
ἐπιμιξίας</span>.  Clémencet here holds that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p107.6"></span>οἱ τῆς ἐρημίας</span> are hermits as
distinguished from cœnobites, but does not hint at any further
subdivision between the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p107.7"></span>κοινωνικοὶ</span> and the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p107.8"></span>μιγάδες</span>.  Cf. also
xliii. 62; xxi. 19.  Montaut, “Revue Critique, &c.” (pp. 48–52) attempts
to distinguish between the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p107.9"></span>μιγάδες</span> and the <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p107.10"></span>κοινωνικοί</span>.  But
although he confirms the overthrow by Clémencet of the views of previous
translators, he leaves Clémencet’s own position really unweakened.  S.
Gregory uses the two terms as practically convertible.  In xxi., § 19,
(which Montaut misinterprets) he explains that the life of the cœnobite
is a hermit-life in its relation to the world which he has forsaken,
while it has opportunities in community-life for the growth of those
virtues which are required by the relation of man to man.  Cf. Bened.
edition (Clémencet), Præf. Gener., Pars. II., § iii. sub finem.

<span id="fn_2617"></span>[211:2618](2070047.htm#fr_2617) <span
id="iii.iv-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p111"></span> *The source of persuasiveness*, lit.,
“the medicine of persuasion.”

<span id="fn_2618"></span>[211:2619](2070047.htm#fr_2618) <span
id="iii.iv-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p112"></span> *condescension*, lit., ‘equity,’ dealing
gently with their weakness, not exacting the literal fulfilment of the
law.

<span id="fn_2619"></span>[211:2620](2070047.htm#fr_2619) <span
id="iii.iv-p113.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p114"></span> *Are requisite to form*, lit., by
‘actual…they become clear to.’

<span id="fn_2620"></span>[212:2621](2070047.htm#fr_2620) <span
id="iii.iv-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p116"></span> [Numb. xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2621"></span>[212:2622](2070047.htm#fr_2621) <span
id="iii.iv-p116.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p117"></span> [Prov. iv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#027)<span id="iii.iv-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2622"></span>[212:2623](2070047.htm#fr_2622) <span
id="iii.iv-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p119"></span> S. [Luke xii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#042)<span id="iii.iv-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2623"></span>[212:2624](2070047.htm#fr_2623) <span
id="iii.iv-p119.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p120"></span> *Worlds*, i.e. the invisible and visible,
of which S. Greg. held that the former was created before the latter.
cf. Orat. xviii. 3; xxvii. 10; xxviii. 31; xxxviii. 10; xl. 45.

<span id="fn_2624"></span>[212:2625](2070047.htm#fr_2624) <span
id="iii.iv-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p122"></span> *Dissolution*; some translate
‘return’—i.e. of the Ascension; referring the ‘resurrection, &c.’ to
mankind in general.

<span id="fn_2625"></span>[212:2626](2070047.htm#fr_2625) <span
id="iii.iv-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p123"></span> *Original*.  Perhaps better ‘supreme.’

<span id="fn_2626"></span>[212:2627](2070047.htm#fr_2626) <span
id="iii.iv-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p124"></span> *Illumination*.  Some apply this to Holy
Baptism, with its preliminary instruction.

<span id="fn_2627"></span>[212:2628](2070047.htm#fr_2627) <span
id="iii.iv-p124.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p125"></span> *Contracting*, i.e. by the Sabellian
heresy.  A parallel passage in almost identical terms is Orat. xx. 6.

<span id="fn_2628"></span>[212:2629](2070047.htm#fr_2628) <span
id="iii.iv-p126.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p127"></span> *Atheism*.  This term is used of
Sabellianism xviii. 16. xx. 6. xxi. 13. xliii. 30, in the sense in which
it is here explained.  Cf. Petav. de Trin. I. vi. 3, sqq.

<span id="fn_2629"></span>[212:2630](2070047.htm#fr_2629) <span
id="iii.iv-p127.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p128"></span> *Madness* of Arianism, xxi. 13. xxxiv. 8.
xliii. 30.  This term is applied in a letter of Constantine after the
Council of Nicæa.  It is called Judaism also Orat. xx. 6 as frequently
by S. Athanasius.  Cf. Petav. de Trin. I. ix. 8.

<span id="fn_2630"></span>[213:2631](2070047.htm#fr_2630) <span
id="iii.iv-p130.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p131"></span> *Piety*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p131.1"></span>εὐλάβεια</span>. i.e. The pious readily and
attentively receive instruction in morality or generally received truth,
but are more suspicious and intolerant than ordinary people, if, at a
time when any theological question is hotly debated, a preacher touches
upon any point connected with it, and so stirs party feeling or personal
prejudice.

<span id="fn_2631"></span>[213:2632](2070047.htm#fr_2631) <span
id="iii.iv-p132.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p133"></span> *The primary hope*.  This term is used of
the full knowledge and confession of the doctrine of the Holy Trinity,
Orat. xxxii. 23; where its necessary connection with Christianity and
the life of the soul is insisted on.  For its vital importance cf.
Liddon, Bamp. Lect. pp. 435, 6, and its bearing on the Mediatorial Work
of Christ, and so on our salvation.  Ibid. Lect. VIII. esp. pp. 472–9
(5th ed.).  S. Cyr. Hier. Catech. 13. 2.  S. Cyr. Alex. de S. Trin.
dial. 4. tom v. pp. 508, 509.  S. Proclus Hom. in Incarn. 5. 6. 9. 
Bright. Hist. of the Church. p. 149.

<span id="fn_2632"></span>[213:2633](2070047.htm#fr_2632) <span
id="iii.iv-p133.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p134"></span> [Rom. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2633"></span>[213:2634](2070047.htm#fr_2633) <span
id="iii.iv-p134.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p135"></span> [Luke xii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span id="iii.iv-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2634"></span>[213:2635](2070047.htm#fr_2634) <span
id="iii.iv-p136.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p137"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p137.1"></span>.
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2635"></span>[213:2636](2070047.htm#fr_2635) <span
id="iii.iv-p137.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p138"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2636"></span>[213:2637](2070047.htm#fr_2636) <span
id="iii.iv-p138.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p139"></span> S. [Matt.
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006), [Matt.
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#032)<span id="iii.iv-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2637"></span>[213:2638](2070047.htm#fr_2637) <span
id="iii.iv-p140.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p141"></span> [Eph. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2638"></span>[213:2639](2070047.htm#fr_2638) <span
id="iii.iv-p142.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p143"></span> *Doctrines and dogmas*.  Elias takes the
former to refer to morality and the latter to belief.

<span id="fn_2639"></span>[214:2640](2070047.htm#fr_2639) <span
id="iii.iv-p145.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p146"></span> [1 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002), [Heb.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2640"></span>[214:2641](2070047.htm#fr_2640) <span
id="iii.iv-p146.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p147"></span> *Our material bodies*, lit., “matter.” 
This, together with “dust,” “mire” or “clay” and other similar terms, is
often used by S. Gregory as a synonym of “the body.”

<span id="fn_2641"></span>[214:2642](2070047.htm#fr_2641) <span
id="iii.iv-p147.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p148"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[214:2643](2070047.htm#fr_2642) <span
id="iii.iv-p148.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p149"></span> [Heb. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2643"></span>[214:2644](2070047.htm#fr_2643) <span
id="iii.iv-p149.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p150"></span> [Rom. xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2644"></span>[214:2645](2070047.htm#fr_2644) <span
id="iii.iv-p150.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p151"></span> [Col.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#011),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[214:2646](2070047.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="iii.iv-p151.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p152"></span> [Eph. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[214:2647](2070047.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="iii.iv-p153.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p154"></span> [2 Cor.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[214:2648](2070047.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="iii.iv-p154.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p155"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)<span id="iii.iv-p155.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[214:2649](2070047.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="iii.iv-p155.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p156"></span> [Ps. civ.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2649"></span>[214:2650](2070047.htm#fr_2649) <span
id="iii.iv-p156.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p157"></span> *Ventriloquists*.  [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p157.1"></span>,
“Wizards.”

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[214:2651](2070047.htm#fr_2650) <span
id="iii.iv-p157.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p158"></span> [Ezek.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#020), [Ezek.
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[214:2652](2070047.htm#fr_2651) <span
id="iii.iv-p159.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p160"></span> I.e., venerable for wisdom due to
experience.

<span id="fn_2652"></span>[214:2653](2070047.htm#fr_2652) <span
id="iii.iv-p161.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p162"></span> *Law*.  Not definitely enacted, but a
custom constantly observed.  It applied to the earlier and later
chapters of Ezekiel and the Song of Solomon.

<span id="fn_2653"></span>[215:2654](2070047.htm#fr_2653) <span
id="iii.iv-p162.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p163"></span> *Exterior*, Origen, Hom. 5, in Levit.,
speaks of the ‘body, soul, and spirit of Scripture.’

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[215:2655](2070047.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="iii.iv-p163.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p164"></span> *Alone*.  If, as many <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv-p164.1"></span>mss</span>. we read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p164.2"></span>μόλις</span>, “with
difficulty.”  This is preferred by the Bened. note.

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[215:2656](2070047.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="iii.iv-p165.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p166"></span> *Degrees, etc*.  [Heb. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p166.1"></span> V.
“use” (in the singular), the sense is “any rule for confining the use of
difficult passages of Holy Scripture to those whose experience is a
guarantee against their abuse.”

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[215:2657](2070047.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="iii.iv-p166.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p167"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[215:2658](2070047.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="iii.iv-p167.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p168"></span> S. [Matt. xxiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[215:2659](2070047.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="iii.iv-p168.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p169"></span> “More spiritual and noble.”—This is
ironical.

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[215:2660](2070047.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="iii.iv-p170.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p171"></span> S. [Luke viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[215:2661](2070047.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="iii.iv-p171.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p172"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
25.9](../../../bib/apo/sir025.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[215:2662](2070047.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="iii.iv-p172.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p173"></span> [Eccles. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p173.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[215:2663](2070047.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="iii.iv-p173.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p174"></span> [Prov. xxvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p174.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2663"></span>[215:2664](2070047.htm#fr_2663) <span
id="iii.iv-p175.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p176"></span> *Their grace*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p176.1"></span>τὸ χάρισμα</span>.  Elias takes this of the
power to heal diseases.  Tillemont of miracles in general.  Perhaps
better of the special position as Apostles to the Jews and to the
Gentiles ([Gal. 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p176.2"></span>)
where the term is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p176.3"></span>χάρις</span>.

<span id="fn_2664"></span>[216:2665](2070047.htm#fr_2664) <span
id="iii.iv-p176.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p177"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022)<span id="iii.iv-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2665"></span>[216:2666](2070047.htm#fr_2665) <span
id="iii.iv-p179.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p180"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p180.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_2666"></span>[216:2667](2070047.htm#fr_2666) <span
id="iii.iv-p180.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p181"></span> [1 Cor.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012), [1 Cor.
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2667"></span>[216:2668](2070047.htm#fr_2667) <span
id="iii.iv-p181.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p182"></span> [1 Cor.
4.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p182.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2668"></span>[216:2669](2070047.htm#fr_2668) <span
id="iii.iv-p182.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p183"></span> His *cause* reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p183.1"></span>τοῦ</span>:  v. 1. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p183.2"></span>τῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_2669"></span>[216:2670](2070047.htm#fr_2669) <span
id="iii.iv-p183.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p184"></span> [Tit. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2670"></span>[216:2671](2070047.htm#fr_2670) <span
id="iii.iv-p184.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p185"></span> [2 Cor.
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="iii.iv-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2671"></span>[216:2672](2070047.htm#fr_2671) <span
id="iii.iv-p185.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p186"></span> *Pressure* <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p186.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p186.2"></span>πιστασίαν</span>, [2 Cor. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#028)<span id="iii.iv-p186.3"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p186.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p186.5"></span>πίστασιν</span>.

<span id="fn_2672"></span>[216:2673](2070047.htm#fr_2672) <span
id="iii.iv-p187.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p188"></span> [Eph.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2673"></span>[216:2674](2070047.htm#fr_2673) <span
id="iii.iv-p188.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p189"></span> [Rom. xiii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p189.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2674"></span>[216:2675](2070047.htm#fr_2674) <span
id="iii.iv-p189.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p190"></span> [Eph.
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#022)<span id="iii.iv-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2675"></span>[216:2676](2070047.htm#fr_2675) <span
id="iii.iv-p190.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p191"></span> [Eph. vi.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p191.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2676"></span>[216:2677](2070047.htm#fr_2676) <span
id="iii.iv-p191.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p192"></span> [1 Cor.
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#008),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="iii.iv-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2677"></span>[216:2678](2070047.htm#fr_2677) <span
id="iii.iv-p192.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p193"></span> [Rom.
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p193.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2678"></span>[216:2679](2070047.htm#fr_2678) <span
id="iii.iv-p193.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p194"></span> [1 Cor.
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027), [1 Cor.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2679"></span>[216:2680](2070047.htm#fr_2679) <span
id="iii.iv-p194.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p195"></span> [Rom.
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029)<span id="iii.iv-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2680"></span>[216:2681](2070047.htm#fr_2680) <span
id="iii.iv-p195.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p196"></span> [Gal. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p196.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2681"></span>[216:2682](2070047.htm#fr_2681) <span
id="iii.iv-p196.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p197"></span> [Phil. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p197.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2682"></span>[216:2683](2070047.htm#fr_2682) <span
id="iii.iv-p197.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p198"></span> [Gal. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p198.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2683"></span>[216:2684](2070047.htm#fr_2683) <span
id="iii.iv-p198.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p199"></span> [1 Cor. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2684"></span>[216:2685](2070047.htm#fr_2684) <span
id="iii.iv-p199.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p200"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p200.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2685"></span>[216:2686](2070047.htm#fr_2685) <span
id="iii.iv-p200.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p201"></span> [1 Cor.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007), [1 Cor.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p201.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2686"></span>[216:2687](2070047.htm#fr_2686) <span
id="iii.iv-p201.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p202"></span> [1 Cor.
4.21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021)<span id="iii.iv-p202.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2687"></span>[216:2688](2070047.htm#fr_2687) <span
id="iii.iv-p202.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p203"></span> [1 Cor.
15.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p203.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2688"></span>[216:2689](2070047.htm#fr_2688) <span
id="iii.iv-p203.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p204"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p204.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2689"></span>[216:2690](2070047.htm#fr_2689) <span
id="iii.iv-p204.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p205"></span> [Phil.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023), [Phil.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p205.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2690"></span>[216:2691](2070047.htm#fr_2690) <span
id="iii.iv-p205.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p206"></span> [1 Cor. x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033)<span id="iii.iv-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2691"></span>[216:2692](2070047.htm#fr_2691) <span
id="iii.iv-p206.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p207"></span> [1 Cor.
4.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p207.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2692"></span>[216:2693](2070047.htm#fr_2692) <span
id="iii.iv-p208.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p209"></span> [2 Cor.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010), [2 Cor.
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2693"></span>[216:2694](2070047.htm#fr_2693) <span
id="iii.iv-p209.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p210"></span> [Rom.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003), [Phil.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p210.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2694"></span>[216:2695](2070047.htm#fr_2694) <span
id="iii.iv-p210.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p211"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p211.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2695"></span>[216:2696](2070047.htm#fr_2695) <span
id="iii.iv-p211.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p212"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p212.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2696"></span>[216:2697](2070047.htm#fr_2696) <span
id="iii.iv-p212.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p213"></span> [1 Cor.
9.27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="iii.iv-p213.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2697"></span>[216:2698](2070047.htm#fr_2697) <span
id="iii.iv-p213.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p214"></span> [2 Tim. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p214.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2698"></span>[216:2699](2070047.htm#fr_2698) <span
id="iii.iv-p214.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p215"></span> [Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p215.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2699"></span>[216:2700](2070047.htm#fr_2699) <span
id="iii.iv-p215.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p216"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p216.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2700"></span>[216:2701](2070047.htm#fr_2700) <span
id="iii.iv-p216.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p217"></span> S. [Matt. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p217.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2701"></span>[217:2702](2070047.htm#fr_2701) <span
id="iii.iv-p218.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p219"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p219.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2702"></span>[217:2703](2070047.htm#fr_2702) <span
id="iii.iv-p219.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p220"></span> [Phil. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p220.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2703"></span>[217:2704](2070047.htm#fr_2703) <span
id="iii.iv-p220.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p221"></span> [Rom. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p221.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2704"></span>[217:2705](2070047.htm#fr_2704) <span
id="iii.iv-p221.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p222"></span> [2 Cor.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p222.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2705"></span>[217:2706](2070047.htm#fr_2705) <span
id="iii.iv-p222.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p223"></span> [Isa. xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p223.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2706"></span>[217:2707](2070047.htm#fr_2706) <span
id="iii.iv-p223.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p224"></span> [Isa.
9.16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2707"></span>[217:2708](2070047.htm#fr_2707) <span
id="iii.iv-p224.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p225"></span> [Isa.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p225.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2708"></span>[217:2709](2070047.htm#fr_2708) <span
id="iii.iv-p225.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p226"></span> [Isa.
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p226.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2709"></span>[217:2710](2070047.htm#fr_2709) <span
id="iii.iv-p226.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p227"></span> [Isa.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p227.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2710"></span>[217:2711](2070047.htm#fr_2710) <span
id="iii.iv-p227.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p228"></span> [Isa.
9.15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p228.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2711"></span>[217:2712](2070047.htm#fr_2711) <span
id="iii.iv-p228.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p229"></span> [Isa.
1.23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p229.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2712"></span>[217:2713](2070047.htm#fr_2712) <span
id="iii.iv-p229.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p230"></span> [Isa.
8.21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021)<span id="iii.iv-p230.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2713"></span>[217:2714](2070047.htm#fr_2713) <span
id="iii.iv-p230.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p231"></span> [Isa.
40.2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p231.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2714"></span>[217:2715](2070047.htm#fr_2714) <span
id="iii.iv-p231.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p232"></span> [Isa.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p232.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2715"></span>[217:2716](2070047.htm#fr_2715) <span
id="iii.iv-p233.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p234"></span> [Prov. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030)<span id="iii.iv-p234.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2716"></span>[217:2717](2070047.htm#fr_2716) <span
id="iii.iv-p234.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p235"></span> [Hos.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p235.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2717"></span>[217:2718](2070047.htm#fr_2717) <span
id="iii.iv-p235.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p236"></span> [Hos.
6.5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p236.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2718"></span>[217:2719](2070047.htm#fr_2718) <span
id="iii.iv-p236.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p237"></span> [Hos.
7.7](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p237.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2719"></span>[217:2720](2070047.htm#fr_2719) <span
id="iii.iv-p237.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p238"></span> [Hos.
8.4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p238.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2720"></span>[217:2721](2070047.htm#fr_2720) <span
id="iii.iv-p239.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p240"></span> [Mic. iii.
10-12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv-p240.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2721"></span>[217:2722](2070047.htm#fr_2721) <span
id="iii.iv-p240.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p241"></span> [Mic.
7.1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p241.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2722"></span>[217:2723](2070047.htm#fr_2722) <span
id="iii.iv-p241.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p242"></span> [Ps. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p242.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2723"></span>[217:2724](2070047.htm#fr_2723) <span
id="iii.iv-p243.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p244"></span> [Joel i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p244.1"></span>,
seq.

<span id="fn_2724"></span>[217:2725](2070047.htm#fr_2724) <span
id="iii.iv-p244.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p245"></span> [Isa. lviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p245.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2725"></span>[217:2726](2070047.htm#fr_2725) <span
id="iii.iv-p246.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p247"></span> [Hab. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p247.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_2726"></span>[217:2727](2070047.htm#fr_2726) <span
id="iii.iv-p247.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p248"></span> [Hab.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p248.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2727"></span>[218:2728](2070047.htm#fr_2727) <span
id="iii.iv-p249.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p250"></span> [Mal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p250.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2728"></span>[218:2729](2070047.htm#fr_2728) <span
id="iii.iv-p250.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p251"></span> [Mal.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p251.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2729"></span>[218:2730](2070047.htm#fr_2729) <span
id="iii.iv-p251.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p252"></span> [Mal.
2.5-7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p252.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2730"></span>[218:2731](2070047.htm#fr_2730) <span
id="iii.iv-p252.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p253"></span> *Strongly worded*, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv-p253.1"></span>βλάσφημον</span>, perh.
“ill omened.”

<span id="fn_2731"></span>[218:2732](2070047.htm#fr_2731) <span
id="iii.iv-p253.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p254"></span> [Mal.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p254.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2732"></span>[218:2733](2070047.htm#fr_2732) <span
id="iii.iv-p255.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p256"></span> [Zech. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p256.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2733"></span>[218:2734](2070047.htm#fr_2733) <span
id="iii.iv-p256.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p257"></span> [Zech.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p257.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_2734"></span>[218:2735](2070047.htm#fr_2734) <span
id="iii.iv-p257.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p258"></span> *A greater*, &c. i.e. they refer to the
Person of Jesus Christ Himself.

<span id="fn_2735"></span>[218:2736](2070047.htm#fr_2735) <span
id="iii.iv-p258.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p259"></span> [Heb. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p259.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2736"></span>[218:2737](2070047.htm#fr_2736) <span
id="iii.iv-p260.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p261"></span> [Zech. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p261.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[218:2738](2070047.htm#fr_2737) <span
id="iii.iv-p261.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p262"></span> [Zech.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p262.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[218:2739](2070047.htm#fr_2738) <span
id="iii.iv-p262.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p263"></span> [Zech.
13.7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p263.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2739"></span>[218:2740](2070047.htm#fr_2739) <span
id="iii.iv-p263.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p264"></span> [Zech.
10.3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p264.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[218:2741](2070047.htm#fr_2740) <span
id="iii.iv-p265.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p266"></span> [Sus.
5](../../../bib/apo/sus001.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p266.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[218:2742](2070047.htm#fr_2741) <span
id="iii.iv-p266.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p267"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p267.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[218:2743](2070047.htm#fr_2742) <span
id="iii.iv-p268.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p269"></span> [Ezek.
7.26](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#026)<span id="iii.iv-p269.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[218:2744](2070047.htm#fr_2743) <span
id="iii.iv-p269.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p270"></span> [Ezek.
22.24](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p270.1"></span>
seq.

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[218:2745](2070047.htm#fr_2744) <span
id="iii.iv-p270.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p271"></span> [Ezek.
22.26](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#026)<span id="iii.iv-p271.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[218:2746](2070047.htm#fr_2745) <span
id="iii.iv-p271.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p272"></span> [Ezek.
13.14](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p272.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[219:2747](2070047.htm#fr_2746) <span
id="iii.iv-p272.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p273"></span> [Ezek. xiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p273.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[219:2748](2070047.htm#fr_2747) <span
id="iii.iv-p274.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p275"></span> [Ezek.
34.2](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p275.1"></span>
et seq.

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[219:2749](2070047.htm#fr_2748) <span
id="iii.iv-p275.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p276"></span> [Ezek.
39.17](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p276.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[219:2750](2070047.htm#fr_2749) <span
id="iii.iv-p276.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p277"></span> [Ezek.
34.8](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p277.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[219:2751](2070047.htm#fr_2750) <span
id="iii.iv-p278.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p279"></span> [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p279.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[219:2752](2070047.htm#fr_2751) <span
id="iii.iv-p279.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p280"></span> [Jer.
9.1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p280.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[219:2753](2070047.htm#fr_2752) <span
id="iii.iv-p281.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p282"></span> [Jer.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p282.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[219:2754](2070047.htm#fr_2753) <span
id="iii.iv-p282.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p283"></span> [Jer.
10.21](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#021)<span id="iii.iv-p283.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[219:2755](2070047.htm#fr_2754) <span
id="iii.iv-p283.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p284"></span> [Jer.
12.10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv-p284.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[219:2756](2070047.htm#fr_2755) <span
id="iii.iv-p284.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p285"></span> [Jer.
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p285.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[219:2757](2070047.htm#fr_2756) <span
id="iii.iv-p285.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p286"></span> [Jer.
25.34](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#034)<span id="iii.iv-p286.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[219:2758](2070047.htm#fr_2757) <span
id="iii.iv-p287.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p288"></span> [1 Tim.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002),
[0](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#000), [Titus
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p288.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[219:2759](2070047.htm#fr_2758) <span
id="iii.iv-p288.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p289"></span> [Matt.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009), [Luke
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p289.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[219:2760](2070047.htm#fr_2759) <span
id="iii.iv-p290.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p291"></span> S. [Matt. xxiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p291.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[219:2761](2070047.htm#fr_2760) <span
id="iii.iv-p293.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p294"></span> [Matt.
23.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p294.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[219:2762](2070047.htm#fr_2761) <span
id="iii.iv-p294.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p295"></span> [Matt.
25.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p295.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[219:2763](2070047.htm#fr_2762) <span
id="iii.iv-p295.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p296"></span> “*The grace*” i.e. the grace of the
priesthood.

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[220:2764](2070047.htm#fr_2763) <span
id="iii.iv-p297.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p298"></span> S. [Luke viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p298.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[220:2765](2070047.htm#fr_2764) <span
id="iii.iv-p298.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p299"></span> S. [Matt. xiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p299.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[220:2766](2070047.htm#fr_2765) <span
id="iii.iv-p299.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p300"></span> [Matt.
7.26](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#026)<span id="iii.iv-p300.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[220:2767](2070047.htm#fr_2766) <span
id="iii.iv-p300.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p301"></span> [Eccles. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p301.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[220:2768](2070047.htm#fr_2767) <span
id="iii.iv-p301.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p302"></span> [Prov. xxix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#020)<span id="iii.iv-p302.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[220:2769](2070047.htm#fr_2768) <span
id="iii.iv-p303.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p304"></span> [Prov.
25.3](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p304.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[220:2770](2070047.htm#fr_2769) <span
id="iii.iv-p304.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p305"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p305.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[220:2771](2070047.htm#fr_2770) <span
id="iii.iv-p305.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p306"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p306.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[220:2772](2070047.htm#fr_2771) <span
id="iii.iv-p306.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p307"></span> [Isa.
66.1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p307.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[220:2773](2070047.htm#fr_2772) <span
id="iii.iv-p307.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p308"></span> [Isa.
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#025)<span id="iii.iv-p308.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[220:2774](2070047.htm#fr_2773) <span
id="iii.iv-p309.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p310"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p310.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[220:2775](2070047.htm#fr_2774) <span
id="iii.iv-p310.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p311"></span> [Eccles. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p311.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[220:2776](2070047.htm#fr_2775) <span
id="iii.iv-p311.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p312"></span> [Eccles.
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv-p312.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[220:2777](2070047.htm#fr_2776) <span
id="iii.iv-p313.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p314"></span> [Ps. xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p314.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[220:2778](2070047.htm#fr_2777) <span
id="iii.iv-p314.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p315"></span> [Ps.
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012), [Ps.
104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p315.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[220:2779](2070047.htm#fr_2778) <span
id="iii.iv-p315.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p316"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p316.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[220:2780](2070047.htm#fr_2779) <span
id="iii.iv-p316.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p317"></span> [Exod. xxxiii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p317.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[220:2781](2070047.htm#fr_2780) <span
id="iii.iv-p318.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p319"></span> S. [Matt. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p319.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[220:2782](2070047.htm#fr_2781) <span
id="iii.iv-p319.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p320"></span> [Ps. xxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p320.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[220:2783](2070047.htm#fr_2782) <span
id="iii.iv-p320.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p321"></span> [Ps.
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010), [Ps.
119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103)<span
id="iii.iv-p321.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[220:2784](2070047.htm#fr_2783) <span
id="iii.iv-p321.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p322"></span> [Prov. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p322.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[221:2785](2070047.htm#fr_2784) <span
id="iii.iv-p322.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p323"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p323.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2785"></span>[221:2786](2070047.htm#fr_2785) <span
id="iii.iv-p324.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p325"></span> [Ps. cvii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#040)<span id="iii.iv-p325.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2786"></span>[221:2787](2070047.htm#fr_2786) <span
id="iii.iv-p325.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p326"></span> *Princes*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p326.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p326.2"></span>ρχοντας</span>.  i.e. The office of the
priesthood, which is one of dignity, has been brought into contempt by
the unworthiness of those ordained to it, who have, by their want of the
virtues requisite for their office, made it an empty name—and, not only
so, but have been actively vicious.

<span id="fn_2787"></span>[221:2788](2070047.htm#fr_2787) <span
id="iii.iv-p327.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p328"></span> *Knowledge*, &c.  cf. the ironical
passage, §§ 49, 50.

<span id="fn_2788"></span>[221:2789](2070047.htm#fr_2788) <span
id="iii.iv-p328.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p329"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv-p329.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2789"></span>[221:2790](2070047.htm#fr_2789) <span
id="iii.iv-p329.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p330"></span> [1 Cor.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p330.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2790"></span>[221:2791](2070047.htm#fr_2790) <span
id="iii.iv-p330.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p331"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p331.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2791"></span>[221:2792](2070047.htm#fr_2791) <span
id="iii.iv-p331.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p332"></span> [Ps. cvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#039)<span id="iii.iv-p332.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2792"></span>[221:2793](2070047.htm#fr_2792) <span
id="iii.iv-p332.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p333"></span> [Deut. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p333.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2793"></span>[221:2794](2070047.htm#fr_2793) <span
id="iii.iv-p333.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p334"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p334.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2794"></span>[221:2795](2070047.htm#fr_2794) <span
id="iii.iv-p334.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p335"></span> [Ps.
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007), [Ps.
140:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p335.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2795"></span>[221:2796](2070047.htm#fr_2795) <span
id="iii.iv-p337.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p338"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p338.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2796"></span>[221:2797](2070047.htm#fr_2796) <span
id="iii.iv-p339.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p340"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#002), [Hos.
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p340.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2797"></span>[222:2798](2070047.htm#fr_2797) <span
id="iii.iv-p342.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p343"></span> [Ps. cxxix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p343.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2798"></span>[222:2799](2070047.htm#fr_2798) <span
id="iii.iv-p343.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p344"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p344.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[222:2800](2070047.htm#fr_2799) <span
id="iii.iv-p344.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p345"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p345.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[222:2801](2070047.htm#fr_2800) <span
id="iii.iv-p347.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p348"></span> S. [James ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p348.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2801"></span>[222:2802](2070047.htm#fr_2801) <span
id="iii.iv-p348.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p349"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005), [Rom.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p349.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2802"></span>[222:2803](2070047.htm#fr_2802) <span
id="iii.iv-p350.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p351"></span> [Phil. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p351.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2803"></span>[222:2804](2070047.htm#fr_2803) <span
id="iii.iv-p352.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p353"></span> [Eph. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p353.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2804"></span>[222:2805](2070047.htm#fr_2804) <span
id="iii.iv-p353.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p354"></span> [Exod. xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p354.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2805"></span>[222:2806](2070047.htm#fr_2805) <span
id="iii.iv-p354.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p355"></span> [Josh. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p355.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2806"></span>[222:2807](2070047.htm#fr_2806) <span
id="iii.iv-p355.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p356"></span> [1 Sam.
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#016), [1 Sam.
17:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#049)<span id="iii.iv-p356.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2807"></span>[222:2808](2070047.htm#fr_2807) <span
id="iii.iv-p356.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p357"></span> [Ps. xviii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#039)<span id="iii.iv-p357.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2808"></span>[222:2809](2070047.htm#fr_2808) <span
id="iii.iv-p357.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p358"></span> [Psa.
144.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p358.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2809"></span>[222:2810](2070047.htm#fr_2809) <span
id="iii.iv-p358.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p359"></span> [1 Sam. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p359.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2810"></span>[222:2811](2070047.htm#fr_2810) <span
id="iii.iv-p360.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p361"></span> [Joel ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p361.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2811"></span>[222:2812](2070047.htm#fr_2811) <span
id="iii.iv-p361.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p362"></span> [Ezek.
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#020)<span id="iii.iv-p362.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2812"></span>[222:2813](2070047.htm#fr_2812) <span
id="iii.iv-p362.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p363"></span> *Judah, etc*., cf. Orat. vi. 7; xxxii. 4.

<span id="fn_2813"></span>[222:2814](2070047.htm#fr_2813) <span
id="iii.iv-p364.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p365"></span> [Lam. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028)<span id="iii.iv-p365.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2814"></span>[222:2815](2070047.htm#fr_2814) <span
id="iii.iv-p365.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p366"></span> [Lam.
3.19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p366.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2815"></span>[222:2816](2070047.htm#fr_2815) <span
id="iii.iv-p366.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p367"></span> [Mic. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p367.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2816"></span>[222:2817](2070047.htm#fr_2816) <span
id="iii.iv-p367.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p368"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p368.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2817"></span>[222:2818](2070047.htm#fr_2817) <span
id="iii.iv-p368.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p369"></span> [Jer. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p369.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2818"></span>[222:2819](2070047.htm#fr_2818) <span
id="iii.iv-p369.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p370"></span> [Hos. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p370.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2819"></span>[222:2820](2070047.htm#fr_2819) <span
id="iii.iv-p370.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p371"></span> [Jer.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021), [Jer.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p371.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2820"></span>[222:2821](2070047.htm#fr_2820) <span
id="iii.iv-p371.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p372"></span> [Ps. lxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv-p372.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2821"></span>[222:2822](2070047.htm#fr_2821) <span
id="iii.iv-p372.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p373"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
62:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p373.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2822"></span>[222:2823](2070047.htm#fr_2822) <span
id="iii.iv-p373.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p374"></span> [Ezek. xxviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p374.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2823"></span>[222:2824](2070047.htm#fr_2823) <span
id="iii.iv-p374.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p375"></span> [Ezek.
23.42](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#042)<span id="iii.iv-p375.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2824"></span>[222:2825](2070047.htm#fr_2824) <span
id="iii.iv-p376.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p377"></span> [Phil. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span id="iii.iv-p377.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2825"></span>[222:2826](2070047.htm#fr_2825) <span
id="iii.iv-p377.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p378"></span> [Ps.
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002), [Ps.
69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p378.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2826"></span>[222:2827](2070047.htm#fr_2826) <span
id="iii.iv-p378.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p379"></span> [Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p379.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2827"></span>[223:2828](2070047.htm#fr_2827) <span
id="iii.iv-p380.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p381"></span> [Exod.
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p381.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2828"></span>[223:2829](2070047.htm#fr_2828) <span
id="iii.iv-p381.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p382"></span> [Exod.
19.16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p382.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2829"></span>[223:2830](2070047.htm#fr_2829) <span
id="iii.iv-p382.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p383"></span> [Heb. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv-p383.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2830"></span>[223:2831](2070047.htm#fr_2830) <span
id="iii.iv-p383.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p384"></span> [Exod.
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#015),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv-p384.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2831"></span>[223:2832](2070047.htm#fr_2831) <span
id="iii.iv-p384.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p385"></span> [2 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p385.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2832"></span>[223:2833](2070047.htm#fr_2832) <span
id="iii.iv-p386.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p387"></span> [Lev. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p387.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2833"></span>[223:2834](2070047.htm#fr_2833) <span
id="iii.iv-p387.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p388"></span> [1 Sam.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#012),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#015),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p388.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2834"></span>[223:2835](2070047.htm#fr_2834) <span
id="iii.iv-p388.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p389"></span> [2 Sam. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p389.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2835"></span>[223:2836](2070047.htm#fr_2835) <span
id="iii.iv-p390.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p391"></span> [Lev. xxi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p391.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2836"></span>[223:2837](2070047.htm#fr_2836) <span
id="iii.iv-p391.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p392"></span> [Lev.
22.19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p392.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2837"></span>[223:2838](2070047.htm#fr_2837) <span
id="iii.iv-p392.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p393"></span> [Lev.
8.31](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#031)<span id="iii.iv-p393.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2838"></span>[223:2839](2070047.htm#fr_2838) <span
id="iii.iv-p393.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p394"></span> [Exod.
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#033),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#038)<span id="iii.iv-p394.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2839"></span>[223:2840](2070047.htm#fr_2839) <span
id="iii.iv-p394.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p395"></span> [Lev.
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#034), [Heb.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p395.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2840"></span>[223:2841](2070047.htm#fr_2840) <span
id="iii.iv-p396.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p397"></span> [Rom. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p397.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2841"></span>[223:2842](2070047.htm#fr_2841) <span
id="iii.iv-p397.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p398"></span> [Ps. l.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p398.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2842"></span>[223:2843](2070047.htm#fr_2842) <span
id="iii.iv-p398.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p399"></span> *The great mysteries, i.e*., the
Sacrificial Death of Christ upon the Cross.

<span id="fn_2843"></span>[223:2844](2070047.htm#fr_2843) <span
id="iii.iv-p399.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p400"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004), [Isa.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv-p400.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2844"></span>[223:2845](2070047.htm#fr_2844) <span
id="iii.iv-p400.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p401"></span> [Prov. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p401.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2845"></span>[223:2846](2070047.htm#fr_2845) <span
id="iii.iv-p401.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p402"></span> [Ps. cxix.
131](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#131)<span id="iii.iv-p402.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2846"></span>[223:2847](2070047.htm#fr_2846) <span
id="iii.iv-p402.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p403"></span> [Psa.
81.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)<span id="iii.iv-p403.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2847"></span>[223:2848](2070047.htm#fr_2847) <span
id="iii.iv-p403.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p404"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p404.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2848"></span>[223:2849](2070047.htm#fr_2848) <span
id="iii.iv-p404.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p405"></span> [Prov. xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p405.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2849"></span>[224:2850](2070047.htm#fr_2849) <span
id="iii.iv-p405.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p406"></span> [Ps. lvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p406.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2850"></span>[224:2851](2070047.htm#fr_2850) <span
id="iii.iv-p406.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p407"></span> [Psa.
137.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p407.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2851"></span>[224:2852](2070047.htm#fr_2851) <span
id="iii.iv-p407.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p408"></span> [Ps.
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033), [Ps.
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p408.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2852"></span>[224:2853](2070047.htm#fr_2852) <span
id="iii.iv-p408.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p409"></span> [Psa.
73.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p409.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2853"></span>[224:2854](2070047.htm#fr_2853) <span
id="iii.iv-p409.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p410"></span> [Rom. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p410.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2854"></span>[224:2855](2070047.htm#fr_2854) <span
id="iii.iv-p410.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p411"></span> [2 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p411.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2855"></span>[224:2856](2070047.htm#fr_2855) <span
id="iii.iv-p412.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p413"></span> S. [Luke xxiv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#032)<span id="iii.iv-p413.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2856"></span>[224:2857](2070047.htm#fr_2856) <span
id="iii.iv-p413.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p414"></span> [Ps. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p414.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2857"></span>[224:2858](2070047.htm#fr_2857) <span
id="iii.iv-p414.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p415"></span> *Triple*, a quotation from [Prov. xxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#020)<span id="iii.iv-p415.1"></span>. 
The meaning of the Hebrew is doubtful.  Clémencet, not noticing this,
suggests that the allusion is to the law being twice inscribed on tables
of stone, once on the heart by the Spirit.

<span id="fn_2858"></span>[224:2859](2070047.htm#fr_2858) <span
id="iii.iv-p415.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p416"></span> [Prov. xxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#020)<span id="iii.iv-p416.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2859"></span>[224:2860](2070047.htm#fr_2859) <span
id="iii.iv-p416.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p417"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p417.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2860"></span>[224:2861](2070047.htm#fr_2860) <span
id="iii.iv-p417.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p418"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p418.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2861"></span>[224:2862](2070047.htm#fr_2861) <span
id="iii.iv-p418.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p419"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p419.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2862"></span>[224:2863](2070047.htm#fr_2862) <span
id="iii.iv-p420.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p421"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p421.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2863"></span>[224:2864](2070047.htm#fr_2863) <span
id="iii.iv-p421.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p422"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016)<span id="iii.iv-p422.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2864"></span>[224:2865](2070047.htm#fr_2864) <span
id="iii.iv-p422.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p423"></span> [Eph. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#022)<span id="iii.iv-p423.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2865"></span>[224:2866](2070047.htm#fr_2865) <span
id="iii.iv-p423.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p424"></span> Eph. 7.6<span id="iii.iv-p424.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2866"></span>[224:2867](2070047.htm#fr_2866) <span
id="iii.iv-p424.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p425"></span> [Rom. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p425.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2867"></span>[224:2868](2070047.htm#fr_2867) <span
id="iii.iv-p426.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p427"></span> *Titles*.  These are more fully dealt
with Orat. xxx. 17–21.

<span id="fn_2868"></span>[224:2869](2070047.htm#fr_2868) <span
id="iii.iv-p428.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p429"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p429.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2869"></span>[224:2870](2070047.htm#fr_2869) <span
id="iii.iv-p429.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p430"></span> [1 Cor.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="iii.iv-p430.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2870"></span>[224:2871](2070047.htm#fr_2870) <span
id="iii.iv-p430.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p431"></span> [Numb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p431.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[224:2872](2070047.htm#fr_2871) <span
id="iii.iv-p431.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p432"></span> [Eph. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p432.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[224:2873](2070047.htm#fr_2872) <span
id="iii.iv-p434.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p435"></span> S. [Luke xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#028)<span id="iii.iv-p435.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2873"></span>[225:2874](2070047.htm#fr_2873) <span
id="iii.iv-p437.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p438"></span> [Gen. xxvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#021)<span id="iii.iv-p438.1"></span>,
sq.

<span id="fn_2874"></span>[225:2875](2070047.htm#fr_2874) <span
id="iii.iv-p438.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p439"></span> [Eccles. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p439.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2875"></span>[225:2876](2070047.htm#fr_2875) <span
id="iii.iv-p440.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p441"></span> [Ps. cxliii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p441.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2876"></span>[225:2877](2070047.htm#fr_2876) <span
id="iii.iv-p442.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p443"></span> S. [Matt. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv-p443.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2877"></span>[225:2878](2070047.htm#fr_2877) <span
id="iii.iv-p444.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p445"></span> [Jonah i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p445.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2878"></span>[225:2879](2070047.htm#fr_2878) <span
id="iii.iv-p446.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p447"></span> *A man*.  A Greek scholiast says that
this was Origen (ob. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv-p447.1"></span>a.d.</span> 235), who gives this
interpretation in his commentary on the prophecy of Jonah.  Elias says
that he had read it in the commentary of Methodius (fl. <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv-p447.2"></span>a.d.</span> 300), who usually
combats Origen’s interpretations.  We know that Origen did comment on
the book of Job, and that Methodius wrote on one at least of the Minor
Prophets:  but both these works have been lost, so that we cannot
absolutely decide the question, though the assurance with which both the
notes are written makes us hesitate to consider either of them merely a
happy guess.  Combefis thinks that S. Greg. alludes to one of his own
instructors:  the gen. with <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p447.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv-p447.4"></span>κόυω</span> (cf. Plato, Gorg., 503, c.)
favours this view, but the interpretation may well have been derived
from one of the earlier writers.

<span id="fn_2879"></span>[225:2880](2070047.htm#fr_2879) <span
id="iii.iv-p447.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p448"></span> [Jonah i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p448.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2880"></span>[225:2881](2070047.htm#fr_2880) <span
id="iii.iv-p448.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p449"></span> [Rom. xi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span id="iii.iv-p449.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2881"></span>[226:2882](2070047.htm#fr_2881) <span
id="iii.iv-p450.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p451"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p451.1"></span> et
seq.

<span id="fn_2882"></span>[226:2883](2070047.htm#fr_2882) <span
id="iii.iv-p452.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p453"></span> *Shall be worked out*.  This promise, as
Elias tells us, was fulfilled by S. Gregory in his History of Ezekiel
the Prophet, a work no longer extant.

<span id="fn_2883"></span>[226:2884](2070047.htm#fr_2883) <span
id="iii.iv-p455.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p456"></span> *Of the Church*.  S. Gregory seems to
describe a series of three steps, (1) the Church, of which all should be
worthy members, (2) the Sanctuary, reserved for the Priests, (3) the
Throne of the Bishop.  Clémencet refers both 1 and 2 to the ministry. 
If we suppose S. Gregory’s own position to be referred to, the third
would be applicable to his office under his father, which is held by
Thomassin to have been that of Vicar-General (Disc. Eccles., I., ii., 7
§§ 2, 3).  A similar post was offered to him by S. Basil (Orat., xliii.,
39).

<span id="fn_2884"></span>[226:2885](2070047.htm#fr_2884) <span
id="iii.iv-p456.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p457"></span> [1 Sam. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#022)<span id="iii.iv-p457.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2885"></span>[226:2886](2070047.htm#fr_2885) <span
id="iii.iv-p459.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p460"></span> [Ezek. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018)<span id="iii.iv-p460.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[227:2887](2070047.htm#fr_2886) <span
id="iii.iv-p460.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p461"></span> [1 Sam.
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#026), [Hos.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p461.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2887"></span>[227:2888](2070047.htm#fr_2887) <span
id="iii.iv-p461.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p462"></span> [Zech.
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#013)<span id="iii.iv-p462.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2888"></span>[227:2889](2070047.htm#fr_2888) <span
id="iii.iv-p462.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p463"></span> [Ps. ci.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="iii.iv-p463.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2889"></span>[227:2890](2070047.htm#fr_2889) <span
id="iii.iv-p464.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p465"></span> [Exod.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#013),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#027)<span id="iii.iv-p465.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2890"></span>[227:2891](2070047.htm#fr_2890) <span
id="iii.iv-p465.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p466"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008)<span id="iii.iv-p466.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2891"></span>[227:2892](2070047.htm#fr_2891) <span
id="iii.iv-p466.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p467"></span> [Jer. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p467.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2892"></span>[227:2893](2070047.htm#fr_2892) <span
id="iii.iv-p468.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p469"></span> [Ps. cxix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p469.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2893"></span>[227:2894](2070047.htm#fr_2893) <span
id="iii.iv-p469.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p470"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p470.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2894"></span>[227:2895](2070047.htm#fr_2894) <span
id="iii.iv-p470.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p471"></span> [Isa.
53.7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p471.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2895"></span>[227:2896](2070047.htm#fr_2895) <span
id="iii.iv-p471.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p472"></span> [1 Pet. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p472.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2896"></span>[227:2897](2070047.htm#fr_2896) <span
id="iii.iv-p472.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p473"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
42:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p473.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2897"></span>[227:2898](2070047.htm#fr_2897) <span
id="iii.iv-p473.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p474"></span> [Isa.
26.20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020)<span id="iii.iv-p474.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2898"></span>[227:2899](2070047.htm#fr_2898) <span
id="iii.iv-p474.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p475"></span> [Ps. cvii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#032)<span id="iii.iv-p475.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2899"></span>[227:2900](2070047.htm#fr_2899) <span
id="iii.iv-p476.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p477"></span> [1 Pet. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv-p477.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2900"></span>[227:2901](2070047.htm#fr_2900) <span
id="iii.iv-p477.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p478"></span> *Of the land*, lit., “external,” i.e. the
Roman laws, which gave absolute power to a father over his children.

<span id="fn_2901"></span>[227:2902](2070047.htm#fr_2901) <span
id="iii.iv-p478.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p479"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
3.9](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p479.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2902"></span>[227:2903](2070047.htm#fr_2902) <span
id="iii.iv-p479.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p480"></span> [Ps.
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p480.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2903"></span>[227:2904](2070047.htm#fr_2903) <span
id="iii.iv-p480.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p481"></span> [Heb. xii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023)<span id="iii.iv-p481.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2904"></span>[227:2905](2070047.htm#fr_2904) <span
id="iii.iv-p482.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p483"></span> [Heb. xiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020)<span id="iii.iv-p483.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2905"></span>[227:2906](2070047.htm#fr_2905) <span
id="iii.iv-p483.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p484"></span> [Eph. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p484.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2906"></span>[227:2907](2070047.htm#fr_2906) <span
id="iii.iv-p484.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p485"></span> [1 Sam.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008), [Ps.
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p485.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2907"></span>[227:2908](2070047.htm#fr_2907) <span
id="iii.iv-p485.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p486"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
70](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#070)<span id="iii.iv-p486.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2908"></span>[227:2909](2070047.htm#fr_2908) <span
id="iii.iv-p486.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p487"></span> [1 Sam. xvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#014)<span id="iii.iv-p487.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2909"></span>[227:2910](2070047.htm#fr_2909) <span
id="iii.iv-p487.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p488"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p488.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2910"></span>[227:2911](2070047.htm#fr_2910) <span
id="iii.iv-p488.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p489"></span> [Ps.
73:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p489.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2911"></span>[227:2912](2070047.htm#fr_2911) <span
id="iii.iv-p489.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p490"></span> [Ezek. xxxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#012)<span id="iii.iv-p490.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2912"></span>[227:2913](2070047.htm#fr_2912) <span
id="iii.iv-p490.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p491"></span> [Jer. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p491.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2913"></span>[227:2914](2070047.htm#fr_2913) <span
id="iii.iv-p491.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p492"></span> [Zech. xi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p492.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2914"></span>[227:2915](2070047.htm#fr_2914) <span
id="iii.iv-p492.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p493"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035)<span id="iii.iv-p493.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2915"></span>[227:2916](2070047.htm#fr_2915) <span
id="iii.iv-p493.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p494"></span> [Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span id="iii.iv-p494.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2916"></span>[227:2917](2070047.htm#fr_2916) <span
id="iii.iv-p494.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p495"></span> [Ps. lxxxvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv-p495.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2917"></span>[227:2918](2070047.htm#fr_2917) <span
id="iii.iv-p495.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p496"></span> [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="iii.iv-p496.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_2918"></span>[227:2919](2070047.htm#fr_2918) <span
id="iii.iv-p496.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p497"></span> [Ps. xxix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009)<span id="iii.iv-p497.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Those Who Had Invited Him, and Not Come to Receive
Him.](2070048)
