[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2070082)  [Next](2070084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Ep. V.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p2"></span>(Circa <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 361.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>Since you do take my jokes kindly, I send
you the rest.  My prelude is from Homer.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4"></span>“Come now and change thy theme,

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5"></span>And sing of the inner adornment.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6"></span>—Od. viii. 492.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p7"></span>Your roofless and doorless hut, your
fireless and smokeless hearth, your walls dried by fire, that we may not
be hit by the drops of the mud, condemned like Tantalus thirsting in the
midst of waters, and that pitiable feast with nothing to eat, to which
we were invited from Cappadocia, not as to a Lotus-eater’s poverty, but
to a table of Alcinous—we young and miserable survivors of a wreck.  For
I remember those loaves and the broth (so it was called), yes, and I
shall remember them too, and my poor teeth that slipped on your hunks of
bread, and then braced themselves up, and pulled themselves as it were
out of mud.  You yourself will raise these things to a higher strain of
tragedy, having learnt to talk big through your own sufferings…for if we
had not been quickly delivered by that great supporter of the poor—I
mean your mother—who appeared opportunely like a harbour to men tossed
by a storm, we should long ago have been dead, rather pitied than
admired for our faith in Pontus.  How shall I pass over that garden
which was no garden and had no vegetables, and the Augean dunghill which
we cleared out of the house, and with which we filled it up (sc. the
garden), when we drew that mountainous wagon, I the vintager, and you
the valiant, with our necks and hands, which still bear the traces of
our labours.  “O earth and sun, O air and virtue” (for I will indulge a
little in tragic tones), not that we might bridge the Hellespont, but
that we might level a precipice.  If you are not put out by the mention
of the circumstances, no more am I; but if you are, how much more was I
by the reality.  I pass by the rest, through respect for the others from
whom I received much enjoyment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter VI](2070084.md)
