[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap06) [Next](chap08)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII

# A LONG RIDE THROUGH UTAH VALLEY

*"It were a journey like the path to Heaven,  
    To help you find them."*

*Milton*

IT was the midsummer of 1876, when I was invited to take a long distance
drive through these Mormon settlements, with a missionary.  
  
He was not a Mormon missionary, however, but a representative of an
orthodox Protestant denomination; several such religious bodies were
seeking a foothold for school and church in this territory.  
  
In a certain sense we were doing scout duty for a Mission Board in New
York City. As Moses of old sent spies into the land on the other side of
Jordan of Scripture, so this Board sent its representatives to spy out
this Promised Land, not from Dan to Beersheba, but from Ogden to Mount
Pleasant.  
  
We were almost boys in spirit, and not far removed in years, so this
task appealed to us as a sort of adventure mixed with duty imposed.  
  
We did not go afoot but drove a one-horse wagonette having for its load
two dozen school desks and seats for an incipient academy of elementary
grade. The hope for the educational up-lift of a miseducated Utah.  
  
This to some, in these now liberal days, may seem a bigoted endeavor and
a youthful assumption of a capacity to instruct others; but it,
nevertheless, was the outcome of the wise and weighty council of older
men who accepted our offer as adventurers in this Pioneer Mission in San
Pete Valley.  
  
It was not then given us to see the long, hard grind of work and duty to
establish this educational plant, so we went cheerfully south, like
sailors shipping for a distant port.  
  
The pull for one lone horse, of these seats for future scholars, to say
nothing of a box of heavy books, was unfair when we came to see the
sand-ridges in our way on the roads over the valley divides. It was get
out and push behind while the horse panted in front.  
  
If we had been better horse-jockeys, we would have insisted on a team
when we left the city; but our commercial and theoretical well-wishers
and providers, in their scholarly incapacity as mountain travellers,
insisted that one horse was ample.  
  
Well, we crawled along, and whiled away the time with some healthy and
also some unhealthy discussions of religious questions in comparative
theology. We were like most of the young men, quick to discuss deep
problems, and rushed in with our logic on subjects where "Angels feared
to tread."  
  
Both warmed in body from our cart-pushings, and in mind from our
arguments, we passed the heat of the day and the divide of land, so that
at the sunset we saw no longer the Salt Lake to the north, but the sea
of fresh water to the south; Lake Utah colored by the last rays of
light.  
  
My companion was a Mac, one of the numerous Macs, whose forebears came
from Scotland, and he lived up to his clan as "Varra creetical" in
discussions. Now it is very hard to overcome a Scot in argument and so I
had the worst of it just then. My companion wore a thin smile of victory
and conceit at his superior intellectual prowess, more especially as he
prided himself on the possession, not only of a B.A. and B.D., but an
M.A. degree, whereas I had not quite finished college life when I had to
mix with the world.  
  
But I had rubbed edges with that world; had been tutored by city
stock-brokers and had been  
  
a photographer, when a man had to be not only an artist but a chemist,
to ply his trade; all this before I received my teaching degree. So I
had my companion when it came to business things, and pushed him hard to
the wall over this "scrub horse" that he had been tricked into by a
trader; and the awful load that his ignorance of teaming had put into
the wagonette for so long a drive.  
  
Crossing a creek about twelve miles on our way, the strain was too much
for the harness and "crack" went one of the tugs.  
  
Here I gave my chum a little verbal rub on the unwisdom of cheap
harnesses. I rubbed it farther in during the hour we spent in mending
the leather with old rope; as I informed him that no Western man ever
travelled far without a coil of buckskin to meet such disasters as had
overtaken us. He learned a great deal about the sorrows of a tenderfoot
before he was through with the trip, and his harness, often repaired,
resembled some of those rare bargains offered to the green-hand in junk
stores.  
  
The point of the mountain, seen all day from our Salt Lake City start,
ended our up-grade pull, and now down-grade we went to our first
stopping place. We were high enough to overlook the Jordan river,
flowing well within its banks; for this Utah Jordan never overflows them
to swell its waters like its Palestinian brother-river. We could see the
haze over the Great Lake north, and the forming film of vapor over the
smaller lake south of us, where Lehi and American Fork, two Mormon
settlements, showed up their dry streets and the green fields
adjacent.  
  
"Well, Mac! do we camp when we reach the borders of that lake?" I asked,
fully supposing that he wanted to do the correct thing and sleep under
the sky.  
  
"We'll not need to camp. We will make Lehi soon, and there's a chance
for a room for us, and a corral for the horse."  
  
"Any hotels in these towns?" I asked, for he had been this way before by
road.  
  
"None: but I know a Mormon family. The elder will take in travellers, if
he likes their looks, and they don't catch him too much unawares." We
carried a camp outfit, but did not wish to trench on our supplies, if
possible, so early in the journey. The tired horse, that had done
wonders from any point of view, but was dubbed a lazy brute by Mac,
pulled us slowly into the distant town, and along its adobe-lined
streets.  
  
"That is a long-drawn-out one?" I said, pointing to a low-built house of
sun-dried brick, "five doors and five windows all in a line."  
  
"Yes," said Mac, "that is an indication of plural marriage. Each door
and window is in a separate section. The patriarch, who lives there, has
five wives."  
  
At last we stopped before a house. Our tired horse sighed as though his
heart would break with relief. But we were to face disappointment.  
  
"No room for travellers this night," said the elder when Mac accosted
him. I saw by the man's eye that he disapproved of us and our errand,
although he looked with pity on our tired horse. He pointed south.  
  
"You can make American Fork in three miles."  
  
It happened that we entered this new town in the right place for us. A
rather larger adobe than usual, was lighted up and the owner agreed to
shelter us for the night by our paying a good stiff fee.  
  
I gave the horse a good feed and rubbed him down before I went in to
wash and eat.  
  
Our host was a hearty old man, and one of the early converts from Wales.
He had prospered in lands and goods, and was loud in his praise of this
practical religion. I cannot say much for his table manner; for he ate
with dirty hands, and used them twice to break up lumps of sugar in the
bowl. The table-ware was primitive, indeed, but the cloth was clean and
the meal well cooked by his energetic daughter.  
  
"Sugar was a very scarce article in my early days here, and I don't like
to see it wasted."  
  
He was a widower, but no polygamist. He was a sample of the earnest, but
ignorant peasant class of the old world who had greatly improved their
material welfare by this change of country and faith.  
  
Mac met a horse trader at the table, and I was highly entertained by
their efforts to make a swap. The trader's animal was a little worse
blown than Mac's, but after all he was not the easy mark that he was
supposed to be, and he kept his horse.  
  
We pulled out the next morning somewhat refreshed but hauling the same
full load. We passed over dry creeks, sand ridges, and through the town
of Battle Creek; the site of an early fight; through Provo, the county
seat, to Spring-ville, the most progressive of all these valley
settlements.  
  
A knife-edged lofty ridge, Mount Aspinwall, overlooked us all the way on
the east, while the lake glittered in the sun, six miles distant on the
west. Down the canyons of this range at times the winds swept with
sudden blasts, and crossing the lake, churned its waters into a fury.
The breezes were refreshing since they blew across the road and not
along it. We saw many pretty spots of green, such as fields of wheat,
nearly ripe, alfalfa patches of emerald hue and thrifty peach and prune
orchards. We carried off, from one farm a bale of alfalfa, and a
generous sample of early fruit.  
  
Just one year later, I rode through this region on a long horseback
journey, and all the green was gone although it was yet early summer.
The locusts were in the land. They had come in such clouds as to darken
the day, and with such hearty appetites that even the bark on the
orchard trees was consumed before they left. Their hatching ground was
in mountainous Idaho, on the north, and periodically they passed out,
leaving destruction in their track. Even a piece of green-straw matting
hung on a fence to air and dry, went down their ready throats.  
  
While in Springville, we prospected for a site in the interests of a
liberal school. We had been invited to do so by some of the local men of
influence. There was a desire for something new in this progressive town
at that time, and it bore fruit three years later in a well built brick
edifice for school and mission work. It was later known as the
Hungerford Academy, under the auspices of the Presbyterian Mission
Board. It was put in charge of George Washington Leonard, an ex-staff
officer of the Union Army.  
  
Of course we conferred with the so-called liberal element. In most of
these settlements there were to be found a number of disaffected people.
Some were so because they had been treated domineeringly by the church
authorities, who ruled the civic as well as the religious interests of
these valley towns; others because they had changed their views, with
their increase of knowledge of the world at large, due to their contact
with the new and non-Mormon elements filtering in to the population of
the territory; still others because of business interests which carried
them outside of the commerce of the co-operative stores to deal with
mining men and mining machinery.  
  
In the old hortatory days, when the Mormon preachers painted every
gentile with a coat of black, they gave a false idea of the outside
world, which these business men now found to be untrue, for the gentile
was not as black as he had been painted.  
  
A natural reaction set in, and a friendliness for the new-comers sprang
up, and we found a few men, but no women, who desired an established
opposition to the dominant church; in order to check its power and to
give a spice of life in the business world in place of the old-time
autonomy and monotony.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Through Spanish Fork Canyon and Thistle
Valley](chap08)
