[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap19)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XX

# A LATTER DAY VIEW OF A LATTER DAY STATE

*"Often do the spirits of great events stride on before the events, and
in to-day already, walks tomorrow."*

*Coleridge*

I REMEMBER that it was the great fear of the Gentile and liberal element
in the Territory, that if the United States Congress gave statehood to
the people, a return to the old order of religious and political tyranny
would begin. That in due time the newer element would be driven out by
the usual political methods, or a terrorism reign, like that in the
Southern States over the colored voter.  
  
Statehood came in due course, but none of the fears of the Liberals were
realized. The people seemed to have caught the free spirit of a free
country and realized that they were a part of a great and growing
republic. They immediately divided on all political questions into the
two great party organizations, the Republican and the Democratic. Their
religious affiliations did not override their party affiliations, as a
general rule, and the great bugaboo of the alarmists was gone like a
nightmare dream. Utah had come to its own consciousness of popular life,
and had decided that everything should go along on normal and popular
lines. The worth of commercial and religious interests should be
decided, solely, by the merits of the interests involved, and the
preferences of a free people.  
  
Thus many found their fears to be no more real than worries. The
reformers found reform was still alive, and vital enough to make for
better things. The reactionaries found past bitternesses were hardly at
home in the bosoms of a newer generation.  
  
Some abnormal conditions, like polygamy, died slowly, since the welfare
and rights of wives and children could not be ruthlessly disregarded.
Time is always softer hearted, in human history, than the extremist and
reformer. So we note how time allowed a revelation to come, through the
proper way, and it was announced that it was no longer an "order of
Heaven" to live one's religion in the bonds of polygamous marriage. It
gradually declined, but of course, being a social condition, its actual
cessation took some time. It is about dead, at this writing, save in a
few isolated cases, *contra leges*, and this is found in every well
conducted country. There are always law breakers of some sort, but the
law always prevails until war or revolution breaks the peace.  
  
No such effort was made to fight for polygamy as was made for slavery
for the simple reason that no money value was at stake in the former
"twin relic of barbarism," while it was very prominent in the latter. A
man's "niggers" brought him in money while a man's wives cost him a
great deal of money. So the Mohammedan tinge to the Territory died out
when statehood was fully established. Those who had invested in polygamy
and were deeply involved as to character and social standing through its
practice, fought even to the floor of the United States Senate for its
existence and "their right." Nothing harsh was done to the offenders for
the reason that this condition was due to previous religious convictions
and teaching; but it was very soon evident that Utah, like other states,
must be monogamous in its domestic life in harmony with the custom of
the country.  
  
Some foolish people who persisted, as they will in anything religious
that conflicts with the State, in the practice of polygamy, found
themselves under arrest and in prison where they posed as martyrs of
religious persecution. Some people pitied them, but the majority laughed
at them since this was at the close of the Nineteenth Century, and was
not in the Middle Ages.  
  
Thus the years, and the "Age-Patience," which with the "Time-Spirit"
does wonderful things for us, shelved this heated question, and it faded
away like the light of a day that is dead. The mixed multitude was the
agent of the change. The fanatical cannot last long where isolation
ends, and contact with the world begins. Here is the reason for the call
of the zealot, "Come out of her, my people!" whether that call be voiced
by a Hebrew of the Hebrews, like Isaiah, or a Christian like Athanasius,
who gloried in standing "*contra mun-dum*," or an ecclesiast like
Torquemada, opponent of all heretics, or a Brigham Young against a
modern world. Religion, if it is to live, must live right up against the
world in which it lives, and mellow it with good living. It will surely
die if it hides itself in monastic cloisters, beneath a nun's garments,
or rejects the law of the monogamous life, the while men and women are
being born in just equal numbers all over the habitable world.  
  
Now view this state as a place to live in. It is a goodly land since its
soil is of the richest. I used fairly to ache, when my horse's feet
turned up the finest garden ground, growing only sage brush, on the mesa
or bench-land about the base of the mountain ranges. I am an
agriculturist in my tastes, and it seemed such a waste for all this soil
to produce no more than coarse brush Of course, the rainfall was too
meagre for "dry-farming, as they then thought. It can be done, and is
being done, in these days of the more scientific culture of the soil.
The snow-water of the great ranges is ample for the cultivation of every
foot of good ground, if conserved in reservoirs, until the heated season
calls for its use. Here is where capital and science can double Utah's
acreage.  
  
Then think of the climate of this land. There is just enough winter to
put "glame into the atmosphere. Bright days and a generous sunlight
paint everything richly vivid. The oxygen of the hills makes the eyes
sparkle, the blood to flush the cheeks redly, and gives the hands the
grip which full labor requires. The very gram grown feels this climatic
impulse, and the flour of Utah wheat has a golden tint, shown in the
bread-loaf, and tasted in its good flavor. The fruits too notably the
peaches and apples, have a taste out-rivaling such products in
California. More than soil and climate and the fruits of their union are
visible in Utah's future. Uncle Sam has a pocket-book in its mountain
ranges. A clasp holds the contents very tightly: gravity has its strong
hand on these treasures. Still Industry, Understanding, Patience, Skill,
and Capital, are the five fingers of another hand which can unclasp this
hold of gravity on these hills, and allow the wealth to pour out, in
such rich recoveries of ore as have made Bingham and Big Cottonwood
Canyons famous. There is enough in Utah to keep generations busy with
the soil and water and with the pocketed ores of the hills. Such
industry will make comfortable, and therefore happy, myriads of homes to
be established in this state.  
  
So wide a physical outlook should have a counterpart in a metaphysical
one. The mind of the people, in this age of free mentality, should also
expand to consider and solve great questions of intellectual,
philosophical, social and religious importance. All these realms of mind
are necessary to make a population worthy of the land which they
inhabit, and out of whose generous bosom they draw their physical
life.  
  
Yet what is physical life worth, if it does not give the opportunity to
climb higher to those metaphysical realities which lie back of, and are
the cause of, these physical appearances. We say that we see, we touch,
we taste, and so these things, sensible to us, are real. But we know
that these things change and decay. All this phenomenal existence, with
its display of beauty, power and production, is for the use of the minds
which are superior to these phases of matter.  
  
Utah, rich in material wealth to come should also produce a richer
metaphysical wealth m the mental and moral intelligence of the people
and that acquisition will entitle them to be called, of a truth, the
Saints of the Latter Days.
