[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi102)  [Next](mtsi104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10. THE HUNTER AND HIS DOGS (25)

### (SECOND VERSION)

A hunter took many dogs along with him. He camped and went about
hunting, but presently he fell sick, Then the dogs went out hunting and
killed and brought back turkeys, which the sick man ate. While he lay in
bed the dogs which had been running all around started for another
place. They went about talking with one another and a wolf met and
talked with them. The wolf said, "His wife has another husband. If he
wants her treated in accordance with the law, we will do it." One of the
puppies, which always went about with his master, told him what the wolf
said. He acted as interpreter. While he was with him he said to his
master, "Do you want to do as the wolf said." "All right," he answered.
So the puppy went back again and told the wolf, and the man heard the
wolf and dogs go off howling. He heard the howling until the sound was
lost in the distance and then he went and lay down.

In the morning he heard them howling again. He heard them howling on the
way back. When daylight came the little dog said, "They say we had
better move from here. Do you think you can do it?" "Yes," he answered,
so they lifted his blanket by the corners and carried it along.
Presently they stopped and camped. While they were there the dogs hunted
about, and meanwhile the man got well. Then he said, "Let us go home."
The puppy told

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

the big dogs what he said and they answered, "All right. But when we get
there and they set food before you, you must say to us, 'Eat!' and we
will eat it." They told the little dog to tell him that. He told his
master what they had directed him to say. "All right," said his master,
and they went on. They kept going and when they arrived someone said to
him, "Some strange animals seized and ate up the woman and a new husband
she had taken." After he had been told this they went and got him some
food. They set before him blue cakes, sofki, and lots of food of various
kinds and he sat down at the table ready to eat. He thought of what the
dogs told him and did not know what to do. He set apart one cake for
each of his dogs and put them down for them. One sat down crying and lay
down and died. All died in the same manner. Last of all the puppy took a
blue cake, went a little way off, set it down and cried. As he sat there
he fell down and died. It has been told.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. The Man and the Owl](mtsi104)
