[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi029)  [Next](mtsi031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 28. THE KING OF THE TIE-SNAKES (41)

(Tuggle collection)

A chief sent his son on a message to another chief, and delivered to him
a vessel as the emblem of his authority.

The son stopped to play with some boys who were throwing stones into the
water. The chief's son threw his vessel upon the water

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

and it sank. He was frightened. He was afraid to go to the neighboring
chief without the vessel, and he did not like to return home and tell
his father of the loss. He jumped into the stream and, reaching the spot
where the vessel had sunk, he dived into the water. His playmates waited
a long time for him, but he did not reappear. They returned and reported
his death.

When the chief's son was beneath the surface of the stream the
Tie-snakes seized him and bore him to a cave and said to him: "Ascend
yonder platform." He looked and saw seated on the platform the king of
the Tie-snakes. The platform was a mass of living Tie-snakes. He
approached the platform and lifted his foot to ascend, but the platform
ascended as he lifted his foot. Again he tried, with the same result.
The third time he tried in vain. The Tie-snakes said, "Ascend."

He lifted his foot the fourth time and succeeded in ascending the
platform and the king invited him to sit by his side. Then the king said
to him:

"See yonder feather; it is yours," pointing to a plume in the corner of
the cave. He approached the plume and extended his hand to seize it, but
it eluded his grasp. Three times he made the attempt and three times it
escaped him. On the fourth attempt he obtained it.

"Yonder tomahawk is yours," said the Tie-snakes' king.

He went to the place where the tomahawk was sticking and reached out his
hand to take it, but in vain. It rose of itself every time he raised his
hand. He tried four times and on the fourth trial it remained still and
he succeeded in taking it.

The king said: "You can return to your father after three days. When he
asks where you have been, reply: 'I know what I know,' but on no account
tell him what you do know. When he needs my aid walk toward the east and
bow three times to the rising sun and I will be there to help him."

After three days the Tie-snake carried him to the spot where he had
dived into the stream, lifted him to the surface of the water, and
placed his lost vessel in his hand. He swam to the bank and returned to
his father, who was mourning him as dead. His father rejoiced over his
son's wonderful restoration.

He informed his father of the Tie-snake king and his message of
proffered aid. Not long afterwards his father was attacked by his
enemies. He said to his son: "You understand what the king of the
Tie-snakes said. Go and seek his aid."

The son put the plume on his head, took the tomahawk, went toward the
east, and bowed three times to the rising sun.

The king of the Tie-snakes stood before him.

"What do you wish?" he said.

"My father needs your aid."

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

"Go and tell him not to fear. They will attack him, but they shall not
harm him or his people. In the morning all will be well."

The son returned to his father and delivered the message of the king of
the Tie-snakes.

The enemy came and attacked his town, but no one was harmed. Night came.
In the morning they beheld their enemies each held fast in the folds of
a tie-snake, and so all were captured and the chief made peace with his
foes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. The Story of the Turkey](mtsi031)
