[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi264)  [Next](mtsi266.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

### 65. MONEY-SPITTER (77)

An old woman was living with her only daughter and a grandchild. One
time she said to her grandchild, "Go to hunt for the hogs." "What kind
of bread shall I make to carry along?" "Make white cornmeal bread, and
put it into a sack." So she put the bread into a sack and started out.
On the way two old women met her and took the basket. "Where are you
going?" they said. "I am going in search of hogs," she answered. "The
hogs are down by the creek," they said, so she set out after them and
presently found them. Then she started to drive them back. On the way
one of them ran off and she pursued it. While she was doing this she
coughed and coughed out a nickel. She drove them on again and presently
coughed again. She kept coughing until she had brought up a dime. Again
she had a coughing spell and this time coughed up a quarter. She kept on
doing this and got home quickly. As she coughed she said to her
grandmother, "Look here," and spit up some money. Her grandmother was
very glad. She took a box and set it down before the girl and let it
remain there until it was full. She brought out another and filled that.
She brought out still another and filled that.

When another old woman saw that the girl had traveled about and found
something, she said to her daughter, "You also go and hunt." Then she
put wheat bread in a sack and dragged it along. After she had gone on
for a while the same two old women met her. They said to her, "Where are
you going?" "I am going to hunt hogs." "The hogs stay down there by the
water," they said to her. So she started on and after a while found
them. She went along driving them. After a while she became tired and
coughed, and she coughed up a little frog. Going on again, she coughed
and spit up two frogs. Still doing this she arrived home. She lay down
there and kept coughing up frogs until she died. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_66.md)

The white men heard of that first girl who spit out money, came to the
place where she lived, and tried to get hold of her. At first the old
woman did not want to let them have her, but they kept on teasing until
they overcame her with their entreaties and she gave her to them. Then
they took her and went on and shut her up in a house. They brought all
kinds of things to her. Then she sat down inside of the house and spit
up money. But the old woman had nothing. She went and asked the girl for
some wheat flour. But she would not give wheat flour to her; she gave
her only cornmeal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[213:1](mtsi265.htm#fr_67.md) In this version of
the story the point that power to spit money came as the result of
generosity is lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. The Flood](mtsi266.md)
