[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi061)  [Next](mtsi063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 60. TERRAPIN RACES (57)

### (FIFTH VERSION)

(Tuggle collection)

One day the Deer was lying in the grass chewing his cud, when a Terrapin
crawled near. The Deer looked at him moving slowly along, and said:
"Why, brother Terrapin, you crawl as though you are sick. Why don't you
go faster?"

"Oh, brother Deer, I like to go this way. I can run fast, and I can beat
you running," replied the Terrapin. The Deer laughed.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "When do you want to try it?" he asked. "Any
time. How will tomorrow suit you?" responded the Terrapin.

So it was agreed that they should have the race the following day. They
selected the ground and chose the Rabbit as judge. The Terrapin went to
see all his friends that evening and told them that the honor of the
family was at stake and appealed to them to aid in maintaining it. All
having said they would, he continued, "Now here is my plan. I will meet
the Deer to-morrow on the ground we picked out, and tell him I prefer to
run through the grass and let him run along the trail. Well, this is the
way we can beat him. I will start off at the word through the grass and
you will be stationed in the grass along the way, and when you hear the
Doer running on the trail, you can run a little way and stop. If the
Deer calls out 'Oh, brother Terrapin, where are you?' you can tell him
'Here I am crawling along in the grass,' and the last one can crawl up
to where the Rabbit will be sitting, when he hears the Deer coming, and
claim the race." They all agreed that this was a fine plan, except the
Terrapin who was assigned to the last station, and he said the Deer
would know he was not the same Terrapin and would suspect some trick. So
the first and the last Terrapin exchanged places, the last being
cautioned to hide in the grass near the starting place so that the Deer
could not see him plainly. They separated and the Terrapins all took
their places along the race course.

The next day the Deer galloped over the prairie and, reaching the
starting point, called out: "Oh, brother Terrapin, where are you?" "Here
I am," answered the Terrapin hiding in the grass. "Well, are you ready?"
asked the Deer. "Yes," said the Terrapin, and at the word the Deer
leaped forward. Hearing no sound in the grass after going some distance,
he called out, "Where are you, brother Terrapin?" One of the Terrapins
answered, "Here I am down in the grass crawling along."

The Deer was surprised, so he ran faster and called out, "Oh, brother
Terrapin, where are you?" Another Terrapin answered, "Here I am, just
a-crawling through the grass." So the Deer ran with all his might and
did not stop till he reached the Rabbit. But just as he thought he had
won the race, he saw the Terrapin crawl up to the end of the course. The
Rabbit decided that the Terrapin had won.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 61. The Bungling Host](mtsi063)
