[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi241)  [Next](mtsi243) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 42. THE STORY OF OPOSSUM

Opossum lived with her children. Big Bat got them and carried them off
to a hole in the rocks. Then Opossum went about crying. Presently Wolf
came to her and said, "Why are you crying?" "Oh, I am crying because
something big has stolen my children and taken them into a hollow in the
rocks." Then Wolf said, "Guide me to the place." So she guided him to
the place and he disappeared inside. Scarcely had he gotten in, however,
when he began to curse, and was so scared that he ran back and came out.
"I can't do it," he said, and he disappeared.

Opossum kept on crying continually until Rabbit came and said to her,
"Why are you crying?" "Oh, I am crying because something big has taken
my children from me and hidden them in a hole in the rocks." "Where is
the place?" he said. "Go and show it to me." She guided him thither and
pointed it out. Then he went inside. But scarcely had he gotten started
when he cursed and was so scared that he ran back out. "I can't do
anything," he said, and he went off.

Now while she was walking about crying continually, Highland-terrapin
came up. He said, "Why are you crying?" "I am crying because something
big has taken away my children and carried them off to a hole in the
rocks." Then Terrapin said, "Show me the place." She guided him to it
and said, "Here it is." Then he went inside. When he had nearly reached
the young opossums he stepped on some hot ashes and cried out
"Wim+kå'p?aiheheho'." But he went straight on, grasped the little
opossums, and started out with them. He came along with them and got
them out. Then the bat flew out and disappeared.

When Highland-terrapin got back he cut Opossum open under her navel and
said to her, "Keep them here. Before they have stopped nursing keep them
here; when they have stopped nursing, let them go." And he said to her,
"They have stopped."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 43. The Story of Opossum (Second Version)](mtsi243)
