[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi278)  [Next](mtsi280) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 14. THE PLEIADES (18)

Seven persons went apart, fasted, and took medicine for four days in
order to prophesy. Then they came in and reported to the people what
they had found out. Then the people said, "We will select seven persons
and find out more." So they sent out seven persons who fasted and took
medicine for seven days. At the end of this time they wondered if they
should continue their fast for seven months. They fasted and took
medicine until the seven months were completed. Then they asked one
another if they could not observe their regulations for a whole year.
They accomplished it, but when the time was completed they had become
wild and feared to go near the rest of the people, so they went into the
woods and stayed there, They asked one another what they should do, and
finally said, "Let us turn ourselves into pine trees." At that time
there were no iron axes but tools made of flint with which little wood
could be cut. But when the white men came and they saw them cutting down
pine trees with their axes they said. to one another, "That has cut us
down." When the whites went on destroying pine trees they said, "Let us
turn ourselves into rock. A rock lies undisturbed on top of the ground."
But after they had turned themselves into rocks they saw the white
people turn to the rocks and begin to use them in various ways. Then
they made up their minds to go above, saying, "We can not escape in any
other manner."' So they rose and went up into the air, where they became
a constellation (probably the Pleiades).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. The Hunter and His Dogs](mtsi280)
