[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi066)  [Next](mtsi068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 65. THE TASKS OF RABBIT (54)

### (SECOND VERSION)

Rabbit came to Christ and asked him for more knowledge. He was given a
sack and told to get a lot of Blackbirds which were making a noise some
distance away. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) So Rabbit went to the
Blackbirds and said, "People say there are just a few of you. You could
not fill up this sack, could you?" And so, to prove that they were very
numerous they flew into the sack until it was filled, and he carried
them to Christ.

Then Christ said to him, "If you bring the Rattlesnake I will give you
more knowledge." Then Rabbit went home, saying to himself, "That Snake
is a pretty bad creature." But after thinking over the matter for a
while he got a dogwood arrow and made it

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

very sharp. He went out with this very early in the morning and climbed
to the top of a big rock. Presently he saw the Rattlesnake and called to
him, "My friend, are you asleep?" There was no reply and he called out
again, "My friend, are you asleep?" He repeated these words several
times, and presently the Rattlesnake said, "Yes, I was asleep. I was out
hunting all night and lost a lot of sleep, so I was making up for it."
Rabbit replied, "I have seen Christ and he says you are not as long as
this arrow, but I think you are longer. Let me measure you and see if I
am not right." The Rattlesnake answered, "I am pretty sure I am longer
than that little arrow, but it looks sharp as if it would not be good."
"Well, lie perfectly still and I will take pains not to hurt you. Now,
shut your eyes and keep them shut." So Rabbit began measuring him, but
when he got as far as his head he ran the arrow through it and pinned
him to the ground. Then he ran off, coming back as soon as the Snake
stopped making a noise with his rattles. He picked up his arrow and the
snake and took the latter to Christ, who said, "If I were to impart to
you any more knowledge, you would set the world afire." He then seized
him by the tail and threw him into a brier thicket, saying: "That shall
be your home."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[59:1](mtsi067.htm#fr_11) The beginning seems to
be badly garbled, but these sentences convey the meaning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 66. The Tasks Of Rabbit (Third Version)](mtsi068)
