[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi204)  [Next](mtsi206.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5. A STORY OF THE ORIGIN OF CORN AND TOBACCO

Six Indian brothers traveled about. The youngest did not have enough to
eat, so he left the people and went off by himself. He took nothing with
him except an earthen pot which he carried on his back. He went on,
camping each night and traveling in the daytime. Going on camping in
this way he settled at a certain place near which he saw that two
persons had built a fire. But he stayed by his own fire watching it. In
the morning the two persons saw him and called to him to come over. When
he got there they said, "Cook and eat," and they gave him food which he
cooked and ate. He remained to watch the camp, but when day came those
two men started out to hunt. After they were gone that Indian took the
little earthen pot, made it grow large by snapping his fingers against
it, set it in the fireplace filled with water in which he had placed
some food, and kept up a fire beneath until it boiled.

The two persons traveled about and came back. When they got there he
said, "I am cooking for you." "Alas! (Hīha)," they said, "it is spoiled
for us. Now we must leave you." <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

"To-morrow I will drive bear," said one of them. Together they went on
to drive the game toward him. They went on and camped four nights
driving bear, and saying to him, "You must drive bear this way." Then he
himself went along the trail. The Indian went. When he got where the men
were standing together they said, "We shot in this direction. The ground
is bloody." Following the trail for a while, they saw some red corn
dropped on the ground. The Indian took it and went on with it. Again
they found two ears (or kernels) of corn in the trail. He picked them up
and carried them on. Again they found two or three lying in the trail
which he picked up and carried along. Presently it was bright in front
of them because there was a big field there. When they reached it, it
was something ripe (grain). The men said, "You must stay here," and they
went off. They showed him how to make corncribs before they went. Then
they left him alone. But they also gave him tobacco seed, saying, "Plant
some of this tobacco and smoke it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[167:1](mtsi205.htm#fr_51.md) This is not clear.
Perhaps he should not have cooked the food for them because they were
supernatural beings. They leave him after showing him how to hunt bear
and giving him corn and tobacco.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. Corn Woman](mtsi206.md)
