[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi027)  [Next](mtsi029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 26. THE MAN WHO BECAME A SNAKE (35)

### (FOURTH VERSION)

Two men went to war, but after they had had some encounters with the
enemy one of them fell sick and they decided they had better return
home. While they were camping about on their way back the one who was
sick said that he wanted something very much. "What is it?" asked his
companion. "Fish," he replied. Later, when his companion was away from
camp, the sick man found a place where a tree had been uprooted, leaving
a hollow filled with water, and in this was a fine fish. He cooked this,
ate as much as he wanted of it, and saved some for his friend. When his
friend returned he said to him, "You know how much I wanted some fish. I
found one and have eaten a part but I saved some for you. I discovered
it in some water at the root of that tree that is blown over." But his
friend answered, "It might not be good, but as long as you have eaten
some take the rest." So the sick man finished it.

Soon after this night came on and they lay down on opposite sides of the
fire. But some time in the night the sick man called out to his friend
repeatedly until he awoke him. "What is the matter?" said his friend. "I
have a curious feeling," replied the other. "Look at me and see what is
wrong." So the well man lighted a pine knot and examined his companion
and he found that he had turned into a snake from the hips down.

The snake man said, "Do not be afraid of me. There is a spring over
yonder and when it is morning you must accompany me thither. Take along
two pine knots. I will call out when I get tired." By morning the sick
man had turned completely into a serpent which hung from one tree to
another above him. When his friend struck the two pine knots together he
came down and the other led the way toward the spring. About noon the
Snake called out and his human companion stopped. After a rest they
again set out and, sure enough, they arrived presently at a nice little
spring. Telling his companion to remain where he was, the Snake went
down into the water and as he did so the sides caved in all about so
that the spring expanded into a big water hole in which the man stood
ankle deep.

After that the man went home and when the mother and sisters of his
friend saw him come alone they thought that the other had been killed in
the war. "He has not been killed," he said, "but has

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

turned into a snake and made for himself a water hole. If you wish we
will go to see him." So all of them set out. There was now a big blue
water hole at the place, and when they arrived their guide got his
knots, which he had placed somewhere for safe-keeping, and struck them
together in the water, making a great wave. Then the Snake came out in
the middle of the pond. He had blue horns. After circling about in the
water he came to land near them and laid his head in his mother's lap.
They hung the belt and other ornaments he had used on his horns. Then he
circled the pond again and when he came back seized his youngest sister
and carried her down into the water with him. Ever after people avoided
that pond. It was a fearful place and about it were snakes of all sorts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. The Man Who Became A Snake (Fifth Version)](mtsi029)
