[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi290)  [Next](mtsi292.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

### 26. THE CRANE AND THE HUMMING BIRD (50)

The Humming Bird and Crane lived on the shore of the ocean in the east,
and the Humming Bird came to the Crane to ask him for a race. The Crane
answered, "I can't race. I can't do anything." The Humming Bird kept at
him, however, and finally they agreed to race to the ocean in the west.
So they placed themselves at the edge of the water and the Humming Bird
said, "Well! let's go." The Crane had no more than raised his wings when
the Humming Bird was out of sight. Finally the Crane rose and began
working his wings slowly up and down. When darkness came on the Humming
Bird stopped for the night, and toward daylight, as he was sitting on a
tree, the Crane came flying by. When daylight came the Crane had gotten
on a long distance, and the sun was well up before the Humming Bird
passed him. That night the Humming Bird again stopped for the night, and
this time the Crane overtook him at midnight, getting so far ahead that
the Humming Bird did not catch up with him until noon of the next day.
The third night the Crane passed the Humming Bird fast asleep on a tree
before midnight and the Humming Bird did not overtake him until late in
the evening of the fourth day. He had not gone far beyond before he had
to stop and the Crane passed him very soon. So the Crane got to the
western ocean far ahead, and going into the water he began catching
fish, for he was hungry. It was morning when he finished flying and the
Humming Bird did not arrive until noon. Then the Humming Bird said to
the Crane, "I had no idea you could get here first. If I were able I
would whip you. I could pass around you, under you, under your wings and
everywhere else."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. The Owl and the Perch](mtsi292.md)
