[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi129)  [Next](mtsi131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 37. MAN AND RABBIT (71)

Rabbit ate some vegetables in a garden but the owner did not know it was
he. The master of the garden thought, "I will watch and find out who it
is." So he sat watching in the field and saw Rabbit follow along the
rows eating peas. The master of the field saw him going about eating. He
was very angry with Rabbit and thought, "I will kill him." He sat
watching him eat, and when day came saw him start off. Then he ran
quickly, circled around, and came back toward him.

When Rabbit saw the man coming he kneeled down beside a big tree. He was
bracing himself against it. Then the man came up and said, "I am going
to kill you, Rabbit, for you have been eating out of my garden." Rabbit
answered, "You can kill me but you will die also. This tree standing
here braces up the earth and is going to fall down. If it falls they say
the earth, the sky, and everything will be wiped out and disappear. I am
standing here bracing it. I said, 'Go and get some other people to help
us brace it.' So several started off and I am standing here holding the
tree. Therefore, if you kill me, the earth and the sky together, and all
things will pass away."

The man looked up at the tree and the sky appeared to him low as if it
were going to fall. He looked closely. The tree appeared to touch the
sky. The tree looked as if it were still lower and about to fall. When
he saw that the man ran away. Then Rabbit let go of the trunk and ran
off also.

This is how they tell it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 38. Man And Rabbit](mtsi131)
