[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi023)  [Next](mtsi025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 22. THE RACING SNAKE (34)

One time two men were off hunting, and one of them said to the other,
"They say there is a very swift snake, seldom seen, from which nothing
that he pursues can escape, but I believe I could get away from him. If
you find one, let me know."

Some time later his companion saw something glittering on the side of a
hill, and when he returned to the other hunter he said, "I thought I saw
on the side of a hill the kind of snake about which You were speaking. I
will show him to you." The other thought at first that he was joking,
but he insisted, so they started off to find

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

him. When they reached the place the man who believed he could overcome
this snake prepared himself. He stripped off his clothing, prepared his
bow and arrows, and started up toward the snake. As he went by, the
snake chased him. There were coils and coils of him which made a shrill
noise as they were dragged along on the ground.

The man ran on ahead whooping, this whoop being his charm. When his
companion saw the huge snake in pursuit of his friend he wished that he
had not brought him there. Presently they got so far away that the man's
whoop could be heard no longer, although the noise made by his pursuer
was still audible. By and by they circled around and came back again,
and they kept making circles back and forth, sometimes nearly out of
hearing and sometimes quite close.

After a time the whooping stopped and also the noise made by the snake
traveling along the ground. The person looking on was sure his friend
had been killed, but the contrary had happened. There was a big pine log
lying in such a situation that the man could pass under it and he went
under and over too fast for the snake to catch him. Instead, the snake
wrapped himself up about the log and the man shot at him until he killed
him. He was made strong by means of his magic formula.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. The Man Who Became A Snake](mtsi025.md)
