[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi217)  [Next](mtsi219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 18. THE OBSTACLE FLIGHT (9)

### (SECOND VERSION)

Big Man-eater stole a little girl and took her to the place where his
mother lived. By and by Big Man-eater went hunting and said to the
little girl, "Get a cut of meat and cook it for me." When he was gone
his mother cut off a piece of her own flesh and cooked it. When Big
Man-eater got back she fixed the table and told him to eat. Then he
said, "That is very hard for the flesh of a little girl." "It is indeed
hers," his mother said. By and by he was going hunting again and said,
"Cut off another piece and cook it." After he was gone his mother said,
"Go and hunt for fruits of all kinds. He hurts me badly by eating off of
me; he will eat you up." She hunted for all kinds of fruits;
blackberries, huckleberries, watermelons, all kinds of things, she
brought back and prepared. "Now, runaway," she said. "By and by, when
you hear Big Man-eater making a noise in pursuit of you, throw down some
blackberries and run on. He goes along with a great roller. When again
he almost catches you throw some more down and run on. When he nearly
catches you again, throw down some huckleberries."

So it happened, and when she got near home she began to sing, and her
father and mother heard it. "Oh ho, that little girl has been off
traveling somewhere and is coming home," said her father.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He took a bow and arrows and ran to meet her.
When he met her, the little girl's father shot an arrow and broke the
roller behind which Big Man-eater was running. He shot again trying to
kill Big Man-eater but the latter said "Heye, the way mosquitoes bite is
too bad," No one could kill him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. Thunder And Laigatonōhona](mtsi219)
