[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi001)  [Next](mtsi003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# MYTHS AND TALES OF THE SOUTHEASTERN INDIANS

## By JOHN R. SWANTON

### INTRODUCTION

The greater part of the accompanying material was collected by the
writer between the years 1908 and 1914. Among the Creek myths, however,
are included most of those secured by W. O. Tuggle many years ago, the
originals of which are preserved among the documents in the Bureau of
American Ethnology. The rest were taken down at various places and from
various persons, and for the most part in English, no systematic attempt
having been made at what might be called a Creek collection. The Alabama
stories are from the Alabama Indians living in Polk County, Tex., and
the Koasati stories from some of the same informants and from the
Koasati near Kinder, La. The Hitchiti stories were obtained from a few
speakers of the Hitchiti language in the, northern part of Seminole
County, Okla., part of them having been recorded directly, while part
were written down in the original by an Indian. The Natchez collection,
so called, was secured from one of the few remaining speakers of the
ancient Natchez tongue residing near Braggs, Okla., a man named Watt
Sam. This informant had drawn not merely upon his own people but upon
his Cherokee and Creek neighbors, and it would now be impossible to say
how much of the collection is pure Natchez, or, indeed, whether any of
it may be so denominated. These stories and those from the Hitchiti,
Koasati, and Alabama were also recorded in text form.

No attempt has been made to separate these stories into classes, but the
following general order has been observed. Stories which deal with
natural phenomena or the doings of ancient native heroes, such as might
more properly be called myths, have been placed first. Next have been
entered stories of visits to the world of the dead, of which there are
few, as it happens, except in the Alabama series. Then come stories
detailing encounters between men and animals or supernatural beings in
animal form. After these have been placed tales dealing with happenings
among the animals, concluding with all of those having to do with the
Southeastern trickster Rabbit. Then appear stories--or other
stories--known to have been borrowed from the whites or Negroes, or such
as probably had such an origin, and at the end a few war tales of
miscellaneous character.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

The native attitude toward these was, of course, various, some no doubt
having been originally sacred legends embodying actual beliefs, while
others were told for amusement. Only in the Natchez series have I any
absolute clew as to which were considered sacred and the reverse. My
Natchez informant stated that certain stories, among which he included
numbers 2, 4, 5, 9, 13, 18, 23, 30, and the stories about the tie-snake,
must be told only during cold weather. Otherwise bad luck would follow.
This list was communicated to me before I had collected all of the
Natchez stories here given and it is, therefore, defective. It is of
value only as indicating that such a distinction was made. It is
surprising that such tales as "The Bungling Host" and "The Wolves and
the Fawn" should be included. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](mtsi002.htm#fr_0.md) Some of the stories
included in this bulletin were printed in The Journal of American
Folk-Lore, vol. xxvi, no. ci, 1913.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. How Day And Night Were Divided](mtsi003.md)
