[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi299)  [Next](mtsi301.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 35. RABBIT AND MAN-EATER <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_87) (65.md)

Rabbit was traveling westward when he met Man-eater coming toward him.
Man-eater said, "Where are you going?" and Rabbit answered, "I am going
over yonder to eat someone. How is it with you?" he said, and Man-eater
answered, "I am going eastward

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

hunting." "You can't find anything in that direction. I ate them all up
and left. Turn back and let us travel together," said Rabbit, so he
turned back and they started on.

After they had gone along for a while Rabbit said, "Let us sit facing
each other with our eyes shut and defecate." So they sat down, and when
Man-eater shut his eyes and defecated Rabbit held his hand under him and
took his excrements away. He returned his own in exchange. Man-eater's
excrement he laid down under himself. He had said to Man-eater, "When I
say 'Now' we will get up." So he said "Now" and they got up. "Let us
look at our excrements," he said to him, and when they looked Rabbit
said, "This excrement of yours looks pitiful." And Man-eater answered,
"I never defecated like that before. My life must be nearing its end.
Hehā+."

Then the two started on. When evening came they built a fire near a
river and sat down to spend the night. "They say that the fire will
pepper whoever stays here all night, but I hardly believe that," said
Rabbit. Then Man-eater lay down on one side of the fire and Rabbit lay
down on the other. "What noise do you make when you are asleep?" said
Rabbit, and Man-eater answered, "When I sleep I always say 'dåno'~~l~~,
dåno'~~l~~' (I am asleep, I am asleep). But what do you say when you are
asleep?" Rabbit replied, "When I sleep I always say '~~l~~ēk, ~~l~~ēk'."
Then Man-eater pretended to be asleep and said as he lay, "dåno'~~l~~,
'dåno'~~l~~." When Rabbit said to him, "Are you asleep?" he lay still.
Rabbit also lay snoring, saying "~~l~~ēk, ~~l~~ēk." When the other said
to him, "Are you asleep?" he went on without stopping. So Man-eater
thought he had gone to sleep and lay down and slept, making a noise like
"~~l~~ā+k," as he lay. When Rabbit heard that he got up, shoveled up
some live coals and sprinkled them about where he himself had lain down.
He said, "It has turned out just as I told you they say it does," and he
sprinkled his companion. Man-eater jumped up and they both ran off. "It
always does that when you are going along," Rabbit said, as he ran on.

As they wore traveling on they jumped across a stream and when Man-eater
was across Rabbit jumped back and made the river grow larger. Man-eater
walked about on the other side unable to get back. Then he said to a
Crane flying along, "Crane, make a foot log for me." So Crane stood on
the bank of the river and stretched out his neck, and Man-eater climbed
upon it. But when he got halfway over Crane said, "I am almost
breaking," so Man-eater turned back. Then he climbed on again and got
halfway across. "I am on the point of breaking," Crane said, and
Man-eater turned round and got off. After this had happened several
times Crane flew away.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

Then Man-eater remained on the other side. Rabbit kept saying, "The
river is growing bigger." He whooped and made gobbling noises as he
wandered about.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[259:1](mtsi300.htm#fr_88.md) Called "Lion" by my
informant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 36. Story of a Bison](mtsi301.md)
