[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi180)  [Next](mtsi182) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 45. A FIGHT BETWEEN THE ALABAMA AND THE CHOCTAW

The Choctaw captured an Alabama Indian who remained with them and fought
for them against the Alabama. Once the Choctaw and Alabama fought each
other all day and at night the Alabama got into a creek bottom
surrounded by bluffs. The Choctaw watched them, making fires all about.
The Alabama they had captured stayed with them rolling rocks down upon
the other Alabama and saying repeatedly, "You stay there." In
consequence they were angry with him.

After the Alabama Indian had done this for a while, the Choctaw took him
away and put him in a hollow tree. When they got back the Choctaw said,
"When day comes, shoot the Alabama in their big bellies," and the
Alabama in the hollow tree shouted, "That is good," so that all heard
him.

After that the Alabama called upon one of their number to make it rain.
He moved away a little and sat down. He talked and called for rain until
it became cloudy and the rain fell. It rained continually until the
place was covered with water. Then one of the Alabama crawled between
the watchmen, passed through, and got out. He walked around howling like
a fox and came back. He said it was all right and all of them crawled
off and passed through, dragging behind them the warriors who had been
wounded. Then they started off and came to the place where the renegade
stood in the hollow tree. They called out in the Choctaw language and he
answered them. "Come out," they said, and when he came out they seized
him, struck him, and killed him. They cut off his head and carried it
along with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 46. The Girl Captives](mtsi182)
