[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi078)  [Next](mtsi080.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 77. RABBIT ESCAPES FROM THE BOX (66)

(Tuggle collection)

The Rabbit had so often deceived mankind that a council was held to try
him and, being found guilty, he was condemned to death by drowning. A
box was made and he was put into it, carried to

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

the banks of a stream and left there for a while. A little child came to
the box during the absence of the people and, discovering the Rabbit,
asked him what he was doing there.

"Oh, I am listening to the sweetest music in the world," said be. "Let
me get in there too," begged the child. So the Rabbit told the child bow
to open the box, and once out and the child fastened in, away he ran to
the forest. When the people returned they lifted the box and threw it
into the stream and said: "There, we will never be troubled by the
Rabbit again." The next busk came, when every criminal is free to
return, and hardly had the dancing ground been swept clean when in
jumped the Rabbit, all dressed in red, and danced with the pretty girls,
while all the people stood amazed.

"Did we not drown him?" they said. "We put him in a box and threw him
into the water, yet here he is." Being asked how he came back the Rabbit
replied: "I am glad you threw me into the water. I did not die, I went
to a beautiful country, where there were thousands of pretty girls who
begged me to stay, and I am now sorry I came away from them." The young
warriors crowded around him and did not tire of hearing of such a lovely
land. They begged him to show them the way, and be selected those whom
he most envied and told them to prepare boxes in which they could be
placed. When all were ready their friends carried them to the stream and
the Rabbit ordered them thrown in. Again the busk rolled around and
anxious friends awaited the return of the young warriors, but they did
not come. At last the boxes were found on an island and in the boxes
were the bodies of the ill-fated young men. A little box was also found
containing the bones of the child. Then it was known that the Rabbit had
deceived them again. On being questioned he said:

"I told you I was the only one who had ever returned from that beautiful
country. I warned the warriors, but they would have me show them the
way, and no one can be blamed except themselves."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 78. Rabbit's Imposition is Detected](mtsi080.md)
