[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi142)  [Next](mtsi144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### 7. THE RESCUE OF THE SUN (67)

An old woman put the sun into an earthen pot and kept it there. Rabbit
wanted it and stayed at her house dancing. Rabbit said to the people
assembled, "Sing for me so that I can dance." "We don't know how to sing
for you," they answered. "Sing 'Rabbit, Rabbit, Rabbit,'" he said. So
they sang "Rabbit, Rabbit, Rabbit," and he danced. While he was dancing,
he said, "Move it toward me," and they moved it toward him. Again he
said, "Move it toward me. I am dancing like a crazy person." After they
had moved it toward him farther, he seized the sun. They chased him as
he ran away but he kept on with it. On the way he struck the pot
repeatedly against the bushes but it did not break, so he again took it
and ran on. Then he struck it against a hornbeam tree and broke it in
pieces.

Then all creatures assembled and counselled, and all the flying things
gathered together. They wanted to set it up in the sky. The flying
things tried to move it but it did not move. The Tciktcikano (a bird
like a wren) tried to move it and it rose a short distance but fell back
again. He said, "If another should help me I could carry it up," so
Buzzard and Tciktcikano helped each other. Grasping it on each side they
flew up with it. They carried it up and placed it in the sky, and when
they came back the people said to Buzzard, "You shall eat animals that
have died." They said to Tciktcikano, "You shall wash in cold water
every morning and so you will never be sick."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. How Water Was Lost and Recovered](mtsi144)
