[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi148)  [Next](mtsi150.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

### 13. BIG MAN-EATER AND THE PERSIMMON TREE (11)

Six brothers lived together. While five of them were out hunting the
last one remained at home as cook. He spent his time digging wild
potatoes close to the water and washing them. He took one white wild
potato and was trying to wash it when it fell into the water and
disappeared. He hunted about in the water for it for a while and pulled
out a baby tied to a baby board. He brought it to camp and laid it down.
When the others came back he said, "I have a little something to show
you." Bringing something out, he took out a baby on a baby board.

They kept the child, which was a girl, and when she grew up and they
were gone hunting she stayed there and cooked. At that time a
Sharp-buttocks came in a canoe, landed, and brought fish. He said (in
Choctaw), "Very good niece of the six men, roast it for me." "How shall
I roast it?" "Stick your finger into it, put it close to the fire and it
will be done." "How shall I set it down for you?" she said. "Stoop over
and lie down," he answered. And when she stooped over and lay down, he
ate it up on her back and it killed her, and he went off in his canoe.
Afterwards she returned to life.

The next time her brothers went hunting the Sharp-buttocks brought fish
and said, "Roast it for me," and she roasted it for him with the same
result as before.

"Next time say to him, 'You roast it for me'" her brothers said to her,
and they stayed near by. When he came, he said, "Roast this for me," but
she answered, "You roast it for me." They remained a little while,
saying to each other, "You roast it for me," when the brothers all
exclaimed, "Roast it for me," and came in. Sharp-buttocks said, "How
shall I roast it?" "Stick it on your buttocks," they said, and he stuck
it on his buttocks. After he had stooped down for a little while, it was
cooked. "How shall I set it out for you to eat?" he said. \["Stoop over
and lie down," they said.\] He stooped over and lay down, they ate off
of his back, and killed him. Then they took him back, put him into the
canoe, pushed it off, and it started away. It went on, turning about as
it went, and presently remained circling about in one spot. One of the
brothers went to discover why this was so and did not come back. Another
went and did not return. The next went and did not return. The fourth
went and did not return. Another went and did not return.

Then the last one started off. Going on for a while he came to where a
persimmon tree stood, climbed up into it and ate some of the fruit. The
stem of this tree was smooth on one side as if someone had climbed it
frequently. While he was standing there, a female Big Man-eater came
underneath carrying a basket in which was a club (atåsi). She looked up
and saw him. She said, "Get down and let us

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

wrestle, he he he he." So the man came down and when he got to the
ground the Big Man-eater laid the basket with the club to one side and
stood ready. When he got down they wrestled and after a while the Big
Man-eater threw him down. But he got up and they wrestled again. After
they had done this for a while she threw him down again. He stood up
again and when in wrestling around they got close to the basket, the man
threw the Big Man-eater down, seized the club, killed her, and cut her
head off. <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md) But when Big Man-eater
said "Come together," it reunited with the body. When he cut it off
again, she said, "Come together," and it reunited. It kept on reuniting
every time, but the fourth time he cut the head off it remained that
way.

When she was dead the man cut her in pieces and threw the parts away. He
took out her heart and hit a tree with it. "Stick there and become tree
fungus (båkta)," he said. The intestines he took and threw into the
bushes and they hung on a tree. "Keep on hanging as bå~~l~~kapitca (a
long blue or black vine found in the bottoms)," he said. Her nose he cut
off and carried along, and he took the club and carried that also, going
in the direction from which the Big Man-eater had come.

Presently he heard some girls pounding corn with a pestle and reached
the place. When he sat down with them they saw the club and said, "This
looks like our grandmother's club." "No," he answered, "God sent it to
me." They saw her nose and said, "This looks like our grandmother's
nose." "No," he answered, "It is a pipe which God sent me." "The club is
to tickle people," he said, and he tried to tickle them. "If you all lie
down in a straight line, I will tickle you," he said. All lay down,
whereupon he stood over them holding the club and cut all of their
throats.

Then he asked a boy who was there, "Do you eat human beings who are
brought here?" "Yes," he said. "Where do you throw their bones?" he
asked. "We throw them over there under that tree," he answered. "Go and
point out the place." So he guided him and he went there. He reached the
place and said "Here it is," and there were many human bones piled under
that tree. Then the youth shot an arrow up and when it came down said,
"Look out! It will stick into you." <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34.md)
"Ofhaha," said the dead man, and awoke and sat down. He shot above the
next in the same manner and when the arrow descended he awoke and sat
down. It went on that way until all came to life.

Then he took them and guided them on. "Do not turn to look behind you,"
he said. He went on, but after they had gone along

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

for a while one looked back and turned into a wildcat. It said "Wā'ō,
wā'ō," and disappeared. The others went on for a while, when another
turned and looked back. He turned into a crow, crying, "a' a' a'" and
flew out of sight. After they had gone on for a while longer another one
turned and looked back. He turned into a chicken hawk which cried
"bīå<sup>n</sup>k, bīå<sup>n</sup>k, bīå<sup>n</sup>k," and flew out of
sight. Two others disappeared in the same way until only the first one
returned to his place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[130:1](mtsi149.htm#fr_33.md) According to another
version the cannibal woman struck at him with her war club before he
reached the ground but he dodged to the other side of the trunk and her
club stuck fast in it. Afterwards he killed her by means of a stick.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[130:2](mtsi149.htm#fr_34.md) According to another
version he first fitted the bones together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. The Obstacle Flight](mtsi150.md)
