[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi015)  [Next](mtsi017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 14. THE WATER PANTHER (LEOPARD) <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

A girl whose father and mother were dead lived at a certain place with
some relatives. Every day she went for water to a spring, the trail to
which ran through a deep hollow. One time, after she had

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

grown up, a Water Panther (Oī-kātca) appeared to her there and she came
to be with child by him. As she had been very carefully watched the
people did not know what to make of this. Some said, "Let us kill her,"
but others replied, "No, it was probably nature."

Finally the woman gave birth to three Water Panthers, and then some of
the people again said, "Let us kill them." "No," replied the others,
"their mother is a human being," and after consultation they agreed to
let them live.

The woman saw her Water Panther husband from time to time and she
reported what had been done. She said she was very anxious because some
of the people had threatened to kill her young ones. Then the Water
Panther said, "Let the friends of the young ones separate from the
others and live by themselves," so they moved off to another place.
Afterwards the old town in which the enemies lived sank and the place
turned into a great pool of water. The posts of the hot house continued
to stand out above the water of the lake for some time afterwards. That
town is thought to have been Coosa, although it is possible it may have
been Fus-hatchee. It is called Kosa-talåksûmgi, "Sunk Coosa." The people
who wanted the young Water Panthers killed were taken into the dwelling
of the Water Panther farther beneath the waves; what became of the
others is unknown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[21:1](mtsi016.htm#fr_5) See versions in my paper
on Social Organization and Social Usages of the Indians of the Creek
Confederacy (Forty-second Ann. Rept. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pp. 69-72). The
water panther was identified by my informant with the leopard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. How the Alligator's Nose Was Broken](mtsi017)
