[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi296)  [Next](mtsi298.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 32. THE WOLF AND THE RABBIT <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_86) (61, 62.md)

There was a girl whom the Wolf and the Rabbit both wanted to marry. The
Wolf got her but afterwards the Rabbit came to court her. The girl's
mother told him that her daughter belonged to the Wolf, but the Rabbit
said that the Wolf was like a riding horse to him. Then the mother said,
"If you will ride the Wolf here, I will believe you." After that, when
the Rabbit and Wolf met, the former said, "When are you going to see
this girl? When you go, come by and we will go together." When he was
ready the Wolf came to his house, and the Rabbit said, "May I ride you?
My stomach troubles me." The Rabbit got upon his back and then said, "It
is hard for me to ride you. I will put a saddle on you." The Wolf agreed
and the Rabbit put the saddle on him and got into it. But the Rabbit
said, "If you will let me put spurs on I will sit steady in the saddle."
So the Rabbit put spurs on and remounted. Still he was not quite
satisfied and said, "It will be better if I put a bridle on you." He did
this and got on, saying, "This is all right," and they started off. When
they rode up to the door of the girl's house the Rabbit said, "I said I
could do this. I have brought him up." Then he pulled the saddle off of
the Wolf and put him into the horse stable. The people gave the Wolf hay
and corn,

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

but the Rabbit said, "He will not eat this hay and corn; he eats fresh
meat." As they had none, the Wolf remained in the barn all day without
eating. Meanwhile the girl and her mother agreed to take Rabbit, and he
remained in the house that night. When night came the Wolf began to dig
his way out and got away. When the Rabbit found this out he was afraid
to go far from the house, thinking that the Wolf was waylaying him.
During the night, however, he began to get hungry, and he began eating
about among the weeds and grass. The Wolf found him there and chased him
round and round, but the Rabbit finally escaped through a crack in the
fence. The Wolf stayed around, however, chasing the Rabbit every chance
he got. Finally the Rabbit hid in the garden and fed on the vegetables
there, but the Wolf slipped up on him and caught him.

Now the Wolf took the Rabbit home, got an ax, and said he was going to
cut his head off. The Rabbit said, "I do not care if you do kill me.
When you cut my head off I shall become two." Then the Wolf tied the
Rabbit down and built a big fire, saying, "I am going to burn you up in
this fire." But the Rabbit said, "If I make water on this fire I shall
put it out." Then the Wolf put a kettle of water over the fire and said,
"I am going to scald you in this kettle of water." But the Rabbit
replied, "If you put me into that kettle I will kick up my heels and
break it." Then the Wolf said to the Rabbit, "I will throw you into this
big brier patch." The Rabbit answered, "I will cry all I can when you do
it." So the Wolf threw the Rabbit as far into the brier patch as he
could, but when the Rabbit struck the ground he raised a great whoop and
started off on the run. The Wolf was beside himself with rage at this
and ran after him. He chased the Rabbit round and round until he finally
chased him into a hollow tree. When he found he could not get him out of
this he went to an Owl which lived close by and told him to keep watch,
saying, "Don't let the Rabbit get away while I am gone." "If the Rabbit
comes out I will kill him," said the Owl. So the Wolf started off after
an ax. When the Rabbit found that the Owl was there he said, "Come and
look at me. I am in a pretty hole." The Owl said, "It is too dark. I can
not see well." The Rabbit said, "Open your eyes as wide as you can."
Meanwhile, the Rabbit was chewing tobacco, and when the Owl opened his
eyes wide he spit tobacco juice into them. Then the Owl suffered so much
with his eyes that he fell off of the tree and staggered around trying
to got relief, while the Rabbit came out of the hole in the tree and ran
off. When the Wolf came back and said to the Owl, "Is the Rabbit in
here?" he replied, "He got out. He said 'Come and look at me.' Then we
had a fight." While the Owl staggered around he had defecated until
there was a great heap of manure. So he said, "While we were fighting
the Rabbit made that pile you see there."

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then the Wolf said, "I am going to burn up this
pile of rabbit manure," but the Owl answered "You will spoil it." The
Owl objected so much that the Wolf finally said, "You must have made
that big pile of manure yourself; you are so stingy with it." When the
Wolf said this he struck the Owl on the side of the head with the handle
of his ax and the Owl squealed, "O-o-o-o." Since then the Owl has always
called out in this way, and his head swelled up from the blow so that he
now has a big head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[256:1](mtsi297.htm#fr_87.md) Told to Watt Sam by
Charlie Jumper, one of the three remaining speakers of Natchez, who got
it from his grandmother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33. The Tar Baby](mtsi298.md)
