[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi173)  [Next](mtsi175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 38. THE OWL AND THE HAWK (32)

A person went hunting and made a camp. While he was sitting by it a
Horned Owl and a Hawk. came flying thither. The Hawk came on without
stopping and settled between the man's knees. The Horned Owl came and
perched on the other side of the fire. He kept saying, "Throw that one
over to me," but the Hawk answered, "Don't throw me to him." The Owl
repeated the same words, "Throw him over to me," but the other replied,
"Don't throw me to him." Again the Owl said repeatedly, "Throw him over
to me. If you give him to me, I will enable you to see at night." But
the Hawk answered, "Do not throw me there. He is a wizard. If you do not
throw me to him I will enable you to kill all kinds of creatures." "Give
me that one," replied the other, "and you will see like me." If you do
not you will kill all kinds of things the Hawk answered. "That creature
is very bad. If you follow my advice you will come to do as I do in
spite of the many snakes on the water which might hurt you." In the same
way the Horned Owl teased in order that he might kill him. When day
began to break he turned about and discovered it. Then he jumped up and
flew off. As he was going along the Hawk pursued and caught him, cut off
his head and threw it down. Then he turned about and came back to the
man. He pulled out his last wing feather and threw it down. "Take this
with which I kill things and keep it and you can kill anything," he
said. Then he disappeared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 39. The Owl and the Hawk (Second Version)](mtsi175)
