[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi079)  [Next](mtsi081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 78. RABBIT'S IMPOSITION IS DETECTED

### (Tuggle collection)

There were three pretty girls who lived near a spring. Every day they
went to this spring for water. The Rabbit fell in love with them and
frequently came to visit them. One day the news came that one of the
fair maidens was missing. The alarm was given, but search was made in
vain. She could nowhere be found and never came back. It was suspected
that the Rabbit had made away with her. Not many mornings afterwards
another sister was lost. The same mystery surrounded her fate. She was
seen going to the spring but was seen no more. The hand of the third
sister was offered as a

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

reward for the discovery of the fate of the two beautiful girls and for
the killing of the monster who had destroyed them. Many entered the
contest and among them the suspected Rabbit. A warrior watched the
spring day after day, and at last saw an enormous serpent crawl forth,
as if watching for his prey. He slew the monster, cut off his head, and
bore it away as a trophy of victory. But the Rabbit had also seen the
monster serpent and after the warrior had departed with the head, he
took up the body of the snake and dragging it to the council ground,
exclaimed:

"See the monster! I killed him. I claim the bride."

Everybody congratulated the Rabbit, and the beautiful girl, arrayed in
rich costumes, was brought forth. But just as the Rabbit approached to
take her hand the warrior stepped within the circle and said:

"Behold, the monster's head. I cut it off after slaying, him, and I left
his body at the spring. I claim the beautiful bride."

She was given to the brave warrior, and the Rabbit was made to drag
about the dead and putrid body of the snake and was also chased away as
a tricky rascal, who made his way in the world by deception. "Go and
live with the dead snake," they said. "You are corrupt like him."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 79. The Flight to the Tree](mtsi081.md)
