[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi150)  [Next](mtsi152.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

### 15. THE OBSTACLE FLIGHT (9)

### (SECOND VERSION)

Big Man-eater had a wife but stole another woman and carried her to the
place where his wife lived. Next day he started off. After he had
traveled about hunting for a while he came back without having killed
anything. Then he said to his wife, "Cut off a piece of your body and
roast it for me." She roasted a small piece of her body and gave it to
him, and he ate. That went on every day. Big Man-eater came back every
time and just the same thing happened over again.

Then the woman who had been carried away was afraid that her body would
be eaten up and she ran off. She started for the home of her three
brothers. Big Man-eater came back and called for her but she was gone.
Then he set out in pursuit of her on the trail just like a dog.

Before she started the first wife broke off four huckleberries and gave
them to her \[along with some canes\]. And when Big Man-eater followed
her and had almost caught her she threw the huckleberries down on the
ground and Big Man-eater stopped behind the bushes and ate them. When he
came on again and got close she dropped canes on the ground, and canes
grew up high and thick and it became boggy. Big Man-eater started in
slowly, and meanwhile the woman got to where her brothers lived and they
took her in. Her brothers shut her in the house. When Big Man-eater came
along to the house they shot him. Some of them struck him from behind on
the ankle with a stick and knocked him down. They shot at him and killed
him. Then the men hunted up wood, piled it upon him, and burned him up.
It took a long time, but his body was finally consumed. Then the men
picked up the ashes and threw them up into the air. When they threw up
the ashes they turned into bees and flew away. When they threw them up
again in the same manner blackbirds flew away. The next time crows flew
away. Then hornets flew away, next wasps, then yellow jackets. It kept
on so until all sorts of winged insects, including mosquitoes and flies,
had been created.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. Lodge Boy and Thrown-Away](mtsi152.md)
