[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi138)  [Next](mtsi140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. THE FLOOD (2)

When this world was almost lost in the waters a frog predicted it. One
man seized the frog and threw it into the fire, but another said, "Don't
do that." He took it, cared for it, and healed it, and it said to him,
"The land will almost disappear in the waters. Make a raft and put a
thick layer of grass underneath so that the beavers can not cut holes
through the wood." So he cut long dry sticks of wood and tied them
together and put a quantity of grass underneath.

When other people saw this they said, "Why did you make it?" He
answered, "A flood is going to cover the whole country." "Nothing like
that can happen," they said. Some persons stayed about laughing at him.
After some time he finished his raft and the flood came. When it arrived
fish came with it and some of the people killed them and said, "We are
having a good time." The man and his family got upon the raft along with
the frog.

When the water rose the raft went up also, and some of the people said,
"We want to get on," but no one got on. When it rose higher all of the
other people were drowned. Then those on the raft floated up with it.
The flying things flew up to the sky and took hold of it, with their
tails half in the water. The ends of their tails got wet. The red-headed
woodpecker was flat against the sky and said, "My tail is half in the
water."

(According to the Koasati version a lizard fell into the fire. One man
took pity on it and pulled it out. Then the lizard said, "I am not going
to die before the flood comes." The man cared for it until it got well.
The rest of the story is much the same.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Swinging Grapevines](mtsi140)
