[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi056)  [Next](mtsi058.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 55. RABBIT FOOLS ALLIGATOR (70)

### (SECOND VERSION)

(Tuggle collection)

The Alligator was sunning himself on a log when the Rabbit said to him:
"Mr. Alligator, did you ever see the devil?" "No, Mr. Rabbit, but I am
not afraid to see him," replied the Alligator.

"Well, I saw the devil, and he said you were afraid to look at him,"
said the Rabbit. "I'm not afraid of him, and you tell him so," bravely
responded the Alligator.

"Are you willing to crawl up the hill to-morrow and let me show you the
devil?" asked the Rabbit. "Yes, I am willing," said the Alligator. The
Rabbit spoke up and said, "Now Mr. Alligator, when you see smoke rising
don't be afraid, the devil will be just starting out."

"You need not be so particular about me. I am not afraid," said he. "Now
when you see birds flying and deer running past you, don't get scared."
"I shall not get scared." "When you hear fire crackling close to you and
the grass burning all around you, don't get scared. The devil will come
along and you can get a good look at him," and with this advice the
Rabbit left.

The next day he returned and told Alligator to crawl out and lie in the
high grass and wait until the devil came. So out crawled the Alligator
and took his position in the grass as directed by the Rabbit.

When he saw the Alligator so far from the water the Rabbit laughed to
himself. He ran across the prairie till he reached a burning stump, got
a chunk of fire, and returned to a spot near his confiding friend, where
he kindled the grass and soon had the pleasure of seeing a blaze all
around the Alligator. Then, running to a sandy place where there was no
grass, he sat down to see the fun. He had not long to wait, for when the
smoke rose in clouds and the birds flew by, and the animals ran for life
over the prairie, the Alligator cried out: "Oh, Mr. Rabbit, what's
that?" The Rabbit answered: "Oh, you lie still; that's nothing but the
devil starting out." Soon the fire began to crackle and roar, and the
flames swept over the prairie, and the Alligator called: "Oh, Mr.
Rabbit, what's that?" "Oh, that's the devil's breath. Don't be scared.
You will see him directly." The Rabbit rolled over in the sand and
kicked his heels

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

in the air. The fire came nearer and nearer and began to burn the grass
all around the Alligator, and under him, till he rolled and twisted in
pain. "Don't be scared, Mr. Alligator. Just lie still a little longer
and the devil will be right there and you can get a good look at him,"
cried out the Rabbit, as he saw the movements of the Alligator. But the
latter could stand it no longer and started down the hill to the water
through the burning grass, snapping his teeth and rolling over in pain,
while the Rabbit laughed and jumped in delight, saying, "Wait, Mr.
Alligator, don't be in such a hurry. You are not afraid of the devil."
But the Alligator tumbled into the water to cool his roasted skin, and
wondered how the Rabbit could stand such awful scenes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 56. Terrapin Races](mtsi058.md)
