[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi210)  [Next](mtsi212) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11. THE STILL CRAWLING SISTER

An Indian had four grown sisters and a fifth who was still crawling.
They had but the one brother. Onetime the sisters said, "To-night let us
lie with our brother." The little girl who was still crawling heard
them. And when her brother came home she said to him, "They want to lie
with you." Then he broke up a bottle and kept the small sharp pieces. At
night, when he lay down he put them by his pillow. After all had gone to
bed and had lain for a while, his oldest sister woke up and lay down
with him. Then he took the broken pieces of bottle and stuck them into
her so that the blood came out; she awoke with her face all bloody and
went away. Another lay with him and he stuck the pieces into her under
the ear. When the blood came out she awoke and started off. When another
came and lay with him he stuck them into some part of her and she went
back. All were treated in the same manner.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

Then the brother disliked them. They had made him angry and when day
came he tied up a small package and put it upon his back. "You can stay
by yourselves," he said and set out. The one who was still crawling
tried to follow him, so he took her up, placed her upon his pack, and
started on. He went until he came to a bluff on the shore of a lake and
threw her from it into the water. About four o'clock on the same day she
came back out of the water. He had thought she would come crawling but
she came out walking. When she reached him he took her and went on.
Traveling along with her he made his camp close to a big sheet of water.

After he had made his camp there and some time had elapsed children were
born to his sister in some strange way. One that she bore was a little
Otter. Next she gave birth to a human baby. The third time she bore a
little yellow Mouse. They continued to live in that place.

After that an old woman came to look at the sister and went away again.
Certare cum ea volebat utra pilos genitales longiores haberet. Postquam
Mus flavus adeo satis crevit vetulae ad domum mittebatur, vetulaeque
pilos genitales longos detondebat, quoscum detondisset reportabat. Illa
ergo mulier quae serpserat picem pineam inter vetulae crura ponendam
curabat. Postridie mane ad mulierem vetula adibat. Vetula vestitum suum
elevabat et videbatur vagina carere. Deinde mulier quae serpserat
vestitum suum elevabat et pili sui adeo erant longi ut usque infra genua
pertinerent.

After that the old woman said, "Let us race with each other." She said
to the woman that had crawled, "I will not run down there close to the
water. You run down there." She teased her until she agreed to race. The
woman that had crawled ran along on the trail close to the water. When
she was about halfway, something said, "Oho, go back!" and as if she
were flying she fell upon the water and disappeared under it. And she
did not come out again.

Next day the little Otter was sent to look under the water and he came
back. After he had gotten back he said, "A tie-snake is holding her
under water so that she can not come out." Then the human child cried
until he was almost dead. He broke a bottle and gave the Otter the
pieces, and next day he dived down again with them. The woman came up
near a log lying on the water and sat there with the little Otter. The
little Otter then took the pieces broken from the bottle and cut the
snake in two. And his mother came out.

Then they said to the little Otter, "Your place shall be in the water."
They said to the little yellow Mouse, "You shall live in hollow trees.

The human child, however, they took with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. Bead-Spitter](mtsi212)
