[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi270)  [Next](mtsi272.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

### 6. LODGE BOY AND THROWN-AWAY (3)

### (SECOND VERSION)

A hunter had a little boy who stayed at the hunting camp. When he went
off his boy said to him, "Make some arrows for me." He made arrows for
him but the next time he went off again the boy again said, "Make some
arrows for me." "How does it happen, said his father, "that you use up
so many arrows?" and the child answered, "A boy comes around and we
shoot together and bet and he wins all from me." "If that is so, when he
comes back you must catch him. I will sit watching and when you seize
him I will run up and tie him." Then he made the arrows and left, but he
stayed near by watching and when the boys were playing about his son
caught the other and they fell about wrestling. The second boy tried to
run away but the father caught and tied him.

After he had sat tied for some time the strange youth quieted down and
the man untied him, left the two together and started off hunting.
"To-day some one will call toward the west to be ferried across in a
canoe. It is not a human being. It is Old-woman-who-sticks-to-one and
you must not set her across. When someone toward the east shouts, that
will be a human being. You must set that one across." He said this to
them and started off.

Not long afterwards some one toward the west shouted and the strange boy
said, "Let us go and set her across." The other answered "I think he
said, 'Do not set that one across. It will not be a human being,'" but
the first replied, "If you will not do it I will hack you with father's
big ax." So the other became frightened and they went along together.
Old-woman-who-sticks-to-one was standing by the bank and they put her
across. After they had done so they jumped back. They jumped back across
the creek quickly but Old-woman-who-sticks-to-one jumped back after them
and fastened herself upon them. They could not get rid of her in any
way, until finally they killed her and heated water and poured it over
her, when she came off. They cut off her nose and made a pipe out of it.
"It will be good for our father to use when he smokes," they said.

While they were sitting holding this their father came home. He said,
"Have you been right here all the time?" "We have been nowhere else,"
said the boys. "We have made a pipe for you," they said, and they gave
it to him. He put tobacco into it, lighted it, and smoked. When he
pulled at it hard, it made a noise, ~~l~~ā+k. When he pulled at it still
harder it made a noise, tlāk. Then he said, "Didn't you do what I told
you not to?" His child answered, "We put that one across and jumped back
but she also jumped back and stuck to us. When we could do nothing else
with her we killed her

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

and poured hot water on her, and she came off. We cut her nose off and
made a pipe out of it for you."

When he was about to start out to hunt again he said, "If you want to go
in swimming you must not swim in the creek toward the west. You must
swim toward the east. You must not swim toward the west because there
are lots of leeches in the creek there." Then he set out.

Not long afterwards the boys said, "Let us go in swimming," and they
swam eastward in the creek. When they came back the strange boy said,
"Let us go in swimming to find out about the leeches of which he spoke."
"I think he forbade us," said the other. The strange boy replied, "If
you do not agree I will hack you with father's ax," so he became
frightened and they set out. They went in swimming. When they came out,
leeches were all over their bodies. Then they wallowed in the sand and
mashed them. When their skins got dry they made a noise,
"tsågāk tsågāk," and the boys danced in order to hear the noise.

When their father came home he said, "Have you been right here?" and the
strange boy answered, "We have been nowhere else." But his own child
said, "We went in swimming where you said, 'Do not swim there,' and when
we came out leeches hung all over our bodies. We rolled in the sand and
mashed them, and when their skins were dried they made a noise and we
danced."

Then the boys said to each other, "When he leaves this time we will
follow him. Let us make many arrows." So they made them and hid them
away where they would be ready and the next time he went out they
followed. He opened a low mountain, a deer came out, and he shot at it
and killed it. Then he shut the mountain, laid the deer on his back and
started to return. They concealed themselves and waited until he had
gotten away, but when he was a considerable distance off they opened the
door. Deer came out and ran off; also turkeys and bear. They shot at
them until they ran out of arrows. Then they shut the mountain and ran
off. They got home first and sat down, not intending to tell what had
happened.

When their father came back he said, "You have not been off anywhere?"
and they answered, "We have been right here all the time," so he thought
everything was all right. But presently the deer meat gave out and he
again started off. He could find nothing and so came back. "Well then,"
he said, "you are also the ones who did that. There is nothing to be
had. Now, let us go back to the place from which we came. That food was
for us to live upon. Let us start away," and they set out.

When they got to the place he said, "I want to reconnoitre," and started
off. In the evening he came back and said, "I am going to a council
meeting," and he set out again. Then the boys followed

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

him stealthily. People were gathering at the council house and when it
became dark they entered. "I wonder what they are talking about in
there," said the boys, so they crept under the floor and listened. As
they sat there they heard that they themselves were being tried, and
they were convicted. It was agreed to kill them before morning.

Then the two boys went out and started off. They collected guards to
protect themselves, placing ducks in the outermost row. As a protection
they put bumblebees into a hollow cane and stopped it up. In the same
way they put hornets into a hollow cane and stopped it up. They
stationed geese as guards in the next row. They also put yellow jackets
into a hollow cane and stopped it up. They stationed sandhill cranes as
guards in the, third row. Then they put wasps into a hollow cane and
stopped it up. In this way they collected all kinds of stinging things.
In the last row they put quails on guard. They themselves went into a
small corncrib standing on the trail along which the enemy were to come.

While the boys were sitting in the corncrib the ducks came flying past
making a noise. "I think they are coming," they said as they sat there.
After a while the geese also went by. "They are getting nearer," they
said. After another interval the sandhill cranes also passed. "They are
getting close," they said. After still another interval the quails flew
past making a thundering noise, and they said, "They have come." So they
opened the hollow canes and threw them outside, and, when the people
came to fight, these stung them. Then they began to fight. As more and
more stinging insects came out they began fighting one another in
fighting the stinging insects. They struck and killed one another.

Toward daylight the shouting and tumult quieted down. The stinging
things rose upward humming. "What has happened?" said the boys, and they
went out. Their enemies all lay about dead. "Father is lying among them
somewhere," they said, and they hunted for him. After they had hunted
about they found him barely alive lying with his backup. "Do you think
we had better let him die for good?" said the strange boy to the man's
son. When he asked this question the latter answered, "He shall always
stay in the fields and steal garden vegetables and people shall chase
him." Then the strange boy made a little bow and scraped the string over
the man's buttocks. He stopped, and when the man tried to speak he said,
"gāx, gāx, gāx, gāx." He turned into a crow and flew away.

"What shall we ourselves do?" they said as they stood there. "We will go
into the ground," they said. "No, for we can never see each other," they
concluded. "Let us wade into the water," they said, but they concluded,
"If we do that we shall again be unable to see each other." Then they
said, "If we go above we can arrange

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

to see each other, talk together, and travel together." "I will go
toward the west to live," said the strange boy, and the man's child went
eastward. They made it thunder and lighten. A cloud separated them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. The Origin of Corn](mtsi272.md)
