[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi149)  [Next](mtsi151.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 14. THE OBSTACLE FLIGHT (9)

When Big Man-eater and his wife were living on the other side of the
ocean Big Man-eater got into his canoe. and came across. At the same
time a young girl who was living with her three brothers was sent after
water. She set out, and when she reached the water Big Man-eater was
there in his canoe and he had with him some pretty little puppies which
she liked. "Come here and look at them," he said, and she started to go.
But when she got into the canoe and was looking at the puppies he put
out to sea with her. He brought her to his wife on the other side of the
ocean.

Next day Big Man-eater went hunting and hunted about all day but came
home without having killed anything. He said to the girl, "Cut off a
piece of your body and roast it for me," but instead his wife cut off a
piece of her flesh and gave it to the girl, who roasted it and gave it
to him and he ate. Next day he went hunting again. He hunted all day,
but came back without having killed anything. He said to the girl, "Cut
off a piece of your body and roast it for me," and, as before, his wife
cut off a piece of her flesh and gave it to her; she roasted it and gave
it to him and he ate.

Next day, when Big Man-eater went hunting again, his wife said to the
girl, "If you stay here, he will devour you. He has caused me grief by
eating me nearly up. Run away. Run along upon this good trail and return
and then run along. upon this other good trail and return." After she
had defecated close to the house she ran along upon every trail and
returned. The woman had given her four ripe huckleberries, four
blackberries, \[and four pieces of cane\]. She also gave her some mud.
"Run along upon this old trail," she said. "When he has nearly come up
to you, throw down a huckleberry and go on," she said. "The next time he
has almost caught you do the same thing. The next time throw down a
blackberry and go on. After that throw down the mud and go on," she said
to her.

Big Man-eater came back before it was late and called out "Woman!" "Hā,"
said the excrement lying there. The next time he called "Woman!" it said
"Hā" again. Next time he went to look and found only the excrement. He
did not know which way she had gone. He asked his wife repeatedly, but
she said, "I can not see at all. She is somewhere about."

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

Then Big Man-eater said, "She has run away from me." He hunted for his
chunk stone and, not finding it, asked his wife, "Where did you put that
thing?" "I can't see at all," she answered. Then he hunted for it all
over the inside of the house. By and by he found it down under the bed.

Then he took it and placed it in one of the good trails. It ran off out
of sight and he followed it. It stopped and he said, "Why do you stop
here?" Then he took it and set it down in another trail. It ran on and
was gone. He started after it. After a while it stopped again and when
he got there he said, "Did I tell you to stop here?" He took it, placed
it in another trail, and it ran on. When it stopped and he came up to
it, he said, "Why do you stop here?" He took it, carried it back, and
put it down in an old trail, when it ran off and disappeared.

Following it, he went on, went on, went on, and after a while came to
where there were lots of ripe huckleberries which he stopped to eat. He
stayed there for sometime and then said, "I will comeback here and eat
again." He started ahead once more. After he had gone on for a time
longer he came to a place where cane grew thick. The chunk stone
stopped. Then he took it, walked on, and reached the other side of the
canebrake. He put it down and it ran on. He followed it until it came to
a boggy place where it stopped. Then he took it and walked on slowly
until he got through. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md) He put it down
and it ran off out of sight, and he followed it.

When he had nearly overtaken the woman, she called to her people, "Elder
brothers, elder brothers, I am nearly caught." They heard her, and,
taking their bows and arrows, went to meet her. <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36.md) When Big Man-eater and the roller had
nearly come up with her they shot at him repeatedly with their arrows,
but he did not die because they did not know how to kill him. Then a red
bird came flying and perched upon a tree near by, saying, "Tåkho'lho
tåkhol'ho, if you hit him in the ankle and head, he will fall down." So
they got sticks, one got a cooking paddle, and all hit him and knocked
him down so that he died along with the chunk stone. The girl went into
the house.

After that they wanted to burn Big Man-eater's body. They gathered
sticks, and kept piling them on it. The next day they continued putting
more on. It burned slowly until nothing was left but ashes. Then they
took a sifter and put the bones into it. When they sifted, some fell
through. What did not fall through they tossed up into the air, saying,
"You will be blackbirds," and many blackbirds flew away. They picked up
more ashes and threw them up, saying," You will be bees," whereupon the
ashes turned into bees which flew away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[132:1](mtsi150.htm#fr_35.md) In the complete
version of the story four huckleberries, four blackberries, and four
pieces of cane wore evidently thrown down in succession. The pieces of
cane wore a fourth gift of the old woman, and that is why cane is
mentioned here, though not noted in my original story when the gifts
were enumerated. Four, however, satisfies the story requirements of the
Alabama.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[132:2](mtsi150.htm#fr_36.md) No attempt is made to
explain how the woman could return from the other side of the ocean by
land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. The Obstacle Flight (Second Version)](mtsi151.md)
