[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi014)  [Next](mtsi016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 13. MAN-EATER AND THE LITTLE GIRL (9)

(Tuggle collection)

Once there was a beautiful girl who lived with her brothers on the bank
of a river. Her youngest brother was named Kut-che-he-lo-chee (probably
Katcilutci, Little Panther-foot).

The Lion, Istepahpah (Man-eater), came near their house in a boat and
landed. He asked the little girl to enter his boat, but she refused, He
told her he had some young lions in his boat and begged her to come and
see them. She consented and entered his boat. Then Istepahpah pushed his
boat from shore and carried her away to his home. On reaching home
Istepahpah put her in his wife's charge. The next day as he was starting
off on a hunt he said to the girl: "Take some acorns and wash them in
the stream. I love acorns. And make soup of them with my meat. Wash them
before my return." After Istepahpah went away his wife said to the
little girl: "I am sorry he brought you here. He treats me cruelly and
he will treat you the same way. When he fails to obtain any game, he
eats a piece of my flesh with his acorns. He will punish you in the same
way. I wish you to escape."

She called Kotee (Koti), the water frog, from the stream and asked him
if he would take the girl's place and wash the acorns. Kotee said he
would. She instructed him to answer Istepahpah, when he asked if the
acorns were washed, "No."

She then helped the girl to climb over the house and told her to run to
her brothers' house.

When Istepahpah returned he called out to the girl, "Have you washed my
acorns?" Kotee answered, "No."

Again Istepahpah asked, "Have you washed my acorns?" Kotee replied,
"No."

Istepahpah, not understanding this, went down to the water and Kokee,
hearing him approach, jumped into the stream.

Istepahpah, thinking it was the girl, plunged in after, but he could see
her nowhere. He said in gentle tones: "Little girl, why do you run away
from me?"

After searching in vain he came from the stream and went to his house.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Istepahpah possessed a Motarkah, a wheel, which could find anything
which was lost. He threw Motarkah from him and it ran a short way and
returned. He tried several directions, but Motarkah came back to him.

At last he threw Motarkah down in his yard. It went over the house and
started off in a straight course, following the trail of the girl.
Istepahpah followed Motarkah, for he knew the girl had gone that way.

Soon they came, in sight of the little girl, who was running and
singing. "I wonder if I can reach my brothers' house before they catch
me. I wonder if I can reach my brothers' house before they catch me."

While Kut-che-he-lo-chee was playing he thought he heard his lost
sister's voice in the distance. He said to his brothers, "I hear my
sister's voice."

Kut-che-he-lo-chee insisted that he had heard her singing in distress.

Nearer she came, pursued by Motarkah and Istepahpah, and again she sang
as she ran: "I wonder if I can reach my brothers' house before they
catch me. I wonder if I can reach my brothers' house before they catch
me."

Kut-che-he-lo-chee was now convinced that he heard his sister's voice.
He called his brothers and persuaded them to go with him. They went and
now heard their sister crying in distress: "I wonder if I can reach my
brothers' house before they catch me. I wonder if I can reach my
brothers' house before they catch me."

They said to Kut-che-he-lo-chee: "You can stay here. You are too young
to help us. Remain behind."

But Kut-che-he-lo-chee, would go with them. They now saw their sister
pursued by Motarkah and Istepahpah. As they came nearer the brothers
shot arrows at Motarkah, but could not stop it. Their sister passed them
and ran to the house. Motarkah followed. Kut-che-he-lo-chee ran to
Motarkah and struck it with the little wooden paddle he used in parching
his food and Motarkah rolled to one side and stopped. Istepahpah still
came on. The brothers shot at him but could not kill him. Then
Kut-che-he-lo-chee ran to Istepahpah and struck him on the head with his
little wooden paddle and killed him. His brothers said
Kut-che-he-lo-chee was the bravest of all and had saved their sister's
life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. The Water Panther (Leopard)](mtsi016.md)
