[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi022)  [Next](mtsi024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 21. THE HUNTER, THE MONSTER LIZARD, AND THE PANTHER (33)

### (SECOND VERSION)

There was a great hunter who owned many dogs, with which he would beat
up a bottom and frequently kill bear. One time he heard them barking and
thought they had discovered a bear, but when he reached them he found
them around a hollow tree on which

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

an hatcūkliba lived. The hatcūkliba would come out, take a dog, and
carry it back into his den. Then the man ran off, and when he got nearly
out of sight he could hear a few dogs still barking. The .number was
presently reduced to one, and soon this one stopped. Then the man looked
back and saw the hatcūkliba coming after him, glittering as it came.
When it came jumping up to him he shot it, but it seized him by the
middle, knocked his gun out of his hands, and started back with him. He
was not hurt, but he thought that when it got him to its young ones,
they would eat him up. The hatcūkliba took him down a valley and as they
passed between two

pine trees, he caught sight of something yellow and thought, "Now they
are going to devour me." What he had seen, however, was a Panther which
jumped upon the hatcūkliba and made the hatcūkliba let go of him. Then
it jumped back upon the tree. Every chance it got the Panther would jump
down upon the hatcūkliba and then back to the tree, and in this way it
tore the hatcūkliba's back to rags and killed it. Then the Panther came
to where the man lay and the latter thought he was going to be eaten,
but the Panther said, "Are you dead yet?" "No," he answered, "I am not
dead yet." "Well, get up." So he got up, and the Panther marched around
him mewing like a cat, and said, "Nothing will disturb you. Stay there."
The man started a fire, and the Panther brought up some wood for him.
Then it went off, killed a deer, and brought it back. So he cut up and
roasted the deer, and, after he got better, the Panther said to him,
"Never kill anything of my species. Get your gun and go home."

By and by the man took a notion to hunt and discovered a turkey on a
tree. He discovered, however, that a wildcat was creeping toward it, so
he stopped and watched it. But, when the wildcat jumped at the turkey,
it missed and fell to the ground with a squall as if it were hurt. It
seemed to be in pain, and in fact the man saw that one of its eyes was
out. When he came up to help it, however, the wildcat pulled out its
other eye and threw that away also and ran away. This is said to signify
the separation of man and beast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. The Racing Snake](mtsi024)
