[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi044)  [Next](mtsi046.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 43. RABBIT GETS MAN-EATER OVER TO THE OTHER SIDE OF THE OCEAN (65, 67)

### (FOURTH VERSION)

A big Lion (Man-eater) was destroying people, therefore Rabbit was
employed to deceive him and get him across to the other side of the
waters. All were gathered at the square ground, some saying they
believed he could not do it, but others maintaining that he could
because he was so clever. These last said to him, "If you can overcome
him and get him across the waters it will be a good thing for you. Some
say that you can't do it, but we are wagering that you can." Rabbit
replied that he thought he could succeed, and at least he would try.

After that Rabbit began traveling about and finally he met the Lion. He
said to the Lion, "People hate me so much that I am going to Jumping
Creek (Tota'skita håtci)." "They hate me a lot more than they do you,"
said the Lion, "I think I will go with you." They hated him, he said,
because they claimed he had eaten a lot of children. Rabbit said, "When
I get ready to travel I will let you know," so presently they set out.

After they had started Rabbit said, "There is a pretty bad creek beyond
which they call Sprinkling Creek (Tofogaga håtci)." They

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

reached it late in the evening, built a fire there, and prepared to
sleep on opposite sides of it. "What noise do you make when you are
asleep?" said Rabbit. "When I say 'aw' I am asleep," was the reply.
Rabbit answered, "When I am asleep I say 'tcu.'" Then Rabbit Jay awake
and listened and when he heard the Lion say "aw" he gathered a lot of
hot embers and threw them over him. Then he sprinkled some over himself,
jumped up, ran about and came back. "That is just what they say happens.
It is a bad place," he exclaimed. In this way he kept the Lion awake all
night.

Afterwards Rabbit said, "Let us sit down side by side and defecate to
see who has been eating children." They did so, and the Lion grunted and
groaned terribly. But Rabbit changed the position of the excrements and
when the Lion saw only a few little balls beneath himself he said, "Let
us try it again." This time bones came from him and he was satisfied.

They went on from that place and in the middle of the afternoon reached
Jumping Creek. The country on the other side looked good and Rabbit said
he knew it was a fine country and he was going across. The Lion said to
him, "When you are prepared to jump say 'Ready, '" and he fixed his belt
and his ornaments ready to make the leap. Rabbit said, "We must sit side
by side to jump." They did so, and when he said "Ready" both sprang over
to the other bank. Rabbit, however, jumped back immediately and at once
the river began expanding. The Lion said, "My friend, you are leaving
me." "I will make a foot log for you," said Rabbit, but his ax broke and
he said he could not do it. Then the river continued to widen until the
Lion disappeared from sight, while Rabbit went home.

Some time after this two persons went to see Rabbit to learn what he had
done. After he had told them they said, "We are going to have a stomp
dance and you must come and be our leader." Then they went back. Fire
was at that time very valuable. It was made with a fire drill (totka
boli). Rabbit determined to carry off some of this, so he covered his
hands with tar and started for the stomp ground. He seated himself at
the end of one of the beds and remained there until it was nearly day.
Finally someone said, "Rabbit is a good stomp dance leader. You ought to
invite him to lead." Accordingly they asked him to lead the dance and he
accepted. Just as he was through dancing, however, he reached a place
close to the fire, seized some fire and ran off into the thicket. It
blazed as he went along. "Rabbit has stolen the fire," they shouted.
"Make it rain," they said, and a rain was brought on, but Rabbit escaped
into a hollow tree. When they thought they had put the fire, out and the
rain ceased, he came out and set the woods afire, and that is why the
woods still burn off.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 44. Rabbit Steals Fire](mtsi046.md)
