[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi273)  [Next](mtsi275.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 9. THE PANTHER CHILD (6, 7)

A woman was washing at a creek with her baby lying close by her. While
she was dipping up water a Tiger, <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_74.md)
which had been watching her, ran up and carried off her child. She did
not know at first what had happened to it. The Tiger took the child,
which was a boy, to its den, and with its mate raised him. When he had
grown to be of some size the Tigers gave him a bow. The boy would go out
and on coming back tell the Tiger that be had seen something that scared
him, which was in fact a bird. Then the Tiger would explain that these
birds were to be killed and eaten. So he got into the habit of going out
hunting, killing these birds, and bringing them in. By and by he said,
"Some baldheaded things scared me." "Those are to kill and eat," said
the Tigers. They were turkeys. When be became a young man he saw
something else which scared him and said, "I saw something with small
legs which scared me." "They are to be killed and eaten," said the
Tigers. So he went out and killed them. They were deer.

Some distance away was a mountain which looked blue in the distance. The
Tigers said, "You must never go to that mountain." By and by the Tigers
went off somewhere to make a visit, and the boy thought, "Why is it that
they do not want me to go to that mountain?" So he decided to go there,
and after he had climbed to the top he found a crowd of people playing
ball. He saw his

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

mother playing among them. Then he got back to the Tigers' home and when
the Tigers came back they found that he had been somewhere and said,
"Haven't you been over there?" "Yes," he said, "I have been there."
"Well, that is your town. You shall go back to it, and we will prepare
for your return." The Tigers asked him to kill birds of a certain kind,
and, when he had done so, they said, "Kill another kind." He kept on
until he had killed as many different kinds of birds as he could find.
With these they decorated the boy, placing a parrakeet on his head, jays
on each shoulder, and smaller birds of different kinds about his belt.
The Tiger caused these birds to live. "When you start off," he said,
"you will come to a house, and when you have passed the house you will
meet a person, but you must keep right on without talking to him." The
Tiger also gave him a horn to blow oil, and when he blew every bird
would cry out.

So the youth started off, and, as had been foretold to him, he passed a
house and met a person beyond it. This was Rabbit. Rabbit stopped him
and said, "Where are you going?" "I am going to my mother's. Where are
you going?" "I am going to the creek to catch turtles. Your mother lives
close to this place. Let us go back and catch turtles, and then go to
her house together." Upon this the boy turned back with Rabbit, and,
when they reached the creek, he pulled off his clothing and said, "How
do you catch these turtles?" "I always take a hickory bark rope, dive
into the deep water, catch and tie them, and drag them out." So the two
took hickory bark cords and waded into the water. Rabbit said, "When I
say 'Now!' we will dive into the water at the same time." When Rabbit
said this word the boy dived in, but Rabbit jumped back on the bank,
seized the boy's clothes, and ran off with them. The youth caught a
turtle and, coming out and looking round, saw that his clothes were
gone. Then he hung his head and began to think, "What shall I do?" Then
he began looking around, and he spied a persimmon tree loaded with
fruit. He shook this tree and rubbed the fruit all over himself. Then he
started on toward his mother's house, dragging the turtle after him.
When he reached his mother's house he stopped in the yard. His mother
was cutting up raccoon meat. He said "Mother," but his mother answered,
"I don't know whether I have a child." Then the boy started off again,
saying, "If you have a child let the raccoon bite you," and the raccoon
bit her. He went along while his mother cried out from the biting of the
raccoon. He came to a number of houses, but he looked so filthy they
would give him something to eat out in the yard and turn him away.
Finally he came to a house where an old woman lived with her
granddaughter. There was a hole in a clay bank out in the yard of this
house, and the young man put his turtle into it. Then the women

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

welcomed him, invited him into the house, and fed him there. The youth
told them that that was the first house in which he had eaten, and
related how he had been treated at the different houses he had passed.
The old woman said, "That is not the way to treat a person." Then the
young man said, "If you eat turtle, I put one into a hole out there."
"Well, if it is turtle," said the old woman, "it is something that has
always been scarce." When they went to the hole and looked in, it was
full of turtles making all kinds of noises. They took one of them out
and cooked it. Then the old woman said, "I will give you my
granddaughter. No one ever brought us anything of this kind before." The
boy said, "If you have any relations let them come and get some of
these." So the young woman went to inform some of their relations, and
they came after turtles.

By and by the young man said, "Let us go to the creek." He stripped off
his clothing and began diving back and forth under water from one side
of the creek to the other. Then the fish became addled (or drunk), and
the youth said, "Go and tell your relations and let them kill the fish."
The young woman did so, and they came and killed some of the fish.

When Rabbit heard what the youth had done he determined that he would do
the same. After he did so there were a lot of minnows floating about
which he told the people to kill, but they soon found that the minnows
were floating about of their own accord, and they scolded Rabbit.

When the young man had jumped into the creek he had gotten the persimmon
stains washed off of him and appeared as a fine youth. Presently he
asked his wife to comb her hair well and part it in the middle in the
usual manner. She did so, and he said, "Give me that broad ax and a
grindstone." "I will give them to you," she said. As he sat there a
short distance away from her he said, "I am hungry." So his wife went
into the house and brought out different kinds of food. "Where shall I
put the food?" she said. Then the young man got up quickly, and,
swinging his broad ax, struck his wife in the middle of her head where
her hair was parted, thereby making two persons out of her, who laughed
and smiled at each other.

When Rabbit heard what had taken place he had his wife comb her hair,
and afterwards asked her to give him the ax and grindstone. Then he sat
down and sharpened his ax. Then he said, "I am hungry," and his wife
went in and brought out different kinds of food for him. "Where shall I
put it?" she said, upon which he stood up, struck her on the head, and
killed her.

When this happened the different animals and other creatures went to the
youth and arrested him, saying that he was the cause of Rabbit having
killed his wife. They tried him and sentenced him

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

to death. First they thought they would kill him by setting him to cut
cane for arrows in a canebrake where there were poisonous snakes. But
first the youth went to the Tiger, who gave him four balls and said,
"Take these balls, and when you get into the canebrake and think your
enemies are near by throw a ball and they will run after it. Throw the
fourth ball as far as you can." So when the young man arrived at the
canebrake he threw one of the balls, and while the snakes were pursuing
it he began cutting cane. When they came back he threw another and then
the third, and, having cut enough cane, he throw the fourth ball as far
as he could and ran off, returning safely to the place from which he had
been sent. Next the youth's enemies sent him to a cannibal who lived
near, telling him to cut off his beard to wrap around the arrows. Again
he went to the Tiger, who said, "Go there, turn into a
granddaddy-longlegs and climb up on the ceiling. He will not be there
when you arrive, but be on the ceiling when he comes back." When he got
to the house he found only the cannibal's wife at home, who agreed to
cut off her husband's beard for him, so he turned himself into a
granddaddy-longlegs and climbed up on the ceiling. After a time the
cannibal came in, lay down, and went to sleep, when his wife cut off his
beard and gave it to the youth, who took it back to his enemies. Next he
was sent to a creek where there was something dangerous, to dig up clay
from the bottom. He consulted the Tiger again, who said, "Let that
person who wears a white collar get that clay from the bottom of the
creek. You can not do it. You must sit down at the edge of the water and
tell this person to hurry up." When he did so the person he called came,
and it was a Kingfisher. The young man asked him to dig clay out of the
bottom of the creek for him, and the Kingfisher said, "I can do so. When
I dive under the water, if white bubbles rise, you will know I am all
right, but if red bubbles of blood rise you must go back." He dived, and
the boy sat watching, and presently he saw some white bubbles rise to
the surface. Then the bird came out and asked the boy to take the earth
out from under his nails. When he had done so the bird said, "Strike the
rock with this clay," and at once the clay grew large. He returned with
it to the people who had sent him. Now, the people thought they would
take this youth across to the other side of the creek, where there were
numbers of cannibals. He consulted the Tiger once more. Then the people
ferried him across and left him on the other side. That night hounds got
after him, but in obedience to the instructions of the Tiger he got into
a hollow tree. The cannibals who followed the hounds tried to twist him
out with a switch, as is done in the case of rabbits, but he twisted it
about in some spider webs, and when the cannibals saw it they thought
that the hounds had lied and began to beat them. Then they went back
home.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

When day came the young man got out of the hollow tree and began
wandering about, and after a time he came to where two women were
swimming. He took their clothes and climbed up into a tree near by. When
the women found this out and discovered him they asked for their
clothes, but he said, "What will you be to me?" "We will be your
sisters," they said. He remained where he was. Then they said "We will
be your aunts." He did not move. "We will be your mothers." They named
all kinds of relationships. Finally they said, "We will be your wives,"
and as soon as he heard it he came down and they took him with them. As
they went along they said to him, "We always want a man, but if we get
one our father always kills and eats him. In the first place our father
makes him enter a race. There is a deep washout in which he has stuck up
sharp spikes, and when they run and have nearly reached that place, he
lets them get a little ahead of him and pushes them in so that they fall
on the spikes and are killed." When they reached their house their
father began to shout and rejoice, saying, "Those women never fail to
bring a good man." Then he asked the young man to run a race, but just
before they reached the washout he dropped back and the old man went on,
falling into the ditch, but by the side of the spikes, so that he was
not killed. Then the youth helped him out. That night the youth slept
between his two wives, and over his head he had something fixed like a
mask, making it appear as if his eyes were wide open. The old man would
come over from time to time and peep at him, but when he saw him lying
with his eyes apparently wide open he went back. Finally he gave up any
expectation of catching his son-in-law asleep, so he whispered to his
daughters that he was going to set the house on fire, and one night,
while they were asleep, he struck them on the head and woke them up. So
the two girls got up and started out, but they had the young man between
them. Then the old man set fire to the house and while it was burning
and everything was crackling and popping he said, "Those bones that I
like to eat so well are crackling and popping." He would run around the
house saying "Hayi haa."

After a while he looked about, saw his son-in-law standing near and
said, "I thought my son-in-law had burned up. I thought bad luck had
befallen him. That was what I meant by acting the way I did." After this
the two women said, "Our father will not give up doing this. Go home if
you want to." Then they told him they would find four young pups for
him. They said, "You will find something with white round its neck. You
ride it across the river. You can name it 'My friend.'" Then he took his
four pups to the bank of the river, sat down there, and began calling
for something. Snakes and turtles of various kinds would raise their
heads out of the water,, and he would say to them, "I am not speaking to
you," upon which they

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

would answer, "I thought you were calling me," and dive under water
again. After a time something with a white ring about its neck stuck its
head out from under the water and said, "What is the matter?" The young
man answered, "I want you to carry me across the river." Then the snake
said, "Why, what are you going to do for me?" and the young man
answered, "I will give you something to eat while you are carrying me
over." "All right," said the snake, and the youth got upon his horn
(this snake having horns like a deer). When they started the young man
gave the snake one pup, but as soon as he had finished it he began to
sink toward the bottom. Then he gave him another pup and he rose and
started on. He fed him with all four in the same manner. As he went the
youth began sawing off one of the prongs of the snake's horns. The snake
perceived the dust and said, "What is this falling?" "It is some
kauhi'sitå (meal made from parched corn) that I am eating." So he got
one of the prongs cut off unknown to the snake. When they were nearly
over he shot an arrow which stuck up in the earth. Seeing this he shot
again but held to the arrow and alighted upon the ground. Upon this the
snake became angry and said, "Well, you could have done that in the
first place without tiring me." The youth answered, "You are so proud
minded and cross I could dry the water up from you which is all you have
to support yourself on." So he dried up the water, and the snake began
to tumble about. It said, "You have treated me badly." So the young man
brought the water back and let the snake go.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[234:1](mtsi274.htm#fr_75.md) Popular name for the
panther.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. Thunder](mtsi275.md)
