[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi248)  [Next](mtsi250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 49. CRANE AND HUMMING BIRD (50)

Sandhill Crane was traveling along and met Humming Bird and they talked
together. Then Crane said, "I can beat you." And Humming Bird said, "O
o+o, you can't do it." "Yes, I can beat you," said Crane. After they had
disputed for some time Crane said, "All right, let us race," so Humming
Bird went to Crane's place to race with him. Then Crane said, "He who
reaches the

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

ocean earlier on the fourth day shall have his home close by the water
forever." "All right," said the other. Then they started. And Humming
Bird disappeared far in the lead on rapid wing. Crane flew slowly along,
but he did not stop. Humming Bird, however, stopped wherever he saw
flowers and Crane passed him. But Humming Bird pursued him and passed
him quickly. At night, however, Humming Bird slept and Crane did not
sleep. He kept going on day and night. It went on like that until the
fourth day. When Humming Bird was asleep that night the Crane's crying
passed him. Then Humming Bird was scared. "Now he has beaten me," he
thought. Then Humming Bird got up and, as soon as it was day, started
on. Crane reached the water's edge and Humming Bird got there
afterwards. So Crane had beaten him. Then Humming Bird said, "Well, you
have beaten me. All you can do is to stay by the water and catch and eat
things there. I, however, can go on licking flowers."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 50. The Conceit of Tciktcinigåsi](mtsi250)
