[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi268)  [Next](mtsi270) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. THE CANNIBAL WOMAN (19)

A young man named Idzo<u>g</u>o<sup>n</sup>'ciya was out hunting and met
a young woman named Micu'x. He would shoot birds with his arrows and she
would pick the arrows up, but, when he asked her for them, she was at
first afraid to come near. Finally, however, she came to him.

Then he asked to go home with her. Finally she agreed, but as they were
going along she told him that her mother was a cannibal, and whenever
her daughter got a man her mother would kill him. But she told the man
she would help him. As they were going along they found the feathers of
different kinds of birds, such as the crane, shitepoke, duck, etc.,
which they collected. Afterwards they reached a creek and, taking mud
from it, they made it into balls, one of which they stuck on the end of
each feather. The woman said, "When we

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

get to my home my mother will offer you something to eat, but you must
not eat it. Eat this parched corn instead. Fool her." When they reached
the house the old woman was away, but presently they heard her coming,
her feet sounding ki~~l~~ki~~l~~ki~~l~~. When she came in she threw
herself down on the bed opposite to that on which the two others lay and
said hå'hu<u>x</u> hå'hu<u>x</u>. After some time she got up again,
saying, "Håhu'<u>x</u>, why am I lying like this? I wish I would soon
smell," meaning that she wished she would soon eat. She began cooking
something which she ate and afterwards threw herself over on the bed,
again saying as before, "håhu'<u>x</u>." By and by she sat up and said,
"Where did my son-in-law come from?" Then she got up and prepared some
food for him, saying, "Eat." He got up out of bed with some parched corn
in one hand which he ate, after which he lay down again. Then the old
woman put away her cooking vessels and food and lay down on the bed
uttering the same ejaculation. At that time she began to snore, but her
daughter said that she never did this when she was really asleep. After
a time she again got up, saying, "I want to smell again." That meant
that she wanted to kill her son-in-law and eat him. When she found him
awake, however, she said, "I always dream. Sometimes I wake up lying by
the door." Again she lay down on the bed. By and by she got up again
with the same remark as before, upon which the young man raised up and
cleared his throat. Then she said, "I am an old woman and sometimes not
just right. Sometimes when I wake up I am out in the yard." She again
fell over on the bed, and presently she fell asleep in reality. When she
did so her daughter took the feathers with balls of mud attached and
placed them all around her mother's head. Immediately there came to be a
lake full of wild fowl under the bed on which she was lying. Finally she
jumped up, and the first thing she knew she was bobbing about in a lake.
The ducks, snipes, and cranes were scared by her and began calling out.
She became tired after a long time and wading across the doorstep where
the water was up to her breast, went to sleep. Then her daughter rose,
gathered up the feathers and mud, and, wrapping them together, took them
out of the house and put them away.

Next morning the old woman woke up and ran out into the woods. Her
daughter said, "When she comes back she will say, 'There are raccoons
out there in a tree. If my son-in-law will kill them I will smell
them.'" By and by they heard her coming ti~~l~~ ti~~l~~ ti~~l~~. She
said, "There are seven raccoons out in a tree here. I want my son-in-law
to shoot them." His wife said, "Kill them for her." He went out and shot
them all, but if he had missed his mother-in-law had determined to kill
and eat him. Then she said to herself, "Son-in-law is all right in
shooting," and she began crying, "hiii."

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

\[paragraph continues\] After that she began picking up acorns which she
pounded in a mortar and afterwards carried to the creek to wash. Her
daughter said, "When she comes back from the creek she will say this:
'There are drumfish feeding about where I was washing my acorns. If
son-in-law will catch them for me I will smell them.'" She did as her
daughter had foretold. Then her daughter said to her husband, "You must
shoot the biggest one. When you do that you must turn around and run and
not let the water touch you. If the water touches you it will knock you
down." The young man did so, and when he had shot the biggest drumfish
the water pursued him up the hill. About halfway up a little water
touched his heel and he fell down. He lay there for seven days.
Meanwhile some cannibals came and looked at him, but they said, "He is
extremely lean. In three or four days his flesh might be much better."
So they went away. As he lay there the youth sang, and he heard a song
in reply up in the air just like his own song. He thought to himself,
"When that person comes he will surely kill me." It was his wife's
voice, however, and when she arrived she began doctoring him, so that he
got up.

When they returned to the house his wife told him that her mother was
over on the other side of the creek. "When she comes back," she said,
"she will want you to kill some white haxt (birds called in Cherokee
umu'~~l~~î or umi'~~l~~î, which are like sandhill cranes)." She did as
her daughter had predicted. "Let me smell some white haxt," she said.
The man's wife also said, "She will offer to carry you across the creek
in a canoe, and she will then run away with the canoe. When she does
that you must take four arrows and shoot them in four different
directions. You must also take four feathers off of those birds and put
them together to form a bridge. She thinks that when she leaves you over
on that side something will kill you." As her daughter had said, she set
her son-in-law across and took away the canoe. He found the white fowls
and shot them during the day, and when night came on he shot arrows
north, south, east, and west from the point where he intended to pass
the night.

Late that night several parties of cannibals found his trail and called
his name, saying, "He has been here." Then they heard an answering cry
"hiyu'<u>x</u>" off at a distance, and, thinking that it was his voice,
the cannibals all ran in that direction and hunted all around for him.
It was one of his arrows which had answered them. When they called again
another arrow answered, and in this way they spent the entire night
wandering around. At daylight they gave it up and went away. The youth
then threw his feathers joined together across the stream and went home.
Now the old woman went to the place where her husband lived, and, when
she came back, she said, "I have

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

set a time for a game of ball." When the time was up different creatures
arrived to take part in the game. Among these were such things as holes
in clay banks and excrements resulting from diarrhea. As these things
gathered in she would say, "Go ahead and tell old stories." She herself
would fall about on the bed. When her husband came he had a black gum
tree upon his shoulder in which all kinds of birds would gather, and he
had canoes for earrings. When she saw him coming she said, "Well, ball
playing shall never disappear." She said to them, "When the game opens
this person will slip on the excrement and fall into the clay bank hole,
and we will kill him." She shouted, "wa-a-a," rejoicing at the prospect.
On the other side the woman's daughter and son-in-law had a number of
beings to aid them, such as wind, cyclone, and thunder. Before they had
played long thunder and wind destroyed the canoe earrings worn by the
cannibal. Cyclone went round and round lifting the opposing players up
from the ground, and thunder and lightning began tearing them to pieces.
Every now and then a leg or a foot would drop to the ground with a noise
like "tâx." So the old man and his wife and all of their party were
destroyed, leaving the young man and woman safe. Then they gathered up
all of the pieces of the bodies of their enemies, piled them up along
with a lot of firewood and burned them. When all were burning a crack
sounded in the fire and went westward. Their spirits crossed the ocean
and the young woman said, "Well, we have had revenge." Then the man and
woman were told to wander around and go westward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Lodge Boy And Thrown-Away](mtsi270)
