[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi194)  [Next](mtsi196.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 59. THE BUNGLING HOST (58)

Bear was once traveling along when he met Rabbit. Stopping to talk to
him, he said, "Come and smoke tobacco with me." The other replied, "Come
and smoke tobacco with me."

So Rabbit went to Bear's house. Bear cooked some peas, took out some of
his leaf lard, and cooked the peas in it. Rabbit ate and started home,
saying: "Come to smoke tobacco with me." So Bear started out. He came to
Rabbit's house. Then Rabbit cooked some peas and opened his belly in
order to take out some leaf lard, but he injured himself.

When he cried out Bear went to see what the matter was and opened his
own belly. "Oh, you have hurt yourself," he said. "Get a doctor for me,"
answered Rabbit. So Bear went to see several buzzards who were sitting
in the trees. "Do you know how to doctor?" he asked one of them. "No,
indeed," he answered. He asked one sitting on another tree, who said, "I
do not know how." Then he said to the last one, "Do you know how to
doctor?" and he answered, "When I doctor, the house in which I treat the
patient is shut up tight." They wanted this one, so he came along and
shut himself up with Rabbit. Rabbit cried out and they said, "What is
the matter with him?" "I am pouring medicine on him." He cried again,
and when they asked "What is the matter with him

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

now?" Buzzard said, as before, "I am pouring medicine over him." This
happened four times. When his cries ceased, Buzzard came out and flew
away. And when someone looked into the house he saw nothing lying there
but bones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 60. The Flight to the Tree](mtsi196.md)
