[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi254)  [Next](mtsi256) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 55. RABBIT FOOLS BIG MAN-EATER (65)

Big Man-eater killed all of the people in one town and was going on to
another town. Rabbit met Big Man-eater, ran back to the village and told
all of the Indians. So all the Indians ran away, leaving only a poor
orphan. Then Rabbit wetted some old red paint, reddened his mouth with
it, and knocked down and killed the orphan. Carrying its body he went
along until he met Big Man-eater. Big Man-eater said to him, "How are
the people there?" "I have killed them all," he said. "How are they down
yonder?" "The same thing happened to them." Then Rabbit said, referring
to the orphan child, "This is all I have left." When he gave him to Big
Man-eater the latter threw him into the air and when he came down
swallowed him at a gulp. "Let us be friends," he said, so they became
friends and traveled on together. Then they said, "Let us shut our eyes
and defecate." When they did so Big Man-eater passed nothing but split
bones while Rabbit defecated only grass. What Big Man-eater passed
Rabbit picked up and put down under himself and his own excrement he
placed under Big Man-eater. "Let us open our eyes," he said. Nothing but
bones were under Rabbit, while Big Man-eater was sitting over excrement
from grass.

"I was never so before; I feel ashamed," said Big Man-eater.

"Now let us go to Ashes-thrown-up Camp," said Rabbit. They set out and
camped there and Rabbit hunted up a lot of old bark which he laid down
near. Then they built a fire, and he heaped

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

a lot of hot ashes on the bark, and threw it upon Big Man-eater's chest
when he was asleep. Rabbit threw a few upon his own chest and lay down.
Then Big Man-eater groaned and stood up, and Rabbit rubbed the ashes off
of him. They lay down again until day. Then Rabbit said, "Let us go to
Tree-falling-down Camp." They went on and got there. When they made camp
they built a fire under a dead tree standing near. When it was lighted,
Rabbit walked about, took a small tree, and brought it back. Then Rabbit
lay down and Big Man-eater laid himself at the foot of the tree. When it
was nearly midnight the tree fell upon Big Man-eater. Rabbit laid the
small tree over himself and remained where he was groaning. Big
Man-eater was frightened, woke up, and kicked away the tree with his
feet. He stood up, pulled the tree off of Rabbit, and threw it away.

When day came Rabbit said, "Let us go to Jumping-back-and-forth Creek,"
and they set out for it. When they got there Rabbit went ahead and
jumped to the other side of it and back. He jumped again until he had
jumped four times. Then he said to Big Man-eater, "You do it." So Big
Man-eater jumped across and back four times. "Let us jump again," he
said. When they jumped, Rabbit crossed over and back quickly. When Big
Man-eater was going to jump back, Rabbit said, "Let me take your bag,"
and he gave it to him. He jumped across and started to come back, but
the stream suddenly became full of water, the rising of which struck Big
Man-eater. The running water carried him off to the other side of the
ocean. Rabbit kept saying, "My friend threw his bag down on the water to
me. Look! my friend has gone to the ocean." He was calling to him but he
had disappeared far across the sea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 56. Rabbit and Big Man-eater Swap](mtsi256)
