[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi068)  [Next](mtsi070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 67. WHY THE RABBIT STEALS (60)

(Tuggle collection)

In the beginning all the animals held a meeting and agreed that each
should select a tree the fruit of which should belong to the descendants
of the chooser. The first choice fell to the Rabbit, who went down to a
river and ran slowly up the bank looking first at one tree and then at
another. At last he stopped under a sycamore tree and, seeing the large
balls hanging from its limbs, he chose the sycamore. All the other
animals picked out such trees and fruits as they liked, the Raccoon
taking muscadines and the Opossum persimmons, till all the different
fruits were taken. Then the Rabbit, becoming hungry, ran down to his big
tree and hunted on the ground for some of the fine balls, but none were
on the ground. He looked up into the tree and there were hundreds on the
limbs. Thinking some would fall in a little while, he sat under the tree
and waited. Night came and he hopped away home hungry. Next day he came
back and looked again on the ground. None of the balls had yet fallen.
He sat under the sycamore all that day and again had to go to bed
hungry. The third day he came to his tree and his body was thin and his
eyes were big, and they got bigger looking while he longed for the balls
to fall to the ground. His body got thinner and his eyes bigger and all
his descendants have been like him. He waited till he nearly perished,
and at last he decided to go around at night and steal from the other
animals, as there were no more trees from which he could select. In this
way the Rabbit learned to steal for a living and he has always kept up
the habit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 68. Why the Opossum Looks Ashamed](mtsi070)
