[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi161)  [Next](mtsi163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 26. THE GHOST

People were out hunting. They took their families, made camps, and
hunted out from them. Then one man went out hunting and got lost. He
traveled about trying to find the camp and at night sat down under a
tree. Far off he heard someone shout and he thought "People are in
search of me." Presently the noise came close. Then it was something
else that howled. It came near and was gone. The voice again sounded far
off, approached, got near, and was gone. Far off again the voice
sounded, approached, got near, and was gone. Then it was gone for good.
The man stuck his hunting

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

knife into the ground, held his gun prepared to shoot, remained there
until day came and then rose and started off. He hunted for the camp. He
traveled about in search of it but could not find it and when night came
he again sat down under a tree.

Now a fire glowed redly in the distance and he thought, "People are
coming to meet me." It was just a raccoon which came near, its body
giving out light, and it stayed scratching up something to eat. Then the
man remained seated but did not sleep and when day came started on
again. He traveled about hunting for the camp but could not find it and
at night he again sat down under a tree. Then a horned
owl-crawfish <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) from the direction of a
bright sheet of water in the distance hooted and came toward him. It
came on and when it got close to him it disappeared. After he had
remained seated for a while it hooted again in the distance, came on,
got close to him and was gone. He sat there until day and again traveled
about in search of his camp. At night he sat under a tree as usual,
stuck his knife into the ground, and held his gun ready. Day found him
still sitting there, and again he arose and walked about. He was sleepy
and thought, "I will lie down for a while."

While the man was asleep he thought he saw someone sitting upon the top
of a tree who said to him, "Your camp is straight in the direction in
which your head lies." He was astonished and awoke. Then he arose and
went on in the direction in which his head had been lying. He came to
the camp. The other people had thought, "He is dead." When he arrived
all went there and saw him. Then he covered himself up with a blanket
and lay down without saying a word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[146:1](mtsi162.htm#fr_42) See note to last
story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. The Owl Wives](mtsi163)
