[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi115)  [Next](mtsi117.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 23. HERON AND HUMMING BIRD (50)

Heron and Humming Bird agreed to race. They said to each other, "We will
race for four days, and whichever first on the fourth day reaches and
sits down by a big dead tree standing on the bank of the river shall own
all the fish in the water." When the time for the race came, Heron
started off, while Humming Bird went along or stopped as he chose. While
he was going about tasting the flowers Heron overtook him and went on
past, while Humming Bird when he got ready went on and overtook Heron.
He passed him and when he got a considerable distance ahead tasted the
flowers again. While he was flitting about, Heron kept on, reached him,
and went past, but while he was going along Humming Bird overtook and
passed him once more. When night came he stopped and slept. Humming Bird
sat there asleep, but Heron traveled all night. He went on past and when
day came Humming Bird chased him and again overtook him. They went on
and the night of the fourth day Humming Bird also slept. He sat where he
was until morning and then started on, but when he got to where the dead
tree stood, Heron had reached it first and was sitting on it. When
Humming Bird got there Heron said to him, "We agreed that whoever got to
the dead tree first should own all of the water. Now all of the water is
mine." Because Heron said to Humming Bird, "You must not drink water but
only taste of the flowers when you travel about," Humming Bird has since
merely tasted of the flowers.

This is how it has always been told.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24. The Theft of Fire](mtsi117.md)
