[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi090)  [Next](mtsi092.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### 89. A LEGEND RECORDED BY BARTRAM

The following quotation from Bartram <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)
gives another mythic tale, which is added by way of supplement.

"The river St. Mary has its source from a vast lake, or marsh, called
Ouaquaphenogaw, which lies between Flint and Oakmulge rivers, and
occupies a space of near 300 miles in circuit. This vast accumulation of
waters in the wet season appears as a lake, and contains some large
islands or knolls of rich high land, one of which the present generation
of the Creeks represent to be a most blissful spot of the earth; they
say it is inhabited by a peculiar race of Indians, whose women are
incomparably beautiful; they also tell you that this terrestrial
paradise has been seen by some of their enterprising hunters, when in
pursuit of game, who being lost in inextricable swamps and bogs, and on
the point of perishing, were unexpectedly relieved by a company of
beautiful women, whom they call daughters of the sun, who kindly gave
them such provisions as they had with them, which were chiefly fruits,
oranges, dates, etc., and some corn cakes, and then enjoined them to fly
for safety to their own country; for that their husbands were fierce
men, and cruel to strangers; they further say that these hunters had a
view of their settlements, situated on the elevated banks of an island,
or promontory, in a beautiful lake; but that in their endeavors to
approach it they were involved in perpetual labyrinths, and, like
enchanted land, still as they imagined they had just gained it, it
seemed to fly before them, alternately appearing and disappearing. They
resolved, at length, to leave the delusive pursuit and to return; which,
after a number of inexpressible difficulties, they effected. When they
reported their adventures to their countrymen, their young warriors were
inflamed with an irresistible desire to invade, and make a conquest of,
so charming a country, but all their attempts have proved abortive,
\[they\] never having been able again to find that enchanting spot, nor
even any road or pathway to it; yet they say that they frequently meet
with certain signs of its being inhabited, as the building of canoes,
footsteps of men, etc. They tell another story concerning the
inhabitants of this sequestered country, which seems probable enough,
which is, that they are the posterity of a fugitive remnant of the
ancient Yamases, who escaped massacre after a bloody and decisive
conflict between them and the Creek nation (who, it is certain,
conquered, and nearly exterminated that once powerful people), and here
found an asylum, remote and secure from the fury of their proud
conquerors."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[83:1](mtsi091.htm#fr_21.md) Wm. Bartram, Travels,
Dublin, 1793, pp. 24-26. This tale was made the subject of a poem by the
Poetess Felicia Hemans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 90. The Creation of the Earth](mtsi092.md)
