[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi235)  [Next](mtsi237.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 36. THE MONSTER LIZARD (33)

Six Indians went out to hunt bear. One of them said, "Here stands a
hollow tree," but he did not think there was a bear in it. Then an
Indian climbed to the top and they tied up spunk and gave it to him. He
set it on fire and put it into the hollow. As he did so there was a
roaring sound and the tree shook. Then those who had remained on the
ground were frightened and fled in all directions. Then the thing came
out, jumped down upon the ground, and pursued one of them, whom it soon
caught. It trailed another and seized him. It caught another in the same
manner and returned with him. It kept on thus, and just as it was
starting after the last one the Indian who had thrown the spunk came
down and ran to a skiff. When he had nearly reached it he fell down, but
he pulled himself along by means of the grass until he got into the
skiff. He pushed off quickly and went down with the current. The big
lizard (hanabia tcoba) pursued him, howling. It kept on and jumped into
the stream, which it crossed. It hunted about on the other side and then
crossed back. It went back and forth several times, but, not finding
him, turned about and disappeared. The Indian crossed to the other shore
in his skiff, got out, and traveled on. He traveled on until he came to
where some Shawnee lived and he informed them what had happened. They
told him to show them the place, but he was afraid. However! they told
him that they wanted to go to the place so that they might kill the
monster. "Tell us where that tree stands and we will kill it," they
said. So the man guided them. He went with them and showed them where
the tree stood. They said, "Do as you did before." He climbed up into
the tree and they set fire to some spunk and gave it to him. When he
climbed up they made it boggy underneath. And then he threw the spunk
into the tree. Just as he did so the big lizard made a roaring sound and
came out. It came down, made a jump while still far up from the ground
and stink into the boggy place. Then the Shawnee ran upon the lizard and
chopped at it. They chopped it up and killed it. Then they went back and
the Indian was very happy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 37. The Story of Life-Eater](mtsi237.md)
