[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi230)  [Next](mtsi232.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 31. THE MAN AND THE EAGLE (27)

Some Indians went hunting and camped in a certain place. While they were
there one Indian was attracted by a certain high mountain. So he went to
it and spent sometime walking around its sides. After he had looked as
much as he wished he started back to camp, but before he had gotten
there something like a cloud pursued him, seized him, and flew with him
to the top of the rocky mountain. Arrived there, it threw him down to be
food for an eaglet, which was on the top, but he whipped it and made it
run away. He himself hid in a rocky cave.

After he had stayed in this place for a while he got hungry, and laid
down slices of venison from a deer he had killed upon a hot rock where
they became dried in the sun. He lived upon them and also gave some
venison to the eaglet, which was very small. When the big eagle killed
and brought home a bison he ate that in the same manner. He also fed it
to the eaglet. Another time it killed a bear and he fed the eaglet with
it. He did so because he wanted to ride upon its back. He was watching
for a chance to do this. The old eagle went off early in the morning and
came back late in the evening. So the Indian thought, "That is how I
will escape." He kept trying to ride upon the little eagle. By and by he
cut a stick to take along, and after the old eagle had started off, he
carried the eaglet to the edge of the rock, mounted upon it and made it
start downward by striking it on the head. If it inclined upward he hit
it on the head and made it turn down. He struck it on the head and made
it come down four times. When it dropped upon the ground he got off and
ran away. As he went he saw the thing like a black cloud following him
and he ran fast. When he got to some woods the eagle approached them,
wheeled about and went back.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 32. The Old Dog Saves His Master](mtsi232.md)
