[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi004)  [Next](mtsi006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. THE ORPHAN (43)

An orphan was walking about shooting arrows. One day he came to the
lower end of a creek where the water was deep and heard a noise like
thunder. Looking closely he discovered a Tie-snake

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

and the Thunder-being fighting, and when they saw him both asked him to
help them. The Tie-snake spoke first, saying, "My friend, help me, and I
will tell you what I have learned." The boy was about to aim at his
antagonist when the Thunder said, "Don't shoot me. Kill the Tie-snake.
There is a spot under his throat and it is there that his heart is. If
you shoot him there you will kill him." Upon hearing this the boy aimed
at the white spot and killed the Tie-snake. In this way he obtained all
of the Thunder's power, but the Thunder told him not to tell anyone
where he was getting it.

Some time after this some people went bear hunting, taking the orphan
with them. It was in winter when the bears were hibernating. Two camps
were formed, one consisting of the boy's uncles. While they were there
an owl was heard to hoot and the orphan said, "The hooting of that owl
is the sign of a bear." His uncles said they did not believe it. "He
doesn't know anything," said one of them, but the boy declared, "I am
right." His brother-in-law believed him, so he said that they two would
go out after it. They set out next morning and, sure enough, discovered
a bear in a hole in the ground. They killed it and brought it back to
camp. The Thunder gave this orphan such power that all that he foretold
came to pass. If he told the hunters a certain kind of game animal was
in a tree it was actually there and they got it.

Some time later war broke out. The orphan said he could fight without
help from anyone, and they told him to go ahead by himself. "I will
certainly do so," he answered. The brother-in-law who had confidence in
him also went along in the party. When they got close to the hostile
camp, the boy went on ahead while the others sheltered themselves behind
trees. Then the orphan caused thunder and lightning all over the camp of
the enemy. Some were killed and the rest ran about in helpless terror,
so that the boy's followers ran up and killed all of them.

Later there was another war and those who knew the orphan wanted him to
lead. When they got close to the enemy, he told his companions to remain
at some distance. Then he went nearer and began to circle round a tree.
As he did so lightning played all about and struck all over the camp of
the enemy, killing every one in it. The orphan was never seen
afterwards, and so they thought that he went up in the midst of the
thundering to the sky. Therefore, they claimed that the Thunder was an
orphan child.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Thunder Helper](mtsi006.md)
