[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi042)  [Next](mtsi044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 41. RABBIT GETS MAN-EATER OVER TO THE OTHER SIDE OF THE OCEAN (65)

### (SECOND VERSION)

Lion used to live on this side of the ocean where he killed people and
ate them. Therefore, the people got Rabbit to get him over to the other
side. Rabbit went to meet Lion and said, "I know where you can find lots
of people to eat. I eat them myself." "You poor little thing," said
Lion, "what can you eat?" Rabbit said: "They

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

will come ashore in a boat from a vessel, and you can eat them, but
first we will hang up long pieces of bark about the fire." So they went
out and collected many pieces of dry bark which they hung up around the
fire in order to be ready to cook the people whom they killed. By and by
both went out after human flesh, and, when they came in, Lion said: "I
have all I want. It doesn't look as if you had eaten anything good."
"The only way to prove that," said Rabbit, "is to sit side by side with
closed eyes and defecate. Whoever passes human bones has eaten human
flesh." They did so, and Lion defecated human bones, while Rabbit passed
only balls of grass, but before they opened their eyes again, he changed
the places of the excrement. The Rabbit said: "You do not know where to
go." After that Lion did not want to be with him any more, but Rabbit
persuaded him to stay. That night they prepared to sleep on opposite
sides of the fire. While they were preparing Rabbit said: "What do you
say when you are asleep?" "I snore," said Lion. "What do you say?" "I
say said Rabbit. After they had been lying down for a while, Lion began
to snore, and Rabbit saw that he was fast asleep. Then he got up, set
the dried barks on fire, and threw them down on top of Lion. Lion was so
badly burned that he jumped into the ocean and swam away, and he did not
stop swimming until he reached the other side, where he is to-day. (Told
by Silas Jefferson.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 42. Rabbit Gets Man-eater Over to the Other Side of the Ocean
(Third Version)](mtsi044)
