[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi096)  [Next](mtsi098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. THE BOY AND THE WIZARDS (38)

Two old people, an old woman and her husband, and the nephew of the
latter, were living together. One evening the boy went visiting and the
old people were alone in the house. When it was dark

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

the boy came back. The door of the house was shut and he heard them
talking inside. He went to a corner and stood listening to them. While
he stood there one of them said, "Let's go round." "All right," the
other answered. After they had gone out, the boy went in, turned down
the bedclothes, and got into bed. He lay there waiting for those old
people. One made a noise like a horned owl, and he heard the other sound
like that also. While he was still lying there they left the house, but
presently he again heard the sound coming back. After going round and
round the house they came in. While they were getting the bed ready to
lie down in, the old woman turned over the bedding and found the boy
lying there. "Did you hear us go out?" she said. "Were you there while
we were around?" "I heard," he said. "Well, do not tell anyone about us.
If you do not tell anyone about us, when we are both dead all the things
in this house shall be yours." "I will not tell," he answered, and all
went to sleep.

Next day a little girl who lived near fell sick and died. The old woman
heard people crying and started out. When she got to the place, she went
to where the little girl was lying dead, dropped upon her body and wept
and rolled about upon it. The boy had an arrow. He got to the place and
saw her. The old woman saw him and stopped crying. When she started back
the little boy came up and spoke to those people. He said, "Last night
that old woman bewitched her so that she died." When he said so, they
exclaimed, "That old woman has killed her." They followed her to her
house. When she got there the old man was sitting outside sunning
himself. She came up and said, "Come in. They want to kill us," and he
ran in and shut the door. Then the people surrounded the house and set
it on fire and both were burned.

This is how it is told.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. The Man-eating Bird](mtsi098)
