[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi181)  [Next](mtsi183.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 46. THE GIRL CAPTIVES

The Choctaw and Alabama once had a fight in which the Choctaw won and
captured two young women. They carried them to their town and kept them
there. By and by they saw the Choctaw gather grass, tie it in bundles
and bring it in. They were frightened. "They are going to burn us to
death," they said. "Let us run away." That night when the Choctaw were
all asleep they went out and ran off. They came on in this
direction. <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47.md) They came on without
stopping. They came on day after day. After they had traveled for a long
time they crept into a hollow log and lay down. They shut up the opening
completely with punk. While they were lying

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

there, their pursuers arrived, walked upon the log, passed by, and spent
some time hunting about. When they did not find the trail they went back
to the log and hunted about back and forth. After all had gone back and
it was night the girls got out and came on. They came on steadily
without stopping and next day reached a place where white people lived.

By that time the skin was all worn off of the soles of their feet, so
the white people gave them deer hide which they dressed and made into
moccasins. They remained there for a while, and when they started on
again the white people gave them a note saying, "When you see any
person, give it to him." They kept coming on and when they met a white
man on the way they gave him the note and he received them, went with
them, and pointed out the trail. When he left them they started on
again. Wherever they encountered whites they gave them the note and the
white people gave them food and anything else they were in need of. They
went on in that way until they reached home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[155:1](mtsi182.htm#fr_47.md) This event could have
taken place only in the old country and their course would have been
eastward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 47. The Alabama and Choctaw Wars](mtsi183.md)
