[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi158)  [Next](mtsi160.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 23. THE FRIENDS

Two friends used to go about together. One of them died, and the one who
was left fell sick. He lay down all of the time, was unable to get well,
and his body became so lean that it was nothing but bones. His friends
did not know how to restore him to health,

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "What is the matter with him?" they thought, so
in order to find out they hunted for a prophet. When the prophet arrived
he said to them, "His soul has been gone for a long time." Then they
wanted him to try to get it back. "He must have gone after the other
man," they said.

Then the prophet took four bottles of whisky and a white blanket to lie
on. They wrapped him up, placed the whisky by him, tied the corners with
a rope and lifted him. Those assembled smoked tobacco, blowing the smoke
about continually, until the prophet lay as if dead. Then they laid him
down on the ground.

Meanwhile his soul took the whisky and went up. He went toward the sky
after the sick man's soul. When he got there he found the two standing
together dancing, the sick man held by his friend. The prophet tried to
get him away but his friend held him so tight that he could not separate
them. He remained there watching him. By and by the friend loosened his
grip a little and the doctor seized his friend and started back with
him. When he heard his friend coming after them he opened a bottle of
whisky, threw a little on the ground and came on again. The friend
remained at the place a while and came on once more, whereupon the
prophet scattered some more whisky. Then he came on again, carrying the
soul. When the dead man again followed, the doctor sprinkled out more
liquor. He remained there for a short time as before but soon came on
again. The next time the prophet emptied it all out and when he started
on the friend remained longer before resuming the pursuit.

He kept on that way until he had used up all but the fourth bottle, the
last one. He heard him shout in the distance. Then he poured out the
last of this bottle and came on once more, but when the friend reached
that place he stopped and disappeared.

So they got back, and the sick man recovered. He who had fainted \[i.
e., the prophet\] came to life. And because he had gone after the soul
they gave him in payment a horse with its saddle, a fine horse and a
good saddle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24. The Dead Wife](mtsi160.md)
