[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi126)  [Next](mtsi128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 34. THE TAR BABY (63)

### (SECOND VERSION)

One man was master of the water. Whoever wanted water would pay that
man, but Rabbit stole some and drank. After a time the man who was
master of the water found out that someone had been stealing it. He
thought of a way to find out who it was. He set up a doll made of tar
where the person would pass.

Now when Rabbit got to the place he saw a black person standing near the
water. Rabbit said to him, "Get out of my way at once. I am going along
that way as I have been in the habit of doing." The doll did not move.
Therefore, Rabbit said, "I will hit you." When it did not move Rabbit
came up close and said, "If I hit a person he always dies." He hit it
and his hand stuck. "If I hit a person with one of my hands he always
dies." he said. He hit it with his other hand and that also stuck. "If I
hit a person with my

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

head he also dies," he said. He hit it with his head and that stuck. "My
feet are not stuck," he said. So he kicked it and his feet stuck. The
Rabbit was stuck to the doll.

Next day the man who was master of the water discovered him. He said to
him, "You are the one who has been stealing and drinking the water," but
Rabbit answered, "I have not stolen any water from you, but was just
passing along the road. The little black man stood there and I said to
him, 'Move out of my way.' He would not move out of my way so I hit him
and he got hold of me and I have sat here until day." The man said, "Was
it not you who stole the water from me?" and Rabbit said, "I have never
stolen any water from you." "If that is so, I will let you go, but you
must look out for me. If you find out who has been stealing the water,
you must tell me," he said. Rabbit said, "All right." So the man let him
go, and he ran off and disappeared.

This is how it is told.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 35. The Bungling Host](mtsi128)
