[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi301)  [Next](mtsi303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 37. THE BISON HELPER

A man who had two wives went hunting. He killed nothing and saw nothing
in the woods, and before he could see any game in the grassy places it
would run away. Then he thought, "I will kill them by jumping into the
water," but first he thought he would go about setting fires. So he went
along setting fire to the pines and finally he set fire to a bison lying
down which jumped up all ablaze and set more fires as he ran on.

The bison made a circle of fire as far as the hunter had thought of
going, so he jumped into the water and when the flame came toward him he
killed deer, turkeys, bear, and other animals as they came down. As he
sat doing this his gun would become clogged and he would clean it out,
dry it, and then kill more. After he had shot them for some time he said
to himself, "I think that will do," and he stopped.

Then he began skinning the animals. He picked out the fat ones and kept
them, but he picked out the lean ones and threw them away, taking only
their skins. When he got through skinning them he put bear fat into the
deerskins, made two canoes, and put these in them. He filled both canoes
with the meat and fat, tied them together and drifted down with them.

As he was going along he saw a man and a woman lying asleep on the bank
of the river at a certain place and he wanted to play a trick upon them.
So he brought the canoes to shore, went up the bank, and lay with the
sleeping woman. Then he filled a clay pot with bear fat and laid down
some dried deer meat near it, and thought, as he went on, "When they
wake up they will sop it up."

While he was going on farther bethought, "I will rest and then start on
again," so he landed and went up the bank, but while he was lying there
he saw turtles floating near. He wanted to get them, so he made a cord
and dived under water. He tied up many of them and, thinking, "I guess
that will do," he went up and tied them to a tree on

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

the river bank, one bending over the water. He cooked one and when it
was done he split it in two and said to himself, "I will eat it when it
is cool, and meanwhile lie down on my back and go to sleep."

It was the end of the fourth day <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_88)
when he awoke, and lots of maggots had come out on him. "The turtles
have pulled up the tree near which I put them and it is standing up in
the deep water near the other side of the river," he said.

When he reached the place where his people came to get water one of his
wives came down with her head dishevelled. He thought, "Whose wife looks
like that? I thought it was mine," and when he looked closely he wept.
He had been gone so long that she thought, "Something must have killed
him," and she dressed herself like a widow. When she wept, he said to
her, "You can both come and get what I brought," but she answered, "The
other one has married again." "All right," he said, "you take all the
things for yourself," and she took them out of the canoe.

Then they took many hides to the store. When they sold them he said to
her, "Take that shawl which you have around you off and throw it away."
So she took it off and he gave her a new one which she wrapped about
herself. Farther on he was buying dry goods and there were tearing
noises as they separated off the goods for him. He said, "When I was
shooting them it sounded like that."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[262:1](mtsi302.htm#fr_89) So the text, but a
longer time seems to be indicated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 38. The Mosquito](mtsi303)
