[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mtsi271)  [Next](mtsi273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7. THE ORIGIN OF CORN (4, 5)

Corn-woman lived at a certain place in company with twin girls. When the
corn was all gone she went into the corn house, taking two baskets, and
came out with the baskets full. They lived on the hominy which she made
from this.

One time the girls looked into this corn house and saw nothing there.
They said to each other, "Where does she get it? Next time she goes in
there we will creep up and watch her."

When the corn was all gone she started to go in and they saw her. So
they crept after her and when she entered and closed the door they
peeped through a crack. They saw her set down the basket, stand astride
of it and rub and shake herself, and there was a noise, tsågak, as if
something fell off. In this way she filled one basket with corn. Then
she stood over the other, rubbed herself and shook, the noise tsågak was
heard and that basket was full of beans. After that the girls ran away.

"Let us not eat it," they said. "She defecates and then feeds us with
the excrement." So when the hominy was cooked they did not eat it, and
from that she knew they had seen her. "Since you think it is filthy, you
will have to help yourselves from now on. Kill me and burn my body. When
summer comes things will spring up on the place where it was burned and
you must cultivate them, and when they are matured they will be your
food."

They killed Corn-woman and burned her body and when summer came corn,
beans, and pumpkins sprang up. They kept cultivating these and every
day, when they stopped, stuck their hoes up in the ground and went away.
But on their return more ground would be hoed and the hoes would be
sticking up in different places.

They said, "Let us creep up and find out who is hoeing for us," and they
did so. When they looked they saw that the hoes were doing it of
themselves and they laughed. Immediately the hoes fell down and did not
work for them any more. They did not know that it was just those two
hoes which were helping them and they themselves spoiled it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Corn-Woman's Son](mtsi273)
