[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi143)  [Next](mtsi145.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8. HOW WATER WAS LOST AND RECOVERED (13)

There is a game called ~~l~~åkålu'nka (the moccasin game) which is
played with four square pieces of deer hide placed upon a big bearskin
laid down hair side up. The players having formed two sides, a man on
one side takes a bullet, moves it about in his hands and after
pretending to put it under various pieces of deer hide finally deposits
it under one of them when he thinks the fact will escape observation.
One of the opponents then guesses under which skin it has been placed,
and if he is successful his party takes the bullet; if he fails he
guesses again, and if he fails two or three times another of his party
tries his skill.

One time a man who was very fond of this game and who had a very
considerable family was so unfortunate as to lose all of his
possessions, down to his very clothes. Finally he wagered the water of
the world and lost that, upon which all of the streams, ponds, and other
reservoirs of water dried up and everyone was dying of thirst. All were
seeking water but did not know how they could get it.

By and by a Bicici'hka (a small speckled woodpecker with a red head)
discovered a cane as big as a tree, lighted upon it, and began

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

pecking. But before he had made much of a hole he heard a noise inside
which frightened him and he flew away. He found some one and said to
him, "Something is making a noise inside of a cane." The person
answered, "It is water," so he went back to the place and pecked a hole
all the way through, when the water gushed out and all of the creeks
were overflowed. All the creatures drank and were very happy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. Thunder](mtsi145.md)
