[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southeast](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mtsi227)  [Next](mtsi229.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 28. THE ORPHAN AND THE BEAR (36)

Some Indians crossed a big river and hunted on the other side. A poor
orphan went with them and kept watch of the camp. They camped at a
certain place and spent the night there. Next morning they scattered
about hunting. The orphan remained in camp and presently one of the
hunters came with a deer over his shoulder. He skinned it, cut the meat
up, dressed it, and told the orphan to roast it, and he went back
hunting.

Then the orphan roasted the meat and walked about watching it. At noon
all of the Indians came back and ate the cooked meat. When they were
going back to hunt the orphan wanted very much to go with them. So they
gave him an old gun they had brought. When all were gone, he picked up
the old gun, put it over his shoulder, and started off. He went straight
west and on the way he saw a Bear in its den. Then he pointed his gun at
it prepared to shoot, but the Bear said "Don't shoot me." He called to
the orphan, "Come and sit down!" So he went and sat down and the Bear
talked to him. He took him home and the orphan stayed with him, but the
other Indians hunted for him. When he did not return they hunted for him
but could not find him. He lay still for a long time, and afterwards the
Bear took him along with himself. By and by the Bear said, "Are you
hungry?" and the orphan answered "I am hungry." Upon this the Bear
reached under his armpit, drew out a persimmon--a good, ripe
persimmon--and gave it to him to eat.

In that way they traveled on and presently the Bear said, "A male person
better than I comes to meet me. Take a good pine knot along." So the
orphan took a good pine knot and they went on. When they saw a fellow
coming to meet them the Bear said, "There now, he is coming; when he
throws me down, hit him, but don't hit him too hard. When I say
'Enough,' stop." Then the one who was coming toward them jumped upon the
Bear, they wrestled together, and the Bear was thrown down. The orphan
took his stick, ran upon the conqueror and struck him upon the head,
"båk." So the other became dizzy and fell down. When he hit him the
second time the Bear said, "Don't whip him too much," and he stopped.
Then they started on. They went on and reached his home.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

Then the Bear said to the orphan, "Now I must leave you. The hunters are
coming after me and want to kill me." And the Bear said to the orphan,
"When they kill me, they will take you back, but don't eat of my flesh.
If the people say 'Eat!' do not eat of me! After they have killed me,
cut off leaves and put them under me and leave me, but, when they are
gone, come back here, pile the leaves up, set them on fire, and return.
When four days are passed come here to look at the place. You will see a
young pokeweed standing there, which you must cut off and split in two.
Look into it and you will see something inside. Take it with you, and
with it you can kill anything you desire. Don't kill me! (i. e.,
bears?)" But the orphan was very sad. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[192:1](mtsi228.htm#fr_59.md) There Is a little
more to this story which my informant had forgotten.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. The Bear's Revenge](mtsi229.md)
