[TOPY](https://www.topy.net/topy/) \[External Site\] 
[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [Index](black) 
[Previous](black5)  [Next](black7) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

FIVE

  

A

  
Thee moment ov orgasm is central to thee process. It is special and
allshould be done to make it so. Thus we decorate thee moment as we
would ajewel, with all manner ov objects and actions that are precious
and personal.Like gifts to a Lover, we consecrate thee moment in
L-ov-e.  
  

B

  
We say to make thee room or space ov work special. We say likewise ov
theeinterior mood, for so thee one is physical, so thee other is
psychick andour aim is to join thee two to a single purpose.  

C

  
In sex, physical self-consciousness is abandoned in favour ov
intensifiedsensual pleasure. In sleep, everyday consciousness is
abandoned in favourov thee unconscious, thee world ov dreams. In Sigils,
thee two states meetin a single act: and so is released a special and
potent energy; a fertilepower ov harmony, transcending thee barriers ov
thee conscious/unconsciousdivide. And so it is thee Sigil lets forth an
energy that cuts through likea flaming sword, overcouming all that
stands in its path.  

D

  
Intuition and instinct are thee only pointers in everyday
consciousnessto thee objects and methods from which to construct a
potent Sigil. Theebooks and lessons are ov thee museum ov thee past -
thee future is entirelyours to construct as we will.  

E

  
All must coum from experience, and all experience is ov value. It is
simply a question ov observation; seeing thee links, and drawing all
without exception into thee universe ov magickal intent and action.

F

  
Sex is thee medium for thee magickal act, enacted physically and with
directcontrol ov thee Individual. It generates thee greatest power
which, whenreleased, is diverted from its ordinary object and thrust
with thee intenseforce ov will towards thee fulfilment ov desire.  

G

  
All must becoum focused to thee single purpose in hand. It is a case
ovgiving up all pre-conceptions, all inhibitions and preferences, for
theework involves a totality and anything that gets in thee way ov
coumpletenessis as a vestige ov thee past which will remain to trick and
trouble theematter to its detriment. Relinquish all control and
prejudice in order toreclaim and master it, redefined and in thee train
ov informed desire.  

H

  
Sigilisation leads to thee realisation ov personal truth, and provides
theemeans with which to express that truth in life.  

I

  
"E know what E will, and E will what E desire."  

J

  
Sigils are thee unity and integration ov Will, Desire and Knowledge.
Theyare thee process by which dreams becoum reality.

  
K

  
It is certain to us that Sigils, enacted with true determination, and
filledwith thee perfect strength ov a sincere desire, generate ov their
own theenecessary will for success. It is simply a matter ov intent and
intensity;thee practice in thee sure knowledge and acceptance ov
result.  

L

  
Sigils are thee art ov transforming former belief into current
knowledgeov thee way ahead. Sigils are thee revealers ov truths, be they
hidden orput aside through fear or expedience.  

M

  
Thee Sigil is thee declaration ov intent. It awakens thee Individual
magickallyto thee circumstances ov their life and in this way makes thee
focused desiremore likely to happen. Sigils are not a way ov
guaranteeing success, theycan only open thee door for your own action. A
Sigil might ensure that anopportunity for what you desire becoums
apparent to you, butter you muststill act upon that knowledge for thee
desire to be fulfilled.  

N

  
Without thee physical response thee psychick work is pointless. Be
awakenot asleep to action.  

O

  
Thee more Sigils you perform, thee greater thee clarity ov aim you
willfind within. A cumulative power ov activated will develops, and thee
Sigilsbecoum intensified in direction and effect.  

P

  
Thee ritual ov thee Sigil should be enacted to produce a climax ov
utmostintensity. At thee moment when thee rising flux ov sexual
excitement becoumsungovernable, when thee whole ov physical and mental
consciousness undergoesa spasm that takes it beyond thee point ov
return, at that moment all mustbe focused on thee Sigil, thee physical
sensation discarded and forgotten.  

Q

  
A Sigil can be designed to answer any desire, without limitation or
constraint.Thee aim need in no ways be sexual. Thee Sigil encompasses
all possibility.  

R

  
Thee result ov thee Sigil becoums a part ov thee life process. Thus it
maynot bring obvious results immediately, butter however long it takes
youcan be certain that if thee desire was true, and thee intent real,
you willbe moving towards achieving thee desired goal; preparing and
passing throughall thee necessary stages so that when thee moment is
right you will beready and alive to it.  

S

  
As we have said before, thee methods described by TOPY are butter guides
to Individual action. As long as thee Sigil contains thee basic element
ov focused will, all other details can be varied. Indeed it is essential
that thee ritual be one that is reflective ov who you are, and so should
be thee result ov personal input intuitively arrived at.

T

  
Although some days and times might have particular significance to an
Individualand thee Temple, a potent Sigil can be performed at any time
on any day.

  
U

  
Orgasm during a Sigil can be reached by any method. Alone or with a
partner,by masturbation or intercourse, orally or in any other way thee
Individualdesires. A partner need not be involved in Temple activity to
be an effectivecollaborator.  

V

  
Thee act ov making a physical record ov one's Sigil is a useful way ov
instructingthee subconscious, and at thee same time ov revealing to
consciousness whatit is thee subconscious wishes to say. Thus thee
process forces thee dividedself into Unity, and manifests thee outcoum
in thee physical plane.  

W

  
Although we strongly recommend thee making ov a Sigil Paper, other
methodsov recording may also be incorporated into thee ritual:
polaroids, photographs,cassette recordings, drawings (automatic or
otherwise), film or video. Aswith thee Sigil Paper, all these methods
should be used in thee ritual toheighten thee intensity ov what it is
you do, rather than purely to documentthee event. Let intuition not
logic be thee guide in this, and experimentfreely without embarrassment
or doubt.  
  
