[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol080)  [Next](lol082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0082"></span>

### TALES OF PURITAN LAND

<span id="an_2H_4_0083"></span>

### EVANGALINE

The seizure by England of the country that soon afterward was
rechristened Nova Scotia was one of the cruellest events in history. The
land was occupied by a good and happy people who had much faith and few
laws, plenty to eat and drink, no tax collectors nor magistrates, in
brief, a people who were entitled to call themselves Acadians, for they
made their land an Arcady. Upon them swooped the British ships, took
them unarmed and unoffending, crowded them aboard their
transports,—often separating husband and wife, parents and
children,—scattered them far and wide, beyond hope of return, and set up
the cross of St. George on the ruins of prosperity and peace. On the
shore of the Basin of Minas can still be traced the foundations of many
homes that were perforce deserted at that time, and among them are the
ruins of Grand Pre.

Here lived Evangeline Bellefontaine and Gabriel Lajeunesse, who were
betrothed with the usual rejoicings just before the coming of the
English. They had expected, when their people were arrested, to be sent
away together; but most of the men were kept under guard, and Gabriel
was at sea, bound neither he nor she knew whither, when Evangeline found
herself in her father's house alone, for grief and excitement had been
more than her aged parent could bear, and he was buried at the shore
just before the women of the place were crowded on board of a transport.
As the ship set off her sorrowing passengers looked behind them to see
their homes going up in flame and smoke, and Acadia knew them no more.
The English had planned well to keep these people from coming together
for conspiracy or revenge: they scattered them over all America, from
Newfoundland to the southern savannas.

Evangeline was not taken far away, only to New England; but without
Gabriel all lands were drear, and she set off in the search for him,
working here and there, sometimes looking timidly at the headstones on
new graves, then travelling on. Once she heard that he was a *coureur
des bois* on the prairies, again that he was a voyageur in the Louisiana
lowlands; but those of his people who kept near her inclined to jest at
her faith and urged her to marry Leblanc, the notary's son, who truly
loved her. To these she only replied, "I cannot."

Down the Ohio and Mississippi she went—on a raft—with a little band of
those who were seeking the French settlements, where the language,
religion, and simplicity of life recalled Acadia. They found it on the
banks of the Teche, and they reached the house of the herdsman Gabriel
on the day that he had departed for the north to seek Evangeline. She
and the good priest who had been her stay in a year of sorrow turned
back in pursuit, and for weary months, over prairie and through forest,
skirting mountain and morass, going freely among savages, they followed
vain clues, and at last arrived in Philadelphia. Broken in spirit then,
but not less sweet of nature for the suffering that she had known, she
who had been named for the angels became a minister of mercy, and in the
black robe of a nun went about with comforts to the sick and poor. A
pestilence was sweeping through the city, and those who had no friends
nor attendants were taken to the almshouse, whither, as her way was,
Evangeline went on a soft Sabbath morning to calm the fevered and
brighten the hearts of the dying.

Some of the patients of the day before had gone and new were in their
places. Suddenly she turned white and sank on her knees at a bedside,
with a cry of "Gabriel, my beloved!" breathed into the ears of a
prematurely aged man who lay gasping in death before her. He came out of
his stupor, slowly, and tried to speak her name. She drew his head to
her bosom, kissed him, and for one moment they were happy. Then the
light went out of his eyes and the warmth from his heart. She pressed
his eyelids down and bowed her head, for her way was plainer now, and
she thanked God that it was so.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Snoring Of Swunksus](lol082)
