[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol074)  [Next](lol076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0076"></span>

### FATHER AND SON

It was three soldiers, escaping from the rout of Braddock's forces, who
caught the alleged betrayer of their general and put him to the death.
They threw his purse of ill-gotten louis d'or into the river, and sent
him swinging from the edge of a ravine, with a vine about his neck and a
placard on his breast. And so they left him.

Twenty years pass, and the war-fires burn more fiercely in the vales of
Pennsylvania, but, too old to fight, the schoolmaster sits at his door
near Chad's Ford and smokes and broods upon the past. He thinks of the
time when he marched with Washington, when with two wounded comrades he
returned along the lonely trail; then comes the vision of a blackening
face, and he rises and wipes his brow. "It was right," he mutters. "He
sent a thousand of his brothers to their deaths."

Gilbert Gates comes that evening to see the old man's daughter: a
smooth, polite young fellow, but Mayland cannot like him, and after some
short talk he leaves him, pleading years and rheumatism, and goes to
bed. But not to sleep; for toward ten o'clock his daughter goes to him
and urges him to fly, for men are gathering near the house—Tories, she
is sure,—and they mean no good. Laughing at her fears, but willing to
relieve her anxiety, the old man slips into his clothes, goes into the
cellar, and thence starts for the barn, while the girl remains for a few
minutes to hide the silver.

He does not go far before Gates is at his elbow with the whispered
words, "Into the stack-quick. They are after you." Mayland hesitates
with distrust, but the appearance of men with torches leaves no time for
talk. With Gilbert's help he crawls deep into the straw and is covered
up. Presently a rough voice asks which way he has gone. Gilbert replies
that he has gone to the wood, but there is no need for getting into a
passion, and that on no account would it be advisable to fire the stack.
"Won't we though?" cries one of the party. "We'll burn the rebel out of
house and home," and thrusting his torch into the straw it is ablaze in
an instant. The crowd hurries away toward the wood, and does not hear
the stifled groan that comes out of the middle of the fire. Gates takes
a paper from his pocket, and, after reading it for the last time, flings
it upon the flame. It bears the inscription, "Isaac Gates, Traitor and
Spy, hung by three soldiers of his majesty's army. Isaac Mayland."

From his moody contemplation he rouses with a start, for Mayland's
daughter is there. Her eyes are bent on a distorted thing that lies
among the embers, and in the dying light of the flames it seems to move.
She studies it close, then with a cry of pain and terror she falls upon
the hot earth, and her senses go out, not to be regained in woful years.
With head low bowed, Gilbert Gates trudges away. In the fight at
Brandywine next day, Black Samson, a giant negro, armed with a scythe,
sweeps his way through the red ranks like a sable figure of Time.
Mayland had taught him; his daughter had given him food. It is to avenge
them that he is fighting. In the height of the conflict he enters the
American ranks leading a prisoner—Gilbert Gates. The young man is pale,
stern, and silent. His deed is known, he is a spy as well as a traitor,
but he asks no mercy. It is rumored that next day he alone, of the
prisoners, was led to a wood and lashed by arms and legs to a couple of
hickory trees that had been bent by a prodigious effort and tied
together by their tops. The lashing was cut by a rifle-ball, the trees
regained their straight position with a snap like whips, and that was
the way Gilbert Gates came to his end.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Envy Of Manitou](lol076)
