[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol039)  [Next](lol041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0040"></span>

### BIRTH OF THE WATER-LILY

Back from his war against the Tahawi comes the Sun, chief of the Lower
Saranacs,—back to the Lake of the Clustered Stars, afterward called, by
dullards, Tupper's Lake. Tall and invincible he comes among his people,
boasting of his victories, Indian fashion, and stirring the scalps that
hang at his breast. "The Eagle screams," he cries. "He greets the chief,
the Blazing Sun. Wayotah has made the Tahawi tremble. They fly from him.
Hooh, hooh! He is the chief." Standing apart with wistful glance stands
Oseetah, the Bird. She loves the strong young chief, but she knows that
another has his promise, and she dares not hope; yet the chief loves
her, and when the feasting is over he follows her footprints to the
shore, where he sees her canoe turning the point of an island. He
silently pursues and comes upon her as she sits waving and moaning. He
tries to embrace her, but she draws apart. He asks her to sing to him;
she bids him begone.

He takes a more imperious tone and orders her to listen to her chief.
She moves away. He darts toward her. Turning on him a face of sorrow,
she runs to the edge of a steep rock and waves him back. He hastens
after. Then she springs and disappears in the deep water. The Sun
plunges after her and swims with mad strength here and there. He calls.
There is no answer. Slowly he returns to the village and tells the
people what has happened. The Bird's parents are stricken and the Sun
moans in his sleep. At noon a hunter comes in with strange tidings:
flowers are growing on the water! The people go to their canoes and row
to the Island of Elms. There, in a cove, the still water is enamelled
with flowers, some as white as snow, filling the air with perfume,
others strong and yellow, like the lake at sunset.

"Explain to us," they cry, turning to the old Medicine of his tribe,
"for this was not so yesterday."

"It is our daughter," he answered. "These flowers are the form she
takes. The white is her purity, the yellow her love. You shall see that
her heart will close when the sun sets, and will reopen at his coming."
And the young chief went apart and bowed his head.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rogers's Slide](lol041)
