[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol060)  [Next](lol062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0062"></span>

### MARK OF THE SPIRIT HAND

Andover, New Jersey, was quaint and quiet in the days before the
Revolution—it is not a roaring metropolis, even yet—and as it offered
few social advantages there was more gathering in taprooms and more
drinking of flip than there should have been. Among those who were not
averse to a cheering cup were three boon companions, Bailey, Hill, and
Evans, farmers of the neighborhood. They loved the tavern better than
the church, and in truth the church folk did not love them well, for
they were suspected of entertaining heresies of the most forbidden
character. It was while they were discussing matters of belief over
their glasses that one of them proposed, in a spirit of bravado, that
whichever of the trio might be first to die should come back from the
grave and reveal himself to the others—if he could—thus settling the
question as to whether there was a future.

Not long after this agreement—for consent was unanimous—Hill departed
this life. His friends lamented his absence, especially at the tavern,
but they anticipated no attempt on his part to express the distinguished
consideration that he had felt for his old chums. Some weeks passed, yet
there was no sign, and the two survivors of the party, as they jogged
homeward to the house where both lived, had begun to think and speak
less frequently of the absent one. But one night the household was
alarmed by a terrible cry. Bailey got a light and hurried to the bedside
of his friend, whom he found deathly white and holding his chest as if
in pain. "He has been here!" gasped Evans. "He stood here just now."

"Who?" asked Bailey, a creep passing down his spine.

"Hill! He stood there, where you are now, and touched me with a hand
that was so cold—cold—" and Evans shivered violently. On turning back
the collar of his shirt the impression of a hand appeared on the flesh
near the shoulder: a hand in white, with one finger missing. Hill had
lost a finger. There was less of taverns after that night, for Evans
carried the token of that ghostly visit on his person until he, too, had
gone to solve the great secret.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Liberal Church](lol062)
