[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol100)  [Next](lol102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0103"></span>

### THE GREAT CARBUNCLE

High on the eastern face of Mount Monroe shone the Great Carbuncle, its
flash scintillating for miles by day, its dusky crimson glowing among
the ledges at night. The red men said that it hung in the air, and that
the soul of an Indian—killed, that he might guard the spot—made approach
perilous to men of all complexions and purposes. As late as Ethan
Crawford's time one search band took a "good man" to lay the watcher,
when they strove to scale the height, but they returned "sorely bruised,
treasureless, and not even saw that wonderful sight." The value of the
stone tempted many, but those who sought it had to toil through a dense
forest, and on arriving at the mountain found its glories eclipsed by
intervening abutments, nor could they get near it. Rocks covered with
crystals, at first thought to be diamonds, were readily despoiled of
their treasure, but the Great Carbuncle burned on, two thousand feet
above them, at the head of the awful chasm of Oakes Gulf, and baffled
seekers likened it to the glare of an evil eye.

There was one who had grown old in searching for this gem, often
scrambling over the range in wind and snow and cloud, and at last he
reached a precipitous spot he had never attained before. Great was his
joy, for the Carbuncle was within his reach, blazing into his eyes in
the noon sunlight as if it held, crystallized in its depths, the
brightness of all the wine that had ever gladdened the tired hearts of
men. There were rivals in the search, and on reaching the plateau they
looked up and saw him kneeling on a narrow ledge with arms extended as
in rapture. They called to him. He answered not. He was dead—dead of joy
and triumph. While they looked a portion of the crag above him fell away
and rolled from rock to rock, marking its course with flashes of bloody
fire, until it reached the Lake of the Clouds, and the waters of that
tarn drowned its glory. Yet those waters are not always black, and
sometimes the hooked crest of Mount Monroe is outlined against the night
sky in a ruddy glow.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Skinner's Cave](lol102)
