[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol109)  [Next](lol111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0112"></span>

### THE OLD MILL AT SOMERVILLE

The "old powder-house," as the round stone tower is called that stands
on a gravel ridge in Somerville, Massachusetts, is so named because at
the outbreak of the Revolutionary War it was used temporarily as a
magazine; but long before that it was a wind-mill. Here in the old days
two lovers held their tryst: a sturdy and honest young farmer of the
neighborhood and the daughter of a man whose wealth puffed him with
purse-pride. It was the plebeian state of the farmer that made him look
at him with an unfavorable countenance, and when it was whispered to him
that the young people were meeting each other almost every evening at
the mill, he resolved to surprise them there and humiliate, if he did
not punish them. From the shadow of the door they saw his approach, and,
yielding to the girl's imploring, the lover secreted himself while she
climbed to the loft. The flutter of her dress caught the old man's eye
and he hastened, panting, into the mill. For some moments he groped
about, for his eyes had not grown used to the darkness of the place, and
hearing his muttered oaths, the girl crept backward from the stair.

She was beginning to hope that she had not been seen, when her foot
caught in a loose board and she stumbled, but in her fall she threw out
her hand to save herself and found a rope within her grasp. Directly
that her weight had been applied to it there was a whir and a clank. The
cord had set the great fans in motion. At the same moment a fall was
heard, then a cry, passing from anger into anguish. She rushed down the
stair, the lover appeared from his hiding-place at the same moment, and
together they dragged the old man to his feet. At the moment when the
wind had started the sails he had been standing on one of the
mill-stones and the sudden jerk had thrown him down. His arm caught
between the grinding surfaces and had been crushed to pulp. He was
carried home and tenderly nursed, but he did not live long; yet before
he died he was made to see the folly of his course, and he consented to
the marriage that it had cost him so dear to try to prevent. Before she
could summon heart to fix the wedding-day the girl passed many months of
grief and repentance, and for the rest of her life she avoided the old
mill. There was good reason for doing so, people said, for on windy
nights the spirit of the old man used to haunt the place, using such
profanity that it became visible in the form of blue lights, dancing and
exploding about the building.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Edward Randolph's Portrait](lol111)
