[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol165)  [Next](lol167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0168"></span>

### LIGHTS AND SHADOWS OF THE SOUTH

<span id="an_2H_4_0169"></span>

### THE SWIM AT INDIAN HEAD

At Indian Head, Maryland, are the government proving-grounds, where the
racket of great guns and splintering of targets are a deterrent to the
miscellaneous visitations of picnics. Trouble has been frequently
associated with this neighborhood, as it is now suggested in the noisy
symbolry of war. In prehistoric days it was the site of an aboriginal
town, whose denizens were like other Indians in their love for fight and
their willingness to shed blood. Great was the joy of all these citizens
when a scouting party came in, one day, bringing with them the daughter
of one of their toughest old hunters and a young buck, from another
faction, who had come a-courting; her in the neighboring shades.

Capture meant death, usually, and he knew it, but he held himself
proudly and refused to ask for mercy. It was resolved that he should
die. The father's scorn for his daughter, that she should thus consort
with an enemy, was so great that he was on the point of offering her as
a joint sacrifice with her lover, when she fell on her knees before him
and began a fervent appeal, not for herself, but for the prisoner. She
would do anything to prove her strength, her duty, her obedience, if
they would set him free. He had done injury to none. What justice lay in
putting him to the torture?

Half in earnest, half in humor, the chief answered, "Suppose we were to
set him on the farther shore of the Potomac, do you love him well enough
to swim to him?"

"I do."

"The river is wide and deep."

"I would drown in it rather than that harm should come to him."

The old chief ordered the captive, still bound, to be taken to a point
on the Virginia shore, full two miles away, in one of their canoes, and
when the boat was on the water he gave the word to the girl, who
instantly plunged in and followed it. The chief and the father embarked
in another birch—ostensibly to see that the task was honestly fulfilled;
really, perhaps, to see that the damsel did not drown. It was a long
course, but the maid was not as many of our city misses are, and she
reached the bank, tired, but happy, for she had saved her lover and
gained him for a husband.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Moaning Sisters](lol167)
