[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol178)  [Next](lol180) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0182"></span>

### A GHOSTLY AVENGER

In Cuthbert, Georgia, is a gravestone thus inscribed: "Sacred to the
memory of Jim Brown." No date, no epitaph—for Jim Brown was hanged. And
this is the story: At the close of the Civil War a company of Federal
soldiers was stationed in Cuthbert, to enforce order pending the return
of its people to peaceful occupations. Charles Murphy was a lieutenant
in this company. His brother, an officer quartered in a neighboring
town, was sent to Cuthbert one day to receive funds for the payment of
some men, and left camp toward evening to return to his troop. That
night Charles Murphy was awakened by a violent flapping of his tent. It
sounded as though a gale was coming, but when he arose to make sure that
the pegs and poles of his canvas house were secure, the noise ceased,
and he was surprised to find that the air was clear and still. On
returning to bed the flapping began again, and this time he dressed
himself and went out to make a more careful examination. In the shadow
of a tree a man stood beckoning. It was his brother, who, in a low,
grave voice, told him that he was in trouble, and asked him to follow
where he should lead him. The lieutenant walked swiftly through fields
and woods for some miles with his relative—he had at once applied for
and received a leave of absence for a few hours—and they descended
together a slope to the edge of a swamp, where he stumbled against
something. Looking down at the object on which he had tripped, he saw
that it was his brother's corpse—not newly dead, but cold and rigid—the
pockets rifled, the clothing soaked with mire and blood.

Dazed and terrified, he returned to camp, roused some of his men, and at
daybreak secured the body. An effort to gain a clue to the murderer was
at once set on foot. It was not long before evidence was secured that
led to the arrest of Jim Brown, and there was a hint that his
responsibility for the crime was revealed through the same supernatural
agency that had apprised Lieutenant Murphy of his bereavement. Brown was
an ignorant farm laborer, who had conceived that it was right to kill
Yankees, and whose cupidity had been excited by learning that the
officer had money concealed about him. He had offered, for a trifling
sum, to take his victim by a short cut to his camp, but led him to the
swamp instead, where he had shot him through the heart. On the culprit's
arrival in Cuthbert he was lynched by the soldiers, but was cut down by
their commander before life was extinct, and was formally and
conclusively hanged in the next week, after trial and conviction.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wraith Ringer Of Atlanta](lol180)
