[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol158)  [Next](lol160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0161"></span>

### THE LAMB OF SACRIFICE

The Revolution was beginning, homes were empty, farms were deserted,
industries were checked, and the levies of a foreign army had consumed
the stores of the people. A messenger rode into the Connecticut Valley
with tidings of the distress that was in the coast towns, and begged the
farmer folk to spare some of their cattle and the millers some of their
flour for the relief of Boston. On reaching Windham he was received with
good will by Parson White, who summoned his flock by peal of bell, and
from the steps of his church urged the needs of his brethren with such
eloquence that by nightfall the messenger had in his charge a flock of
sheep, a herd of cattle, and a load of grain, with which he was to set
off in the morning. The parson's daughter, a shy maid of nine or ten,
went to her father, with her pet lamb, and said to him, "I must give
this, too, for there are little children who are crying for bread and
meat."

"No, no," answered the pastor, patting her head and smiling upon her.
"They do not ask help from babes. Run to bed and you shall play with
your lamb to-morrow."

But in the red of the morning, as he drove his herd through the village
street, the messenger turned at the hail of a childish voice, and
looking over a stone wall he saw the little one with her snow-white lamb
beside her.

"Wait," she cried, "for my lamb must go to the hungry children of
Boston. It is so small, please to carry it for some of the way, and let
it have fresh grass and water. It is all I have."

So saying, she kissed the innocent face of her pet, gave it into the
arms of the young man, and ran away, her cheeks shining with tears.
Folding the little creature to his breast, the messenger looked
admiringly after the girl: he felt a glow of pride and hope for the
country whose very children responded to the call of patriotism. "Now,
God help me, I will carry this lamb to the city as a sacrifice." So
saying, he set his face to the east and vigorously strode forward.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moodus Noises](lol160)
