[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol108)  [Next](lol110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0111"></span>

### THE FATAL FORGET-ME-NOT

Three miles out from the Nahant shore, Massachusetts, rises Egg Rock, a
dome of granite topped by a light-house. In the last century the
forget-me-nots that grew in a little marsh at its summit were much
esteemed, for it was reported that if a girl should receive one of these
little flowers from her lover the two would be faithful to each other
through all their married life. It was before a temporary separation
that a certain young couple strolled together on the Nahant cliffs. The
man was to sail for Italy next day, to urge parental consent to their
union. As he looked dreamily into the sea the legend of the
forget-me-not came into his mind, and in a playful tone he offered to
gather a bunch as a memento. Unthinkingly the girl consented. He ran
down the cliff to his boat, pushed out, and headed toward the rock, but
a fisherman shouted that a gale was rising and the tide was coming in;
indeed, the horizon was whitening and the rote was growing plain.

Alice had heard the cry of warning and would have called him back, but
she was forsaken by the power of speech, and watched, with pale face and
straining eyes, the boat beating smartly across the surges. It was seen
to reach Egg Rock, and after a lapse came dancing toward the shore
again; but the tide, was now swirling in rapidly, the waves were running
high, and the wind freshened as the sun sank. At times the boat was out
of sight in the hollowed water, and as it neared Nahant it became
unmanageable. Apparently it had filled with water and the tiller-rope
had broken. Nothing could be done by the spectators who had gathered on
the rocks, except to shout directions that were futile, even if they
could be heard. At last the boat was lifted by a breaker and hurled
against a mass of granite at the very feet of the man's mistress. When
the body was recovered next day, a bunch of forget-me-not was clasped in
the rigid hand.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Old Mill At Somerville](lol110)
