[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol099)  [Next](lol101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0102"></span>

### THE VISION ON MOUNT ADAMS

There are many traditions connected with Mount Adams that have faded out
of memory. Old people remember that in their childhood there was talk of
the discovery of a magic stone; of an Indian's skeleton that appeared in
a speaking storm; of a fortune-teller that set off on a midnight quest,
far up among the crags and eyries. In October, 1765, a detachment of
nine of Rogers's Rangers began the return from a Canadian foray, bearing
with them plate, candlesticks, and a silver statue that they had rifled
from the Church of St. Francis. An Indian who had undertaken to guide
the party through the Notch proved faithless, and led them among
labyrinthine gorges to the head of Israel's River, where he disappeared,
after poisoning one of the troopers with a rattlesnake's fang. Losing
all reckoning, the Rangers tramped hither and thither among the snowy
hills and sank down, one by one, to die in the wilderness, a sole
survivor reaching a settlement after many days, with his knapsack filled
with human flesh.

In 1816 the candlesticks were recovered near Lake Memphremagog, but the
statue has never been laid hold upon. The spirits of the famished men
were wont, for many winters, to cry in the woods, and once a hunter,
camped on the side of Mount Adams, was awakened at midnight by the notes
of an organ. The mists were rolling off, and he found that he had gone
to sleep near a mighty church of stone that shone in soft light. The
doors were flung back, showing a tribe of Indians kneeling within.
Candles sparkled on the altar, shooting their rays through clouds of
incense, and the rocks shook with thunder-gusts of music. Suddenly
church, lights, worshippers vanished, and from the mists came forth a
line of uncouth forms, marching in silence. As they started to descend
the mountain a silver image, floating in the air, spread a pair of
gleaming pinions and took flight, disappearing in the chaos of
battlemented rocks above.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Great Carbuncle](lol101)
