[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol255)  [Next](lol257) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0262"></span>

### THE QUEEN OF DEATH VALLEY

In the southern part of California, near the Arizona line, is the famous
Death Valley—a tract of arid, alkaline plain hemmed in by steep
mountains and lying below the level of the sea. For years it was
believed that no human being could cross that desert and live, for
horses sink to their knees in drifts of soda dust; there is no water,
though the traveller requires much drink; and the heat is terrific.
Animals that die in the neighborhood mummify, but do not decay, and it
is surmised that the remains of many a thoughtless or ignorant
prospector lie bleached in the plain. On the east side of Dead Mountain
are points of whitened rock that at a distance look like sheeted
figures, and these, the Indians say, are the ghosts of their brethren.

In the heart of this desert is said to be the ruin of a pueblo, or
village, though the shape and size of it suggest that it was made for a
few persons rather than for a tribe or family. Long ago, the tale runs,
this place of horrors was a fair and fertile kingdom, ruled by a
beautiful but capricious queen. She ordered her subjects to build her a
mansion that should surpass those of her neighbors, the Aztecs, and they
worked for years to make one worthy of her, dragging the stones and
timbers for miles. Fearing lest age, accident, or illness should forbid
her to see the ending of her dream, she ordered so many of her subjects
to assist that her tribe was reduced to practical slavery.

In her haste and heartlessness she commanded her own daughter to join
the bearers of burdens, and when the toilers flagged in step in the
noonday heat she strode among them and lashed their naked backs. As
royalty was sacred, they did not complain, but when she struck her
daughter the girl turned, threw down her load of stone, and solemnly
cursed her mother and her kingdom; then, overcome by heat and weariness,
she sank to the earth and died. Vain the regrets and lamentations of the
queen. The sun came out with blinding heat and light, vegetation
withered, animals disappeared, streams and wells dried up, and at last
the wretched woman gave up her life on a bed of fever, with no hand to
soothe her dying moments, for her people, too, were dead. The palace,
half-completed, stands in the midst of this desolation, and sometimes it
seems to lift into view of those at a distance in the shifting mirage
that plays along the horizon.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bridal Veil Fall](lol257)
