[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol229)  [Next](lol231) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0235"></span>

### THE DIVISION OF TWO TRIBES

When white men first penetrated the Western wilderness of America they
found the tribes of Shoshone and Comanche at odds, and it is a legend of
the springs of Manitou that their differences began there. This
"Saratoga of the West," nestling in a hollow of the foot-hills in the
shadow of the noble peak of Pike, was in old days common meeting-ground
for several families of red men. Councils were held in safety there, for
no Indian dared provoke the wrath of the manitou whose breath sparkled
in the "medicine waters." None? Yes, one. For, centuries ago a Shoshone
and a Comanche stopped here on their return from a hunt to drink. The
Shoshone had been successful; the Comanche was empty handed and ill
tempered, jealous of the other's skill and fortune. Flinging down the
fat deer that he was bearing homeward on his shoulders, the Shoshone
bent over the spring of sweet water, and, after pouring a handful of it
on the ground, as a libation to the spirit of the place, he put his lips
to the surface. It needed but faint pretext for his companion to begin a
quarrel, and he did so in this fashion: "Why does a stranger drink at
the spring-head when one of the owners of the fountain contents himself
with its overflow? How does a Shoshone dare to drink above me?"

The other replied, "The Great Spirit places the water at the spring that
his children may drink it undefiled. I am Ausaqua, chief of Shoshones,
and I drink at the head-water. Shoshone and Comanche are brothers. Let
them drink together."

"No. The Shoshone pays tribute to the Comanche, and Wacomish leads that
nation to war. He is chief of the Shoshone as he is of his own people."

"Wacomish lies. His tongue is forked, like the snake's. His heart is
black. When the Great Spirit made his children he said not to one,
'Drink here,' and to another, 'Drink there,' but gave water that all
might drink."

The other made no answer, but as Ausaqua stooped toward the bubbling
surface Wacomish crept behind him, flung himself against the hunter,
forced his head beneath the water, and held him there until he was
drowned. As he pulled the dead body from the spring the water became
agitated, and from the bubbles arose a vapor that gradually assumed the
form of a venerable Indian, with long white locks, in whom the murderer
recognized Waukauga, father of the Shoshone and Comanche nation, and a
man whose heroism and goodness made his name revered in both these
tribes. The face of the patriarch was dark with wrath, and he cried, in
terrible tones, "Accursed of my race! This day thou hast severed the
mightiest nation in the world. The blood of the brave Shoshone appeals
for vengeance. May the water of thy tribe be rank and bitter in their
throats."

Then, whirling up an elk-horn club, he brought it full on the head of
the wretched man, who cringed before him. The murderer's head was burst
open and he tumbled lifeless into the spring, that to this day is
nauseous, while, to perpetuate the memory of Ausaqua, the manitou smote
a neighboring rock, and from it gushed a fountain of delicious water.
The bodies were found, and the partisans of both the hunters began on
that day a long and destructive warfare, in which other tribes became
involved until mountaineers were arrayed against plainsmen through all
that region.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Besieged By Starvation](lol231)
