[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol262)  [Next](lol264) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0271"></span>

### STONE-THROWING DEVILS

There is an odd recurrence among American legends of tales relating to
assaults of people or their houses by imps of darkness. The shadowy
leaguers of Gloucester, Massachusetts, kept the garrison of that place
in a state of fright until they were expelled from the neighborhood by a
silver bullet and a chaplain's prayers. Witchcraft was sometimes
manifested in Salem by the hurling of missiles from unseen hands. The
"stone-throwing devil" of Portsmouth is the subject of a tradition more
than two centuries of age, but, as the stone-thrower appears rather as
an avenger than as a gratuitously malignant spirit, he is ill treated in
having the name of devil applied to him. In this New Hampshire port
lived a widow who had a cabin and a bit of land of her own. George
Walton, a neighbor, wanted her land, for its situation pleased him, and
as the old woman had neither money nor influential friends he charged
her with witchcraft, and, whether by legal chicanery or mere force is
not recorded, he got his hands upon her property.

The charge of witchcraft was not pressed, because the man had obtained
what he wanted, but the poor, houseless creature laid a ban on the place
and told the thief that he would never have pleasure nor profit out of
it. Walton laughed at her, bade her go her way, and moved his family
into the widow's house. It was Sunday night, and the family had gone to
bed, when at ten o'clock there came a fierce shock of stones against the
roof and doors. All were awake in a moment. A first thought was that
Indians were making an assault, but when the occupants peered cautiously
into the moonlight the fields were seen to be deserted. Yet, even as
they looked, a gate was lifted from its hinges and thrown through the
air.

Walton ventured out, but a volley of stones, seemingly from a hundred
hands, was delivered at his head, and he ran back to shelter. Doors and
windows were barred and shuttered, but it made no difference. Stones,
too hot to hold a hand upon, were hurled through glass and down the
chimney, objects in the rooms themselves were picked up and flung at
Walton, candles were blown out, a hand without a body tapped at the
window, locks and bars and keys were bent as if by hammer-blows, a
cheese-press was smashed against the wall and the cheese spoiled,
hay-stacks in the field were broken up and the hay tossed into branches
of trees. For a long time Walton could not go out at night without being
assailed with stones. Bell, book, candle, and witch-broth availed
nothing, and it was many a day before peace came to the Walton
household.

In 1802 an epidemic of assault went through the Berkshire Hills. The
performance began in a tailor's shop in Salisbury, Connecticut, at
eleven of the clock on the night of November 2, when a stick and lumps
of stone, charcoal, and mortar were flung through a window. The moon was
up, but nothing could be seen, and the bombardment was continued until
after daylight. After doing some damage here the assailants went to the
house of Ezekiel Landon and rapped away there for a week. Persons were
struck by the missiles, and quantities of glass were destroyed. Nothing
could be seen coming toward the windows until the glass broke, and it
was seldom that anything passed far into a room. No matter how hard it
was thrown, it dropped softly and surely on the sill, inside, as if a
hand had put it there. Windows were broken on both sides of buildings at
the same time, and many sticks and stones came through the same holes in
the panes, as if aimed carefully by a gunner.

A hamlet that stood in Sage's ravine, on the east side of the Dome of
the Taconics, was assailed in the same way after nightfall. One house
was considerably injured. No causes for the performance were ever
discovered, and nobody in the place was known to have an enemy—at least,
a malicious one.

At Whitmire Hill, Georgia, the spot where two murders were committed
before the war, is a headless phantom that comes thundering down on the
wayfarer on the back of a giant horse and vanishes at the moment when
the heart of his prospective victim is bumping against his palate. At
times, however, this spook prefers to remain invisible, and then it is a
little worse, for it showers stones and sods on the pedestrian until his
legs have carried him well beyond the phantom's jurisdiction.

The legends of buried treasure, instanced in another place, frequently
include assaults by the ghosts of pirates and misers on the daring ones
who try to resurrect their wealth.

Forty-seven years ago, in the township of St. Mary's, Illinois, two lads
named Groves and a companion named Kirk were pelted with snowballs while
on their way home from a barn where they had been to care for the stock
for the night. The evening had shut in dark, and the accuracy of the
thrower's aim was the more remarkable because it was hardly possible to
see more than a rod away. The snowballs were packed so tightly that they
did not break on striking, though they were thrown with force, and Kirk
was considerably bruised by them. Mr. Groves went out with a lantern,
but its rays lit up a field of untrodden snow, and there was no sound
except that made by the wind as it whistled past the barn and fences.
Toward dawn another inspection was made, and in the dim light the
snowballs were seen rising from the middle of a field that had not a
footprint on it, and flying toward the spectators like bullets. They ran
into the field and laid about them with pitchforks, but nothing came of
that, and not until the sun arose was the pelting stopped. Young Kirk,
who was badly hurt, died within a year.

The men of Sharon, Connecticut, having wheedled their town-site from the
Indians in 1754, were plagued thereafter by whoops and whistlings and
the throwing of stones. Men were seen in the starlight and were fired
upon, but without effect, and the disturbances were not ended until the
Indians had received a sum of money.

Without presuming to doubt the veracity of tradition in these matters,
an incident from the writer's boyhood in New England may be instanced.
The house of an unpopular gentleman was assailed—not in the ostentatious
manner just described, yet in a way that gave him a good deal of
trouble. Dead cats appeared mysteriously in his neighborhood; weird
noises arose under his windows; he tried to pick up letters from his
doorstep that became mere chalk-marks at his touch, so that he took up
only splinters under his nails. One night, as a seance was about
beginning in his yard, he emerged from a clump of bushes, flew in the
direction of the disturbance, laid violent hands on the writer's collar,
and bumped his nose on a paving-stone. Then the manifestations were
discontinued, for several nights, for repairs.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Storied Springs](lol264)
