[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol206)  [Next](lol208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0211"></span>

### HIAWATHA

The story of Hiawatha—known about the lakes as Manabozho and in the East
as Glooskapis the most widely disseminated of the Indian legends. He
came to earth on a Messianic mission, teaching justice, fortitude, and
forbearance to the red men, showing them how to improve their
handicraft, ridding the woods and hills of monsters, and finally going
up to heaven amid cries of wonder from those on whose behalf he had
worked and counselled. He was brought up as a child among them, took to
wife the Dakota girl, Minnehaha ("Laughing Water"), hunted, fought, and
lived as a warrior; yet, when need came, he could change his form to any
shape of bird, fish, or plant that he wished. He spoke to friends in the
voice of a woman and to enemies in tones like thunder. A giant in form,
few dared to resist him in battle, yet he suffered the common pains and
adversities of his kind, and while fishing in one of the great lakes in
his white stone canoe, that moved whither he willed it, he and his boat
were swallowed by the king of fishes. He killed the creature by beating
at its heart with a stone club, and when the gulls had preyed on its
flesh, as it lay floating on the surface, until he could see daylight,
he clambered through the opening they had made and returned to his
lodge.

Believing that his father had killed his mother, he fought against him
for several days, driving him to the edge of the world before peace was
made between them. The evil Pearl Feather had slain one of his
relatives, and to avenge that crime Hiawatha pressed through a guard of
fire-breathing serpents which surrounded that fell personage, shot them
with arrows as they struck at him, and having thus reached the lodge of
his enemy he engaged him in combat. All day long they battled to no
purpose, but toward evening a woodpecker flew overhead and cried, "Your
enemy has but one vulnerable point. Shoot at his scalp-lock." Hiawatha
did so and his foe fell dead. Anointing his finger with the blood of his
foe, he touched the bird, and the red mark is found on the head of every
woodpecker to this day. A duck having led him a long chase when he was
trying to capture it for food, he angrily kicked it, thus flattening its
back, bowing its legs, despoiling it of half of its tail-feathers, and
that is why, to this day, ducks are awkward.

In return for its service in leading him to where the prince of serpents
lived, he invested the kingfisher with a medal and rumpled the feathers
of its head in putting it on; hence all kingfishers have rumpled knots
and white spots on their breasts. After slaying the prince of serpents
he travelled all over America, doing good work, and on reaching Onondaga
he organized a friendly league of thirteen tribes that endured for many
years. This closed his mission. As he stood in the assemblage of chiefs
a white bird, appearing at an immense height, descended like a meteor,
struck Hiawatha's daughter with such force as to drive her remains into
the earth and shattered itself against the ground. Its silvery feathers
were scattered, and these were preserved by the beholders as ornaments
for their hair—so the custom of wearing feather head-dresses endures to
our time. Though filled with consternation, Hiawatha recognized the
summons. He addressed his companions in tones of such sweetness and
terms of such eloquence as had never been heard before, urging them to
live uprightly and to enforce good laws, and unhappy
circumstance!—promising to come back when the time was ripe. The
expectancy of his return has led to ghost-dances and similar
demonstrations of enmity against the whites. When he had ended he
entered his stone canoe and began to rise in air to strains of melting
music. Higher and higher he arose, the white vessel shining in the
sunlight, until he disappeared in the spaces of the sky.

Incidents of the Hiawatha legend are not all placed, but he is thought
to have been born near the great lakes, perhaps at Mackinack. Some
legends, indeed, credit him with making his home at Mackinack, and from
that point, as a centre, making a new earth around him. The fight with
his father began on the upper Mississippi, and the bowlders found along
its banks were their missiles. The south shore of Lake Superior was the
scene of his conflict with the serpents. He hunted the great beaver
around Lake Superior and brought down his dam at the Sault Sainte Marie.
A depression in a rock on the southern edge of Michipicotea Bay is where
he alighted after a jump across the lake. In a larger depression, near
Thunder Bay, he sat when smoking his last pipe. The big rocks on the
east side of Grand Traverse Bay, near Antrim City, Michigan, are the
bones of a stone monster that he slew.

So trifling an incident as the kicking of the duck has been localized at
Lake Itasca. \[It is worth passing mention that this name, which sounds
as if it were of Indian origin, is held by some to be composed of the
last syllables of *veritas* and the first letters of *caput*, these
words-signifying "the true head"—being applied by early explorers as
showing that they were confident of having found the actual source of
the Mississippi.\] Minnehaha lived near the fall in Minneapolis that
bears her name. The final apotheosis took place on the shores of Lake
Onondaga, New York, though Hiawatha lies buried under a mountain, three
miles long, on the east side of Thunder Bay, Lake Superior, which, from
the water, resembles a man lying on his back. The red man makes
oblation, as he rows past, by dropping a pinch of tobacco into the
water. Some say that Hiawatha now lives at the top of the earth, amid
the ice, and directs the sun. He has to live in a cold country because,
if he were to return, he would set the earth on fire with his footsteps.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Indian Messiah](lol208)
