[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol201)  [Next](lol203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0206"></span>

### WERE-WOLVES OF DETROIT

Long were the shores of Detroit vexed by the Snake God of Belle Isle and
his children, the witches, for the latter sold enchantments and were the
terror of good people. Jacques Morand, the *coureur de bois*, was in
love with Genevieve Parent, but she disliked him and wished only to
serve the church. Courting having proved of no avail, he resolved on
force when she had decided to enter a convent, and he went to one of the
witches, who served as devil's agent, to sell his soul. The witch
accepted the slight commodity and paid for it with a grant of power to
change from a man's form to that of a were-wolf, or *loup garou*, that
he might the easier bear away his victim. Incautiously, he followed her
to Grosse Pointe, where an image of the Virgin had been set up, and as
Genevieve dropped at the feet of the statue to implore aid, the wolf, as
he leaped to her side, was suddenly turned to stone.

Harder was the fate of another maiden, Archange Simonet, for she was
seized by a were-wolf at this place and hurried away while dancing at
her own wedding. The bridegroom devoted his life to the search for her,
and finally lost his reason, but he prosecuted the hunt so vengefully
and shrewdly that he always found assistance. One of the neighbors cut
off the wolf's tail with a silver bullet, the appendage being for many
years preserved by the Indians. The lover finally came upon the creature
and chased it to the shore, where its footprint is still seen in one of
the bowlders, but it leaped into the water and disappeared. In his crazy
fancy the lover declared that it had jumped down the throat of a
catfish, and that is why the French Canadians have a prejudice against
catfish as an article of diet.

The man-wolf dared as much for gain as for love. On the night that Jean
Chiquot got the Indians drunk and bore off their beaver-skins, the wood
witches, known as "the white women," fell upon him and tore a part of
his treasure from him, while a were-wolf pounced so hard on his back
that he lost more. He drove the creatures to a little distance, but was
glad to be safe inside of the fort again, though the officers laughed at
him and called him a coward. When they went back over the route with him
they were astonished to find the grass scorched where the women had fled
before him, and little springs in the turf showed where they had been
swallowed up. Sulphur-water was bubbling from the spot where the wolf
dived into the earth when the trader's rosary fell out of his jacket.
Belle Fontaine, the spot was called, long afterward.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Escape Of Francois Navarre](lol203)
