[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol228)  [Next](lol230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0234"></span>

### RIDERS OF THE DESERT

Among the sandstone columns of the Colorado foot-hills stood the lodge
of Ta-in-ga-ro (First Falling Thunder). Though swift in the chase and
brave in battle, he seldom went abroad with neighboring tribes, for he
was happy in the society of his wife, Zecana (The Bird). To sell beaver
and wild sheep-skins he often went with her to a post on the New Mexico
frontier, and it was while at this fort that a Spanish trader saw the
pretty Zecana, and, determining to win her, sent the Indian on a mission
into the heart of the mountains, with a promise that she should rest
securely at the settlement until his return.

On his way Ta-in-ga-ro stopped at the spring in Manitou, and after
drinking he cast beads and wampum into the well in oblation to its
deity. The offering was flung out by the bubbling water, and as he
stared, distressed at this unwelcome omen, a picture formed on the
surface—the anguished features of Zecana. He ran to his horse, galloped
away, and paused neither for rest nor food till he had reached the post.
The Spaniard was gone. Turning, then, to the foot-hills, he urged his
jaded horse toward his cabin, and arrived, one bright morning, flushed
with joy to see his wife before his door and to hear her singing. When
he spoke she looked up carelessly and resumed her song. She did not know
him. Reason was gone.

It was his cry of rage and grief, when, from her babbling, Ta-in-ga-ro
learned of the Spaniard's treachery, that brought the wandering mind
back for an instant. Looking at her husband with a strange surprise and
pain, she plucked the knife from his belt. Before he could realize her
purpose she had thrust it into her heart and had fallen dead at his
feet. For hours he stood there in stupefaction, but the stolid Indian
nature soon resumed its sway. Setting his lodge in order and feeding his
horse, he wrapped Zecana's body in a buffalo-skin, then slept through
the night in sheer exhaustion. Two nights afterward the Indian stood in
the shadow of a room in the trading fort and watched the Spaniard as he
lay asleep. Nobody knew how he passed the guard.

In the small hours the traitor was roused by the strain of a belt across
his mouth, and leaping up to fling it off, he felt the tug of a lariat
at his throat. His struggles were useless. In a few moments he was bound
hand and foot. Lifting some strips of bark from the low roof,
Ta-in-ga-ro pushed the Spaniard through the aperture and lowered him to
the ground, outside the enclosure of which the house formed part. Then,
at the embers of a fire he kindled an arrow wrapped in the down of
cottonwood and shot it into a haystack in the court. In the smoke and
confusion thus made, his own escape was unseen, save by a guardsman
drowsily pacing his beat outside the square of buildings. The sentinel
would have given the alarm, had not the Indian pounced on him like a
panther and laid him dead with a knife-stroke.

Catching up the Spaniard, the Indian tied him to the back of a horse and
set off beside him. Thus they journeyed until they came to his lodge,
where he released the trader from his horse and fed him, but kept his
hands and legs hard bound, and paid no attention to his questions and
his appeals for liberty. Tying a strong and half-trained horse at his
door, Ta-in-ga-ro placed a wooden saddle on him, cut off the Spaniard's
clothes, and put him astride of the beast. After he had fastened him
into his seat with deer-skin thongs, he took Zecana's corpse from its
wrapping and tied it to his prisoner, face to face.

Then, loosing the horse, which was plunging and snorting to be rid of
his burden, he saw him rush off on the limitless desert, and followed on
his own strong steed. At first the Spaniard fainted; on recovering he
struggled to get free, but his struggles only brought him closer to the
ghastly thing before him. Noon-day heat covered him with sweat and blood
dripped from the wales that the cords cut in his flesh. At night he
froze uncovered in the chill air, and, if for an instant his eyes closed
in sleep, a curse, yelled into his ear, awoke him. Ta-inga-ro gave him
drink from time to time, but never food, and so they rode for days. At
last hunger overbore his loathing, and sinking his teeth into the dead
flesh before him he feasted like a ghoul.

Still they rode, Ta-in-ga-ro never far from his victim, on whose
sufferings he gloated, until a gibbering cry told him that the Spaniard
had gone mad. Then, and not till then, he drew rein and watched the
horse with its dead and maniac riders until they disappeared in the
yellow void. He turned away, but nevermore sought his home. To and fro,
through the brush, the sand, the alkali of the plains, go the ghost
riders, forever.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Division Of Two Tribes](lol230)
