[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol212)  [Next](lol214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0217"></span>

### THE VIRGINS' FEAST

A game of lacrosse was played by Indian girls on the ice near the
present Fort Snelling, one winter day, and the victorious trophies were
awarded to Wenonah, sister of the chief, to the discomfiture of
Harpstenah, her opponent, an ill-favored woman, neglected by her tribe,
and jealous of Wenonah's beauty and popularity. This defeat, added to
some fancied slights, was almost more than she could bear, and during
the contest she had been cut in the head by one of the rackets—an
accident that she falsely attributed to her adversary in the game. She
had an opportunity of proving her hatred, for directly that it was known
how Wenonah had refused to marry Red Cloud, a stalwart boaster, openly
preferring a younger warrior of the tribe, the ill-thinking Harpstenah
sought out the disappointed suitor, who sat moodily apart, and thus
advised him, "To-morrow is the Feast of Virgins, when all who are pure
will sit at meat together. Wenonah will be there. Has she the right to
be? Have you not seen how shamelessly she favors your rival's suit?
Among the Dakotas to accuse is to condemn, and the girl who is accused
at the Virgins' Feast is disgraced forever. She has shown for Red Cloud
nothing but contempt. If he shows no anger at it the girls will laugh at
him."

With this she turned away and left Red Cloud to his meditations.
Wenonah, at the door of her brother's wigwam, looked into the north and
saw the stars grow pale through streams of electric fire. "The Woman of
the North warns us of coming evil," muttered the chief. "Some danger is
near. Fire on the lights!" And a volley of musketry sent a shock through
the still air.

"They shine for me," said Wenonah, sadly. "For I shall soon join our
father, mother, and sister in the land of spirits. Before the leaves
fell I sat beside the Father of Waters and saw a manitou rise among the
waves. It said that my sisters in the sunset world were calling to me
and I must soon go to them." The chief tried to laugh away her fancies
and comforted her as well as he might, then leading her to the wigwam he
urged her to sleep.

Next day is the Virgins' Feast and Wenonah is among those who sit in the
ring, dressed in their gayest. None who are conscious of a fault may
share in the feast; nor, if one were exposed and expelled, might any
interpose to ask for mercy; yet a groan of surprise and horror goes
through the company when Red Cloud, stalking up to the circle, seizes
the girl roughly by the shoulder and orders her away. No use to deny or
appeal. An Indian warrior would not be so treacherous or unjust as to
act in this way unless he had proofs. Without a word she enters the
adjacent wood, draws her knife, and strikes it to her heart. With summer
came the fever, and it ravaged through the band, laying low the infant
and the counsellor. Red Cloud was the first to die, and as he was borne
away Harpstenah lifted her wasted form and followed him with dimming
eyes, then cried, "He is dead. He hated Wenonah because she slighted
him. I hated her because she was happy. I told him to denounce her. But
she was innocent."

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Falls Of St. Anthony](lol214)
