[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lol250)  [Next](lol252) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPKVU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Myths and Legends of our Own Land*, by Charles M. Skinner, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_2H_4_0257"></span>

### CASCADES OF THE COLUMBIA

When the Siwash, as the Northwestern Indians called themselves, were
few, Mount Hood was kept by the Spirit of Storms, who when he shook his
robe caused rain or snow to fall over the land, while the Fire Spirit
flashed his lightnings from Mount Adams. Across the vale between them
stretched a mighty bridge of stone, joining peak to peak, and on this
the Siwash laid his offering of salmon and dressed skins. Here, too, the
tribal festivals were kept. The priestess of the arch-Mentonee, who fed
the fire on the tribal altar "unimpassioned by a mortal throb"—had won
the love of the wild tamanouses of the mountains, but she was careless
alike of coaxing and threats, and her heart was as marble to them.

Jealous of each other, these two spirits fell to fighting, and, appalled
by the whirl of fire and cloud, of splintering trees and crumbling
rocks, the Indians fled in terror toward the lowlands, but she, unhurt
and undaunted, kept in her place, and still offered praise to the one
god. Yet she was not alone, for watchful in the shadow of a rock stood a
warrior who had loved her so long, without the hope of lovers, that he,
too, had outgrown fear. Though she had given him but passing words and
never a smile, his own heart was the warmer and the heavier with its
freight, and it was his way to be ever watching her in some place where
she might not be troubled by the sight of him.

The war waxed fiercer, and at last the spirits met at the centre of the
arch, and in roar and quake and deluge the great bridge swayed and
cracked. The young man sprang forward. He seized Mentonee in his arms.
There was time for one embrace that cheated death of sorrow. Then, with
a thunder like a bursting world, the miles of masonry crashed down and
buried the two forever. The Columbia leaps the ruins of the bridge in
the rapids that they call the Cascades, and the waters still brawl on,
while the sulky tamanouses watch the whitened floods from their
mountain-tops, knowing that never again will they see so fair a creature
as Mentonee.

<div>

 

 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Death Of Umatilla](lol252)
