<div class="Section1">

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.10 But
the unfaithful, on the day of their resurrection, will hear a voice
crying to them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Certainly
you were all told that Goddess loves you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will care
for you and will protect you, if only you would have sought Her out, in
prayer and supplication;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you were
called to the faith, yet you would still not believe.” </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.11
They will say, “O Lady of Light, we have suffered death once, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and now
You threaten us with being born again on earth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and that
You will twice or more give us life; and we confess our sins,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">is there
no way that we will not again face life on earth, which is like hell
fire to us?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.12 And
it shall be answered to them, “This has happened to you because </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when our
prophetess came to you, you should have believed and become one of the
righteous,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">doing
good works, yet you desired to believe in hell, and judgment and
negativity, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">all of
these things you wanted to associate with Goddess, when you knew that
She is pure love,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so now
you must descend once again to try to find the love of Goddess for
you.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.13 For
it is She that shows you Her signs and miracles, and She sends down food
to you from heaven; but none will have protection, except those that
turn to Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.14
Therefore, call upon Goddess, exhibiting pure religion to Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">although
the unbelievers are adverse to this and will hinder you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.15 For
She is of the highest degrees, She is the possessor of the
throne;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She sends
down the Holy Spirit on such of Her servants as request it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that She
may advise womankind properly on the day of their resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.16
this is the day when everyone will come forth and assemble together in
paradise,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
on earth will walk out of their bodies into paradise for the
assembly;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
nothing at that time will be hidden from Goddess. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">To whom
will the Queendom belong to on that day? </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Only to
the One True Goddess, the Almighty Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.17 On
that day every soul will be rewarded according to its merits;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">there
will be no injustice done on that day.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
Goddess is swift in sending Her accounting and Her love to all.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.18
Therefore advise them, O Prophetess, of the day which might suddenly
come near to them; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when
women’s hearts will leap from them back to Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
ungoddessly will have no friend or intercessor who may be heard.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.19
Goddess will know the deceitful eye, and all that their hearts
conceal;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.20 and
Goddess will instruct everyone properly with Her truth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
false goddesses of wealth, power, greed and self centeredness, which
they invoked besides Her, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She need
not judge at all; for Goddess is She who hears and sees all.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.21
Have not the people gone through the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and seen
what has been the end of those who came before them?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They were
more mighty than the current populations in strength,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and yet
they left more considerable footsteps of their power in the
earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet they
did not escape natural disasters, they did not have them
mitigated,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for they
refused to listen to their prophetesses or turn to Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and so
there was none to protect them from natural and necessary changes in the
earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.22
This they suffered because their prophetesses had come to them with
evident signs and miracles,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and yet
they disbelieved; therefore they did not have Goddess to assist
them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
is strong yet swift to love and forgive.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.23 We
also sent Miriam and Alana with our signs and miracles and manifest
power,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.24 to
Pharaoh, and Haman and Karen, and they said, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Your
Prophetess is nothing but a black sorcerer and a liar.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.25 And
when she came to them with the truth from us,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
said, “Slay the daughters of those who have believed with Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and save
the sons
alive;<a href="#_ftn1" id="_ftnref1"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[1]</span></span></span></span></a> but
the strategy of the unfaithful, was none other than vain folly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.26 And
Pharaoh said, “Let me alone, that I might kill Miriam, and let her call
upon her Lady of Light;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
I fear that she might change our religion, or she might dispossess us of
our nation.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.27 And
Miriam said to her people, “Certainly I have recourse to my Lady of
Light, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
your people, to defend me against every arrogant person,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">who does
not believe in the day of her resurrection or in a Loving
Goddess.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.28 And
as a woman, who was a true believer of the family of Pharaoh,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and who
concealed her faith, she said, “Will you put a woman to death, merely
because she said </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Goddess
is my Lady of Light;” seeing that she has come to you with evident signs
from your Lady of Light?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>If she
is a liar, upon her will be great soul suffering on the day of her
resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but if
she speaks the truth, some of those judgments will come to you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
Goddess never directs anyone who is a transgressor or a liar.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.29 O
my people, the Queendom is yours on this day, and you are conspicuous on
the earth; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but whom
shall defend anyone from those that say that Goddess is one who must be
feared?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Pharaoh
said, “I only propose to you what I think to be most expedient,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and I
guide you only to the right path.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.30 And
the True Believer said, “O my people, certainly I fear for you</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on a day
like that of the unbelievers who tormented the prophetesses of long
ago,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.31
this is a condition like that of the people of Nora, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
tribes of Ada and Thelma, and of those who have lived after them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess wills that injustice should not be done to Her servants.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.32 O
my people, certainly I fear for you on the day of your
resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.33
this is the day when you shall be turned back from paradise,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
will be sent back to earth, which is like hell for you, without guardian
angels or a protectress,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then you
shall have no intercessors as you have imagined. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And she
who has not called upon Goddess, will have no one to direct her
there.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.34
Josie had come to you, before Miriam, with evident signs and
miracles,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but you
never failed to cast aspersions on the true religion she preached to
you; until when she died, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you said,
“Goddess will certainly send another prophetess after her if this is a
true religion.”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Thus
Goddess allows many of you to err and transgress, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">especially
the skeptic, because you will not seek Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.35
Those persons who raise disputes concerning the signs and miracles of
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
any apparent authority which has come to them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">have
moved far askance from the path to Goddess, and with those who
believe.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Thus
Goddess allows you to seal up your hearts so you cannot love and
understand,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
this is what you apparently desire.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.36 And
Pharaoh said, “O Haman build me a great tower, that I may reach the
land,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.37
“the lands of Goddess, and I may view the Goddess of Miriam, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
certainly I think Miriam and Alana are liars.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And so
the destiny of Pharaoh was prepared because he turned from the right
path,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
strategy of Pharaoh only ended in his complete loss of his
lifetime.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.38 And
she who had believed said, “O my people, follow me; I will guide you to
the right way.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.39 “O
my people, certainly this present life is but a temporary
enjoyment;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
life to come is a mansion of firm continuation.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.40
“Whomever works Evil shall have such deeds forgotten,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
whomever works good, whether they are female or male, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and is a
true believer, they will enter into paradise; they will be provided in
this place superabundantly.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.41
“and O my people, as for me, I invite you to salvation;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but you
have invited me to an existence without Goddess, which is like the
hottest fire of hell.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.42
“You desire that I deny Goddess, and that I must associate with Her
negative entities,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">such as
hate, jealousy, rage and greed with Her, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">even
though neither you nor I was ever told to do such a thing,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
have no knowledge of doing this;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but I
invite you to the Most Mighty One, the Forgiver of Sins and the All
Loving One.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.43
There is no doubt that the false negative entities which you desire that
I associate with Her, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">should
not be associated with Her, either in this world, or in the next, for we
all must return to Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
will be like hell fire to you to tell Her that while on earth you
said</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She was
hateful, jealous, full of rage and greed, when in fact you were told She
was Pure Love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.44 And
then you shall remember what I am telling you now.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.45
Therefore Goddess delivered many from the evils which they
devised;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a
great disaster came to the people of Pharaoh, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
because they would not listen to their prophetesses, it was not averted
nor mitigated.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.46
Many shall be exposed to yet another lifetime without a protectress or
angels, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
will be like burning hell fire in the morning and in the evening, until
they turn to Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And the
day of the hour of their resurrection will come,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it will
be said to them, “Come in, O people of Pharaoh,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
return to the world you desired, full of riches, greed and
power,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
will be like a severe torment to them, though they do not know this
yet,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
they will only return to earth, to seek riches, but there will also be
trials and tribulations galore.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.47 And
think of the time when the infidels will dispute together,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
notice they are not admitted into paradise, but must be reborn to
earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
weak will say to the others who behaved with arrogance,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Certainly
we were your followers; will you therefore assist us in any part of
this?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.48
Those who behaved with arrogance will answer, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Certainly
we are all doomed to suffer again on earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess has passed Her merciful judgment upon us.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.49 And
those who will return to earth, will say to the angels,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">”Please
call upon the Lady of Light, that She will give us relief,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for just
one day, before we return to a place that is like hell.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.50
They shall answer, “Did not your prophetesses come to you, with evident
proof?”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They will
answer, “Yes, we were told, but we were stubborn and would not
listen.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
angelic keepers will reply, “If you can call on Goddess here,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then you
can call on Goddess while you are on the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will assuredly assist you, you are not lost; this is your choice; you
have free will always;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
call of the unbelievers to Goddess after the day of your
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will be
in vain, and you all must return to earth.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.51 We
will certainly assist our prophetesses, and those who believe in this
present life, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and on
the day where the witnesses will stand forward;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.52
this will be a day when the excuses of the wicked will not help
them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
will see what the reward is for what they have done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.53
Prior to this, we gave Miriam a direction, and we left as an inheritance
to the children of Israel,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the Book
of the Law;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.54
this was to be a direction and a message of love to women of
understanding.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.55
Therefore you should, O prophetess, bear the insults of the unbelievers
with great patience; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for the
promises of Goddess are true; and ask pardon for your own sins and
errors,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
celebrate the praises of your Lady of Light, in the evening and in the
morning.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.56 As
to those who impugn the signs of Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
any convincing proof which has been revealed to them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">there is
nothing but false pride in their breasts; but they will not attain their
desire in this manner;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
you should fly to Goddess for refuge, for She is the One who hears and
sees all.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.57
Certainly the creation of heaven and earth is far more substantial than
any creation of womankind; but the vast majority of woman do not
understand this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.58 The
blind and the seeing are not held equal among women,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor are
they who believe and do righteousness held equal in paradise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">how few
people consider carefully these issues in their own minds!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.59 The
last hour will surely come to all; there is no doubt thereof;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
great majority of women do not believe this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.60
Your Lady of Light said, “Call upon Me, and I will hear you;” </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but those
people who proudly disdain Her service, will continue on as they walk
this earth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without a
protectress or the angels, and this will be like hell fire to
them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.61 It
is Goddess who has appointed the night for you to take your rest
therein;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
has given you the day to give you light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
Goddess is endued with great benevolence towards womankind;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
vast majority of people do not give thanks.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.62
This is Goddess, your Lady of Light, the Creatress of all things;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">there is
no Goddess besides Her; how therefore are you turned aside from Her
worship?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.63
Thus, they are turned aside, those who oppose the signs and miracles of
Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.64 It
is Goddess who has given you the earth for a floor, and the heaven for a
ceiling; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
has formed you, and made your forms beautiful, and She feeds you with
good and delicious foods.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is
Goddess, your Lady of Light. Therefore, blessed be Goddess, the Lady of
all creatures!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.65 She
is the living Goddess; there is no Goddess but She.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Therefore
call upon Her, and show Her you exhibit the pure religion. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">All
praises be to Goddess, the Lady of all creatures!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.66 Say
to the people, “I simply cannot worship or associate negative things
which you invoke, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">such as
hate, jealousy, greed, violence and anger with the divine, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">especially
after evident proofs have come to me from my Lady;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and I am
commanded to resign myself to the Lady of all Creatures.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.67 It
is She who first created you from a divine spark, and then of ova, and
then as an embryo;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
afterwards She brought you forth into the world as babies out of your
mothers’ uteruses;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then She
permitted you to attain adulthood, and then to grow to wise old
women,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">even
though some died before that age, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
permits you to return home at a predetermined time in your lives, so
that you might understand.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.68 It
is She who gives life, and She causes people to die at their appointed
times, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and when
She decrees a thing, She only says, “Be!” And it is.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.69 Do
you not observe those persons who dispute against the signs and miracles
of Goddess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">how they
are turned aside from the true faith?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.70
Those persons who charge the Book of the Korana and the other
Scriptures,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
revealed doctrines as being false, will, upon the day of their
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">be
informed of the truth, and they will be surely saddened </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
learn of all the good that they might have done on earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.71 and
the weight of their folly shall feel like heavy collars around their
neck,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the grief
will drag them down so very much,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.72 and
their journey back to earth will make it seem as if they were dragged
back there, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if it
were not for their hopes of riches, wealth and power, which keeps them
desirous of earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.73 And
will be asked of them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“How is
your worship of wealth, greed and power going to help you now?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.74
They will reply, “It was obviously fruitless to pay all our attention to
such entities, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
are no help to us at all at this time, in fact they are like
nothing.”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Thus
Goddess allows the unbelievers to wander in error when they do not call
upon Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.75
This has happened to them because they rejoice insolently,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
worship what is false, and they have immoderate joy,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
should be spreading love, generosity and kindness, as directed by
Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.76
Therefore they will reappear on earth, which will be like hell to
them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
angels or a protectress, and wretched their lives may be.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.77
Therefore persevere with patience, O Prophetess; for the promises of
Goddess are true.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Whether
you are able to see how each person in error refuses to believe in
Her</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">is sent
back again to earth; or whether you die before seeing this
process,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">all souls
will nonetheless be assembled before us on the last day of
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.78 We
have sent you all a great number prophetesses before you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
herstories of whom we have related to you, and there are many
herstories;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but no
prophetess has any power to produce a sign or miracle,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except by
permission of Goddess, for She knows best. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">When the
truth of Goddess has come to you all, She will render judgment with
truth; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and then
those that have attempted to make void the signs and miracles of
Goddess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will be
saddened for how they have misled others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.79 It
is Goddess that has given you cattle, that you might ride on some, and
you might eat the others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.80 you
have also received other advantages from
them<a href="#_ftn2" id="_ftnref2"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[2]</span></span></span></span></a>,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and on
them you may arrive at business that you have considered in your
mind,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and on
them you are carried by land, and you are carried by the ships at
sea.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.81 And
She shows you all Her signs and miracles; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and so
how can you deny these wonderful signs and miracles of Goddess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.82 Do
the people not pass through the earth and do they not see what natural
disasters </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">have
occurred to persons coming before them?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do they
not see that many were more numerous than them, and more mighty in
strength,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and yet
left more considerable monuments of their power on the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">still all
they had, and all they had done, did not profit them one iota when a
natural disaster struck?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And yet
some survived.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Do they not think
that Goddess saves those that believe in Her?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.83 And
when the prophetess came to them with evident proofs of their
mission,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
rejoiced in the knowledge that they attained,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but then
some of the people decided to have scorn for this knowledge, and were
lost.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.84 And
when many people saw that we brought peace and patience,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
said, “We believe in Goddess alone,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
reject the negative ideas and emotions that you have associated with
Her,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">40.85 but
then for some of the people, their faith failed them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
began to tell others that Goddess was mean, vengeful,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and would
assault them if they did not believe in Her and Her hell;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or that
they would go to hell if they did not follow a particular
religion.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Each of
these persons will be deeply saddened on the day of their
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for they
have told lies concerning Goddess, and have made others fearful of Her,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when in
fact She is pure Love. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is
the ordinance of Goddess which was formerly observed with respect to Her
servants, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
unbelievers who do not repent, will wander looking for the goodness
their hearts earnestly desire.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FORTY ONE – ENTITLED<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>THE
EXPLANATION</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.1
H.M<a href="#_ftn3" id="_ftnref3"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[3]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.2 This
is a revelation from the most Merciful One;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.3 it
is a Book, the verses in which are distinctly and easily understood,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">an
English Korana, as most people understand English; and it is for people
that desire higher understanding;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.4 it
bears good tidings, and it announces great love from Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
vast majority of the people will turn aside from it, and they will not
hearken to it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.5 And
many people will say of it, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Our
hearts are veiled from the doctrine to which You have invited us,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and there
is a deafness in our ears, and there is a curtain between us and you;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
we will act as we desire only; for you certainly act according to your
own sentiments.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.6 Say
to the people, “Certainly I am only a woman as you are.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But it
has been revealed to me, that your goddess is one Goddess; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
direct your thoughts and hearts straight to Her; and ask forgiveness
from Her for what is past,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
is merciful and full of Love.” But there will be great sadness to the
unbelievers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.7
because they do not give alms, and they do not believe in the life to
come, and they do as they see fit!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.8 But
as to those who believe and work righteousness on the earth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
have an everlasting reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.9<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Say to the people, “Do you fail to
believe in Her, who created the earth in two days;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
you associate negative emotions and actions with Her? She is the
merciful Lady of all Creatures.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.10
“And She has placed upon the earth mountains which have firm
footings;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they rise
above the plains; and She has blessed the earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
has provided food for all creatures inhabiting the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
was done in four days, and you should advise this to all who ask
regarding it.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.11
Then She set Her mind to the creation of heaven, and it was smoke,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
said to it and to the earth, “Come to Me obediently,” and they replied,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“We will
come, immediately obedient to Your every command!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.12 And
She formed the sky into seven heavens in two days, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and each
was informed accordingly of its purpose. And the lower heaven was
adorned with stars, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
placed therein was a guard of angels. This was the creation of the
Almighty, the Wise Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.13 If
some of the people will not consider these instructions,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then they
will have sadness on the day of their resurrection, as did Ada and
Thelma.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.14
When the prophetesses came to them before this, saying,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Worship
Goddess alone;” many answered, “If our Lady of Light had been pleased to
send us messengers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She would
certainly have sent
angels,<a href="#_ftn4" id="_ftnref4"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[4]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
therefore we will not believe the message which you are
conveying.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.15 As
to the tribe of Ada, they behaved insolently in the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
any reason and they said, “Who is more mighty than us in
strength?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Did they
not know that Goddess, who had created them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">was
amazingly more mighty than they were in strength? And they knowingly
rejected our signs.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And they
refused to listen to their prophetess who warned of an upcoming disaster
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
they could have mitigated or avoided, with her help.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.16 And
before they knew it, a piercing wind was upon them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
all said it was ill luck, but it was not,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
was not a punishment of shame, as some thought it was, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but it
was only a hardship already predestined,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
should be aware that they will know this on the day of their
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will be saddened, because they never sought Her protection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.17 As
to Thelma, we directed them; but they preferred blindness over true
direction;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
too refused to listen to their prophetess, therefore a terrible noise
assaulted them all;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and some
said it was an ignominious punishment which they all deserved,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but it
clearly was not, for it was something predetermined which they could
have avoided or mitigated, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if only
they had listened to their prophetess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.18 But
there were some from each tribe that survived,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
were the ones that worshiped Goddess and hearkened to their prophetess,
faithfully and in love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.19 And
you should announce the day when the believers will be assembled
together </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will march in distinct bands into paradise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.20 and
the unbelievers will see what they have done on the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and their
ears, their eyes and their skins, will all be witnesses of what they had
done,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.21 and
they will ask their skins, “Why do you bear witness against us?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.22 And
their skins will reply,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Goddess
has caused us to distinctly show you what you accomplished on
earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
may animate all things; She created you the first time; and to Her you
returned.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.23
“You did not hide yourself, while you erred,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
your ears and your eyes and your skins could not bear witness against
you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but you
thought that Goddess was ignorant of many things that you did.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.24
“This was only your opinion, which you imagined of your Lady of
Light;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and so
you ruined your last lifetime with sin and error; and you were certainly
lost.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.25 And
the unbelievers will be promptly returned to earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will know only what a baby knows when they are reborn;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
whether or not they beg for relief, for respite for awhile in paradise,
they will not necessarily obtain it,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except by
permission of the Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.26 And
they will not have any guardian angels to protect them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for those
that do not believe, did not ask for them during their prior
lifetime,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so they
will not have them in the world to come;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and their
sentence was just and merciful and kind,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
has been formerly pronounced on the nations of genii,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or the
strong and haughty, and women who were before them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for they
all died also and had their day of resurrection before this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.27 The
unbelievers will say, “Do not hearken to this Korana,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but use
vain arguments during the reading of it; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
you might overcome the voice of the reader by your scoffs and
laughter.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.28
Wherefore, they are most assuredly unbelievers, those that do not
respect religious readings;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will have great sadness on the day of their resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
earth was and will be prepared for them as an everlasting abode,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until
they turn to Goddess, for they have rejected our signs and
miracles.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.29 And
the unbelievers shall argue, before they descend again,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“O Lady
of Light, show us the two that seduced us, of the genii and
women,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
we desire to trample them with our feet, so that they will become most
base and despicable.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
Goddess will reply, “It is exactly that demeanor </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">of
vengeance, violence and anger that I do not condone, that you will be
returning to earth for.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">You must
learn forgiveness and love to ascend to Me.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.30 As
for those that say, “Our Lady of Light is Goddess, and we desire only to
behave righteously,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
angels will descend to them and shall say, “Fear not, nor should you be
grieved;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
rejoice in the hopes of paradise which you have been promised.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.31 “We
are your friends and servants in this life, and in the life to come;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therein
you shall have all that your souls shall desire,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
therein you shall obtain whatever you ask for;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.32 “as
a gift from your gracious and most Merciful Goddess.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.33
Whomever speaks better than one who invites another to Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
works righteousness, and says, “I am a Moslema,” she shall assuredly be
blessed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.34
Kindness and grace will never be held equal with evil.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Turn away
evil with goodness, kindness and love, those things which are far
better;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
behold, the women with whom there was once enmity, may become your
warmest friends;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.35 but
none shall attain this perfection, except those people who are
patient;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor shall
any person attain this perfection, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except
the woman who has attained a great control of her temper,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and has
let go of rage, vengeance and malice towards others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.36 And
if a malicious suggestion was offered to you from Evil;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you have
perfect recourse with Goddess, for it is She who hears and knows
all.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.37
Among the signs and miracles of Her power are the night and the day, and
the sun and the moon.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do not
worship the sun or the moon as if they were alive;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
worship Goddess, Who has created them, if you serve Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.38 But
if any person proudly disdains the services of Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you
should remind them that certainly the angels, who are with your Lady of
Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
praise Her night and day, and they do not weary of it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.39 And
among Her signs and miracles, another is that you will see barren
land,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but when
we send down water upon it, it stirs and becomes alive once
again.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And She
who quickens the earth, may easily quicken the dead; for She is the
Almighty One.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.40
Certainly, those who impiously malign our signs and miracles are not
hidden away from us.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Therefore,
who is better esteemed, one who does wickedness</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and will
be returned right back to earth without a protectress,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or one
who is secure and happy on the day of her resurrection?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do the
work that you desire, but recall She sees everything that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.41
Certainly those persons who do not believe in the good words of the
Korana,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">after it
has come to them, will one day discover the truth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will see all the sadness they created because they did not believe this
readily understood concept.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">It is
certainly a Book of infinite value;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.42
vanity shall not approach it, either from before it, or from behind
it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it is a
revelation from a Wise Goddess, whose praise is to be rightfully
celebrated.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.43
Nothing else is said by the unbelievers other than the same derogatory
statements which were made </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to all
the former prophetesses who came before you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
your Lady of Light is inclined to forgive and grant love;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but She
also recognizes where gentle but effective discipline is
warranted.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.44 If
we had revealed the Korana in a foreign language other than
English;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">many
people would have said, “Unless the signs of this Book are distinctly
explained,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we will
not believe in it: is then the Book written in an obscure foreign
tongue, not universally taught?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And do
not quite a few highly educated persons in the world understand
English?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">You may
answer, “It is, and it is given to those who believe, the world
over,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it is
a sure guide and a remedy for doubt and uncertainty:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but for
those who will not believe in it, it only exemplifies the thickness of
the hearing in their ears,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it is
a darkness which covers them; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">these
people are as one who hears only very faintly from a distant
place.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.45
Heaven has formerly given the Book of the Law to Miriam;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a
dispute arose with her people concerning the same;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
previous decrees had not proceeded from the Lady of Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to
respite the opposers of that revelation, certainly the matter was
decided between them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for many
were destroyed then who did not listen to the counsel of the
prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for those
people were in very great doubt of their Scriptures they received from
the prophetess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.46 She
that does right, does it to the advantage of her own soul;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and she
that does evil, does it only against the same; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for your
Lady of Light is not unjust towards Her servants.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.47 To
Her is reserved the knowledge of the hour of your resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and no
fruit bursts forth from its skins without assistance;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and no
female conceives in her womb, nor is she delivered of her baby,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
without Her knowledge and assistance. On a certain day, She shall call
to many souls saying,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Have you
noticed that your idols of wealth, greed and power are not here, in My
heaven?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And they
will provide you with no assistance against sadness </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when you
see all the errors you committed while you were on earth?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They will
answer, “We now see that they were not, and are not currently any
assistance to us,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
see that all we have done was faithfully recorded in heaven, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
are indeed saddened at this situation.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.48 But
the false and negative deities they used to worship will not help
them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will leave them hanging, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will have no escape from sadness on the day of their
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.49
Womankind is never wearied with asking for good from above,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but if
evil comes to her, she becomes truly unhappy and despairs much.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.50 And
if heaven causes us to taste mercy and relief from her troubles,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">even
after she has been afflicted,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">she
surely says, “This is owed to me on account of my being so
wonderful;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">I do not
think that Goddess will ever see all the errors and ill deeds I have
engaged in,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if I
am brought before the Lady of Light, I can always beg for mercy, and be
admitted to paradise.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But the
only thing that will happen, is that they will be shown how their
unbelief caused them to err, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and how
they will reap exactly what they have sowed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will be reborn quickly to earth without a protectress, until they turn
to Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which is
indeed a most severe disciple, for earth is truly a dangerous and
difficult place.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.51
When we confer favors on women, they turn aside, and depart from us
without hardly a thanks;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but when
evil comes to them, they beg and are frequent at prayer.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.52 Say
to the people, “What do you think?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>If the Korana is from Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
do not believe in it; but who will lie with such a great lie, such that
it is easily discovered?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.53
Hereafter we will show them additional signs and miracles in the various
regions of the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and in
themselves, until it has become obvious to them that this Book *is*
Truth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">It is not
sufficient for them that the Lady of Light is witness of all
things?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">41.54 Are
they not in doubt as to their eventual meeting of their Lady</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on the
day of their resurrection?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Does
not She encompass all things?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FORTY TWO – ENTITLED CONSULTATION</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.1
H.M.<a href="#_ftn5" id="_ftnref5"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[5]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.2
A.S.K.<a href="#_ftn6" id="_ftnref6"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[6]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.3 Thus
does the mighty, the wise Goddess reveal Her will to you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and in
the same manner She revealed it to the prophetesses who came before
you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.4 To
Her belongs whatever is in heaven and on the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is The Highest One, the Greatest Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.5 It
would take very little, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
unbelievers would like to tell you that Goddess will tear the heavens in
sunder from above,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to show
you Her terror; for they will tell you fallaciously that Goddess
terrorizes Her beloved children.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But in
reality, the angels celebrate the praise of the Lady of Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and ask
pardon for those who do good things on earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.6 But
as to those that take evil goddesses for their patronesses,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">besides
the One True Pure Goddess; Goddess observes their actions, and you are
not to be their keeper.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.7
Therefore, we have revealed to you this English Korana, that you may
bring good tidings to the cities,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
the people that dwell therein; and may they learn more regarding the day
of resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">of which
there is no doubt; and one part of the people will enter into in
paradise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
another portion will return to earth repeatedly, until the day of final
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
will be like hell, returning to earth without a protectress.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.8 If
Goddess had pleased, everyone would be of one religion; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but She
has given the people many different paths to Her, and She provides mercy
to all that ask for it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and since
the unjust do not ask for Her help; they will have no patroness or
helper.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.9 Do
they take other patronesses, besides Her? Whereas Goddess is the only
one True Patroness,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She
quickens the dead and She is almighty. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.10
Whatever matter your argue about, the decision of this matter belongs
wholly to Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is
my Goddess, my Lady of Light; in Her I do trust, and to Her I will
return;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.11 She
is the Creatress of heaven and earth, She has given you husbands of your
own kind,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
cattle both female and male; by which reproduction occurs; there is
nothing like Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it is
She is the One who hears and sees everything.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.12
Hers are the keys of heaven and earth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She
bestows provisions abundantly on those that call upon Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but She
is sparing with those that do not, and those who are agreeable to
poverty; for She knows all things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.13 She
has ordained to you the religion which She instructed Nora in,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and which
we have revealed to you, O Prophetess, and which we commanded Sarah and
Miriam, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Mary
Magdalene and Mother Mary, and Yeshua, saying,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Observe
this religion and do not be overly divided amongst one another.”<span
style="mso-tab-count:1">           </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
worship of one Goddess, to which you invite Her within your
heart,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">may be a
source of sadness to the unbelievers, but it is necessary for soul
growth and perfection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
will always be there for those that call upon Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will direct the believers who repent to the right path.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.14
Those who lived in times past were not overly divided among
themselves,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
believed mightily in Goddess, until that knowledge of Goddess’ unity had
come to them; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">through
their own perverseness they began to associate negative emotions and
actions with Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
unless a previous decree had passed from their Lady of Light, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to bear
with them until a predetermined time, certainly the matter had been
decided between them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to the
detriment of the gainsayers. Those persons who have inherited the
Scriptures for them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">have many
of them that are in substantial doubt concerning them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.15
Therefore, invite everyone to receive the true faith,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and be
polite to them, as you have been commanded;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
not follow the vain desires of the unbelievers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but say,
“I believe in all the true Scriptures which Goddess has sent to
us;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and I am
commanded to establish justice among you; Goddess is our Lady of Light
and your Lady;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to us
will our works be inspired and imputed, and to you will your works be
imputed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
better or for worse; let there be no argument between you and us;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess will assemble us altogether on the day our resurrection, and to
Her we will all return.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.16 As
to those people who engage in arguments concerning Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">after
obedience has been paid to Her by receiving the true religion;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">their
arguments shall be in vain in the sight of the Lady of Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will experience sadness on the day of their resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.17 It
is Goddess who has sent down the Scriptures with truth; and the balance
of true judgment;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will inform you all whether the last hour is near or far away.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.18
Those persons who do not believe in this precept,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">desire
that it should be hastened, but only by way of mockery;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
who believe and look forward to the same out of love for their Goddess,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and know
it to be the truth, are the true believers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Are not
those who argue concerning the final date of resurrection in wide
error?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.19 For
Goddess is bounteous to all of Her servants; She provides for all that
call upon Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is the Strong One, the Almighty.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.20
Whomsoever prefers only the bounty of the life to come,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to her we
will give a tremendous increase in tillage of the life to come,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but to
her that chooses the tillage of this world, we will often give her the
fruits only of this world,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
life to come may be exceedingly difficult, as she must have
suspected.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.21
Have the unbelievers amassed many deities which give them a
religion</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
does not speak kindly to Goddess, which teaches and associates
Her</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">with
negative emotions and actions such as hate, greed, power, jealousy,
rage, violence and fear?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For the
unjust will certainly suffer tremendously on the day of their final
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.22 On
that day you will see the unjust and the unbeliever in great
sadness,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
view the evil and errors which they committed on this earth</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
they did not believe, and did not love their fellow woman and
sister;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but those
that did believe and do good works, they shall dwell in the delightful
meadows of paradise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
shall obtain whatever they shall desire, from their Lady of Light. This
is the great acquisition.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.23
This is what Goddess promised to Her servants who believe and do good
works.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Say to
the people, “I ask not of you anything for my preaching or teaching or
any payment or reward,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except
the love and kindness to me and my relations,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
whomsoever shall have deserved well by one good action,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to her we
will add the merit of several additional actions thereto;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is inclined to forgive and is highly likely to reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.24 Do
they say that the Prophetess was blasphemous and forged only lies
concerning Goddess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But this
is not the case, and those that will not believe,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">have
effectively sealed up their own hearts by choice,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and also
by their own choice they engage in worthless vanities of
religion,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
also eschew the truth that comes to them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
knows the innermost parts of the hearts of all womankind.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.25 It
is She who accepts repentance from Her servants,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
forgive sins, and She knows all that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.26<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>She will incline her own ear and mind
toward those that believe and work toward righteousness, and She will
add to this far in excess what they shall ask for, or deserve out of Her
bounty;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
unbelievers will suffer severe sadness on the day of their
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">especially
when they see all the good that they might have accomplished, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if only
they had decided to believe.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.27 If
Goddess would bestow abundance upon all Her servants,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
would certainly behave insolently in the earth; but She sends down by
measure to everyone,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that
which She pleases; for She well knows and sees the condition of each of
Her servants.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.28 It
is She who sends down the rain, after women have despaired of ever
seeing it again,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
spreads abroad all Her mercies; and She is the patroness who it is right
and good to praise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.29
Among Her signs and miracles is the creation of heaven and earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and of
the living creatures which She continually replenishes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is able to gather them together before all Her angels, whenever She
pleases.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.30
Whatever misfortune befalls you is a trial you had previously agreed
to,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and is
sent by Goddess and Her angels,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it is
something which your hands have asked for and deserved before you
descended to earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and yet
She forgives a great many things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.31 You
shall not be able to frustrate any divine purpose on the earth; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor shall
you have any protectress or helper, aside from Goddess and
heaven.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.32
Among Her signs and miracles also are the ships traversing the seas,
like high mountains;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.33 If
She pleased, She could cause the winds to cease, but She does not do
this,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">this is
put in motion by Mother Earth; and Mother Earth does not do anything to
harm anyone;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">rather
she sets in forth random and natural disasters, all of which are known
by Goddess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but all
are necessary to renew the earth, and these cannot be averted or
mitigated.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.34 Or
some believe that Goddess destroys by shipwreck, because of what their
crews have merited;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but this
is not the case either, for She only pardons a person and does not
destroy one.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.35 And
those persons who dispute against the signs and miracles of heaven
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">should
know that neither heaven nor Goddess dispenses vengeance;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that this
is a lie falsified by those that would have Goddess portrayed as a
entity with negative emotions engaging in negative behaviors, which is
far afield from the truth of the matter, for She is all love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.36
Whatever things are given to you; they are only fleeting and are
intended for the present life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
reward which comes later from Goddess is far better, and more durable,
for those that believe,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and put
their trust in their Lady of Light;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.37<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>and those who avoid heinous and filthy
crimes, and those that are enraged should forgive;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.38 and
those who hearken to the Lady of Light and who are frequent at
prayer,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and whose
affairs are directed by consultation among the righteous,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
that give alms out of what heaven has bestowed upon them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.39 and
those who, when an injury is done to them, defend themselves only to the
extent necessary,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
always bear it mind it is most important to consider forgiveness
instead;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.40 and
the retaliation of an evil should never be more than the evil which was
propounded,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
violence should never be utilized against another person, except in
necessary self defense; still again, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it is
always more important to forgive; retaliation and vengeance are negative
emotions, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and are
to be avoided; for those that seek justice from Goddess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will
receive her reward many times over from Goddess; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
does not appreciate those that engage in violence.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.41 And
whomsoever shall avenge herself, after she has been injured; there shall
be no blame,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as long
as it has been done in a nonviolent manner that does not injure person
or property.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.42 as
to these persons, they should seek avengement in a court of law;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it is
only lawful to punish those that wrong women, and who act insolently in
the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
that are unjust; these souls will suffer tremendous grief on the day of
their resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.43 And
those who bear injustices patiently, and those that forgive; certainly
this is a gracious endeavor.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.44
Whomsoever desires to err intentionally, will have no protectress,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">unless
and until she seeks Goddess, and asks for repentance and mercy and
forgiveness. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And you
will see the ungodessly, who shall say, when they behold what they have
done, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on the
day of their resurrection, “Is there no way to return back to the
world,” </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will be told that there is, but it will be without a protectress or
guardian angels, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until
they turn to Her during their lifetime, and etch this on their soul
memory,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for the
soul has memory and can select righteousness, even though it is born as
an innocent baby.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.45 And
you shall see them exposed to the trials and tribulations of earth,
which shall be like hell fire,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">dejected,
because the ignominy they must undergo; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
shall look at a new life stealthily and sideways, and the true believers
shall say, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Certainly
the losers are those who have lost their own souls and their families on
the day of resurrection; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will not
the ungoddessly continue in eternal torment upon the earth?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.46
They will not have any protectress to defend themselves against Evil
until they turn to Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and may
will look to Evil for guidance, for the path to righteousness will be
clouded and hard to find.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.47
Therefore hearken to Goddess before the day comes, which Goddess will
allow you to experience;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you shall
have no place of refuge on that day from the evil you have done;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor will
you be able to deny or obscure your mistakes.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.48 But
if those to whom your preach and yet they decide to teach turn aside
from your teachings, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you
should not worry, because certainly we have not sent you to be a
guardian over their souls;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">your duty
is to preach and teach only. When a woman is allowed to spontaneously
taste mercy from us,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">she
rejoices; but if Evil comes to her, even though she has created the
situation;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
the same woman will become ungrateful, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and many
unbelievers will blame Goddess, even though She is entirely
blameless.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.49 To
Goddess pertains the Queendom of heaven and earth; She creates what is
best;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She gives
spouses to whom She pleases;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.50 and
She gives children to whom She pleases; or She allows a couple to be
childless;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
is the Wise One and the Powerful One.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.51 It
is not fitting for women to expect Her to speak to them otherwise than
by private revelation, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">their
dreams, or by sending a messenger to reveal truths, and this is done
only by Her permission, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and as
She pleases; for She is the Exalted One and the Wise One.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.52
Thus we have revealed to you a revelation, by our command.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">You did
not understand this before, what the Book of the Korana was, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor did
you know what faith truly was; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but we
have ordained the same as a light to the people and the world; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
will direct such of our servants as we desire; and those that have
requested direction from Her; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
shall surely direct the people to the right way;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">42.53
this is the way of Goddess, to whom all belongs whatever is in heaven
and upon the earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Will not
all things return to Goddess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FORTY THREE – ENTITLED ORNAMENTS OF GOLD </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.1
H.M.<a href="#_ftn7" id="_ftnref7"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[7]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.2 By
this easily understood Book;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.3
certainly we have ordained the same in English so that you might easily
understand it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.4 and
it is certainly written in the original Book, kept in heaven with the
angels,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">being
sublime and full of wisdom.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.5
Shall we therefore turn away from you this blessing, and deprive you all
of its wonders,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
many of you are a people who transgress?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.6 And
how many prophetesses have we sent to those who came before you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.7 And
no prophetess has come to them, but they did not laugh her to
scorn:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.8
therefore you will see how many nations were destroyed, who were
mightier than you in strength;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
they would not listen to their prophetess, when she foretold of a
natural disaster;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
example of the ancient ones has already been set before them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.9 If
you ask most people who created the heavens and the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
certainly answer, “The Mighty One, the Wise Goddess created them
all:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.10 the
One who has spread out the earth as a bed for you, and has made you many
paths therein,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
you might be directed:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.11 and
She who has sent down to you rain from heaven by measure; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
we are able to quicken barren soil; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
likewise you shall all be raised again to life after death on this
earth:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.12 and
who has created all the various species of creatures, and has given you
ships and cattle,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">whereupon
you are carried;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.13 so
that you may sit firmly with them or on them,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
may remember the favors from your Lady of Light, when you sit on cattle
or within ships,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and so
you should say, “All praise be to Her, who has subjected these things to
our service!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For we
could not have mastered them by our own power;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.14 and
to our Lady of Light we shall surely return.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.15 Yet
they have attributed to Her mere mortals as Her offspring;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
further attribute negative emotions and actions to Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">despite
the fact they were advised She is all Love; certainly most people are
openly ungrateful.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.16 Has
Goddess incarnated and born sons as a woman bears a child, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet did
She not choose daughters for you to be truly blessed?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.17 But
when one of them has a child of that male sex, which they attribute to
the Merciful One,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then her
face becomes dark, and she is oppressed with sorrow.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.18 Do
they therefore attribute to Goddess male issue, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which are
not brought up looking and acting lovely,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">with
ornaments and fine dresses, and who are never contentious without just
cause?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Moreover,
they well know that Goddess does not bear children as a woman
does.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.19 And
do they make the angels which are the servants of the Merciful,
exclusively males?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Were they
present at their creation?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Who has
told them the angels must procreate or incarnate and produce
offspring?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">No
one.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>But their words have been
written down so on the day of their resurrection, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
will explain all this carefully to them again.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Her
angels are neither male nor female nor were they made for
procreation,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as humans
are.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>An angel can choose either
sex
equally,<a href="#_ftn8" id="_ftnref8"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[8]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will appear in a form best suited so that they do not alarm any
human.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do they
not understand that angels may change appearance readily?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.20 And
some people say, “If the Merciful One had pleased,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we would
not have associated negative emotions or actions with Her.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But they
have no knowledge of this; they only utter a vain lie.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.21
Have we given them a Book of revelations before this; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
they keep the same in their possession?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.22 But
they say, “Certainly we found our mothers practicing a good religion we
liked,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
were guided in their footsteps, even though they worshiped wealth, greed
and power.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.23
Thus, we have sent no preacher or teacher before you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">into any
city, but the inhabitants therein had lived in affluence,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
said “Certainly we found our mothers practicing this religion; and so we
did the same.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.24 And
the preacher would answer, “What, although I brought a more loving and
kind religion</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">than that
which you found your mothers practicing?” </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And they
replied, “Certainly we do not believe anything which you have preached
to us.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.25 But
we do not take vengeance on them; this is a lie which was part of their
old religion,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
unbelievers say that the destruction of civilizations is due to the
vengeance of Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but you
have been told it is not; they want to take vengeance on others,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so they
say that Goddess condones vengeance; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
say prophetesses that teach peace and non violence are imposters, yet
they truly are not.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.26
Remember when Sarah said to her mother and to her people,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Certainly
I am not going to worship the goddesses you do, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">with evil
emotions and actions and intentions,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.27
“for I only worship Her who created me and She is all Love;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will direct me properly into new paths of love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.28 And
the Prophetess ordained this to be a constant doctrine among her
posterity;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that they
should be turned aside from deities with evil emotions and evil actions
and evil intentions,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
should turn only to the worship of the One True Loving Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.29
Certainly I have permitted many peoples and their ancestors to live in
prosperity, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until the
truth has come to them, and a manifest prophetess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.30 but
now the truth has come to them, and they say, “This is certainly a piece
of evil sorcery;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
will not believe in it.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.31 And
they say, “Had this Korana been sent down to a great woman,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">leading
the two great
cities,<a href="#_ftn9" id="_ftnref9"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[9]</span></span></span></span></a> then
we would believe in it.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.32 Do
they distribute the mercy and love of your Lady of Light </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">according
to the earthly popularity of the person chosen to declare it?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">We
distribute the necessary provisions among them, in this present
life,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
raise some of them several degrees above the others,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that one
of them might make the other to serve her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
mercy of your Lady of Light is more valuable than riches which they
gather together.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.33 If
it were not that womankind would have become a sect of unbelievers,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
we would have given to those who do not believe in the Merciful One,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">roofs of
silver to cover their homes, and stairs of silver, to ascend
thereto,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.34 and
doors of silver to enter their homes, and couches of silver, for them to
recline and rest upon;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.35 and
ornaments of gold; for all this is the provision of the present
life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
next life with your Lady of Light shall be for those who love Her
only.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.36
Whomsoever shall withdraw from the love, peace and joy of the Merciful
One,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it will
feel as though a devil were chained to her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and she
will feel as though this devil were her constant companion.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.37 and
we know that demons will turn people aside from the way of truth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet the
people imagine themselves to be rightly directed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.38
until, when she will appear before us upon the last day, she can say to
her imagined devil:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“I wish
to Goddess that between me and you there was same distance </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as there
is between the east portion and the west portion of the world!<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">O how
wretched a companion you are that I imagined you and put you on my
back!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.39 But
wishes will not avail a person on this day,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">since you
have put demons on your back and have been unjust to others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for you
shall be partakers of another lifetime without protection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.40 Can
you, O Prophetess make the deaf to hear, or can you make the blind to
see,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and can
you change anyone who desires to remain in obvious error?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.41
Whether we take you away from the unbelievers or not, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
create their own vengeance on their souls, and they will continue on
earth without protection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.42 Or
whether we cause you to see how they suffer thereafter on earth with
protection, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
not truly prevail at anything, until they turn to Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.43
Therefore, hold fast to the doctrine which has been revealed to
you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for you
are following the right and true direction; the direction of love and
compassion and understanding.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.44 And
this is a memorial to you and your people,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
hereafter you will be examined concerning your observance of this
task.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.45 And
ask our prophetesses whom we have sent before you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">whether
we have appointed negative goddesses for them to worship,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">deities
which engage in violence and act in vengeful or hateful manners,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
who do not act kindly and out of love, as the Merciful One does.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.46 We
formerly sent Miriam with our signs and miracles to Pharaoh and to his
princes, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Pharaoh said, “Certainly I am the true prophet of the gods,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">despite
the fact he was evil and cruel and engaged in torture and
oppression.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.47 And
when the prophetess Miriam came to them with our signs, behold, they
laughed her to scorn;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.48
although we showed them no sign, but it was greater than all the
others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and many
were still destroyed, because they would not listen to their
prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Miriam,
who warned them all of an impending natural disaster, so that some or
all might be converted.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.49 And
they said to Miriam, “O magician, pray to your Lady for us,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">according
to the covenant which She had made with you; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for then
we will certainly be directed in a correct manner.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.50 But
when we took the plague away from them when they pleaded with us,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">behold
they broke their promise and continued their wrongful ways.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.51 And
Pharaoh made proclamations among his people, saying,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“O my
people, is not the kingdom of Egypt mine, and these rivers, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
flow beneath me?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Do you not
see?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.52 “Am
I not better than this Miriam, who is a contemptible woman, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and can
scarcely express herself intelligently?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.53
“Have bracelets of gold been put upon
her?<a href="#_ftn10" id="_ftnref10"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[10]</span></span></span></span></a> Do
the angels attend to her in orderly procession?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.54 And
Pharaoh persuaded his people to joke about the matter;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
obeyed him, for they were wicked and enjoyed the torture and oppression
of others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.55 and
after they had been given a considerable period of time to believe in
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Miriam
told them to let her people go, otherwise disaster would come to
them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
must not follow her, but they refused to listen,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so while
her people passed safely at the appointed time she was advised for this
task,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
others were too late and they drowned, but only due to the fact they
refused to believe in Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.56 and
this was a precedent and an example to others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.57 And
when the son of Mother Mary was proposed for an example, the people
cried out for joy,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.58 and
they said, “Are our negative goddesses better or him?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They
proposed this instance for none other than a reason to create an
argument, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yes, they
are quick to argue.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.59
Yeshua was a servant of Goddess who was favored with healing,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">prophecy,
and who was to be an example to the children of Israel.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.60 If
heaven so desired, they could have sent the people angels,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to
succeed everyone on the earth, but this is not the plan of Goddess for
you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.61 And
the appearance of Yeshua to many will be a sign of the approach </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">of the
last and final
resurrection,<a href="#_ftn11" id="_ftnref11"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[11]</span></span></span></span></a>
and you need not have any doubt concerning this, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for many
people will see the saints and prophetesses as this day comes near.
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
follow Me; for this is the right way.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.62 And
do not let Evil cause you to turn aside from this religion; for that is
your open enemy.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.63 And
when Yeshua came with evident signs and miracles, he said,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Now I
have come to you with wisdom, and I want to explain to you</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">some of
those issues which are the subject of your arguments, therefore love
Goddess and obey me.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.64
Certainly Goddess is your Lady of Light, therefore worship Her, this is
the right way.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.65 And
the various sects among them fell into differences; but the message of
most of them was true.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Woe to
those persons who act unjustly, for they will suffer sadness on the day
of their resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.66 Do
the unbelievers wait for any other time than the time of
resurrection?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And it
may come upon them suddenly, when they do not foresee it.<span
style="mso-tab-count:1">           </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.67 The
intimate friends, on that day, may no longer be friends to one
another;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">only the
pious will still assuredly be friends.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.68 O
my servants, there will be no fear which comes to you on that day, nor
will you suffer any grief;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.69
this is for those who have believed in our signs, and have been
Moslemas;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.70
enter into paradise, you and your husbands, with great joy.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.71
Dishes of gold will be carried around to all the believers, and they
will have cups without handles;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
therein they will enjoy whatever their souls shall desire, and whatever
their eyes will delight in;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
shall remain therein forever.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.72
This is paradise, which you have inherited as a reward for that which
you have done on earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.73
Therein you shall have fruits in abundance, of which you shall
eat.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.74 But
the wicked shall remain on earth until they either turn to
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or on the
day of their final resurrection they will be purified with the pure
white light of Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.75
earth shall not be made easier for them; and they will despair
therein.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.76 We
do not deal unjustly with these souls, but they deal unjustly with their
own souls.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.77 And
they shall call aloud, saying “O
Malika,<a href="#_ftn12" id="_ftnref12"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[12]</span></span></span></span></a>
intercede on our behalf so that</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">our Lady
of Light will destroy our souls rather than require us to repeatedly
return to earth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
rest or protection.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.78 She
will answer them, “No, you must remain on earth until your souls turn to
Her.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.79
Have the unbelievers found a method to circumvent what the prophetess
has said?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Or, what
Goddess has decreed?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.80
Certainly there is no method to circumvent what Goddess has
decreed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do they
understand that we hear their every secret? And we hear all their
private discussions?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Yes, and
our messengers who attend them, record the same.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.81 Say
to the people, “If the Merciful One had a child endued with negative
emotions and actions,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
no one would worship such a child, for She is pure light and love,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and so
She cannot and will not have such a child.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.82 Far
be it for the Lady of heaven and earth, the Lady of the Throne, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to even
think of what nasty things they say of Her!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.83
Therefore let them wade in their vanity, and let them amuse themselves
in vain pursuits </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until
they arrive at the day of their resurrection, which they have been
promised.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.84 She
who is Goddess in heaven, is Goddess on this earth also; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is the Wise One, the All Knowing.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.85 And
blessed is She who rules the Queendom of heaven and earth, and whatever
is between them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">with Whom
is the knowledge of the last hour; and before Whom you shall be
assembled altogether.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.86
Those persons whom they invoke besides Her do have any special privilege
to intercede for others; except those who bear witness to the truth, and
those that know the same.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.87 If
you ask these people who has created them, they always answer,
“Goddess.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">How is it
therefore they are inclined to turn to the worship of deities </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that have
negative emotions and actions?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">43.88
Goddess also hears the saying of the prophetess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“O Lady
of Light, certainly these are people who do not believe,” </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will answer, “Then turn away from them and say ‘Peace’; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">hereafter
I will decide the matter for them.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FORTY FOUR – ENTITLED SMOKE</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.1
H.M.<a href="#_ftn13" id="_ftnref13"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[13]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.2 By
the easily understood Book, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.3
which we have sent down on a blessed
night<a href="#_ftn14" id="_ftnref14"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[14]</span></span></span></span></a>, the
night which we had decided upon,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.4
wherein is distinctly sent down the decree of every determined
thing,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.5 as a
command from us.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.6 As a
mercy from the Lady of Light; for it is She that hears and knows
all;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.7 She
is the Lady of heaven and earth, and of whatever is in between
them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if you
are women of certain knowledge and understanding.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.8
There is no Goddess but She; She gives life, and She is there with you
at the time of your death;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She is
your Lady of Light, and the Lady of your foremothers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.9 Yet
some people fall into a pattern of doubt.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.10 But
observe them, before the day of final resurrection, the heavens will
produce a visible
smoke,<a href="#_ftn15" id="_ftnref15"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[15]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.11
which will cover womankind, and this will be a tormenting plague for
some;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
Goddess does not torment and this will be a natural change signifying a
shift in the earth’s character.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.12 The
people will say, “O Lady of Light, what is this thing,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for we
are afraid.”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>But only the
prophetesses will know what it is,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will inform the true believers as to how to mitigate the torment,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
unbelievers will not listen and will not believe how to mitigate this
problem.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.13
There is no reason why their condition would not be mitigated,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except
for their own unbelief, when a prophetess has come to them and explained
it clearly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.14 But
they will retire from her, saying, “This woman is instructed falsely by
others, or she is insane!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.15 “We
will take the plague from you a little;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but we
believe you will return to your former unbelief and you will still not
listen to your prophetess.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.16 On
the day whereupon we will fiercely assault them with the power of love,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
will eradicate vengeance from among them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.17 We
will hold a trial of the people of Pharaoh before them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and an
honorable messenger will come to them saying, “Send me the servants of
Goddess;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.18
“Certainly I am a faithful messenger to you;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.19
“and do not bolster yourselves up against Goddess; for I come to you
with manifest power.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.20
“And I fly for protection to my Lady of Light, and to Your Lady, and you
should not harm me.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.21 If
you do not believe me, at least leave me alone.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.22 And
when they accused her of lying, She called upon Her Lady of Light,
saying, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“These
are a wicked people.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.23 And
Goddess said to her, “March forth with my servants by night; for you
will be pursued;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.24
“and you will see before you a great wind,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
will divide the sea, and warn the Egyptians not to follow you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for the
division of the sea is only for a short time, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and by
the time they arrive, it will close up upon them, and they will all be
drowned.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.25 How
many gardens and fountains,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.26 and
fields of corn and fair dwellings,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.27 and
advantages which people enjoyed, did they leave behind them!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.28
Thus the Egyptians were all dispossessed of much wealth and land,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but only
due to their own failings to listen to their prophetess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.29
They were all gone, and so there was no one to weep for them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.30 And
we delivered the children of Israel from a shameful affliction;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.31
from Pharaoh; for he was arrogant and cruel;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.32 and
we chose them, knowingly, above all people;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.33 and
we showed them several signs and miracles, and this was an evident
trial.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.34
Certainly, many people say,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.35
“Assuredly our final end will be no other than our first natural death;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor shall
we ever be raised again;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.36 or
bring now our foremothers back to life, if you speak the truth.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.37 Are
they better or are the people of
Tova,<a href="#_ftn16" id="_ftnref16"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[16]</span></span></span></span></a> and
those who came before them?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">We sent
them a prophetess, but they were destroyed because they would not listen
to her </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when she
warned of earthquakes and strong winds, and other natural
disasters.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.38 We
have not created the heavens and the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
whatever is in between them, just for sport;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">earth is
a school for those that wish to learn and perfect and grow.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.39
Although entertainment is important for your happiness,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
certainly Goddess wants you to be joyous, this earth was created in
truth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
vast majority of women do not know this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.40
Certainly the day of final resurrection shall be the appointed term of
them all;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.41 a
day where the mistress and the servant will be of no advantage to one
another;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.42
except for those whom Goddess will have mercy; for She is the Mighty One
and the Merciful One.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.43
Certainly, the fruit of the tree of
Zakkum<a href="#_ftn17" id="_ftnref17"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[17]</span></span></span></span></a>
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.44
will be the food of the impious;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.45 the
same as the dregs of oil, and it shall boil in the bellies of the
unbelievers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
food shall be a comparison to the food on earth versus that in
paradise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.46
Further, the boiling and torment of the hottest water drunken by
women,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">is a
similitude to the feeling of the food swallowed on earth versus that
which is served in paradise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.47 And
it shall be said to those that torment others,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Your
evils are inexcusable, and the soul grief you will encounter on the day
of your resurrection, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">shall be
as though you were dragged into the depths of hell; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when you
see the grief and sadness you caused,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and at
the same time see the happiness which you could have wrought,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if you
had followed the correct path of love and light.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.48
This shall be the similitude as if one poured boiling water over your
head,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.49
saying, “Suffer this, for what you have done to mighty and honorable
persons.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.50
Certainly this is the grief which you thought would never come to
you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.51 But
the pious shall be lodged in a place of security, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.52
among gardens and fountains;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.53
they will be clothed in the finest silks and satins; and they will sit
facing one another.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.54
Thus it will be; and they will be wed to handsome young virginal men,
with large black eyes;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
be meek and not demanding of anything, but waiting to serve their
woman.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.55 In
that place they may call for all kinds of fruits, in full
security.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.56
They will not taste death therein, after their last death;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess shall deliver them from the pains of grief;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.57
through the gracious bounty of their Lady of Light, they will have
tremendous happiness.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.58
Moreover, we have rendered the Korana easy for you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">by
revealing it in English, which is now taught and studied throughout the
world;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to the
end that everyone will have the message of the great love of
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">44.59
Therefore you should wait for the day of your resurrection </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
fear or anxiety, as many of the unbelievers wait for misfortune to come
to you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-tab-count:
4">                                                </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FORTY FIVE – ENTITLED THE KNEELING</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.1
H.M.<a href="#_ftn18" id="_ftnref18"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><em><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><strong><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[18]</span></strong></span></span></em></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.2 The
revelation of this Book is from the Almighty One, the wise
Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.3
Certainly both in heaven and upon the earth are signs of the divine
power given to the true believers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.4 and
in the creation of yourselves, and of the creatures which are scattered
about the face of the earth, are signs to people of sound judgment and
good understanding;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.5 and
also in the changes of night to day, and the rain which Goddess sends
down from heaven,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">whereby
She quickens the earth after it has been barren;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in the
changes of the winds are also our signs to people of good
understanding.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.6
These are the signs and miracles of Goddess; we recite them to those
that desire the truth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In what
revelation therefore will they believe, after they have rejected Goddess
and Her signs and miracles?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.7 Woe
to every lying and impious person;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.8 who
hears of the signs and miracles of Goddess, which are recited to
her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
afterwards proudly persists in unbelief, as though she never heard them
at all:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for this
she will experience great sadness on the day of her resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.9 and
to the person who, when she comes to the knowledge of any of our signs
and miracles,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">receives
the same with doubts and scorn. For these people will experience great
soul sadness </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on the
day of their resurrection, when they see all the good they might have
done;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.10 for
they will be reborn back to the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
shall seem like hell without a protectress or guardian angels;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
whatever evil they gained will be of no assistance to them at
all,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor shall
the negative emotions and actions which they associate with
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will suffer great sadness on the day of their resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.11 For
this is a true direction;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and for
those who do not believe the signs and miracles of their Lady of
Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">is
prepared the sadness which will seem like a terrible torment,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
feel the pain and suffering they have caused others through their
wrongful actions.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.12 It
is Goddess who has subjected the sea to you, that the ships may sail
upon it at your command;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and that
you may seek advantages to yourselves by commerce, out of Her
bounty;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and that
you may give your thanks to Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.13 and
that She obliges whatever is in heaven and on the earth to serve
you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the whole
of all emanating from Her. Certainly herein are signs to people who
consider well.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.14
Speak to the true believers, that they will forgive those who do not
hope</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for the
days in the afterlife with Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that She
will reward each person according to what they have done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.15
Whomsoever does that which is right does it to the advantage of Her own
soul;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
whomsoever does evil does it only against the same; hereafter you will
return to your Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.16 We
have given to the children of Israel the Book of the Law, and wisdom and
prophecy;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
fed them with delicious foods, and preferred them above many nations,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
they chose Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.17 and
we gave them plain ordinances concerning the business of
religion;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that they
should not fall into variance, except after that knowledge had come to
them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
disputed among themselves, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">still
their Lady of Light will decide all substantial controversies between
them</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on the
day of their resurrection, concerning whatever they argue about
now.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.18
Afterwards, we appointed you, O prophetess, to promulgate laws
concerning matters of religion:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
follow the same, and do not follow the desires of those persons who are
ignorant.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.19
Certainly they will not assist you against Goddess at all;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
unjust are the patrons of one another; but Goddess is the patroness of
the pious.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.20
This Korana delivers evident precepts to all womankind;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it is
a true direction and a mercy, to people that may instruct others
properly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.21 Do
the workers of inequity imagine that we will deal with them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the same
as those who believe and do good works; so that their life and death
shall be counted equal?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
would be an ill judgment to make!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.22
Goddess has created the heavens and the earth in truth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that She
will compensate every soul according to that which it has done; and none
shall be treated unjustly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.23
What are they thinking? She who takes her own desires for her
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and she
thinks that it is Goddess that makes her fall into error, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and that
she has not sealed up her own heart and ears, or that she has not placed
a veil over her own eyes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">has
certainly deceived only herself.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>These are her own choices to make, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but then
she wonders why she believes that Goddess has forsaken her, when Goddess
clearly has not. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do not
the people understand this?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.24
Then the unbelievers say, “There is no life, but the present
life:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we live
and then we die, and nothing else will destroy us but one death.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But they
have no knowledge in this matter; they only follow their own vain
desires.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.25 And
when our evident signs and miracles are recited to them, their arguments
which they offer to us,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">are the
exact same thing over and over again when they say, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Bring to
life our foremothers who have been dead; if you speak the truth.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.26 Say
to the people, “Goddess has given you life; and afterwards will be with
you when you die;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">hereafter
She will assemble you together on the day of your resurrection; there is
no doubt of this matter;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
vast majority of women do not understand this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.27 To
Goddess belongs the Queendom of heaven and earth; and the day when the
hour will be fixed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on that
day those persons who charge the Korana with vanity </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will be
informed of the errors of their beliefs.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.28 And
you shall see every nation kneeling; every nation will be called to its
Book of account;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
will be said to them, “On this day you will be rewarded to that which
your people have done.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.29 Our
Book will show you all that you have done; we have recorded everything
you have done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.30 As
for those persons who shall have believed and done good works,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">their
Lady of Light will lead them into Her mercy; this will assure them
manifest happiness.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.31 But
as to the unbelievers, it will be said to them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Did you
not receive the signs and miracles of the Lady of Light? </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But you
rejected them, because you were proud!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.32 And
when it was said to them, “Now the promise of Goddess is true;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and as to
the hour of judgment there is no doubt,” </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
unbelievers replied, “We did not know exactly about the hour of
judgment;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we
thought that was an uncertain opinion only; and we were never well
assured of the matter.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.33 But
on that day when all the evils they had done are shown to them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will feel the exact pain and grief they caused others through</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">hate,
greed, jealousy, rage or violence; and all the goodness they mocked
before this will encompass them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.34 and
it shall be said to them, “This day we will forget your problems,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as you
forgot about the problems of others; and your abode will be earth again,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
will be like hell fire, without guardian angels and a protectress, until
you turn to Her.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.35
This discipline will be assured to you, because you turned the signs of
Goddess into ridicule </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
did whatever evil your hearts desired; and the pomp of the world
deceived you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
were so intelligent and arrogant that you deceived yourselves;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">On this
day therefore, they will not be asked any longer of the evil of that
lifetime, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it will
be forgotten; nor will they be asked to do well before Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
will return to earth as innocent babies.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">45.36
Therefore, praise the Lady of all creatures; and to Her belongs all
glory in heaven </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and upon
the earth, for She is the Mighty one the Wise Goddess!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FORTY SIX – ENTITLED THE CROOKED SANDS</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.1
H.M.<a href="#_ftn19" id="_ftnref19"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[19]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.2 The
revelation of this Book is the from the<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>Almighty One, the Wise Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.3 We
have not created the heavens and the earth, and whatever is between
them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">otherwise
than in truth, and for a predetermined period:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
unbelievers turn away from the great gift of love which was given
them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.4 Say
to the people, “What are you thinking? </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Show me
what part of earth did any negative goddess create for you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Negativity
does not create anything, and even if it did, the result would be
disastrous.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Bring me
a Book of Scripture revealed before this, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or some
footstep of ancient knowledge which brings such a detailed accounting
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">of the
great love that Goddess has for you all.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.5
Whoever could be in a wider error than she who invokes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">besides
Goddess, deities that engage in negative actions and emotions?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Such a
goddess will not help you on the day of your resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
hateful, negative deities will not assist you during this life, nor
during the afterlife.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.6 And
when women are gathered together for their judgment,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">how could
you ever tell the difference between a mean, hateful goddess and your
enemies? </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They
would talk and act the same. They would both deny you and act in their
own self interest.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.7 When
our evident signs and miracles of love are shown to you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
unbelievers of the truth will say, when it comes to them, “This is an
obvious work of dark sorcery.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.8 Will
they say that your prophetess has forged it? Answer, “If I have forged
it,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
you will not obtain for me any favors from Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She
certainly knows the injurious language you use when you repeat it,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She will
be a sufficient witness between you and I; and She is gracious and
merciful.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.9 Say
to the people, “I am not alone among the prophetesses,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor do I
know what will be done with me or with you after this:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">I follow
no other teachings besides what has been revealed to me from Goddess;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor am I
any more than a preacher and a teacher.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.10 Say
to the people, “What is your opinion? If this Book is from Goddess and
you do not believe it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a
witness of the children of Israel should bear witness to its constancy
with the law,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
believe therein, yet you proudly reject the same, then are you not an
unjust person?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
Goddess will not direct the unjust people.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.11 But
the unbelievers will say of the believers, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“If the
doctrine of the Korana had not been to their liking, they would not have
embraced it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And they
are not truly guided by anything, for we believe this is nothing but an
antiquated lie.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.12
Whereas the Book of Miriam was revealed before the Korana, to be a guide
and a mercy;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
is a Book confirming the same, delivered in the English tongue;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to
denounce anyone who says Goddess threatens or harms any of Her beloved
children,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
desires only to bear good tidings, and to be especially loving to the
righteous.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.13 As
to those who say, “Our Lady is our One True Goddess,” and those that
behave righteously;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
have no fear, nor shall they be grieved.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.14
These shall be the inhabitants of paradise, they shall remain therein
forever.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.15 We
have commanded woman to show kindness to her parents; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
her mother carried her in her uterus; and she was delivered in great
pain;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
time for pregnancy and the time for nursing is substantial;
approximately thirty months for
both;<a href="#_ftn20" id="_ftnref20"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[20]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and then
she will attain her age of strength at forty years, and she will
say,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“O Lady
of Light, inspire me so that I might be grateful for the favors of my
parents,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and that
I may act with righteousness, so that you might be well pleased with
me;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and be
gracious to me through the children you may give me;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for I am
in your service, and I am a Moslema.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.16
These are the people from whom we will accept their works of
righteousness </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on a most
favorable basis; and whose evil works we will not consider much at
all;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
shall be among the inhabitants of paradise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">this is a
true promise, and what we have promised them in this world.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.17
However, as to the woman that says to her parents,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Curse
you!<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Do you want me to believe
that I will be taken from the grave,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and then
restored to life, when many generations have passed away before
me,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and none
of them have ever come back?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And while
her parents pray for her and beg the assistance of Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
say to her, “We are so very upset!<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>You should believe,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for the
promises of Goddess are indeed true.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But she
will answer, “These are nothing but silly fables of the
ancients.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.18
These are those persons who are like those nations that have come before
them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">of genii,
the haughty ones, and of women, that they are lost,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and will
experience great sadness on the day of their resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.19 For
everyone is prepared a certain degree of happiness or misery;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">according
to what they have done in the world;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess will provide for them just compensation for their good works;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and no
soul will be treated unjustly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.20 On
a certain day, each soul will be resurrected,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will review their lives, and for many, the soul sadness is so great it
will seem </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as if the
flames of hell have encompassed her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">although
there is no physical pain, and they will not be afraid;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
will be said to them, “You received your good things in your
lifetime,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">while you
lived in the world; and you enjoyed yourself greatly;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
you will be adversely rewarded in having to see and feel the pain and
suffering </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you have
caused others because you behaved insolently on the earth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
justice, and for that you have erred.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.21
Remember Hue, a sister from the nation of Ada, when she preached to her
people,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and there
were many good preachers before her, and after her, saying,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Worship
only one Goddess; certainly I fear that many of you will experience
great sadness </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on the
day of your resurrection.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.22 The
people answered her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-spacerun:yes"> </span>“Do you desire that we turn away from
the worship of deities that we love?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Those
that incite us to hate, violence, jealousy and negativity?<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>For we love wealth and power.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">If this
is the case, then bring your so called day of resurrection upon us
now,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if you
are indeed telling the truth!” And they taunted her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.23 She
said, “Certainly the knowledge of the time of your day of resurrection
is with Goddess only;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and I am
only to advise you on what I am sent to preach and teach; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but I see
you are a disbelieving people.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.24 And
when they looked up one day and saw a huge cloud,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and when
they ran toward the valley, they were elated and said,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“This is
a wonderful cloud that will bring us the rain we need and
deserved!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But Hue
answered, “No, it will not bring you rain–in fact it is a dangerous
cloud</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a
whirlwind is soon coming and you must leave, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for it
will destroy everything at its appointed time.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is a
most severe natural disaster. But listen to me, and you might avoid
this.” </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But they
were a stubborn people, and would not believe their prophetess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.25 And
in the morning, nothing was to be seen besides empty buildings.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.26 We
had established these people in a flourishing manner,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">such as
we have provided for the people of Mecca; and we gave them ears and eyes
and hearts;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet
neither their ears, nor their eyes, nor their hearts were of any benefit
to them at all;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
rejected the signs and miracles of Goddess and Her Prophetess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and so
they died, because the earth is a dangerous place,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
are all in need of Her protection while you are here.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.27 If
you look around, you will see many cities which were destroyed due to
natural disasters; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
have shown this as a sign to many peoples, so they might repent and turn
to Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.28 Did
their worship of evil deities having negative emotions and actions
protect them?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">No, for
these evil deities and worship of them was of no assistance to any
person;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
was false, vain opinions that led these people to worship wealth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">greed and
power, and they further engaged in the accompanying blasphemy of such
actions.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.29
Remember when certain of the genii turned to you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
they may hear the Korana; and when they were present at the reading of
the same,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
said, “Let us listen and have enthusiasm for this new work;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and when
it ended, they returned to their people and preached to them what they
had heard.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.30
They said, “O people, certainly we have heard a new Book of Truth read
to us,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which had
been revealed since the time of Miriam,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it
confirms the Scriptures which were revealed before it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
directs us all to the truth and the right way of love.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.31
“People, obey the Prophetess sent by Goddess and believe in Her, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that She
might forgive you your errors,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and so
that you might avoid sadness on the day of your resurrection.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.32
“And whosoever disobeys a prophetess of Goddess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will not
avoid the plans and discipline of Goddess; nor will you have any
protectress besides Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">You will
be in obvious error.” Do the people not know that Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">who has
created the heavens and the earth, and was never tired with such immense
creation,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">might
quite easily raise the dead to life again? Most certainly, for She is
Almighty.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.33 On
a certain day, the unbelievers will experience great soul sadness on the
day of their resurrection, and it will be said to them, “Were you not
told the truth?”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>They will
answer, “Yes, we were.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And She
will reply, “Then you know that you will have to face all the negative
actions and emotions </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that you
harbored during your lifetime, and this will indeed be grievous for
you.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">46.34
Therefore patiently persevere, as all the prior prophetesses have done
before you; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
not be anxious regarding the unbelievers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">On the
day of their resurrection, they will experience great soul
sadness,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
will occur after their death in only the twinkling of a second;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it will
seem to them as if not even a single hour in a single day had passed
that they walked upon the earth; but no one will be destroyed, only they
will be very sad for all the pain they caused while on earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FORTY SEVEN – ENTITLED PROPHETESS</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.1
Goddess will not make effective any of the works of the unbelievers who
intend to do harm to others, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and who
turn away women from the ways of love and Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.2 but
as to those persons who believe, and work righteousness,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
believe in the revelations which have been sent down to the
Prophetess</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">(for this
is the truth from the Lady of Light), She will cleanse their evil deeds
from them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will set their heart alright.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.3 This
She will do because those who believe do not follow vanity,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
because those who believe follow the truth from the Lady of
Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Thus
Goddess propounds to women fine examples of truth and Her love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.4 When
you come to the unbelievers, you will know them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
they engage in acts of violence and attack other people, without
worrying whom they might hurt;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they have
no conscious when it comes to violence, they attack freely,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they may
slaughter others, they may tie them up in bonds, sometimes they may
allow them to freely leave,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but often
they will ask for a ransom, and they foment war instead of peace.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is
what the unbelievers do. And then they will tell you that their goddess
desires vengeance on others,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
commands that they fight battles to prove the strength of one over the
other.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They
further will lie and say that violence and fighting is required </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to defend
the “true” religion of goddess, when in fact you have been told</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that She
demands peace over war, love over strife, and that you should forgive
and forget.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.5 But
Goddess always guides the believers, and She sets their hearts
alright;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.6 and
She will lead the peaceful believers into paradise, which She has
promised them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.7 O
true believers, if you assist Goddess, by making peace in
religion,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then She
will assist you against your enemies; and She will protect you from
them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.8 but
as for the aggressive and violent unbelievers, they will surely kill one
another off, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">through
their violent tendencies, and all that will be left will be the
peacemakers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so stand
aside and let the violent ones perish; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and their
violent works will perish with them also, by the plan of Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Blessed
are the peacemakers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.9 This
will happen to them, because they have rejected with abhorrence</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">all that
Goddess has revealed; their egos demand that they engage in
violence,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to
protect the ego only; the heart does not understand violence;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and their
violent works will become of no avail.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.10 Do
they not travel through the earth and see what has happened to</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">other
violent people who came before them?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These
people were violent and engaged primarily in violence,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess did not stop what their black hearts desired earnestly to
do:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that is,
kill one another.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>A similar
catastrophe awaits the unbelievers who lust after violence.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.11
This will come to pass, for Goddess is the patroness of the peaceful
true believers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
the warmongering unbelievers have no protectress.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.12
Certainly Goddess will introduce those who are peaceful and those who
believe,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
good works, into gardens beneath which rivers flow;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
unbelievers indulge themselves in violent pleasures,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will return to earth repeatedly, and commit violence against one
another,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until
they lust for violence no longer and see it for the worthless cause that
it is,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
process shall be like hell fire to them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.13 How
many cities were more mighty in strength than the city which has
expelled many a prophetess; yet the evil inhabitants destroyed
themselves due to their own violent tendencies, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and there
was no one to help them, for Goddess turns Her back on the violent
souls.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.14
Shall the person who has followed the plain declarations of love and
peace</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from the
Lady of Light be treated the same as one whose works</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">have been
dressed up by evil and those who follow their own violent lusts?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.15 The
description of paradise, which is promised to the pious is:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">there are
rivers of incorruptible water, and rivers of sweet milk, the taste of
which never changes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and there
are rivers of wine, pleasant to those who drink;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and there
are rivers of sweet honey;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
therein the believers shall have plenty of all kinds of fruits;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will receive pardon from the Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Shall the
woman for whom these things are prepared be the same </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as one
who must dwell again upon the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
shall be like hell fire; and those persons will drink the sour,
dirtywater of the earth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
shall be like boiling putrid water told of in the allegory of
hell?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.16 The
unbelievers say some people listen to you, until they have left your
presence,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they tell
others about you in a derisive manner. These people have hardened their
own hearts,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
follow only their own desires;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.17 but
as for those people that are directed by Goddess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She will
grant them a more correct direction when asked; and She will instruct
them on how to avoid evil.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.18 Do
the unbelievers wait for anything other than the last hour,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that it
might come upon them suddenly? Some signs of this have already
come,<a href="#_ftn21" id="_ftnref21"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[21]</span></span></span></span></a>
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and when
it will actually come to them, how will they then understand this entire
Korana at once?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.19
Know therefore, that there is no goddess but Goddess; and ask pardon for
your errors,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and for
the true believers, both women and men.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
knows that you are busily employed in the world,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
also knows your place in paradise after your life in this world.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.20 The
true believers say, “We have already been told not to make war against
other nations!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And they
complain this is too difficult for them, to refrain from war.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But when
a chapter without any ambiguity is revealed, and no war is
mentioned,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you will
be able to see who has hardened her own heart, that she still lusts for
war,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so look
past them and do not argue, and move on to helping others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.21 But
obedience would be much better for them, and to speak what they
desire.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And when
any command is firmly established, if they give credit to Goddess, this
would be better for them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.22
Were you ready, therefore, if you had the authority,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to commit
atrocities on earth, and to violate the ties of kinship?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.23
Unfaithfulness is not loved by Goddess, but some are deaf, and some are
blind,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
they have chosen this demeanor.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.24 Do
the people not attentively meditate on the Korana? Are there locks upon
their hearts?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.25
Certainly those persons who turn their backs,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">after the
true direction has been revealed to them, Evil will seek them
out,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess can only forbear for a short time, for She does not interfere
with free will.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.26
This shall be the situation for all of them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
they say privately to those who detest what comes from Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“We only
will obey you to some extent regarding what Goddess has
commanded.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But
Goddess knows all their secrets.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.27
How, therefore will it be that when the angels shall be with them when
they die,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will gently take their souls from their bodies, away from their faces
and backs,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">what will
they say to the angels?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.28 It
would seem that they will be sad because they will remember the evil
they did,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">thinking
they would not live after death, and they would not see Goddess and the
angels.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They may
be scared because evil has convinced them that Goddess is full of wrath
and vengeance,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
strenuously averse and vehement in enforcing Her commands;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will render any good works in vain.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.29
This is because they listened to the Evil ones preach about
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and wrath
and negativity and hell fire.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>They were told by Evil that Goddess will</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">hang
their malice out for everyone to see, which is entirely untrue.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.30
They are told by Evil that they will be shown with shame to
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will know them by their marks, and their perverse pronunciation of
words.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">While
Goddess knows all your actions, She does not do such things,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
is pure love and She disciplines and guides in ways that you would not
necessarily understand.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.31 She
will put you through trials, and She will know who are the true
believers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">those
that persevere in love and pure emotions, rather than fear and
hate,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Evil
cannot hurt Goddess at all, but Evil works will certainly perish </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">like dust
blown away by the slight breeze.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.32
Certainly those who do not believe, and those who turn other women from
the ways of Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and make
opposition against the prophetess sent by Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">after the
divine direction has been made obvious to them, will not hurt Goddess at
all;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but She
will cause all Evil works to perish, for the only thing that is real
which and survives eternally is love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.33 O
true believers, obey your Goddess; and obey your prophetesses;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
render not what you have done to be of no effect because it was evil or
negative.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.34
Certainly those who do not believe,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
that turn other women from the ways of Goddess, and then die as
unbelievers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
experience great soul sadness on the day of their resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess only forgives those who repent and seek Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.35
Forget not, therefore, to always seek peace with your enemies,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">whether
you are in the superior position or not; for Goddess is always with
you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will not defraud you of the merit of your works.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.36
Certainly this present life is only like a school where you are to learn
and grow </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in love,
kindness, compassion and caring for others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but if
you believe and know that Goddess loves you, She will abundantly provide
you with rewards,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">even
though She does not require that you give your entire substance to
Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.37 If
She should require that you gave your entire self and wealth to
Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
earnestly press you, you would become stingy, and it would raise your
hatred against Her Prophetess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">47.38
Behold, you are those that are invited to expend only a portion of your
substance </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for the
support of Goddess’ true religion; and yet there are some among you that
are stingy.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But
whomever shall be stingy, is only stingy towards her own soul;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess needs nothing from you, but you are extremely needy of
Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
you turn away, you will find soul sadness on the day of your
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when you
see the people that you could have helped </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">with the
money you were supposed to donate to charity</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
spread religion and love around the world.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-spacerun:yes"> </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FORTY EIGHT – ENTITLED THE VICTORY</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.1
Certainly you have been granted certain victory over Evil;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.2 and
Goddess will forgive you your past errors, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
which are current, and those which may come,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will bestow Her favors and blessings upon you, and She will direct you
in the right way;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.3 and
Goddess may assist you in life with a glorious assistance;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.4 It
is She who sends down secure tranquility into the hearts of the true
believers, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that they
may increase in faith, beyond their former faith;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for the
hosts of heaven and earth belong entirely to Goddess; and Goddess is
knowing and wise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.5 for
She will lead the true believers of both sexes into gardens beneath
which rivers flow, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will live therein forever; and She will forgive their evil deeds;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will have great happiness there with Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.6 and
She may guide the hypocritical women and the hypocritical men,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
that associate negativity with Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
who conceive ill opinions concerning Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For it is
only the dark entities that claim Goddess grants ill fortune to the
unbelievers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that She
is angry with them; and She will curse them; and She will send them to a
fiery, tortuous hell;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will have a horrid journey there; but Goddess has commanded no one to
say any such thing;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
is all Love and no woman or man should ever fear Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She is
gentle, She is kind and most of all, She is forgiving.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.7 To
Goddess belongs the hosts of heaven and earth; and Goddess is mighty and
wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.8
Certainly we have sent you, O Prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to be a
witness and to be a bearer of good tidings,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
denounce those that associate negativity with Goddess.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.9 This
is so that you might believe in Goddess, and Her prophetesses; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
might assist Her, and revere Her, and praise Her, morning and
evening.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.10
Certainly those persons who swear loyalty to you, swear loyalty to
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the hand
of Goddess is over their hands. Whomever shall violate her oath,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">violates
the Oath of Goddess, which will hurt only her own soul;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
whomever will perform that which she has contracted with Goddess;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She will
certainly give her a great reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.11 The
Arabs of the desert who were left behind will say to you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Our
substance and our families kept us from true religion,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so we
could not go out with you to worship and to evangelize;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore,
ask pardon for us.” They speak with their tongues, which is not in their
hearts.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Answer
them, “Whom shall be able to obtain for you anything from
Goddess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Will She
be with you every day, or will She not be there because you do not
worship Her?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Yes,
certainly, Goddess is well acquainted with all that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.12
Truly you imagine that the prophetess and the true believers would never
return to their families,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
you conjectured in your own hearts; but then you have an evil
imagination;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
are assuredly quite corrupt.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.13
Whomsoever does not believe in Goddess and Her prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
they will suffer great soul sadness on the day of their
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And Evil
will come to them and tell you Goddess has prepared burning fire for
you, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
without protection from Goddess, you might believe and then come to fear
Her, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which is
not what She ever told you to do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.14 To
Goddess belongs the Queendom of heaven and earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She
forgives all that ask and repent; and She disciplines those that are in
need of it; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet
Goddess is highly inclined to forgive and grant you mercy.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.15
Those who were left behind while others went out to help,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when the
new believers came, they wanted to take all the credit,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
sought to change the herstory of the Word of Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Say to
them, “You shall not be able to take credit for new souls you did not
evangelize,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
has said this heretofore.”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">   </span>They
will reply, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“No, you
envy us and keep us from claiming glory with you; you owe us a share of
this glory.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But they
are women of small understanding.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.16 Say
to the Arabs of the desert who were left behind, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“You
shall be called forth against a people that are warlike and difficult to
convert; you shall go to them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
evangelize them, so they will profess the Islamica religion throughout
the world.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">If you
obey, Goddess will give you a glorious reward, but if you turn
back,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as you
have turned back heretofore, you will experience great soul sadness on
the day of your resurrection</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when you
see all the happiness these souls would have experienced,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">had they
only known that Goddess is all loving, merciful and
compassionate.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.17 It
will not be a mistake for the blind, nor shall it be wrongful for the
lame,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if they
fail to go out and evangelize in the name of Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She will
instead lead them into gardens beneath which rivers flow;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
whomever will turn back, they will be sorely grieved on the day of their
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
see all the goodness and happiness they might have accomplished in their
lifetime, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if they
had only believed in Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.18 Now
Goddess was well pleased with the true believers, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
swore loyalty to Her beneath a tree, and She knew that what was in their
hearts was goodness,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
She sent to them tranquility of mind, and She rewarded them a speedy
victory</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in
bringing the true religion to many towns, and they converted many
souls;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is mighty and wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.19
Goddess promised you many souls, which you could easily convert;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.20 but
She gave you these victories by way of earnest;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
restrained the minds of many women from ignoring you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that
these large scale conversions may be an amazing sign and miracle to the
true believers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
may guide you to the right way.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.21 And
She also promised you additional souls to convert,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which you
have not been able to do right now; but Goddess, nonetheless has them
waiting for you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess is almighty.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.22 If
some unbelieving towns had fought their conversion to Islamica,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
they would have turned their backs; and they would not have found a
Patroness or a Protectress;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.23
according to the decrees of Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
have been put into practice heretofore against the opposers of the
Prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but you
shall never find any changes in the ordinance of Goddess to love
Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
love one another, this is eternal.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.24 It
was She who inclined the hearts of these souls towards you, so they
listened to your words,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in the
valley of Mecca; after that She gave you victory in religion over
them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess saw everything that you did.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.25
These are the people who formerly did not believe,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
had hindered you from visiting certain holy temples,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
hindered you from collecting money offerings,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
hindered you from collecting clothes and food donations,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that came
to you by means of the sacrifices of the people.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">It might
have been that you did not find any people to convert,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">both
women and men, and you did not know this before,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
all had been associated with Evil before your coming, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
had also committed many crimes and offenses,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">even
though you had no knowledge of this, yet She still inclined their hearts
and minds towards you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but this
was done, so that Goddess might bestow even more of Her mercy and love
upon additional souls.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">If they
had been distinguished before this, Goddess would not have sent you to
preach and teach,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">with your
most effective and loving preaching and teaching methods.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.26
When the unbelievers had put into their own hearts the preciseness of
ignorance, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">still
Goddess sent down Her tranquility upon them and Her Prophetess and on
the true believers, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
firmly fixed in you all the words of piety; and they were most worthy of
the same, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
most deserving of this grace; for Goddess knows all things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.27 Now
Goddess has sent in truth to Her Prophetess a vision,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">wherein
she said, “You shall surely enter the holy temple of Mecca,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
Goddess is pleased to do this, in full security, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
pious shall have their heads shaved or close cropped,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if they
desire, as a special sign to others, and you shall not fear
anything;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess knows all which you do not know;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
has appointed you, a speedy victory in Mecca and in converting many
souls in the towns.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.28 It
is She who has sent to you Her Prophetess with the true
direction,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
religion of truth and love; that She may exalt this religion above all
others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess is a sufficient witness in these matters.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">48.29
Your Prophetess is an apostle of Goddess; and those who are with her
will be fierce in loving others; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will also be filled with compassion. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">You may
see them bowing down, or prostrate, or standing quietly,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or
sitting or lying quietly, seeking their just due from Goddess and Her
good will.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Their
signs are upon their faces, and some may bear marks of frequent
prostration.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is
their description in the Pentateuch, and their description in the
gospels,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they are
seeds that grow vigorously, giving great delight to the farmer.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Such are
the Moslemas described to be; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
the unbelievers will often swell unjustly with indignation at
them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
has promised to all that believe and do good works, pardon and a great
reward in the hereafter.</span>

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FORTY NINE – ENTITLED THE INNER APARTMENTS</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.1 O
true believers, do not anticipate any matter which is only in the sight
of Goddess</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and Her
Prophetesses, and love Goddess and love one another;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess both hears and knows everything. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.2<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>and do not raise your voices above
that of the Prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">neither
should you speak loudly to her during discussions, as you speak loudly
to one another,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">unless
your works become in vain, and you fail to understand this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.3
Certainly those who lower their voices in the presence of the prophetess
of Goddess </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">are those
that have hearts that Goddess has made conducive to piety;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
obtain pardon when they ask for it, and a great reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.4 As
to those who scream out to you while you are in private,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the vast
majority of them do not understand the respect due you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.5 If
they wait with patience, until you come to them, it will be better for
them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
Goddess is inclined to forgive and She is merciful.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.6 O
true believers, if a wicked man comes to you with a tale, inquire
strictly as to the truth of it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">otherwise
you might hurt people through ignorance, and later repent of your
actions.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.7 And
know that the prophetess is among you; if she obeyed you in many
things,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you would
be guilty of error, in leading her into mistake.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But
Goddess has made the faith amiable to you, and She has prepared the same
in your hearts,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
infidelity, iniquity and disobedience are hateful to you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These are
the manners of those that walk in the right way.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.8 This
occurs through mercy from Goddess and Her grace; and Goddess is all
knowing and wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.9 If
two parties of believers argue with one another,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you
should try to settle the matter between them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if one
insults the other, you should correct that party,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
request that they look to the judgment of Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
they do agree and make peace between one another with justice,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you
should inform them that they have acted in a blessed manner;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess values those who act justly and make peace.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.10
Certainly the true believers belong to a single sisterhood; therefore
reconcile your sisters;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and love
Goddess, that you might obtain Her mercy.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.11 O
true believers, do not let women laugh at others with hateful scorn;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
it is only from a distorted perception that they might think they are
better than others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor let
men laugh at other men with hateful scorn, because it is only from a
distorted perception</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that they
might think they are better than others. Nor should the people defame
one another;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor
should they call one another by hateful nicknames. A hateful name is but
one form of wickedness,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
should not be an action of one who has joined the true faith;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
they repent not, they will feel the hurt they have caused the other
person,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on the
day of their resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.12 O
true believers, carefully avoid entertaining unfounded suspicions of one
another;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
unfounded suspicions are but another form of soul error.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Inquire
not too curiously into the failings of other persons;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor speak
ill of another person when she is not in your presence.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Would any
of you desire to eat the flesh of her dead sister?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
this would be abhorrent! And love Goddess; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is easy to be reconciled and She is merciful.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.13 O
people, certainly we have created you in both the forms of female and
male; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
have distributed you on the earth into nations, tribes and families,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that you
might know one another. Certainly the most honorable of you, in the
sight of Goddess </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">is the
one that is the most pious; and Goddess is wise and knowing.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.14 The
Arabs of the desert say, “We believe.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Answer
them, “You are not yet believers, you only say ‘We have embraced
Islama’,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for your
hearts have not changed and you are hateful to one another,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
hurt one another intentionally. If you obey Goddess and her
Prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She will
not defraud you of any part of the merit of your works;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is inclined to forgive and She is merciful.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.15
Certainly the true believers are those people who believe in Goddess and
Her Prophetess,<span style="mso-tab-count:2">               
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
afterwards do not entertain doubts concerning this;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
employ part of their resources and their abilities</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in the
defense of the true religion of Goddess; these are people that speak
sincerely.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.16 Say
to the people, “Will you inform Goddess as to what you think Her
religion should be?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But
Goddess knows whatever is in heaven or upon the earth; for Goddess is
omniscient.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.17
Some people scold you regarding their obligations as a Muslima,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that it
is difficult to be peaceful, kind and loving to everyone,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you
should answer them “Do not scold or lecture me about your issues in
adopting the true religion,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess has directed you to this faith; and you will be blessed, if you
can speak lovingly.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">49.18
Certainly Goddess knows the secrets of heaven and earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess knows all that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:13.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:Eras"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:17.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚‚</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:Eras"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY – ENTITLED K</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.1
K.<a href="#_ftn22" id="_ftnref22"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[22]</span></span></span></span></a> In
the name of the glorious Korana:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.2
certainly the people wonder that a preacher and teacher from amongst
themselves has come to them; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
unbelievers say, “This is a very strange thing:”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.3
“after we have died, and our bodies have become dust,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">how will
we return to life?”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>For many,
this is not a believable concept.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.4 Now
we know that the earth consumes people back into it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and in
heaven there is kept a recording of the actions of every person on
earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.5 but
they charge the Prophetess with lying, after it has come to them;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
are plunged into confusion.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.6 Do
they not look up at the heaven above them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
consider how the angels have raised it up and adorned it; and that there
are no flaws therein?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.7 We
have also spread forth the earth, and thrown thereupon mountains firmly
established,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
have caused every delicious species of vegetables to spring up
thereupon;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.8 for
a subject of meditation and a consideration for every woman who thinks
of us.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.9 And
we have sent down rain as a blessing from heaven,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">whereby
we cause gardens to spring forth, and the grain of the harvest to
grow,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.10 and
tall palm trees with branches laden with dates in large clusters
which</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.11 are
a provision for womankind; and we are able to quicken a barren country
or land;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so it
will be the same when the dead are raised to life, even though their
bodies are in their graves.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.12 The
peoples of Nora and those that dwelt at Rasha and Thelma,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.13 and
Ada and Pharaoh, accused their prophetesses of lying; and also the
sisters of Wileh,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.14 and
the inhabitants of the woods near Marian, and the people of
Tova;<a href="#_ftn23" id="_ftnref23"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[23]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">all of
these peoples accused our prophetesses of lying;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
when natural disasters came to them, the vast majority were destroyed,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
they were stubborn and would not listen to their prophetesses.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.15 Is
the power of Goddess exhausted by the first creation?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Yes, they
are perplexed, because of a new creation which has been revealed to
them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">namely,
the raising of the dead to life again.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.16 We
created woman, and we know that her soul whispers comforting words to
her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess and the angels are closer to her than her jugular vein;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
whispers the words “peace, love, patience and faith” to her, over and
over, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if only
she will listen closely.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.17
When the two angels were appointed to take account</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">of the
behavior of each person upon the earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">one will
sit on the right hand, and the other on the left;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.18 she
says not a word, but there is with her someone to watch and record what
she
did.<a href="#_ftn24" id="_ftnref24"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[24]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.19 And
the agony of death shall come in truth: this O woman is what you desire
to avoid.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.20 And
the trumpet shall sound on the day of the final resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">this is
the blessing which you all have been promised, for there you will find
the love of Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.21 And
every soul will come thereto; and there will be both a sergeant and a
witness.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.22 And
the former shall say to the unbeliever, “You were negligent prior to
today;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
veil between earth and heaven is now gone; and your sight will become
piercing today.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.23 And
her companions shall say to her, “This is what is ready to be shown to
her.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.24 And
Goddess shall say, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Do not
be afraid, for only Evil has told you that I would cast you into
hell;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it is
the perverse people that would say such a thing about me.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.25 And
everyone who prevented good actions, and every unrepentant person who
erred,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and every
one who created doubt in the true faith,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.26 and
those persons who equated Me with negative actions and emotions;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they are
the ones that will review their lives with sadness and grief, so they
might learn the truth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but I do
not cast anyone into hell or torment them.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.27 Her
companion shall say, “O Lady of Light I did not seduce her, yet she was
far from the right path.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.28
Goddess will reply, “You need not argue before Me;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you are
aware there are no torments, yet you will now know what we have prepared
for your discipline.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.29
“This sentence is not changed from what you were told; nor do I treat
any soul unjustly.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.30 On
that day, the angels of heaven will ask the angels of earth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Is earth
full, is there room for one more?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.31 And
paradise shall be brought near to the pious;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.32 and
it shall be said to them, “This is what you have been promised;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
everyone who turns herself to Goddess and kept Her commandments;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.33 and
those who loved the Merciful One in secret and came to Her with a
converted heart;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.34
will assuredly enter into paradise in peace; this is the day of eternity
for you.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.35
Therein they shall have whatever they shall desire,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and there
will be a superabundant additional blessing of bliss with us.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.36 How
many generations have experienced massive natural disasters before these
Arabs, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when the
people that lived there were more intelligent,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">more rich
and accomplished than the present Arabian people?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Pass
through the regions of the earth and see if there is any refuge, besides
Goddess and Her prophetesses,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from the
ravages of natural disasters.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.37
Certainly herein is an instruction for someone that has a heart and mind
to understand, or listen,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and is
present with an attentive consciousness.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.38 We
created the heavens and the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
whatever is between them, in six days, and no weariness came to
us.<a href="#_ftn25" id="_ftnref25"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[25]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.39
Therefore patiently suffer what the people say,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
celebrate the praise of your Lady of Light before sunrise, and before
sunset,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.40 and
praise Her in some part of the night;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
perform additional parts of worship to Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.41 And
hearken to the day whereupon the crier shall call women together </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for their
day of resurrection from a near place and a far
place,<a href="#_ftn26" id="_ftnref26"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[26]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.42
this is the day when all shall hear the voice of the trumpet in
truth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">this will
be the day that all graves will be emptied, and all souls will come
together,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.43 we
give life and we are with you when you die,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to us
shall be the return of all creatures;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.44
this will be the day whereupon the earth will cleave in half over
everyone,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet no
one will be afraid.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>This will be
a meeting that is simple for us to assemble together.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">50.45 We
well know that the unbelievers say, and you should not compel anyone
forcibly to the faith.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Therefore
preach via the Korana the love that Goddess has for you all, and who
desires it will come to it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY ONE – ENTITLED THE DISPERSION</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.1 By
the winds dispersing and scattering dust;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.2 and
by the clouds which bear loads of rain;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.3 and
by the ships running swiftly in the sea;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.4 and
by the angels who distribute necessaries for the support of all
creatures;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.5
certainly the love of Goddess which you were promised is true;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.6 and
the day of your resurrection will surely come.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.7 By
the heaven furnished with
paths,<a href="#_ftn27" id="_ftnref27"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[27]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.8 you
all widely differ in what you believe.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.9 But
the person who is turned aside from the true faith, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">is one
that has closed up or hardened her own heart.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.10 And
the liars will have no protectress;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.11 and
they wade in the deep waters of ignorance, for they neglect their own
salvation.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.12
They ask, “When will the day of our resurrection come.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.13 and
Evil replies to them, and they believe it, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“On that
day you shall be burned in hell if you do not believe.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.14 And
Evil shall assert, “Taste a horrid punishment, and Goddess wanted to
hasten it for you.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.15 But
the pious know that Goddess is all love, and they shall dwell among
gardens and fountains,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.16
receiving whatever their Lady of Light will give them; because they did
good deeds before this day.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.17
They slept but a small part of the
night;<a href="#_ftn28" id="_ftnref28"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[28]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.18 and
early in the morning they asked pardon of Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.19 and
a due portion of their wealth was given to both she who asked,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and upon
she that was forbidden by shame to ask.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.20
There are signs of the divine power and goodness in the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
is understood by women of sound thinking;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.21 and
also in your own selves; will you not therefore understand?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.22
Your sustenance is in heaven; and also what you are promised.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.23
Therefore, by the Lady of heaven and earth, I swear that this is
certainly the truth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as true
as I am able to explain it to you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.24 Has
not the story of Sarah’s honored guests been told to you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.25
When they went to go see her, they said “Peace,” and she answered
“Peace;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">saying to
herself, “These are strange and unknown people.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.26 And
she went privately to her family, and brought before them a fatted
calf.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.27 And
she set it out before them to eat, and when she saw they did not touch
it, she said,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Do you
not eat?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.28 And
she began to become fearful of them. But they said, “There is nothing
for you to fear,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
declared to her the promise of a wise daughter.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.29 And
when her husband drew near with amazement, Sarah cast down her face
sadly and said,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“But I am
an old woman and my husband is no longer able to reproduce.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.30 The
angels said, “This is what the Lady of Light has decreed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
She is the Wise One and the Knowing One.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.31 And
Sarah said to them, “What is your errand, O messengers of
Goddess?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.32
They answered, “Certainly we are sent to a wicked people,’</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.33 a
natural disaster is coming, with hail of hard
stones,<a href="#_ftn29" id="_ftnref29"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[29]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.34 and
they are marked from the Lady of Light, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
must warn the believers and tell them what to do,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
that will not believe you will mostly perish due to their lack of faith
and stubbornness.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.35 And
we sought for the true believers who lived and stayed in the
city;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.36 but
we did not find more than one family that worshiped Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.37 And
many died that day, and a sign was left for those that do not believe in
the prophetesses</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">sent to
them from Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.38 In
Miriam there was also a sign; when we sent her to Pharaoh with manifest
power.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.39 But
Pharaoh turned Miriam away, with his princes saying,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“This
woman is a dark sorcerer or insane.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.40 And
then what happened was Miriam left with her people that night,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">after
having previously warned Pharaoh not to follow,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">unless a
natural disaster would befall him and his followers; and they were all
drown in the sea;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Pharaoh’s actions were worthy of reprehension.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.41 And
as for the tribe of Ada, there was also a sign; when hot searing winds
came to the tribe,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">many had
not left or sought the necessary protection that their prophetess had
warned them of;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.42 yet
the wind did not really touch the land, yet it rendered everything
rotten and reduced it to dust.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.43
With Thelma, likewise was to be a sign; when it was said to these
people, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Enjoy
yourself for a time.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.44 But
the people did not give thanks, and they behaved insolently;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">wherefore
we told their prophetess to warn them all of a disaster and save the
believers, and she did;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then a
terrible noise from heaven assaulted them, while many looked on in
horror;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.45 and
many were not even able to stand on their feet; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
could not save themselves from destruction.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.46 And
the people of Nora were also given a sign; for many people behaved
wickedly,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
also would not listen to their prophetess regarding an upcoming natural
disaster.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.47 We
have built the heaven with might and strength; and we have given it a
massive expanse;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.48 and
we have stretched forth the earth underneath; and see how evenly we have
spread the same!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.49 And
of everything we have created two kinds, that perhaps you might consider
this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.50 Fly
therefore to Goddess for refuge; certainly I am a public teacher and
preacher only, sent by Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.51 And
do not set up anything negative with your true loving Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
I am a public teacher and preacher to you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.52 In
a similar manner there has come no prophetess to any ancestor, but they
have said,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“This
woman is a magician or insane.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.53 Has
this generation merely inherited the poor behavior of the former?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Yes,
there are many people who enormously err in this world.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.54
Wherefore, stay clear of people who speak in such a manner;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
will not be blamed for what they do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.55 Yet
continue to instruct and teach; for instruction profits the true
believers greatly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.56 The
women and the genii or haughty ones have not been created</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for any
other purpose than they should all serve Me.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.57 I
do not require any sustenance from them; nor do I require them to feed
me.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.58
Certainly Goddess is the one who provides for all creatures; She is
possessed of almighty power.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.59 To
those who shall injure the prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
encounter great sadness on the day of their resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
day will not and cannot be hastened.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">51.60
Woe, therefore to the unbelievers, because of this day, when they will
suffer and learn.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY TWO – ENTITLED THE MOUNTAIN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.1 By
the mountain of
Sinai,<a href="#_ftn30" id="_ftnref30"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[30]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.2 and
by the Book which was written</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.3 upon
an expanded
scroll,<a href="#_ftn31" id="_ftnref31"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[31]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.4 and
by the visited holy
house,<a href="#_ftn32" id="_ftnref32"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[32]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.5 and
by the elevated roof of heaven,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.6 and
by the swelling ocean;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.7
certainly the love of Goddess will assuredly descend;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.8
there will be no one to withhold it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.9 On
that day the heaven shall be shaken, and it shall reel,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.10 and
that day the mountains shall move and pass away.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.11 And
on that day, woe be to those who accused the prophetesses of Goddess to
be liars.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.12
Those who amused themselves in wading in vain arguments.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.13 On
that day they all will be taken to a place where they will see </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
sadness and suffering they had caused, and it will seem like the fire of
hell;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.14 and
it will be said to them, “This is a sadness which you formerly denied as
fiction.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.15 “Is
this a magic illusion?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Or did you
not understand!?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.16
Enter to the viewing room, and see the pain and suffering that you
caused others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you will
not understand what reward you have garnered by your actions.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.17 But
the pious shall dwell in gardens and pleasures;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.18
delighting themselves in what their Lady of Light has given them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and their
Lady of Light will deliver them from the pains of soul suffering.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.19 And
it will be said to them, “Eat and drink with easy digestion,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
of the goodness which you have done;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.20 and
they will be leaning on couches disposed in order;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will be mated with faithful loving chaste husbands having large black
eyes, only for them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and who
are docile and not demanding in any manner.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.21 And
for those people who believe and whose offspring followed them in the
faith,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we will
join their children with them in paradise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
will not diminish them one bit of the merit of their good works.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Every
woman is given in pledge for that which she has done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.22 And
we will give them fruits in abundance, and flesh of the kinds that they
shall desire.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.23
They shall present to one another a cup of wine, and there will be no
vain discussions,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor will
there be any temptation to wickedness.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.24 And
young men appointed to attend to the believers shall go around
them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">beautiful
as pearls hidden in their shells.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.25 And
they shall approach one another an ask questions.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.26 And
they shall say, “Certainly we were with our family,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
worried about them, what would happen when we died.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.27 but
Goddess has been gracious to us, and She has delivered us all into
paradise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.28<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>for we have all called upon Her
before; and She is the Beneficent One, the Merciful One.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.29
Therefore you should, O Prophetess, preach the love of Goddess to your
people,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so they
will not act wickedly. You are not, by the grace of your Lady of Light,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">a
psychic, nor are you insane.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.30 Do
the people say, “She is a mere poet? We will wait and see if she can
perform some miracle.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.31 Say
to the people, “Your hearts desire my ruin,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
I will wait with you and you will see the sadness you have
created.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.32 Do
they use mature understandings in this matter,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or do
they just desire to act wickedly?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.33 Do
they say you have forged the Korana?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
they do not believe in anything.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.34 Let
them produce a discussion which is as good as this one, if they speak
the truth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.35
Were they created by nothing, or are they the creators of
themselves?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.36 Did
they create the heavens and the earth?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
they are not firmly persuaded that it was Goddess that has created
them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.37 Is
the wealth of the world in their hands, or is it in the hands of
Goddess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Are they
the supreme dispensers of all things?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.38 Do
they have a ladder whereby they may ascend to heaven, and hear the
discussions of angels?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Let one,
therefore who has heard them, produce any proof of what they say.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.39 Did
Goddess have sons, yet you desire daughters?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.40 Do
you ask any reward for your preaching and teaching? But they are still
full of debts.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.41 Are
the secrets of the future with them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
they transcribe the same from the table of Goddess’ decrees?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.42 Do
they seek to contrive a plot against you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But the
unbelievers are those people whose actions will become void.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.43 Do
they have any better goddess besides the One True Goddess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Far be it
that Goddess should be associated with the evil emotions and actions
that they associate with Her!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.44 If
they should see a fragment of the heaven falling down, they would say,
“It is only a thick cloud.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.45
Therefore, leave them alone, until they arrive at their day of judgment
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will not be happy at what they see,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for they
created great sadness and unhappiness for many others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.46
This will be a day in which their subtle contrivances will not assist
them at all,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor shall
they be protected from what they have done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.47 And
those who have acted unjustly</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will
surely suffer grief and unhappiness when they see what they have
done;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
vast majority of them do not understand this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.48 And
you should wait patiently for the declarations of Goddess concerning
them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for you
are the blessed one in our eye, and we watch over you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
celebrate the praises of your Lady of Light, when you arise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">52.49 and
praise Her in the night time, and when the stars begin to
disappear.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY THREE – ENTITLED THE STAR</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.1 By
the star when it sets,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.2 your
Prophetess has not erred; nor is she led astray;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.3
neither does she write from her own will.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.4 It
is nothing other than a revelation which was sent down to her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.5 One
mighty in power, endued with understanding, taught it to her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.6 and
She appeared</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.7 in
the highest part of the horizon.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.8
Afterwards She approached the Prophetess, and came near to her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.9
until She was at the distance of two bow’s length from her, or even
nearer yet;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.10 and
She revealed to Her servant all that was to be revealed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.11 The
heart of your prophetess did not falsely represent what she saw.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.12
Will you therefore dispute with her concerning that which she
saw?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.13 She
also saw Her another time,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.14 by
the lote tree beyond which there is no passing;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.15
near it is the garden of eternal abode.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.16
When the lote tree was covered with all that covered it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.17 her
eyesight was not turned aside, nor did it wander,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.18 and
she really beheld some of the great signs and miracles of her Lady of
Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.19
What do you think of Allat, and Al Uzza,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.20 and
Manat, that other third goddess?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>They are all together in one Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">there is
no separate three.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>But it is more
important to for you all to be kind and loving to one another,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">than to
argue to a state of hate or violence your ideas of religion; Goddess
will teach you all properly,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">at the
day of resurrection for each of you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.21 Of
course as you desire and love your female children, as Goddess also
desires to be female.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.22
This therefore is a wonderful thing.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.23 The
names themselves mean nothing, which you and your mothers have deemed to
be </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">separate
goddesses, but it is now revealed they are all truly one entity.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
has not revealed this other than so that you would understand how to
worship them.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Anything
else is a vain opinion, and just what the souls of a human
desire;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet the
true direction has now come to you from your Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.24
Should a woman have whatever she wishes for?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.25 The
life to come and the present one are all those belonging to
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.26 and
how many angels there are in the heavens, their intercession will not
avail you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
intercession is only granted by the permission of Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.27
Certainly those who believe in the life to come give to the angels a
female Protectress, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
is correct.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.28
Those that have other beliefs as to Goddess have no real
knowledge;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
follow nothing other than a bare opinion;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a
bare opinion does not attain anything close to the truth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.29
Wherefore you should withdraw from any woman who turns away from our
teaching </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and seeks
only the present life.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.30
This is their highest understanding of knowledge.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
your Lady of Light very well knows the person who errs from the correct
path,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
well knows the woman who is properly directed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.31 To
Goddess belongs whatever is in heaven and upon the earth; and She
rewards those that do good, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">according
to what they have done with an excellent reward;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
certainly does not reward evil, but sets up a plan of discipline </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for those
that act in a wrongful manner.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.32 As
to those persons who avoid crime and heinous sins, and are only guilty
of minor errors,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
your Lady of Light will be abundant in mercy towards them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She well
knew you when She produced you out of Her divine spark,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and when
you were embryos in your mother’s uterus; wherefore do not vainly
justify your thoughts,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She best
knows the woman who loves Her and seeks Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.33
What do you think of a person who turns aside from following
truth?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.34 And
they give little, suffering from fear and greed? </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.35 Is
the knowledge of the future with her, so that she can see this is
alright?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.36 Has
this person not been informed of what is contained in the Books of
Miriam,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.37 and
of Sarah, who faithfully performed their covenants?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.38 You
should understand that a burdened soul does not acquire the burdens of
any other souls;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.39 and
that nothing shall be imputed to a woman for righteousness, except her
own endeavors;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.40 and
that her labor will be made obvious after this;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.41 and
she shall be rewarded for goodness with a most abundant reward;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.42 and
that to the Lady of Light will be the end of all things;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.43 and
that She causes you to laugh, and She causes you to weep;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.44 and
She is with you at death, and She gives you life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.45 and
it is She who has created the two sexes, the female and the male;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.46 out
of ova when it is joined with sperm,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.47 and
that to Her pertains yet another production, the raising of the dead to
the life hereafter;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.48 and
that She enriches and allows you to acquire possessions;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.49 and
that She is the Lady of the dog
star,<a href="#_ftn33" id="_ftnref33"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[33]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.50 and
She was there when the tribe of Ada refused to believe the prophetess we
sent to them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and most
died as a result;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.51 and
this also happened to the tribe of Thelma, and many did not live because
they refused to listen.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.52 and
also the people of Nora, before them; for almost all of them were unjust
and wicked;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.53 and
many cities were turned upside down from an earthquake, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
people were warned first by a prophetess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.54 and
everything difficult that covered them, came to cover them in
ruins.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.55
Which, therefore of the benefits of the Lady of Light, O woman, will you
call into question?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.56 Our
prophetess is a preacher and teacher just like the preachers and
teachers which preceded her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.57 The
day of your resurrection is always drawing closer;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.58
there is no one that will reveal the exact time of this to you, besides
Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.59 Do
you then wonder at this new revelation,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.60 and
do you laugh all the time and never weep,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.61
spending your all your time in idle amusements?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.62 But
rather you should worship Goddess and serve Her a portion of your time
each day.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">  
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY FOUR – ENTITLED THE MOON</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.1 The
hour of your resurrection approaches closer each day;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
moon has already been split in
sunder,<a href="#_ftn34" id="_ftnref34"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[34]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.2 but
if the unbelievers see a sign, they turn away, saying “This is powerful
magic.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.3 And
they accuse you, O Prophetess of lying, and they continue to follow
their own desires;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
everything will be immutably fixed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.4 And
now a message has come to them, which is that they should abandon their
obstinate infidelity;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.5 and
turn to consummate wisdom, but preaching may never profit them at
all,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.6 so
you might do well to let them be. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The day
will come when you shall summon them to their final resurrection,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
they will be ungrateful for;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.7 and
they will come forward from the earth or their graves with a downcast
look;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as
numerous as locusts scattered far abroad;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.8
hastening with urgency to the summoner. The unbelievers will say, “This
is a day of distress.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.9 The
people of Nora, which accused their prophetess of lying, and those who
rejected you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">all
accuse our good servants of lying saying, “She is insane;” and all were
rejected with reproach.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.10 She
called therefore to her Lady of Light, saying,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Certainly
I am overpowered in this situation; therefore assist me.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.11 And
we advised her all will be made easier,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that a
natural disaster would be coming; and only the good ones would listen to
her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
others would be washed away, and we opened up the flood gates of
heaven,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">with
water pouring down;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.12 and
we caused the earth to break forth into many springs,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so the
water of heaven and earth all met, according to the decree which had
already been established.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.13 And
we lifted up her and her family on an ark made of planks and
nails;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.14
which moved forward under our watchful eyes;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">this was
compensation to a prophetess who had been ungratefully rejected.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.15 And
we left the vessel for a period as a sign; but were many actually warned
by it?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.16 And
how severe was this disaster,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and how
many times did the prophetess warn them of the disaster to come?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.17 Now
we have provided the Korana as a message of love, but is anyone paying
attention to it?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.18 The
tribe of Ada charged their prophetess with lying; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but how
severe was the disaster they failed to avoid?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And how
much did the prophetess tell them about it and what to do beforehand,
but they did not listen?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.19
Certainly we sent them a roaring hot wind, on a day of continued bad
luck;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">53.20 it
carried people away, as if they had been roots of palm trees, forcibly
torn up.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.21 And
how severe was the disaster, but the words of the prophetess </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">were just
as severe in warning and telling the people what to do, yet they would
not listen.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.22 Now
we have made the Korana easy to understand;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but is
there anyone that seeks understanding from Goddess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.23 The
people of Thelma charged their Prophetess with lying,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.24 and
they said, “Should we follow a mere woman who has come to us?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
we would be guilty of clear error, and preposterous insanity.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.25 “Is
the office of preacher and teacher bestowed upon one that </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">is
certainly not preferable to the rest of
us?<a href="#_ftn35" id="_ftnref35"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[35]</span></span></span></span></a> No,
she is a liar and she is insolent!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.26 But
Goddess said to Sally, “Tomorrow the people will know</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that you
were not lying when you forewarned them regarding the upcoming
disaster;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.27
“for we are sending you a female camel as a trial;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
simply observe them, and bear their insults and scorn with
patience,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.28
“and explain to them that they are to divide the drinking water</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">between
them and the camel, and each portion will be taken on alternating
days.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.29 And
the unbelievers called their dark companion, and he took a sword and he
killed the camel.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.30 But
they were warned, and the disaster was clear to those</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that
treated the camel well and listened to their prophetess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.31For
we sent them the cry of the angel Gabrielle, prior to the hot winds
coming;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
people that did not believe and would not listen to their
prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
became like dry sticks which are used to build enclosures for
cattle.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.32 And
now we have made the Korana easy to understand, but does anyone pay
attention to it?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.33 The
people of Wileh said that she was a false preacher;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.34 and
she warned the people of an upcoming disaster, and told them what to
do,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but then
a wind came with a shower of stones from a volcano, which destroyed them
all,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except
the family of Wileh, whom left at our instructions early in the
morning,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.35
through favor from us, we reward and assist those that are thankful and
pray.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.36 And
Wileh had warned them that disasters on earth were severe and
massive;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
ignored this warning.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.37 And
they demanded to also abuse and torture the guests of Wileh with
violence, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but many
people at that time contracted a severe eye disease,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
unbelievers would not come to the prophetess for a cure, and so they
were
blinded.<a href="#_ftn36" id="_ftnref36"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[36]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.38 And
early in the morning, a severe disaster surprised them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">although
the prophetess tried to speak to them all about it many days before
this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.39 The
Evil ones told them this was vengeance from Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
prophetess told them earth was a dangerous place,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess is the ultimate and only protectress from the dangers of
earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.40 Now
we have make the Korana easy to understand;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but does
anyone pay attention to it?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.41The
warnings of Miriam also came to the people of Pharaoh,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.42 but
they charged everyone of our signs as being false magic;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
they never believed that they must not follow Miriam out of
Egypt,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and so
they drowned when they crossed the sea at the wrong time,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the time
they were told not to do so.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.43 Are
you unbelievers, O people, better than these people?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do you
have immunity from the dangers of earth out of your own powers and
abilities?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do you
not need to turn to the Scriptures for advice?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.44 Do
they say, “We are a people that can prevail against all others, and
against mother nature?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.45
Many people will go to fight other people, they will be the aggressor
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and will
ignore the principals of peace and love taught by Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.46 But
at the hour of their resurrection they will see their error;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and when
they had taken up arms for war, this hour will be much more sad,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and more
grievous than all their afflictions encountered in their life.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.47
Certainly the wicked and the warmonger wander in error,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">far from
Goddess, and they will return to earth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
will be like the raging and tormenting of burning flames.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.48 But
the evil ones will preach that they will be dragged into hell on their
faces,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will taunt them and scorn them with, “You will taste the burning touch
of hell.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But
Goddess does not do that; She merely makes special plans for the evil
ones.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.49 All
things have been created by a predetermined plan;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.50 and
our command is no more than a single word, like the twinkling of an
eye.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.51We
have formerly watched as large nations were destroyed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when few
were saved, and few called for the protection of Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but have
any one of you been inspired to turn to Goddess by means of these
examples?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.52
Everything which they do is recorded by the guardian angels;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.53 and
every action both small and great, is recorded in a permanent
manner.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.54
Moreover, the pious shall dwell among gardens and rivers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">54.55 in
the assembly of truth, and in the presence of their Most Potent
Queen.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY FIVE – ENTITLED THE MERCIFUL</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.1 The
Merciful One</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.2 has
taught Her servant this Korana.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.3 She
created woman and man;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.4 She
taught women speech and provided them with understanding.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.5 The
sun and the moon travel in orbits according to certain rules;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.6 and
the vegetables which creep on the ground, and the trees submit to Her
position.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.7 She
also raised the heavens; and She has appointed a balance for justice to
be done,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.8 so
that you should not err in respect to injustice;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.9
therefore observe fair weights and measures; and do not diminish any
balance.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.10 And
the earth has been prepared for all living creatures;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.11 on
it are various fruits and palm trees bearing sheaths of flowers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.12 and
there is grain with chaff and leaves.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.13
Which, therefore of Goddess’ benefits will you ungratefully deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.14 She
has made womankind from a divine spark, minerals from earth and water,
like an earthen vessel;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.15 but
the genii or haughty ones were created from fire and smoke.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.16
Which, therefore, of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.17 She
has unleashed two seas for you; and they meet each other;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.18
Which therefore, of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.19 She
has given you two great bodies of flowing water which meet
together,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.20 and
between these two is dry land which they do not cross over.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.21
Which therefore, of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.22
From them are taken forth pearls and coral.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.23
Which therefore, of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.24
Hers also are the ships, carrying their sails on high in the sea like
mountains.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.25
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.26
Every creature which lives on the earth is subject to death and
decay,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.27 but
the glorious being of your Lady shall remain forever.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.28
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.29 To
Her all creatures which are in heaven and upon the earth send their
petitions;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">each day
She has completed some new work.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.30
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.31 We
will surely be with you on the day of your resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">O women
and genii, your last day on earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.32
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.33 O
collective body of women and genii, if you are able to leave the
confines of heaven and earth, then go ahead and leave, but you cannot do
so except by permission of Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.34
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.35 A
flame of fire without smoke, and a smoke without flame, will be sent
down to you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
will have no defense, except by prayer to your Protectress.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.36
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.37 And
when the heavens shall be torn in sunder,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
universe will become filled with roses, and will melt away like
ointment;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.38
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.39 On
that day of final resurrection, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">neither
womankind nor the haughty genii will be asked concerning</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">how she
thinks she was in error, or if she did well.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.40
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.41The
wicked will be known by their marks; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
counted among those will be the ones that said you should be taken by
your hair,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and your
feet and then thrown into hell, even though a loving Goddess does not do
such things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.42
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.43 And
the wicked ones tell tall stories of hell, but this is not true for She
is pure Love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.44 The
stories they tell are that the wicked walk back and forth</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and must
drink scalding water, but this is not true for She is pure Love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.45
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.46 But
for her that loves the day of the resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and looks
forward to joining her Heavenly Mother, and Her angels, of which She is
Queen,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">there are
prepared two gardens;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.47
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.48
They are both planted with shady trees.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.49
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.50 In
each garden there will be two gushing fountains.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.51
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.52 And
in each of them there will be every fruit of two
kinds,<a href="#_ftn37" id="_ftnref37"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[37]</span></span></span></span></a><span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.53
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.54 The
souls therein shall recline on couches, the linings will be made of
silk,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">interwoven
with gold, and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand to
eat.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.55
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.56
Therein the souls shall receive handsome young men, men that are demure
and not demanding,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
refrain their eyes from looking at any others besides their
spouses,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and no
woman shall have touched them before, nor an genii or haughty
women;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.57
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.58
They will have complexions like rubies and pearls.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.59
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.60
Shall the reward of good works be anything other than good?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.61
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.62 And
besides these there will be two additional gardens;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.63
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.64
They will contain dark green
vegetation;<a href="#_ftn38" id="_ftnref38"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[38]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.65
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.66 In
each of them there will be two fountains gushing forth water in
abundance.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.67
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.68 In
each of them will be fruits and palm trees and pomegranates.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.69
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.70 In
each garden there will be cordial and handsome young men;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.71
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.72
Having black eyes, and kept in pavilions from public view.<span
style="mso-tab-count:2">               </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.73
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.74
Whom no woman shall have touched before their designated spouse, nor any
genii.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.75
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.76
Therein they will delight themselves, lying on green
cushions<a href="#_ftn39" id="_ftnref39"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><em><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><strong><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[39]</span></strong></span></span></em></span></a>
and beautiful carpets.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.77
Which therefore of your Lady’s benefits will you ungratefully
deny?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">55.78
Blessed is the name of your Lady of Light, possessed of all glory and
honor!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY SIX – ENTITLED THE INEVITABLE</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.1 When
the inevitable day of your resurrection shall finally come;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.2 no
soul shall charge this prediction as being a lie;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.3 on
this day some will grieve, and some will be exalted.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.4 When
the earth will be shaken with a violent shock, yet no one will be
afraid;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.5 and
the mountains shall fall away, yet no one will be afraid;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.6 and
their dirt will scatter to the winds abroad, yet no one will be
afraid;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.7 and
you shall be separated into two distinct classes;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.8 the
companions of the right hand, and how happy they will be!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.9 And
the companions of the left hand and they will encounter grief and soul
suffering!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.10 And
those prophetesses that preceded the delivery of Scripture,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
precede both into paradise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.11
These are souls that shall approach close to Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.12
they will dwell in gardens of delight;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.13
There will be many of the former religions there;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.14 and
some of the later ones too.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.15
They will recline on couches adorned with gold and precious
stones,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.16
reclining opposite to one another.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.17
Youths who will be forever beautiful and handsome will attend them
forever, with goblets and beakers and cups of flowing wine;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.18
their heads will not ache by drinking wine,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.19 nor
shall their reason be disturbed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.20 and
with fruits of the sorts that they will choose;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.21 and
the flesh of birds that they will choose.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.22 And
there will be accompanying them fair young men having large black
eyes;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.23
resembling pearls hidden in their shells;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.24 as
a reward for the goodness they have done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.25
They will not hear any idle chatter or gossip, nor will they hear of any
sin or error;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.26 but
they will hear only the greeting, “Peace!<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Peace!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.27 And
the companions of the right hand will be very happy;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.28<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>and they will live with lote trees
without any thorns,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.29 and
they will have trees of
mauz<a href="#_ftn40" id="_ftnref40"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[40]</span></span></span></span></a>
which frequently bear loads of fruits from top to bottom;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.30 and
which trees provide abundant shade;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.31
near flowing rivers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.32 and
amidst fruits in abundance,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.33
which will not fail, nor will they ever be stopped from gathering the
fruits;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.34 and
they will recline on lofty thrones.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.35
Certainly we have created the young men of paradise by a special
creation;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.36 and
we have made them untouched by women;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.37
beloved by their wives, and of equal age with them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.38 for
the delight of the companions of the right hand.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.39
There shall be many of the former religions,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.40 and
many of the later.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.41 And
the companions of the left hand, they will suffer grief when they see
what they have done;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.42 and
they will return to earth, where there are burning winds in some
nations,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
filthy water to drink in others,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.43 and
in some places the smoke created to keep warm is thick and black,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.44 and
the temperature inside is never temperate; it is either too hot or too
cold.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.45 For
they enjoyed many pleasures of life before this, while on earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.46 and
they obstinately persisted in wickedness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.47 and
they said, “After we shall have died and become dust and bones,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">how could
we ever be raised again to life?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.48
“Will our ancestors also be raised with us?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.49 Say
to the people, “Certainly the earliest and the last peoples,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.50
“will be gathered together on the final day of resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">at a
predetermined time on a predetermined day.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.51
Then everyone who has erred and everyone who has denied the resurrection
as a lie,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.52
will surely eat of the fruit of the tree of
Zakkum<a href="#_ftn41" id="_ftnref41"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[41]</span></span></span></span></a> or
another bitter fruit,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.53 and
you will fill your bellies with bitter foods, for there are much of
these on earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.54 and
you will drink filthy water, for there is much on earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.55 yet
you will be so thirsty, that you will drink as a thirsty camel
drinks.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.56
This will be their sad situation, until they die again,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or until
they turn to Goddess and Her angels for protection. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.57 We
have created you; will you therefore not believe </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that
Goddess can raise you again from the dead? What are you thinking?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.58 The
ova which is in each of your bodies,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.59 do
you think you created it, or we did?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.60 You
will most certainly die at a predetermined time,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
cannot be extended or enlarged, except by permission of Goddess and
those She permits to do so.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.61 We
are able to change your experience, and send angels to you, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in times
of need, and all you need to do is pray.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.62 You
know the original production by creation.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.63 How
is it then, that you do not understand that after you are dead,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we can
renew you again and raise you to life? What are you thinking?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.64 The
grain which you produce, do you cause it to grow up, or does
heaven?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.65 At
anytime, the land you sow could become dry and fruitless, and you would
not cease to wonder,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.66
saying “Certainly we have contracted debts for seeds and labor,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.67 but
why then we are not permitted to reap the benefits of our crops?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.68
What are you thinking?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>The water
which you drink,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">do you
send down from the clouds, or do we do this from heaven?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.69 The
water you drink could one day become salty; will you not give thanks
therefore?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.70
What are you thinking? The fire which you strike,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.71 do
you produce the tree which provides the fire?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.72 Or
are we the producers of the tree?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.73 We
have created these things as a sign, and as a blessing for those that
travel through deserts.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.74
Therefore, praise the name of you Lady of Light, the great
Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.75
Moreover I swear by the setting of the stars,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.76 and
this is certainly a great oath, if only you knew,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.77
that this is the most excellent Korana, the original is written</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.78 in
the preserved Books above;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.79 no
one shall touch the same, except those who are clean.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.80 It
is a revelation from the Lady of all creatures.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.81
Will you therefore, despise this new revelation?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.82 And
do you give thanks to Goddess for your food which you received from
Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or do you
deny that you should be obligated to Her for it?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.83
When the soul of a dying person raises into her throat,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.84 and
many are at the same time looking upon her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.85 and
we are closer to her than you, but you seem not to know her true
condition,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.86
would you not, if you were able to be rewarded for your actions after
this,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.87
cause the soul to return to the body, if you speak the truth?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.88 And
whether she is of those who will be able to be nearest Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.89 her
reward shall be rest, and mercy and a garden of delights;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.90 or
whether she is of the companion of the right hand,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.91 she
will be saluted with the greeting, “Peace be upon you!” By the
companions of the right hand,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.92 or
if she is of those that have rejected the true faith, and good religion,
and have gone astray,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.93 her
entertainment shall consist of a return to earth, she is likely to drink
filthy water there,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
without a Protectress or guardian angels the terror there will seem like
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.94 the
burning of hell fire.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Yet Goddess
is all love and does not harm or hurt a soul.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.95
Certainly this is manifest truth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">56.96
Therefore, praise the name of the Lady of Light, the great
Goddess!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY SEVEN – ENTITLED THE IRON</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA OR AT MEDINA </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-tab-count:
5">                                                           
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.1
Whatever is in heaven and upon the earth sings praises to
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is Mighty and Wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.2 Hers
is the Queendom of heaven and earth; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She gives
life and She is with you at death; and She is almighty.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.3 She
is the first and the last; the manifest and the hidden, and She knows
all things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.4 It
is She who created the heavens and the earth in six days,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and then
ascended Her throne.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>She knows
everything which comes to the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
everything which issues out of the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
everything which descends from heaven,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
everything which ascends to heaven;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is with you, wherever you are;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess sees everything that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.5 Hers
is the Queendom of heaven and earth; and to Her everything will
return.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.6 She
causes the night to succeed the day, and the day to succeed the
night;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
knows the innermost parts of a woman’s heart.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.7
Believe in Goddess and Her Prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and lay
out in alms a portion of the wealth which Goddess has bestowed upon
you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for to
such of you as are believers, and give alms, you will be given a great
reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.8 And
what could it possibly hurt you, if you believe in Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">after the
Prophetess has invited you to the true religion,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
has received your promise to believe concerning this matter,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">should
any proposition be better than this?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.9 It
is She who has sent down to Her servant prophetess evident signs and
miracles,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that she
may lead you out of darkness and into the light;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is compassionate and merciful to you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.10 And
what could it possibly hurt you, that you would not contribute something
out of your wealth</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for the
evangelization of Goddess’ true religion?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">To
Goddess pertains the entire inheritance of both heaven and earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Those
among you who have contributed and gone out to evangelize</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Her
reward shall not be held equal with those that would not do so.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These
entities that have evangelized will be superior to those that never
did;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet all
that have done well, Goddess has promised a most excellent reward;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess knows very well all that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.11 Who
is she that will lend to Goddess an acceptable loan?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For She
will double the same to her that provides it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and she
will receive a more honorable reward for doing so.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.12 On
a certain day, you shall see the true believers of both sexes;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">their
light shall run before them, and over their right
hands,<a href="#_ftn42" id="_ftnref42"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[42]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
will be said to them, “Good tidings to you on this day;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">gardens
through which rivers flow you shall have on this day,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
therein you will remain forever.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>This will be a great happiness for you.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.13 On
that day the hypocritical women and men shall say to those that
believed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Stay for
awhile with us, so that we might borrow some of your light.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">It will
be answered, “You can return back to earth and seek it for
yourself,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">alas, I
am unable to give you any of mine, you must earn it.” And a high wall
shall raise between them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
hypocrites will then be able to return to earth as babies,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">through a
chute, and this will be their mercy from Goddess; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but a
return to earth without a Protectress or guardian angels will be like
the torment of hell for them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.14 The
hypocrites will call out to the true believers, saying, “Were we not
with you and assisted you?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They will
answer, “Yes, sometimes you did, but you also did much evil,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
seduced your own souls through hypocrisy;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
wished for the ruin of others; and doubted the true faith</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
love of Goddess for all, causing much grief and sadness wherever you
went.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And the
hypocrites will see all the pain and suffering they caused
others,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
they did not believe and they led others to their lack of belief.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The great
deceiver deceived you concerning Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.15
This day, therefore, no ransom of your wealth will be accepted from
you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor of
any of your friends who were unbelievers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Your new
abode on earth will be without Goddess and guardian angels and this will
seem</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">like hell
fire to you; this is the plan of Goddess so that you might learn,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and turn
to Her permanently; this will be an unhappy journey for you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.16 The
time has not yet come to those who believe, that their hearts should
humbly submit to Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
the truth which has been revealed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and that
they should not be as those to whom the Scripture was given
heretofore,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
whom the time of forbearance was extended,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but their
hearts were hardened, and many of them caused much evil and grief in the
world.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.17
Understand that Goddess quickens the earth, after it has been
barren.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Now
heaven has distinctly declared many signs and miracles to you, so that
you might understand.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.18
Certainly as to those that give alms, both women and men,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
who lend to Goddess a fair loan, She will increase the return many times
back to them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
shall also receive an honorable reward in the next life.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.19 And
those who believe in Goddess and Her prophetesses, are women of
truth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will be witnesses in the presence of their Lady of Light;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
shall have their reward, and they will be filled with light. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But as to
those who did not believe, and they accused our signs and miracles of
being black magic,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
shall experience great grief on the day of their resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.20 You
should understand that this present life is only an educational
experience for you, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and there
are many vain amusements contained therein;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and there
is worldly pomp, and the desire for glory among you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
multiplying of riches and children, are as the plants nourished by the
rain,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
springing up whereof delights the farmer; afterwards they will all
wither and die, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
will see the same wonderful plants turn yellow after a period of
time;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then they
will become dry stubble. And in the life to come,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">there
will be great grief and sadness for those who only desired worldly
grandeur,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and who
never asked pardon from Goddess, but there will be plenty of favors for
those that renounce it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for this
present light is but mere deceit for many of you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.21
Hasten to obtain pardon from your Lady of Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
paradise, the extent of which equals the entire heaven and earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">is only
prepared for those who believed in Goddess and Her prophetesses.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is
the bounty of Goddess; She will give the same to many who were pleasing
and full of love;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess is endued with great bounty.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.22 No
disaster has ever happened in the earth for you which was not only a
learning experience,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but was
already encoded in the Book of plans of the divine before each one
occurred; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
this is easy for Goddess to do;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.23 and
this is written unless you immoderately grieve for any goodness that has
escaped you, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or
rejoice for that good fortune which came to you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess does not understand excesses pride or vanity,<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or those
that are greedy, or those who exhort others to greed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.24 And
those who turn aside from giving alms; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
Goddess is self sufficient, and worthy to be praised.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.25 We
formerly sent down our prophetesses with evident signs and miracles and
arguments;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
sent down with them the Scriptures, and a fair balance,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
women may observe justice; and we sent them iron, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which is
mighty in strength for all sorts of purposes, and it has many advantages
for you;<span style="mso-tab-count:2">              </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
is so Goddess might know who assists Her and Her prophetesses in secret;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is strong and mighty.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.26 We
formerly sent Nora and Sarah, and we established in their posterity the
gift of prophecy,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
were given the Scriptures; and some of their posterity was properly
directed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but most
of them did evil.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.27
Afterwards we caused our prophetesses to succeed in their
footsteps;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
caused Yeshua, Mary Magdalene and Mother Mary to succeed them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
gave them the gospel of truth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
put in the hearts of those that followed them compassion and
mercy;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but as to
the monastic state, they instituted the same only out of their own
desire to please Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
heaven does not favor celibacy, and many of them could not follow this
covenant, regardless.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.28 O
you people who believe in the prophetesses, and love Goddess
greatly,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
believe in Her special Prophetess; She will give you multiplied portions
of Her mercy;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will ordain for you a light for you to walk within;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will forgive you, for Goddess is ready to forgive, and merciful;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">57.29 so
that those who have received the Scriptures may know that</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they have
no power over any favor granted by Goddess, and that goodness is in the
hands of Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She
bestows goodness on those that are pious and those that repent and pray
for it; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is endued with great benevolence.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY EIGHT – ENTITLED THE PLEADING WOMAN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.1 Now
Goddess has heard the prayer of a woman who had</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">an
argument with her husband, and has made her plea for justice to the Lady
of Light; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess has heard your discussions; for Goddess both hears and sees
everything.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.2 As
to those among you who divorce your spouses </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">by
declaring they will thereafter regard them as a parent, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">let them
know that they are most certainly not a parent to any person they
marry.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Only a
biological parent is forbidden to them, and acting in such a manner is
childish and cruel to a spouse;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
Goddess is gracious and ready to forgive those who repent of such
nonsense.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.3
Those who divorce their spouses by declaring that they will, for the
future regard them as a parent, and afterwards repent of what they have
declared,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will be
obliged to free someone from slavery, before they touch each other
again,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or they
must feed a number of people or clothe them, or teach someone kind and
loving religion.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">That is
what you are instructed to perform; and Goddess is well apprized of all
that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.4 And
anyone who cannot find anyone to free from slavery,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">shall
make a fitting donation to charity, before they touch one another
again.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
anyone who is not able to do this, shall make whatever donation of
whatever they can afford.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These are
the decrees of Goddess; and for those that do not believe, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
suffer great sadness on the day of their resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.5
Certainly anyone who opposes Goddess and Her Prophetess does them wrong,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as the
unbelievers do evil in the earth as they please.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And now
we have sent you manifest signs and miracles, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and have
instructed you of a warning of possible sadness on your day of
resurrection, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a
return to earth, which will be like hell fire.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.6 On a
certain day Goddess will raise everyone back to life, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will explain any errors which they have done. Goddess has an exact
accounting thereof,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but many
souls will have forgotten what they did; and Goddess is a witness over
all things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.7 Do
you not understand that Goddess knows whatever is in heaven and on the
earth?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">There is
no private conversation among three persons, but She is the forth of
them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor among
five, but She is the sixth of them; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">neither
among a smaller number than this, nor a larger, but She is with them,
wherever they are; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will explain to them the significance of everything they have done on
the day of their resurrection; for Goddess knows and sees all
things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.8 Have
you not observed those persons who have been forbidden to use secret
conversation, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
afterwards return to what they were told was forbidden,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
begin to discuss matters privately among themselves,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">matter of
wickedness and hate and disobedience towards the people and the
Prophetess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And when
they come to you, they greet you with a form of greeting</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">whereby
Goddess would never use, and they say among themselves by way of
derision, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Would
not Goddess punish us for what we say, if this woman were truly a
prophetess?” </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They will
surely regret what they have said; for their actions will create grief
for others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.9<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>and disobedience towards the
Prophetess will cause many to err;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and many
will then follow injustice and impiety;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and many
will cease to show their love to Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">before
whom every soul will one day be assembled.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.10
Certainly the clandestine discussions of the unbelievers proceeds
directly from Evil; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that it
may grieve the true believers; but there will be no one to hurt them in
the least,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">unless by
the permission of Goddess; therefore in Goddess let the faithful
trust.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.11 O
true believers, when it is said to you, “Make room in the assembly,”
then make room;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
will grant you ample room in paradise. And when it is said to you “Rise
up,” rise up;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess will raise those of you who believe, and those to whom knowledge
is given,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to
superior degrees of honor; and Goddess is fully apprized of all that you
do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.12 O
true believers, when you go to speak with the Prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">give alms
prior to any conversations with her, to show respect; this will be
better for you and more pure.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But if
you have nothing to give, certainly Goddess will be gracious and
merciful to you nonetheless.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.13 Do
you fear to give alms prior to your discussing matters with the
Prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">unless
you might impoverish yourselves? But if you do not do this, and Goddess
is gracious to you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">by
dispensing a prophesy for the future, then be frequent at prayer, and
pay the legal alms;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and obey
Goddess and Her Prophetess in all other matters; for Goddess well knows
all that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.14
Have you not observed those persons who have taken for their
friends</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">people
that are easily incited to war and violence, and they do evil in the
world?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Such
people should not become part of you, nor should any of your people
become part of them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for these
wicked people swear to lies knowingly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.15
Goddess has prepared for them much sadness on the day of their
resurrection</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
see all the pain and suffering and grief they have caused others</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">through
their war making, torture, hate and oppression of others, for this is
evil what they do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.16
They have taken oaths for a cloak,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
have turned other women aside from the peaceful loving ways of
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
there will be much grief and sadness on the day of their
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.17 Nor
will their wealth, nor their children, shall avail them at all with
Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These
shall be those that return to earth immediately,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
will be like hell fire without a Protectress or guardian angels;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will live there forever, unless and until they turn to Goddess and
repent.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.18 On
a certain day Goddess shall take all the people on earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and raise
anyone recently dead, then they will swear to Her, as they swear now to
you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">imagining
that it will be of benefit to them. Are they not delusional?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.19
Evil has conquered them, and has enticed them to abandon the remembrance
of Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These are
a party of evil ones; and a true believer shall not be party to any evil
doers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.20
Certainly those persons who oppose Goddess and Her Prophetess</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will find
great sadness and grief on the day of Her resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.21
Goddess has written, “Certainly I will be the victor, and my
prophetesses also;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is strong and mighty.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">58.22 You
will hardly find any person who believes in Goddess and the last day to
have any</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">desire to
love a person who opposes Goddess and Her Prophetess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">although
they be mothers, or daughters, or sisters, or very close kin.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For these
unbelieving persons have chosen to harden their own hearts,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">while She
has strengthened the believers with Her spirit;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will lead them into gardens, beneath which rivers flow, to remain
therein forever.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
is well pleased with them; and they are well pleased with
Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They are
the true companions of Goddess, and will not the companions of Goddess
prosper always?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-tab-count:
8">                                                                                               
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
FIFTY NINE – ENTITLED THE FORCED EMIGRATION</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.1
Whatever is in heaven and upon the earth celebrates the praises of
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is the Mighty and the Wise One.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.2 It
was She who caused those who would not believe, yet had received the
Scripture,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to depart
from their homes during the first migration. You did not think they
would go forth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
thought that their fortresses would protect them against their
enemies.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But
Goddess does not love the warmonger, and those who live by the sword,
die by the sword.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">So great
was their fear, they pulled down their own houses with their own
hands,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as the
enemy approached.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>So take good
example of these people;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
provoked an enemy, sought out war, but in the end were left with
nothing,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess does not assist those that hearken to the calling of war.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.3 And
if Goddess had not sent them away and dispersed them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">these
evil doers would have continued to foment war, and lose even more
resources for their families; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">this is
truly discipline in this world; and in the world to come, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
see and feel all the grief and pain they have caused others by fomenting
war.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.4
Their homes were abandoned because they opposed the precepts of
peace</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">taught by
Goddess and Her Prophetess, and anyone who opposes Goddess and Her
Prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
be let alone to see the spoils of what they have sown.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.5
Whatever palm trees you cut down, or those that you leave standing,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it does
not matter, for they are nonetheless abandoned,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and still
this is a sign to others that warmongering is a disgrace.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.6 And
as to the spoils of the people who overran you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">these
were granted to the Prophetess who had only taught peace.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Both
tribes retreated in fear, and the peacemakers quickly picked up the
spoils together.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">You did
not take with you horses or camels, but Goddess gave you dominion over
what is pleasing; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is almighty.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.7 The
spoils of the inhabitants of the towns which Goddess has granted to Her
Prophetess </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">are due
to Goddess and the Prophetess, and those that are of kin to the
Prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
orphans, and the poor, and the oppressed, and the traveler;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that they
may not be always divided from those that are rich. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">What the
Prophetess will give you, you should accept; and what She forbids you,
then abstain from it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and love
Goddess mightily; for Goddess is swift and strong in Her love for
you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.8 A
part also belongs to the peoples who have been dispossessed of their
homes and their resources, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet they
forever seek favor from Goddess; and they seek Her good will,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
are loyal in their assistance to Goddess and Her Prophetess. These are
the women of truth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.9 And
those people who quietly possessed many houses of worship,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
professed the faith without molesting others, as some before them
did,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
that love the person who has fled to the temples,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
that find in their hearts no true desire to covet what others
have;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
prefer the needy before themselves, even though some of them are quite
poor.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
whomsoever prevents greed within her own soul, those shall surely
prosper in the hereafter.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.10 And
those persons who came after said, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“O Lady
of Light, forgive us and your sisters who have preceded us in the
faith,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
not put into our hearts ill will against others who believed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">O Lady of
Light, certainly you are compassionate and merciful.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.11
Have you not observed the hypocrites?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>They say to their sisters that are unbelievers, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
that received the Scriptures, “Certainly if you are expelled from your
homes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we will
surely defend you; and we will not be obedient to the aggressor at any
time; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
you are attacked, we will assist you.” But Goddess is witness to the
fact that they are liars.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.12
Certainly if they are expelled, they will not protect them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
they do assist them, it will only be if the task is simple, otherwise
they will turn their backs;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
victims will not be protected.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.13
Certainly you are stronger that they are, by reason of the love sent to
you from Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They are
not stronger because they are not a people of prudence.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.14
They will not fight against you in troop formation, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
only fight in fenced towns or from behind walls.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Their
strength among themselves is great; you think they are united, but their
hearts are divided.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is
because they are people who do not understand.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.15 As
those who just preceded them, they have tasted the evil consequence of
their deeds;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and much
suffering will be their form of discipline on the day of their
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.16
Thus the hypocrites have deceived the Children of Israel,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as Evil
usually does, when they say to a person, “Be unfaithful;” and when the
person is unfaithful,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">another
person then says, “I will have nothing further to do with you, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for I am
with Goddess, the Lady of all creatures;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when this
person is not, and the person which was led astray is likewise
unfaithful,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.17 and
both of them shall experience soul grief on the day of their
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And they
will return to earth forever, unless they repent and turn to
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
is the discipline planned for the unjust.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.18 O
true believers, love Goddess with all your heart and soul;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and allow
a soul to look at what it intends to do on the following day with
scrutiny;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and love
Goddess, for Goddess is well acquainted with all that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.19 And
do not be like those who have forgotten Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
who have likewise forgotten their own souls; these are the wicked
ones.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.20 The
inhabitants of those immediately reborn to earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
inhabitants of paradise are not held equal.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These
legends are given to you so that you might consider them
carefully.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.21 She
is Goddess besides whom there is no other Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She knows
all that is in the future, and that which is in the present; She is the
Most Merciful;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.22 She
is Goddess, besides whom there is no other Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
Queen, the Holy, the Giver of Peace, the Faithful, the Guardian,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
Powerful, the Strong, the most High.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.23 Far
be it for Goddess to be associated with negative idols</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which the
unbelievers have associated with Her!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For She
has no negative emotions or actions; She is pure love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">59.24 She
is Goddess, the Creatress, the Maker, the Former, the Present and the
Future. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She has
the most excellent names. Whatever is in heaven and on the earth praises
Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is the Mighty One, the Wise One.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY– ENTITLED SHE WHO IS
TRIED<a href="#_ftn43" id="_ftnref43"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[43]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.1 O
true believers, do not take my enemy and your enemy for trustworthy
friends, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for they
may disappoint you; yet be polite to them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for many
of them do not believe in the truth which has come to you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">many have
expelled both you and the Prophetess from their<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>homes, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
you believed in Goddess, your Lady of Light. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">If you go
forth to evangelize for the true religion, and out of a desire to please
Me,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
privately show undue trust towards them, that may lead to hurting
others,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
I will know what you conceal, and that which you publish,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
you intentionally do this, you have erred from the straight path.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.2 If
the unbelievers get the better of you, they will hurt you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will stretch forth their hands and their tongues against you with
evil;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
earnestly desire that you should become unbelievers, as they are.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.3
Neither your kin, nor your children will avail you at all on the day of
your resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
will separate you from one another; and Goddess sees all that you
do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.4 You
will have an excellent example in Sarah,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and in
those who followed her, when she said to her people,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Certainly
we will not worship as you do, and we do not worship idols of
negativity, and negative emotions which you associate wrongfully with
Goddess; we have renounced you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a
distance is spread between you and us; until you believe in a loving and
kind Goddess alone;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except
Sarah’s saying to her father, “Certainly I will beg pardon for
you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but I
cannot obtain anything from my Goddess on your behalf,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until you
cease to associate negative emotions of hate, jealousy, rage and
violence with Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
no longer worship as idols, greed, wealth and power.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">O Lady of
Light, in You we place all our trust; and we know that to You we will
return;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
before You we will be assembled together hereafter.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.5 O
Lady of Light do not let us suffer to be put to trial by the
unbelievers; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
forgive us, O Lady of Light, for you are mighty and wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.6
Certainly you have in them an excellent example,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as her
who places hope only in Goddess and the day of resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
whomsoever turns back, and resumes wrong doing;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">certainly
Goddess is self sufficient and praise worthy.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.7
Perhaps Goddess will establish a friendship between yourselves</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and such
of them as you now hold for enemies; for Goddess is powerful;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess is inclined to forgive and be merciful.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.8 As
for those who have not taken up arms against you</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">due to
your religion, nor turned you out of your homes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
believes you should deal kindly with them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
should show justice towards them, for Goddess loves those who act
justly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.9 But
as for those persons who have acted violently against you</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">only due
to your religion, and those who have turned you out of your
homes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
who have assisted others in forcing you from your homes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you
cannot trust them, and take them only cautiously as friends, for they
are unjust doers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.10 O
true believers, when believing women come to you as refugees,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">ask them
pertinent questions; Goddess well knows their true faith.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And if
you find them to be true believers, they do not need to be returned to
unbelieving homes;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they may
freely divorce as your women may, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
need not be subject any longer to violence, oppression or injustice by
husbands and other men;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it is
not right they should be returned to any unsafe place.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
assist them in obtaining their portion of marriage possessions from
their husbands, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and any
man may be allowed to marry them, upon divorce.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And of
your women that no longer profess the faith, and who no longer love
their husbands,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">allow
them to go freely, and grant them the proper share of your marital
wealth, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
should be about half, or as determined fairly by law.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Both
spouses should share custody of minor children, unless it is shown that
one is unfit.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is
the judgment of Goddess, which She establishes among you; and Goddess is
knowing and wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.11 If
any of your wives leaves you for an unbeliever,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">let them
freely divorce you and give them what is rightfully theirs,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">a share
in half of the marriage, and fairly share custody, and do all of this in
a kindly manner; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and love
Goddess and believe in Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.12 O
Prophetess, when believing women come to you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
explain their plight to you, and swear they will not associate</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">any
negative actions or emotions with Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor kill
or harm any child, nor come making slanderous statements about
anything;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor are
they disobedient to what should be reasonable;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then do
take them in as refugees and treat them well, and ask pardon for them of
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is inclined to forgive, and She is merciful.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">60.13 O
true believers, do not enter into relationships of trust with dangerous
people; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">many
people despair of the life to come, and they are unfaithful and do as
they desire;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and on
the day of their resurrection they will be greatly saddened.
</span><span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY ONE – ENTITLED EVANGELIZATION ARRAY</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.1
Whatever is in the heaven and upon the earth celebrates the praise of
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
is mighty and wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.2 O
true believers, why do you say things which you do not intend to
do?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.3 This
is most annoying in the sight of Goddess, that you say things which you
do not intend to do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.4
Certainly Goddess loves those who evangelize for Her religion</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in large
groups and at large gatherings, as though they were a compact
building.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.5
Remember when Miriam said to Her people,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“O my
people, why do you insult me, since you know that I am a Prophetess of
Goddess sent to you?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And when
they had deviated from the truth, they hardened their own hearts,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess will not direct those whom ignore Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.6 And
when Yeshua said, “O Children of Israel, certainly I am a prophet of
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">sent to
you, confirming the law which was given to you before me,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and I
bring good tidings of prophetesses who will come after me.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And when
he produced to them evident miracles, some of them said, “This is
manifest evil sorcery.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.7 But
who is more unjust than a person who forges lies against Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">especially
when that person is invited to Islama?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.8 They
seek to extinguish the light of Goddess with their mouths; but Goddess
will perfect Her light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">though
the unbelievers find only darkness. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.9 It
is She who sends out Her Prophetesses with direction, and the religion
of truth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that She
may exalt the prophetesses above all others, and the true religion above
other religions,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">although
those that idolize wealth, greed and power are adverse thereto.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.10 O
true believers, shall I show you a product that may deliver you</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from
great sadness on the day of your resurrection?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.11
Then believe in Goddess and Her Prophetess; and defend Goddess’ true
religion with your substance,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and in
your own persons. This will be better for you, if you only knew
it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.12 She
will forgive you your sins, and will introduce you into gardens through
which rivers flow,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
will have agreeable dwellings in the gardens of perpetual abode.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Therein
will be great happiness forever.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.13 And
you shall obtain other things which you desire, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">namely
assistance from Goddess and speedy victory. And do bear good tidings to
true believers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">61.14 O
true believers, be assistants to Goddess; as Yeshua said to the faithful
holy
women,<a href="#_ftn44" id="_ftnref44"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[44]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Who will
be my assistants with respect to Goddess?”<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>The holy women answered, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“We will
be assistants of Goddess.” So a portion of the Children of Israel
believed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a
portion did not; but heaven strengthened those who believed, above the
others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
therefore they believed so that they became victorious in religion over
them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY TWO – ENTITLED THE ASSEMBLY</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.1
Whatever is in heaven and upon the earth praises Goddess; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
Queen, the Holy, The Mighty, the Wise,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.2 It
is She who raised up amongst the illiterate Arabs a prophetess</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from
among themselves, to teach Her signs to them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
purify them, and to teach the Scriptures and wisdom;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">whereas
before they were certainly in clear error;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.3 and
others in the land had not yet attained true faith,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">though
they also will be converted in good time; for Goddess is mighty and
wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.4 This
is the bountiful grace of Goddess; She grants the same on whomever asks
for it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess is endued with great benevolence.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.5 The
likeness of those who were charged with observance of faith, but then
they observed it not,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">is
similar to a mule laden with
Books.<a href="#_ftn45" id="_ftnref45"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[45]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">How
wretched is the likeness of those who charge the signs of Goddess as
lies!<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
does not direct people who have not called out to Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.6 Say
to the people, “O you who follow other religions,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if you
say that you are friends of Goddess above other women,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you will
sorely be disappointed on the day of your resurrection</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when you
find out that mere religion will not increase your stature,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or avoid
sadness when you see all the good and kind things you should have
done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.7 But
such people will never wish for it, this is because of what their hands
have done;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess well knows the unjust people.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.8 Say
to the people “Certainly death, from which you fly, will surely meet up
with you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then you
shall meet your Lady of Light again, and She knows all that you have
done,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">all that
is concealed and all that was public;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will declare to you all the sadness you could have prevented on
earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and all
the goodness you might have done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.9 O
true believers, when you are called to prayer on the day of the final
assembly,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">hasten to
greet your Goddess, and forget your business. This will be better for
you, if you only knew it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.10 And
when prayer is ended, then disperse yourselves through the land as you
desire,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and ask
for liberalness from Goddess, and remember Goddess frequently, so that
you might prosper.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.11 But
when the people see any others running businesses, playing sports;
watching entertainment,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
flock thereto, and the preachers are left standing at the
pulpit.<a href="#_ftn46" id="_ftnref46"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[46]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Say to
the people, “The reward which is with Goddess is better than any sport,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or
business, or entertainment; and Goddess is the best provider.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY THREE – ENTITLED THE HYPOCRITES </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.1 When
the hypocrites come to you they say, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“We bear
witness that you are indeed a prophetess of Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
Goddess knows that you are Her Prophetess; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
Goddess bears witness that the hypocrites are secret liars.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.2 They
have taken other negative religious oaths for protection, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
turn others aside from the ways of Goddess; it is surely evil what they
do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">62.3 This
will be shown to them, because they believe and afterwards became
unbelievers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they have
hardened their own hearts, they will not understand the true
religion.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.4 When
you see them, they are well dressed, and if they speak, you will hear
words of delight.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They
resemble pieces of timber set up against a
wall.<a href="#_ftn47" id="_ftnref47"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[47]</span></span></span></span></a> They
imagine every shout to be against them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">They are
not true believers; do not trust them. Goddess is not pleased with such
behavior,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">how they
turned away from Her truths. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.5 And
when it is said to them, “Come along, so that the Prophetess may pray
for pardon for you;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they turn
away, and they give a look of disdain.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.6 It
will be equal with them, whether you ask pardon for them, or if you do
not ask pardon for them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
does not provide forgiveness to people who do not call upon Her </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
repent and ask for forgiveness themselves. For Goddess does not direct
the fickle person.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.7
These are the women who say to the townspeople,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Do not
give the refugees that associate with the Prophetess anything, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for then
they will desert Her.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Whereas
to Goddess belongs all the stores on heaven and on earth; but the
hypocrites do not understand.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.8 They
say, “Certainly if we return to our town, the worthier shall expel the
meaner.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Whereas
superior worth belongs to Goddess and to Her Prophetess, and to the true
believers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
hypocrites do not know this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.9 O
true believers, do not let your riches or your children </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">divert
you from the remembrance of Goddess; for whomever does this, they will
certainly be the losers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.10 And
give alms out of the resources we have allowed you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">before
death comes to one of you, and she will say, “O Lady of Light, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will you
not forgive me now of my sins and errors and grant me pardon for a short
term,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because I
want to give alms now and be one of the righteous.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">63.11 For
Goddess will reply, “Look at all the grief and sadness your actions have
caused </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when you
did not help others, when you abused them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when you
took advantage of them, when you were corrupt.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">You lived
the way you desired, now see and feel the sadness and grief they endured
due to your behavior.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>You will
study this and return to earth forever, until you repent and become one
of My servants.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For
Goddess is fully apprized of everything that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY FOUR – ENTITLED MUTUAL DECEIT</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.1
Whatever is in heaven and upon the earth celebrates praises of
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Hers is
the Queendom, and to Her is all praise due; for She is the
almighty.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.2 It
is She who has created you; and many of you harden your own
hearts,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
turn to unbelief, yet some become very righteous true believers; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Goddess sees whatever you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.3 She
has created the heavens and the earth with truth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
has fashioned you, and has given you beautiful forms; and back to Her
you must all return.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.4 She
knows whatever is in heaven and upon the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
knows everything that you conceal, and whatever you make public;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess knows the innermost portions of a persons’ heart.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.5 Have
you not become acquainted with the story of those who disbelieved
heretofore, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
tasted the difficult and troublesome consequences of their
behavior?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For them
is prepared yet another life on earth, which will seem like a great
torment and punishment,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
the soul will live without a Protectress and without guardian
angels.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.6 This
they will endure, because their Prophetess came to them with evident
proofs of her mission, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
only said, “Should mere women direct us?” </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She only
taught love and they did not believe love was the greatest
miracle.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Therefore,
they would not believe, and they turned their backs on her.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But
Goddess is in need of no person; Goddess is self sufficient and worthy
to be praised.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.7 The
unbelievers imagine that they will not be raised again.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Say to
them, “Most certainly by my Lady of Light you will be raised to life in
the hereafter; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then you
shall be told about what you have done; and this is all easy for Goddess
to do.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.8
Therefore, believe in Goddess and Her Prophetess, and the light which we
have sent down to you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is well acquainted with all that you do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.9 On a
certain day, She will assemble you all together, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on the
day of the final resurrection in one general assembly; that will be the
day of Mutual Grace.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
whomsoever believes in Goddess, and did what was right,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from her
She will forgive all her evil deeds, and She will lead her into gardens
beneath which rivers flow,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to remain
there forever. There will be great happiness for the believers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.10 But
as for those souls who did not believe, and they accused our signs and
miracles as being false,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
be purified by the bright white light of Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will be pure forever; and they need not fear anything from Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.11 No
misfortune has happened in anyone’s lifetime, except by permission of
themselves and Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
whomsoever believed in Goddess, their heart will be kindly and pure; and
Goddess knows all things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.12
Therefore, obey Goddess and obey Her Prophetess:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but if
you turn back, certainly no duty is incumbent upon our Prophetess to
save you; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for she
is only a preacher and a teacher.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.13
Goddess!<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>There is no Goddess but
Her; wherefore in Goddess let the faithful put their trust.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.14 O
true believers, certainly many of your husbands and many of your
children</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">may be
your enemy in religion; they will worship negativity, both in life and
in their place of worship;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so do not
trust such husbands and children. But if you pass over their offenses
and pardon them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
forgive them, they are likely to feel the love of Goddess bestowed upon
them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
may turn to Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.15
Your wealth and your handsome husbands are only a temptation; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but with
Goddess is a far better reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.16
Therefore, love Goddess with all your heart and soul; and hear Her and
obey Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and give
alms, for the goodness of your souls, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
whomever is preserved from the greediness of her own soul, they will
prosper.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">64.17 If
you lend Goddess an acceptable loan for Her work to be done,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She will
greatly multiply any interest payment back to you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will forgive you; for Goddess is grateful, and though you may be long
suffering, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She knows
both what is hidden and what is public; She is the Mighty One and the
Wise One.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY FIVE – ENTITLED DIVORCE</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.1 O
Prophetess, if you desire to divorce your husband,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you may
do so at any time, when you find it in your heart that you can no longer
love him; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and abide
by the civil laws for the time of separation,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
there are none, then three months should be sufficient,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
compute the time exactly; and love Goddess, your Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do not
oblige any husband of yours to leave your home, until this term is
expired,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">unless
they engage in addictions or are abusive towards you or your
children.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These are
the statutes of Goddess; and whomever transgresses the statutes of
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">assuredly
injures her own soul. You know not whether Goddess will bring something
new into your life,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which may
reconcile a spouse to you after this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.2 And
when a spouse has been separated a sufficient term, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">either
make an agreement to resume the marriage with him, or part from him
honorably;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and where
witnesses are required in court for any purpose,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">use women
of integrity to give your testimony as if you were standing in the
presence of Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
She is there with you. This teaching is given to a person who believes
in Goddess </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
day of their resurrection; and those that love Goddess greatly,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to her
will be granted a pleasing outcome from all of her troubles,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.3 and
She will bestow upon you an ample provision perhaps from where you have
expected it the least; and for those who put their trust in Goddess, She
will be her sufficient support;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess will surely attain Her purpose. Goddess has appointed to
everything a predetermined period.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.4 As
to such of you that fear you might be pregnant,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet
desire to stay for support, you should inform your husband
accordingly,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and he
should let you stay, and should not burden you or be any trouble to
you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until at
least three months have passed. Further if you are pregnant, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
desire the support of your husband during that period, again he should
let you stay, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
should not burden you or be any trouble to you, until three months after
the pregnancy has ended,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if this
is your desire.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>During that time,
he should be chaste, if you desire it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">However,
at anytime that you desire it, you are free to leave.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.5 This
is the command of Goddess, which She has sent down to you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
whomever loves Goddess greatly, She will forgive her evil deeds, and She
will increase her reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.6
Suffer the husbands that you desire to divorce to dwell in some part of
your house, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until the
time of separation proscribed by law, if any, has ended, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but you
will need to endure no more than three months, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and he
should have a new place to live by then.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And they
should live in a reasonable room with reasonable conveniences</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">out of
the resources you both possessed during the marriage;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
not make her or him uneasy, that they become overly stressed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.7 And
husbands should provide necessaries for a pregnant wife,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
should provide support for the child until it reaches adulthood.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And if a
wife is in need of a baby nurse after delivery,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you
should do what is best for her and the baby.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And if
you have financial difficulties, discuss this with your spouse in a
kindly manner for both of you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and let a
husband who has plenty, expend what is necessary for a new
mother,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and for
any baby nurse she may require; and let a husband whose financial
resources are limited,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">expend
only what is reasonable out of these, and a court may determine fairly
what this amount is.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
obliges no soul to give more than they have the ability to give;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
is likely to seek to ease the hardships of the true believers, who ask
for this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.8 How
many cities have undergone natural disasters,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
people would not listen to the prophetess sent to them, and so many
perished, if not all of them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The evil
ones say it was a severe punishment from Goddess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet
Goddess does not torture or maim anyone; these are the evil lies they
spread;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.9 for
many, many people will taste evil on earth, for evil abounds on
earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">some will
taste evil as a result of their own business;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
perhaps the end of their business was particularly painful to
them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.10 but
life on earth is extraordinarily difficult without the assistance of
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it may
seem to be like a severe punishment; yet Goddess does not punish.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Therefore
love Goddess greatly, if you are endued with great understanding;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.11 and
a prophetess may inform you of the easily understood</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">signs of
Goddess; that she may bring forth those that believe and do good works,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from
darkness into the light. And whomsoever believes in Goddess, and does
what is right,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Goddess
will lead into gardens beneath which rivers flow,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to remain
therein forever; and Goddess has already made excellent accommodations
for the believers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">65.12 It
is Goddess who has created seven heavens, and as many different stories
of the earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
the divine command descends to each of them, penetrating all the
earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
you might know that Goddess is omnipotent,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and that
Goddess comprehends all things by Her infinite knowledge.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY SIX – ENTITLED PROHIBITION</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.1 O
Prophetess, you need not hold yourself to standards </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which are
beyond what Goddess has allowed you; you seem to seek to please your
husband,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when you
need to concentrate on your mission, but Goddess is inclined to forgive
and She is merciful.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.2
Goddess has allowed you the dissolution of your oaths, and Goddess is
your mistress;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is knowing and wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.3 When
the prophetess entrusted a secret to her husband, regarding a certain
incident;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and when
he disclosed the same to others as gossip, and Goddess made it known to
the Prophetess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
Prophetess acquainted her husband with a part of what he had
done,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but would
not scold him regarding the entire matter.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And when
the Prophetess had acquainted her husband with this knowledge, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">he said,
“Who has told you this?” She answered, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“The
knowing, the all wise, Goddess has disclosed it to me.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.4 If
you are both turned to Goddess, everything would be fine;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but if
you join against Her; remember that Goddess is the best
patroness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
Gabrielle, and the good women from among the faithful,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
angels are also assistants of the Prophetess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.5 If
the Prophetess desired it, she could divorce her husband, but only on
grounds of infidelity or abuse,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and she
might believe that Goddess will giver her a better husband in
exchange,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">a husband
is supposed to be resigned to Goddess, the true believers, and he should
be devout,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">penitent,
obedient, given to self sacrifice, whether he was chaste when they met,
or not,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">he should
be devoted entirely to his marriage. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
whether or not the Prophetess decides to divorce him or not,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">she
should know that the pain of divorce is severe for all,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except
for the unbelievers, who do not care at all whether or not they hurt
anyone else.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.6 O
true believers, save your souls, and those of your families, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from the
fire of war whose fuel is people, money, hate and greed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">over
which are set angels who carry out the cleansing of the earth, through
natural disasters,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">who never
disobey Goddess, but continue Her set plans for the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
faithful will always be sent a prophetess to warn them thereof,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
unfaithful will not hear or listen.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.7 O
unbelievers, do not think of lame excuses today,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for you
will see the great sadness you have caused on the day of your
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.8 O
true believers, turn to Goddess with a sincere repentance;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so your
Lady of Light will cleanse your sin and errors from you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will admit you into gardens, through which rivers flow;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on the
day whereupon Goddess will not put to shame the prophetesses,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or those
who believed with her; their auras will extend out around them extremely
far away,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and on
their right hands they will say, “O Lady of Light, increase the sparkle
and bright glow of our auras,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
forgive us; for You are almighty.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.9 O
prophetess, attack the infidels with severe love and
evangelization,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
hypocrites with discussions; and treat them with your most severe form
of love;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">send them
all love, and know that unless they repent and turn to Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
return back to the earth, which shall be like hell for them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a sad
journey it will be without a protectress or angels to guide them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.10
Goddess reveals Her instructions as parables and allegories to the
unbelievers, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">such as
the husband of Nora, and the husband of Wileh,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they were
both under two of our most righteous prophetesses,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
deceived them both, and they were troublesome,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">wherefore,
their wives, Nora and Wileh, who were both high priestesses,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
prophetesses, were of no advantage to them at all,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in the
sight of Goddess; and it will be said to them, on the day of their
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“You will
return to earth, which shall be like hell fire, a dangerous place
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
will not have any Protectress or angels to guide you </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until you
remember to repent and turn to Goddess.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.11
Goddess has also revealed a story to you for those that believe,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the wife
of Pharaoh; when she said, “Goddess, build me a house with you in
paradise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
deliver me from Pharaoh and his evil, and deliver me from the unjust
people that torture,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">oppress
and humiliate others; for peace and love is the only way.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">66.12 And
Mother Mary, who preserved her chastity until her marriage to
Joseph,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
within whom the Holy Sprit gave her the gift of Yeshua,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">a strong
holy spirit and preacher, and She taught him the words of
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
both taught Scripture, built a new true religion, and both were devout
and obedient persons.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY SEVEN – ENTITLED THE QUEENDOM</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.1
Blessed is Goddess, and in Her hands is the Queendom, for She is
almighty.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.2 She
has created life and death, and trials and earth as a school,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
you might perfect and become one of the most righteous;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
is mighty and ready to forgive.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.3 She
has created the seven heavens, one above the other;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">you
cannot see in a creature of the most Merciful any unfitness or
flaw.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Lift up
your eyes to heaven, and see if you can perceive any flaw
therein;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.4 then
take two other views; and your eyes may become dull and fatigued.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.5
Moreover, we have adorned the lowest heaven with stars,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
have appointed them with darts to throw at dark entities, which may come
close thereto,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for whom
we have prepared the experience of life on earth, which is like a
torment of burning fire;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.6 and
for those that will not believe in the Lady of Light, they will also
return to earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
return will not be a happy journey, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for they
will return without a Protectress and angels, until they turn to
Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.7 When
they return and they are born, they will squall at the top of their
lungs,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and for a
newborn, the air sears like boiling water;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.8 and
they will feel like they might almost burst with fury.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">So often
as a company of them shall be returned,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">prior
thereto, they will be asked, “Did you not hear the words of a
prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">before
you created all that sadness and grief on the earth?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.9 They
will answer, “Yes, a prophetess came to us; but we thought she was a
liar and told her, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">‘Goddess
did not reveal anything to you; you are in great error from the
truth.’”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.10 and
they will say, “If we had listened or had thoroughly considered what she
told us,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we would
not have been amongst those that are immediately returned to
earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">those
that will experience great trials and tribulations,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which is
similar to hell because we will go there without a Protectress</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or
guardian angels, until we repent and turn to Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.11 and
they will confess that they were in great error;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but this
will not prevent a single soul from being immediately returned to earth,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
angels or protection from Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.12
Certainly those who love their Lady of Light in secret shall receive
pardon and a great reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.13
Either conceal your evangelization, or make it public; She knows the
innermost part of your hearts;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.14
should She not know all things regarding a person She created;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">since She
is the Most Wise One, the Knowing One? </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.15 It
is She who has leveled the earth for you; therefore walk through the
regions of it,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and see
what She has provided for you; to Her shall be the resurrection of every
soul.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.16 And
it is the evil ones that tell you that She who dwells in heaven</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">could not
prevent the earth from swallowing you whole during an earthquake, and
She is likely to do this?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And note,
that earthquakes are part of the natural order on earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.17 Or
do you believe the prophetess who says you should be secure that a
person that dwells in heaven,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">can
assuredly save you in a second from a whirlwind, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">even one
which drives the sands to overwhelm many people?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Then you
shall know how very important your prophetesses are to you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.18
There were many others before you that did not believe;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and see
how grievous was the end of their lives!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.19 Do
you not see how the birds above are able to flap their wings to
fly?<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Nothing
apparently sustains them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except
the Merciful One shows well how to do this; for She understands all
things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.20 Or
who is the person that will be like an army to you, to defend you
against all danger on earth?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
Goddess will. And it is assured that the unbelievers are in gross
disillusion as to their status.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.21 Or
who is the entity in heaven that will give you food, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if you
cannot find any and there is a famine in the land? Yet the unbelievers
persist in their ignorance,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and fly
far from the truth and love which Goddess has to offer them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.22 Is
the cripple that must crawl upon the earth to be seen as the same
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as one
who is able to walk and run standing
up?<a href="#_ftn48" id="_ftnref48"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[48]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.23 Say
to the people, “It is Goddess who has given you life,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
has bestowed upon you hearing, and sight and understanding;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet how
little gratitude many people have for Her!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.24 Say
to the people, “It is She who has sown you on this earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
Her you will be returned and gathered together.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.25
They will say to you, “When shall this blessing of a day of resurrection
come to us, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
we might be prepared for it?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.26 You
should answer them, “The knowledge of this matter rests entirely with
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for I am
only a public teacher and preacher.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.27 But
when the people shall see their day near at hand, the demeanor of the
unfaithful will grow sad,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and it
will be said to them, “This is what you have been expecting.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.28
“What do you think now that you have seen your life?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Do you
think it was a sad life, giving pain and hurt to others?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">You have
felt their pain; and in a merciful manner, just as they did.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.29 Say
to the unbeliever, “She is the Merciful One;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in Her we
believe and in Her we put our trust.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">You shall
hereafter know who is in obvious error.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">67.30 Say
to the unbeliever, “What were you thinking?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">If your
wells, and the rivers and waterfalls all ran dry in the morning,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to whom
would you petition for clear and running water?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY EIGHT – ENTITLED THE PEN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.1
N.<a href="#_ftn49" id="_ftnref49"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[49]</span></span></span></span></a><span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>By the pen, and what is
recorded,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.2 and
by the grace of your Lady of Light, show that you are not insane, O
Prophetess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.3
Certainly there is prepared for you an everlasting reward;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.4 for
you have a noble disposition.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.5 You
shall see and the unbelievers will see,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.6
which of you are bereft of your senses.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.7
Certainly the Lady of Light well knows the person who has wandered from
Her path;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
well knows those that are rightfully directed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.8
therefore do not obey those that accuse you of lying;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.9 They
desire that you should be kind to them; and so they will be kind to
you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.10 But
do not obey any person is a common swearer,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.11 a
despicable and untrustworthy woman,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.12
anyone who forbids goodness, or who is a transgressor, or a wicked
person,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.13
those that are cruel, and besides that, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">those
that obey their parents when they are equally as cruel and
spurious;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.14
this is despite the fact they may be wealthy and have many
children;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.15
when our signs are revealed to them they say, “These are nothing but
fables of the ancient.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.16 For
they are stigmatized in their hearts, and those hearts are most
certainly hard as stone.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.17
When we tried the
Meccans,<a href="#_ftn50" id="_ftnref50"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[50]</span></span></span></span></a>
as we formerly tried the owners of the
garden;<a href="#_ftn51" id="_ftnref51"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[51]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
swore they would gather all the fruit early in the morning;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.18 and
they never said or believed, “If it pleased Goddess;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.19
wherefore a destruction from nature encompassed the entire garden while
they slept;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.20 and
in the morning it became like a garden whose fruits were all gathered,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and would
never be gathered again.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.21 And
they called the one to the other as they arose in the morning,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.22
saying, “Go out early to your plantation, if you intend to gather the
fruit;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.23 so
they went there, whispering to one another and wondering</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">what they
would find after the winds the night before,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.24 “No
poor person will ever enter this garden before us again.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.25 And
they went forth early, with a determined purpose.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.26 And
when they saw the garden was blasted and destroyed, they said,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“We have
certainly made a mistake along the way;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but when
they found it to be their own garden, they cried out,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.27
“Why are we not permitted to reap the fruits of our labors?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.28 The
worthier of them said, “Did I not say to you, ‘Give praise to
Goddess?’”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.29
They answered, “All praise be to the Lady of Light, we see now we have
been unjust to Her.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.30 And
they began to blame one another,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.31 and
they said, “Woe be to us! Certainly we have been great
transgressors”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.32
“perhaps our Lady of Light might give us in exchange a better garden
than this one was: </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
earnestly beseech our Lady of Light to forgive us.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.33
This was indeed a problem for them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
they had listened to their Prophetess they would not have suffered,
having to rebuild their garden;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but now
they knew they also had to rebuild their faith, otherwise on the day of
their resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
would see much sadness for all the grief they caused others,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and for
how the good garden could have helped the poor.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.34
Certainly the pious are always prepared, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and with
their Lady of Light, they will have gardens of delight.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.35
Should we deal with the Moslemas the same as we deal with the
wicked?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.36
What ails you that you judge people in such a manner?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.37 Do
you not have a Book from heaven, wherein you may read</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.38
that you are promised goodness if you chose goodness?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.39 Or
have you received other information </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
shall be binding on you on the day of your resurrection which is all
negative,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and which
will give you only imagined joy on the day of your resurrection?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.40 Ask
the unbelievers who would be the guarantor of negativity, nastiness and
evil?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.41 Or
have they associated negative actions with Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">what good
will that do them on the day of their resurrection?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Ask them
to produce proof that negativity helps, if they speak the truth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.42 On
a certain day the leg will be made
bare,<a href="#_ftn52" id="_ftnref52"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[52]</span></span></span></span></a> and
they will be called to worship, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
will not be able to.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.43
Their eyes will be downcast; hate will haunt them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for they
were invited to worship Goddess, while they were safe, but they would
not listen.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.44 Let
me alone, therefore, and I will keep away from those that accuse me of
lying.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For they
will lead themselves gradually to destruction, by ways that they do not
perceive,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for their
hearts are hardened, but they think their strategies are
effective.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.45 Do
you ask from anyone a reward for your preaching and teaching?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.46 You
do not because you know that they are laden with debts and
obligations.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.47 Are
the secrets of future events with them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
they transcribe the same from the table of the decrees of
Goddess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.48
Therefore patiently wait the day of receipt of instructions from your
Lady of Light;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
not be like Joanie who was swallowed by a great fish; when she cried out
to Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">she was
pitiful and anxious.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.49 If
the grace of the Lady of Light had not reached her, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">she would
have been cast to the shore naked and full of shame;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.50 but
her heart by then had softened, and she became one of the righteous and
acted accordingly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.51 You
should note that the unbelievers desire to strike you down</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">only
through their menacing looks at you when you preach the Korana;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
say, “She is most certainly insane;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">68.52 but
it is no other than a blessed set of directions and instructions to all
creatures,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a
gift of love from Goddess Herself.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SIXTY NINE – ENTITLED THE INEVITABLE DAY</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.1 The
infallible!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.2 And
what is the infallible?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.3 And
how can I make you understand what the infallible is?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.4 The
tribes of Thelma and Ada denied as a lie </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the day
when all the people will hear of the great gathering before the Lady of
Light;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.5 And
recall that Thelma was destroyed by a terrible noise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.6 and
Ada was destroyed by a roaring and furious wind;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.7
which was a natural disaster that assailed them for seven nights and
eight days successively;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
might have seen the people, lying prostrate on the ground,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as if
they had been the roots of hollow palm trees;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.8 and
not a one of them were spared.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.9
Pharaoh also, and those who were before him,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
cities which were
overthrown<a href="#_ftn53" id="_ftnref53"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[53]</span></span></span></span></a>
were also guilty of error;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.10 and
they were disobedient to the prophetess which had been sent to
them</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from
their Lady of Light; therefore when these natural destructions came upon
them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
unbelievers would not listen to their prophetesses regarding what was
coming,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and what
they needed to do to avert destruction, and so they were all
destroyed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.11
When the water of the flood arose, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we
carried the believers in the ark which swam on the flood waters;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.12 so
that we might make the same a memorial to Nora,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
hearkening ear might retain this information.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.13 And
when one cry from Gabrielle will sound the trumpet,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.14 and
the earth will be moved from its place,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
mountains also, and much land will be dashed to pieces,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">although
no one will fear for they will see the glory of the Lady and all her
love on that day;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.15 on
that day the hour of final resurrection will suddenly come;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.16 and
the heavens will cleave in sunder, and will fall into pieces; on that
day;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.17 and
the angels will be along all sides of you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and eight
will uphold the throne of the Lady of Light above them, on that
day.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.18 On
that day you will be presented before the judgment seat of
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and none
of your secret actions will be hidden.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.19 And
some of the souls will look to their right side and will view the
recording device of heaven.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">An angel
shall say, “Look at this,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.20
“certainly on this day I thought that I would be brought to
account;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.21 and
she will review it and then live a pleasing new life,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.22 in
a lofty garden,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.23 the
fruits of which will be near to her and easy to gather.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.24 You
may all eat and drink with easy digestion; because of the good works
which you did before you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in the
days of your life which are past.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.25 But
the person who is directed to look at their recording device on their
left side will say,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“O I wish
that I had not received this information;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.26 and
that I had not known what my life’s accounting truly was like!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.27 “I
wish now that death had finally terminated my soul!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.28 “My
riches have not profited me;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.29
“and my power is passed away from me.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.30 And
Goddess will say to the keepers of the white purifying light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Take her
to your device, and show her that she will be purified,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.31 and
pass the beams through her and all around her; it will look like
burning, but it will not burn you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.32
then place my garments of love all around her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.33 we
know she was not pure in life because she did not desire to feed the
poor;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.34 she
never worried about love or Goddess in life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.35 and
she will not find any evil doing friends here;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.36 nor
is there any food,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.37 but
the filthy corruption flowing from the worst of the evil ones, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and you
will see how the white light cleanses it all away.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.38 I
swear that you will see this;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.39 and
I can tell you what you will not see;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.40
this discussion is the work of an honorable prophetess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.41 and
it is not the vain discussion of a poet to entertain; but how little do
you believe me!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.42
Neither is it the discussion of a soothsayer; how little do you follow
my instructions!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.43 It
is a revelation from the Lady of all creatures.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.44 If
the prophetess had forged any part of these discussions concerning
heaven,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.45
certainly we would have taken her by the right hand,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.46 and
we would show you in many ways how hard her heart was!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.47 Nor
would we keep any person from scolding her for lying.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.48 And
certainly this good Book is a message of love to the pious;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.49 and
we well know that there are some people that charge the prophetess with
being a liar;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.50 but
it will surely be a grievous occasion to the unfaithful,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.51 for
it contains only the certain truth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">69.52
Therefore praise the name of your Lady of Light, the great
Goddess!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-tab-count:
4">                                                </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY – ENTITLED THE STEPS</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.1 One
demanded and called for vengeance to fall upon the unbelievers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.2 but
there will be no one to assert negative emotions against another
person;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.3
because Goddess does not have any negative emotion of vengeance;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so She
cannot possibly execute such a request, for She is possessor of the
steps of love only;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.4 the
means by which the angels ascend to Her, and the spirit Gabrielle
also,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in a day
whose time frame is fifty thousand years;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.5
therefore bear the insults of Meccans and others with becoming
patience;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.6 for
they see that they might be punished,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.7 but
we know there is no punishment, only trials and tribulations.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.8 On a
certain day the heavens will become like molten brass;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.9 and
the mountains like wool of various colors, a rainbow in the sky,
scattered abroad by the winds;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.10 and
a friend will not ask another friend concerning her condition,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.11
although they see one another clearly. The wicked will desire to redeem
herself</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from
seeing the grief she caused others, perhaps even by giving up her own
children,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
soul’s pain will be so intense,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.12 and
her husband, and her sister,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.13 and
her kin who showed kindness to her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.14 and
all the people of the earth; and that this might save her; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.15 but
this will not happen, for viewing the sadness that one caused is
inevitable, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and will
feel like hell fire,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.16
they will feel like they were dragged by their scalps,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.17 one
friend will call out to another friend who turned her back on Goddess,
and on faith,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.18 and
she will have amassed riches, and greedily hoarded them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.19
Certainly a woman can be very impatient;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.20
when evil touches her, she is full of complaints;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.21 but
when good comes to her, she becomes stingy;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.22
except those that are devoutly religious;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.23 and
she who perseveres in her prayers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.24 and
she who owes others many debts;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.25 and
she who is forbidden by shame to ask;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.26 and
those who sincerely believe in the day of their resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.27 and
she who is concerned regarding the day of her resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.28 for
there is not a person that will avoid this procedure;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.29 and
those who abstains from having intercourse with any person other than a
spouse </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and who
marries only one spouse at a time;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.30 and
who is kind to the servants and employees that they hire; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and who
has no slaves in her possession; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.31 but
whomever covets any man or woman who is not their spouse, they fall in
definite error;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.32 and
those who faithfully keep items and things what they are entrusted
with,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and all
their contracts and agreements;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.33 and
those who give fair and accurate testimony;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.34 and
those who frequently are at prayer;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.35
these souls will dwell among gardens, highly honored.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.36
What ails the unbelievers that they often run scared from those they
have harmed?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.37
They scatter to the right and to the left.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.38
Does not every woman hope to enter into an eternal garden of
delight?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.39 But
this will not always happen, and they will not all enter into perpetual
gardens </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until the
day of their final resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and then
only after the unbelievers are purified for such a purpose.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.40 I
swear by the Lady of the east and of the west,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that
heaven will never destroy a soul, they will only be purified.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.41 and
as for those that will not assist the Lady,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they may
be substituted for someone that is willing to do so;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.42
Therefore suffer the wrong doers to wade in vain arguments,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
amuse themselves with sports all day;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but only
until the day of their resurrection comes to them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.43 and
this will be a day when they leave their bodies,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or rise
from their graves, or leave the earthly dimension for the other
side,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as though
they were hastening to the finest hotel;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">70.44 but
on this day, the looks of the unbelievers will be downcast,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
be saddened to review what they have done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Rest
assured, this is the day which they have been promised.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY ONE – ENTITLED NORA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.1
Certainly we sent Nora to her people, saying</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Warn
your people before a severe natural disaster comes to them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but first
preach to them of the true religion and the love Goddess has for them
all.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.2 Nora
said, “O my people, certainly I am a public preacher and teacher to
you;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.3
“therefore, serve Goddess, and love Her greatly, and obey me;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.4 “She
will forgive your sins, if you repent, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will grant you respite until the day of your resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess determines all your time on earth, and this day will not be
deferred for you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">if you
were women of understanding, you would know this.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.5 She
said, “Lady of Light, certainly I have called my people night and
day;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.6 “but
my calling only increases their aversion to You and to faith.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.7 “and
whenever I call them to the true faith, so that they might be
forgiven,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they put
their fingers in their ears, and hide within their garments, and they
persist in being unfaithful,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
proudly disdain my teachings.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.8
“Moreover I have invited them to Your service openly,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.9 “and
I spoke to them again in public; and I also secretly counseled them in
private;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.10 and
I said, “Beg pardon from your Lady of Light, for She is inclined to
forgive;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.11
“and She will cause the heavens to pour down rain super abundantly upon
you soon,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.12
“and if you listen, you will have an increase of wealth and of
children,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will provide you with gardens, and furnish you with rivers.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.13
“What ails you, that you do not hope for benevolence from
Goddess;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.14
“since She has created you in beautiful and varied forms?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.15 “Do
you not see how Goddess has created the seven heavens, one above the
other”;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.16
“and She has placed the moon therein for a light, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and has
appointed the sun for a bright beam of light?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.17
"Goddess has also produced and caused you to spring forth from the
earth;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.18
“hereafter She will cause you to return to Her in the same
manner;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will again take you to Her, by raising you from the dead.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.19
“And Goddess has spread the whole earth out before you as a carpet for
you,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.20
“that you might walk thereupon through spacious paths.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.21
Nora said, “Lady of Light, certainly they are disobedient to me;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
follow only what the wealthy people say, those that have power and
children, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but such
people only increase their wickedness, because the unbelievers worship
only wealth and power</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which are
truly the worst false idols imaginable.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.22 And
they devised a dangerous plot against Nora;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.23 and
the high priestesses said to the others,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“You
shall by no means stop worshiping your goddesses of wealth, power and
greed; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor shall
you forsake any other goddesses that act in negative manners and have
negative emotions</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">though
the use of hate, violence, greed, jealousy and rage.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.24 And
they seduced many of the people, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">because
these people only desired to increase evil in the world;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.25
because of this, they would not listen to a prophetess that
taught</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the love
of money, greediness, hate, violence, jealousy, rage were all to be
desired,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as a
person wanted, and that a Goddess of love was not enough for
them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
they were stubborn and would not listen,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
accordingly they succumbed to the natural disaster of a flood,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and from
there they were sent back to the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
guardian angels or a Protectress which was like hell fire to
them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.26 And
Nora said, “Lady, I tried to warn them all, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
unbelievers died in a sad manner and they are no longer on the
earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but will
soon be babies,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.27
“and unfortunately many innocents on earth will now beget them as
babies,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
will all pray for them, that they might survive such arrogant
children,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">71.28<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Lady of Light, forgive me and my
parents for our errors,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and every
one who shall enter into my home,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and help
us all to become true believers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and help
the true believers of both sexes;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and help
the unjust doers turn to you for guidance and love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY TWO – ENTITLED THE GENII OR HAUGHTY ONES</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.1 Say
to the people, “It has been revealed to me that a company of
genii</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">had
attentively heard me reading the Korana and said, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“Certainly
we have heard an admirable Scripture;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.2
“this is a direction to proper religion; therefore we believe in this
Scripture;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
will associate no dark or negative emotions or actions with
Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.3 May
the majesty of our Lady be exalted, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for She
has not been associated with any negative emotion or action.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.4 Yet
the foolish among
us<a href="#_ftn54" id="_ftnref54"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[54]</span></span></span></span></a> has
said that this is false;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.5 but
we certainly thought that neither a prophetess nor a genie </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">would
ever utter a lie concerning Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.6 And
there are certain women who fly for refuge to certain of the genii; but
they increase their error;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.7 and
they also thought, as you have thought,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that
Goddess could not or would not raise anyone to life.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.8 And
we formerly attempted to pry into what was happening in heaven;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but we
found the same filled with a strong guard of angels, and with shooting
stars;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.9 and
we sat on some of the seats to hear the discussion of the angels;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">such that
whomsoever listens now, finds a flame laid out in ambush for them,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to guard
the celestial confines.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.10 And
we do not know whether these flames are only directed against
evil,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or
whether they are intended to set others in the right direction.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.11
There are some people among us that are righteous; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and there
are some among us who are otherwise; we appear to have differing
ideals.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.12 And
we certainly thought that we could not frustrate Goddess while on the
earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor could
we escape Her by flight;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.13
therefore, when we had heard the directions contained in the Korana, we
believed therein.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
whomsoever believes in the Lady of Light, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">does not
have to fear any diminution of her reward, nor any injustice.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.14
There are some Moslemas among us, and there are others that swerve away
from righteousness.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And those
who embrace Islama, they earnestly seek true direction;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.15 but
those who swerve from righteousness will be greatly saddened on the day
of her resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.16 If
they walk along the path of truth, we will surely send them abundant
rain;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.17 so
that we may prove them with such a trial; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
whomsoever turns aside from the direction of Her Lady of Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
find trials and tribulations in this life or the next.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.18
Certainly the places of worship are set apart to Goddess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
do not invoke anything negative with Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.19
When the true servants of Goddess stand up to invoke the Goddess of
love, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the genii
had pressed in masses into the crowd,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to hear
the prophetess speak the words of the Korana.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.20 Say
to the people, “Certainly I call upon my Lady of Light only,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and I
associate no dark or negative actions or emotions with Her.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.21 Say
to the people, “Certainly I am not able, by myself, to hurt you or send
you blessings.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.22 Say
to the people, “Certainly no one can protect me from trials and
tribulations,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except
Goddess, and I have plenty of these, nor should I find any refuge
besides Her.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.23 “I
can do no more than publish what has been revealed to me from
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and Her
messengers.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>And whomsoever will
be disobedient to Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and Her
prophetess, they will find life to be very difficult, and it will seem
like hell fire;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
will occur until they turn to Goddess.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.24 For
many people, until they understand that their trials and tribulations
are unnecessarily difficult, they will not cease their opposition; but
then they shall know who is the weaker protectress, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and who
is fewer in number. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.25 Say
to the people, “I do not know whether the day of your resurrection is
near to you or far away, or whether it may be appointed far into the
distant time.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.26 She
knows the secrets of the future, and She does not communicate this to
any person,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.27
except a prophetess with whom She is well pleased;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
causes a troop of angels to march before her and behind her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">72.28 so
that She may know that the mission of the Lady of Light is being
properly executed; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and she
understands whatever is given within her knowledge;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
Lady can count anything by exact number.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY THREE – ENTITLED ALL WRAPPED UP</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.1 O my
prophetess that is all wrapped up,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.2
arise to pray and continue therein during the night, except for a few
hours,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.3 that
is today, during one half the night;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.4 or
add or subtract a few hours therefrom;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.5 and
repeat the Korana with a distinct and kindly voice; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for we
will provide you with loving words.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.6
Certainly rising during the night is most efficient for steadfast
devotion,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and more
conducive to decent pronunciation of the Korana;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.7
because in the daytime you have much work to do.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.8 And
commemorate the name of your Lady of Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
not ever separate yourself from Her; you must renounce worldly
vanities.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.9 She
is the Lady of the east and of the west; there is no Goddess but
She.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Therefore
take Her only for your Patroness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.10 and
patiently suffer the lies which the unfaithful utter against you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
depart from them with a gracious departure.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.11 And
leave heaven alone to deal with those who charge the Korana as being
false, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">who enjoy
the blessings of this life only; and bear with them for a while.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.12
Certainly with us are the heavy chains and burning fire of the dangers
on earth </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for those
that live again without guardian angels or a Protectress.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.13 And
there is much bad food on earth that one might choke upon,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and bad
food is a torment to women.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.14 On
a certain day the earth will be shaken and the mountains also,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
mountains will become a heap of sand poured all about,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">yet no
one will be afraid for Goddess will appear and tell them they all are
loved greatly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.15
Certainly we have sent to you a prophetess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to give
witness of the love of Goddess for you, and we have sent a prophetess to
Pharaoh;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.16 but
Pharaoh was disobedient to the prophetess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
he was stubborn and would not listen to stay out of the sea</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.17
after Miriam walked through it and he and all his wicked people were
drowned therein.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And if
you disobey your prophetesses,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then how
will you prevent great sadness on the day of your resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
sadness could even turn the hair of a young child prematurely
grey.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.18 The
heavens one day will be torn in two; the promise of resurrection will
then be executed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.19
Certainly this is an instruction to you; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
whomsoever is willing to listen to this direction will walk in the way
of the Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.20
Your Lady of Light knows that you continue in prayer and
meditation</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">sometimes
for two thirds of the night, and sometimes just one half,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and at
other times only one third, and a part of your friends, who are with
you, do the same.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But
Goddess measures the night and day; She knows that you cannot exactly
compute time;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">therefore
She is forgiving towards you. Read therefore, as much of the Korana as
might be easy for you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She knows
that there will be some infirm among you; and others will travel
throughout the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
they may obtain a competency of this Korana which is a part of the
bounty of Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">while
others evangelize the faith of Goddess to others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Read,
therefore, so much of the Korana as is easy for you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
observe frequent prayer, and pay alms generously; and lend to Goddess an
acceptable loan,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
whatever you send your souls that is good, you will find a much greater
reward with Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This is
better and will merit a reward in abundance.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>And ask Goddess for
forgiveness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is ready to forgive and She is merciful.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY FOUR – ENTITLED ALL COVERED UP</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.1 O
prophetess who is completely covered up;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.2
arise and preach;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.3 and
magnify the Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.4 And
wash your garments;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.5 and
fly from every abomination;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.6 and
do not act in such a manner that you hope to receive </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">many
worldly possessions in return for your works;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.7 and
patiently wait for your Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.8 When
the trumpet will sound,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.9
certainly that day will be a day of hope and understanding for the
believers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.10 For
the unbelievers it will not be easy for them to understand the complete
triumph of My truth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.11 Let
Me alone with those which I created,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.12 and
upon whom I have bestowed abundant riches,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.13 and
children dwelling in her presence,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.14 and
for whom I have disposed of business in a smooth and easy manner,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.15 and
for those that desire I add many blessings to her for no reason.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.16
Certainly not, for She has stubbornly opposed our messages.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.17 For
this is just a vain dream; many wealthy ones are adverse to our signs
and miracles;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.18
because they are stubborn, they will not avoid any natural
calamities,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">all of
which a prophetess will be sent first to warn them of,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.19 and
again, many people think they are cursed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">or that
Goddess curses them (which She does not),</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
only curse themselves when they will not listen to the Prophetess</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">who has
been sent to them from the abundance of love which Goddess possesses for
you all.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.20 And
again, they imagine they are cursed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but how
maliciously they associate such a horrid action with Goddess, the one
that is pure love!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.21
Then the wealthy woman looked back upon the Prophetess, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.22 and
she frowned and put on an austere face;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.23 and
then she turned back, and was elated with pride;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.24 and
she said, “This is no more than dark magic, borrowed from
others:”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.25
“these are only the words of a mere woman.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.26
Does she know that she will only return to earth for this, a place which
is pure hell?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.27 And
what does she think hell is all about?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.28 It
leaves not anything unconsumed, nor does it allow anything to
escape;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it drains
away the energy of a person through trial and tribulation, until they
turn to Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.29 The
heat of the desert will scorch her flesh, if she is there;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.30
over the earth are at least nineteen angels appointed as guardian angels
of Mother Earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.31 We
have appointed none but angels to preside over earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and we
have expressed the number of them only so that the unbelievers</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">can
engage in vain arguments about them; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that the
people to whom the Scriptures have been given may be certain of the
truth of this good Book,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
believers will only increase in faith; and that those to whom the
Scriptures have been given,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
true believers will not doubt after this revelation;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and that
those who have hardened their own hearts through expediency,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
unbelievers will only ask, “What mystery does Goddess intend, by this
number?”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And they
that desire to err, will most certainly err, and do as they please,
without conscience. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">None
knows about the troops that will evangelize the earth to Her, except for
Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
is not other than a memento to womankind.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Assuredly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.32 By
the moon,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.33 and
the night when it diminishes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.34 and
by the morning when the sky begins to redden,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">73.35 I
swear that there will be many natural disasters;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.36 and
it gives proper instruction to women;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.37 as
well as to those people among you that desire to go out, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as well
as those that desire to remain behind.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.38
Every soul is given in pledge for the thing which it has done;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.39
except for the blessed companions of the right hand;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.40
these shall dwell in lovely gardens,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.41 and
they shall ask one another questions concerning the wicked;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.42 and
will be able to ask the wicked themselves,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">saying
“What makes you keep returning to earth, which is hell?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.43
They will answer, “We were not engaged in frequent prayer,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.44
“nor did we feed the poor “;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.45
“and we engaged in vain discussions with evil reasoners;“</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.46
“and we denied that the day of our resurrection would happen;“</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.47
“until death came to us;“</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.48
“and the intercession of others never availed any of us.“</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.49
What ails them, therefore, that they turn aside from the loving
instructions of the Korana,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.50 as
though they were shy donkeys,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.51
flying from a lioness?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.52 But
every woman among them desires that all Scripture </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">must be
handed to her directly from Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.53 But
this will not come to pass. The earth is supposed to be a school to
learn to grow and perfect,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and how
can one do that when Goddess hands you everything?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">As a
result they are not mindful of the day of their resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.54 And
it will never come to pass that Goddess will appear before them on earth
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">providing
every little instruction to give them for life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for the
Korana is a sufficient instruction manual for life on earth; it teaches
love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.55
Whomsoever is willing to listen; to them the love of the Korana will be
given and received well;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">74.56 but
many will not be properly directed, until they soften their own
hearts,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and turn
to Goddess.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>She is worthy to be
loved; and She is inclined to forgive.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY FIVE – ENTITLED THE RESURRECTION</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.1
Certainly I swear by the day of resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.2 and
I swear by the soul which accuses itself;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.3 do
you think that heaven cannot gather bones together and resurrect a soul
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that has
recently died to a new spiritual body?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.4 Yes,
we are able to put together even the smallest bones of her
fingers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and make
a prototype of her former form and resurrect her to a new life,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and a new
body in the twinkling of a second, and this will occur on the day of her
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.5 But
many chose to be wicked, for all the time which has been given
her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.6 She
will ask, “When will the day of the final resurrection be?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.7 But
when her sight is dazzled,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.8 and
the moon is eclipsed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.9 and
the sun and the moon will be joined together,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.10 and
on that day, a woman shall say, “Where is a place for refuge?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">But for
those that pray, Goddess will explain to them, “Have no fear, for I am
with you on this day.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.11 But
there will be no need for refugee; there will be no place for anyone to
fly to.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.12
With your Lady of Light there will be only a place of rest on that
day.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.13 on
that day a woman shall be told all that she has done, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">from the
very first moment to the very last one while she was on earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.14
Yes, a woman shall see herself provide evidence against herself;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.15 and
though she might offer excuses, they will not be received at all.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.16 Do
not move your tongue, O Prophetess in repeating the revelations </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
have been brought to you by the angel Gabrielle before she has finished
her instruction, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and this
will be better for you to more readily memorize them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.17 for
the collecting of the Korana in your mind, and the teaching of an
accurate reading,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">are
incumbent on us.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.18 But
when we shall have read the same to you by the tongue of the angel,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">do follow
the reading thereof;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.19 and
afterwards it shall be our task to explain it to you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">By no
means do you need to be hasty for the future.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.20 But
you love things that hasten away,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.21 and
you neglect the life to come.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.22
Some dispositions on that day will be bright and shiny,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.23
looking towards their Lady of Light;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.24 but
some dispositions on that day will be filled with grief;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.25
they shall think that a crushing disaster will come to them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.26
Assuredly when a woman’s soul will come up to her throat, and her agony
on earth is about to end;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.27 and
the bystanders will say, “Who can bring a doctor to recover her?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.28 and
they will know that she is about to pass over from their world, and into
the next;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.29 and
one leg will be joined to the
next,<a href="#_ftn55" id="_ftnref55"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[55]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.30 and
on that day she will be escorted away to Her Lady of Light by the
angels.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.31 For
she did not believe, nor did she pray;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.32 but
she accused the Prophetess of Goddess of being a liar,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
accordingly she refused to obey the Prophetess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.33
then she departed from her family, walking with arrogant people.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.34
Certainly there will be woe to her!<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>And agony!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.35 And
again grief will be for her; much sadness!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.36
Does she think that she will be left at this time to do as she
pleases?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">As she
did on earth, with full liberty and no control?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.37 Was
she not at one time just an ovum within her mother’s abdomen,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and then
passed forth to the uterus and joined with semen?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.38
Afterwards she became a fetus, and Goddess formed her further,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and she
fashioned her into a proper form;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.39 and
She made this form into two sexes, the female and the male.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">75.40 If
She was able to do this, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">then why
do the people think that She cannot quicken the dead into a new
dimension?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY SIX – ENTITLED WOMAN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.1 Did
there not pass to them a long space of time,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">during
which womankind was not worthy of remembrance?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.2
Certainly we have created people out of commingled ovum and seed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that we
might provide learning and trials for her; and we have made her to hear
and to see.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.3 We
have most certainly directed her in the proper way; whether she is
grateful or ungrateful.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.4
Certainly we have prepared to the unbelievers a great sadness on the day
of their resurrection, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">their
misdeeds will seem like chains to them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">their
omissions of good works will seem like heavy collars to them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
sadness for all the good they might have done will seem like hell fire
to them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.5 But
the just shall drink of a cup of wine, mixed with the water of
Kafir,<a href="#_ftn56" id="_ftnref56"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[56]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.6
which is a fountain where only the servants of Goddess drink;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they will
convey the same by channels to whomsoever they please.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.7
These persons have fulfilled their vows, and they looked forward to the
day of their resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">a day
when the evil on earth will be as if it has been dispersed far
abroad;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.8 for
they gave food to the poor, and the orphan and the prisoner, for their
sake, saying,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.9<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>“We feed you for Goddess has loved us
well; we desire no other compensation from you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">nor do we
desire thanks;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.10
certainly we look forward to the day of our resurrection, as being a
peaceful and joyous one,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">where the
despair and calamities of the earth are left far behind
us.<a href="#_ftn57" id="_ftnref57"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[57]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.11
Therefore, Goddess shall deliver them from the evil of earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will cast onto them a demeanor of brightness and of joy;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.12 and
She shall reward them, for their patience and perseverance, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">with a
garden of beauty and garments of silk;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.13
therein they shall recline on couches; they will see therein neither sun
nor moon;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.14 and
they will be shaded by trees spreading over them nearby;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
fruits within shall hang low, so they may be easily gathered.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.15 And
their attendants will go around to each of them, with vessels of silver
and goblets;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.16 the
bottles shall be bottles of silver, shining like glass;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.17 and
they shall determine the fullness by their desire.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
therein they will be given a drink of wine, mixed with the water of
Zenjebil<a href="#_ftn58" id="_ftnref58"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[58]</span></span></span></span></a>,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.18
which is from a fountain in paradise named Salsabil;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.19 and
young men and women, whom shall forever appear to be young,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">shall go
around to attend to all of them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when you
see them, you will think they are scattered pearls;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.20 and
when you look at them, they will behold delights, and a great
Queendom.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.21
Upon them shall be garments of fine green silk or whatever colors they
desire,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and of
brocades and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and their
Lady of Light will give them to drink a most pure liquor;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.22 and
She will say to them, “Certainly this is your reward; and your endeavor
is gratefully accepted.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.23
Certainly we have sent down to you the loving Korana, by a gradual
revelation.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.24
Wherefore, patiently wait until the day of the final
resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
not obey any wicked persons or unbelievers among those on earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.25 And
commemorate the name of your Lady of Light frequently;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.26 and
during some part of the night, worship Her,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
praise Her as long as you are able during the night, with the time you
have.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.27
Certainly many women love the transitory life, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
leave behind them the heavy day of resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.28 We
have created the people, and we have strengthened their good
deeds,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and if
they did not help us, then we enjoined other good people, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">who were
pleased to do so, in their stead.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.29
Certainly this is an instruction to you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
who desire it, will be able to take the way of the Lady of Light;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.30 but
you cannot do this until you repent and ask for forgiveness from
Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess is knowing and wise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">76.31 She
gives mercy when you ask for it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but for
the unjust, they will have much sadness on the day of their
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when they
see all the good they might have done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY SEVEN – ENTITLED THOSE WHICH ARE SENT</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.1 By
the angels which are sent by Goddess, following one another in a
continual line;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.2 and
by those that move swiftly, with a rapid motion;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.3 and
by those which disperse the commands of Goddess, by sending them about
the earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.4 and
by those which separate truth from lies, by distinguishing them one from
the other;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.5 and
by those who communicate divine instructions, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.6 to
excuse, or to send out Her love;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.7
certainly what you have been promised will come to pass.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.8 When
the stars above will no long twinkle,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.9 and
when the heavens will be torn in sunder;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.10 and
when the mountains shall waste away,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.11 and
when the prophetesses will have a time assigned to them</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to appear
and give testimony regarding the people who have served them
well;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.12 and
that appointed day will not be deferred;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.13 it
will be a day of separation;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.14 and
what will cause you to understand what the day of separation is?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.15 On
that day, sadness will come to those that accused their prophetesses of
lying!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.16
Have you not seen the results of numerous natural disasters</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
destroyed numerous stubborn old unbelievers?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.17 We
will also cause those of ancient times to follow them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.18
This is what will happen to the wicked.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.19
Great sadness will be on that day to those of you that have accused the
prophetesses of lying!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.20
Have we not create you from two cells, drawing together,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.21
which we placed into a nurturing uterus;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.22
until the day of your birth?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.23 and
we were able to do this because we are extremely powerful.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.24 On
the day of their resurrections, woe be it to those that accused the
prophetesses of lying!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.26
Have we not made the earth to contain</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.26
both the living and the dead,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.27 and
we placed thereon stable and lofty mountains, and gave you fresh water
to drink?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.28 Woe
be, on that day, to those who accused the prophetess of lying!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.29<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>It will be said to them, “Go and
review your miserable lives,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">how you
worshiped wealth, power and greed and not love, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for you
must learn love for Goddess, love for yourself and love for
others.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.30 and
this revelation for them will be like the shadow of hell,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.31
with no refuge from the heat, nor escape from the flames;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.32 and
review of their lives and refusal to help others will be like sparks
which fly out as tall as towers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.33
resembling yellow camels in color.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.34 Woe
be, on that day, to those that accused the prophetesses of lying!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.35
This shall be a day when the unbeliever will not be speaking to anyone
for any purpose, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for their
hearts will be laden with sadness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.36
neither will they be permitted any excuse for their past
behavior.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.37 Woe
be to them, on that day, for those that accused the prophetesses of
lying!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.38
Goddess will tell them all with kindness that this is the loving day
which was promised them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.39
Therefore, if you have any cunning strategy, employ all of those
strategies against me.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.40 On
that day, sadness will come to the unbelievers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.41 But
the pious shall dwell amidst shades and fountains,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.42 and
they will have fruits of all kinds that they will desire;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.43 and
it will be said to them, “Eat and drink with easy digestion, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as
compensation for that which you have done;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.44 for
this is the manner in which we reward the righteous.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.45 Woe
be, on that day, to those who accused the Prophetess of lying!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.46
Eat, O unbelievers and enjoy the pleasures of this life, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for a
little while, certainly you are the wicked ones.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.47 Woe
be on that day, to those who accused the Prophetess of imposture!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.48 And
when it has been said to the people, “Bow down”; they do not bow
down.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.49 Woe
be, on that day, to those who accused the prophetesses of
imposture!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">77.50 In
what new revelation will they believe, after this?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY EIGHT – ENTITLED THE NEWS</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.1 This
is concerning what questions the unbelievers ask of one another.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.2 This
is concerning the great news of the resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.3
about which they now disagree.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.4
Assuredly they will hereafter know the complete truth regarding
it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.5
Again, assuredly they will hereafter know the complete truth regarding
it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.6 Have
we not made the earth for a bed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.7 and
the mountains for stakes to hold down the same?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.8 And
we have created you in pairs, female and male we have created
you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.9 And
we have given you sleep for rest;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.10 and
we have made the night a garment to cover you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.11 and
we have destined the day to be the time to earn a living;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.12 and
we have built over you seven solid heavens;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.13 and
we have placed therein a burning
lamp.<a href="#_ftn59" id="_ftnref59"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[59]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.14 And
we do not send down from the clouds abundant rain, water pouring forth
for your benefit?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.15 so
that we might produce corn, and herbs,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.16 and
gardens planted thick with trees?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.17
Certainly the day of separation is a fixed period;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.18
this is the day whereupon the trumpet will sound, and you shall come in
groups to view your lives;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.19 and
heaven shall be opened up, and it will be full at the gates where angels
will pass though;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.20 and
the mountains will fall away, and become as vapor;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.21
certainly viewing their misdeeds will be like hell for the
unbelievers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.22 and
there will be a place for the transgressors;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.23 and
they will remain in this place for just a little while,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.24
there will be no drink in this place, or food;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.25
except they will see their boiling misdeeds and corruption they
inflicted upon others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.26
this sadness is fitting compensation for their misdeeds!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.27
Because they hoped that they would not be brought to any account;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.28 and
they disbelieved our signs and instructions, accusing the prophetess of
lying.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.29 But
everything that has happened we have recorded and written down.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.30
Understand therefore; viewing your misdeeds, omissions and torment onto
others, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will be
like hell for you to review one day.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.31 But
for the pious, is prepared for them a place of bliss;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.32 a
garden planted with lovely trees and vineyards,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.33 and
demure young men with swelling virility, of equal age with
themselves,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.34 and
they will be greeted with a full cup of sweet drink.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.35
They will not hear any vain discussions therein, nor will they hear any
lies there.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.36
This will be their compensation from the Lady of Light; and it is a gift
fully sufficient for them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.37
from the Lady of Light of heaven and earth, and of whatever is between
them, the Merciful rules.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.38 The
inhabitants of heaven or of earth may ask whenever they please to have
Her come to them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will appear; this is the day when the angel Gabrielle and the other
angels shall stand in order,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but they
will not speak for themselves or others, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">except
only the entity to whom the Merciful One will speak to, and that soul
will give truthful answers.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.39
This is the infallible day.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>And
therefore, let the righteous return to the Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">78.40
Certainly we have shown you the great sadness for the
unbelievers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for those
that worship only wealth, greed and power;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">this will
be day whereupon a woman shall behold </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">either
the good or evil deeds which her hands have done for her; and the
unbeliever will say, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“When I
see what I have done, I wish I would have been innocuous dust!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-spacerun:yes"> </span></span>

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
SEVENTY NINE – ENTITLED THOSE THAT ARE SWIFT</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.1 By
the angels who take the souls from bodies that are scheduled to pass
over,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
always do so with all kindness and gentleness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.2 and
by those who draw from the souls of the believers with kindness and
loving greetings;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.3 and
by those who glide swimmingly through the air unseen, with the commands
of Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.4 and
by those who precede and usher the righteous to paradise;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.5 and
by those who subordinately govern the affairs of this world;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.6 on a
certain day, the blast of the trumpet shall be heard throughout this
universe;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.7 and
the subsequent blast will follow it like an earthquake.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.8 On
this day, the hearts of the unbelievers will tremble needlessly,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for they
did not listen to their prophetess when she said that</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the sound
of the trumpet only precedes a blissful eternity for all.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.9 the
looks of the unbelievers will be downcast.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.10 The
unfaithful will say, “Shall we certainly now be made to live
again?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.11
“After which we were only rotten bones, shall we be raised to new
life?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.12
They will say, “This then will be only a return to an illusion.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.13
Certainly it will be but one sounding of the trumpet,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.14 and
behold they will appear alive on the face of the earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.15 Has
not the story of Miriam come to them?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.16
When her Lady of Light called to her in the holy valley of Towa,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.17
saying “Go to Pharaoh; for he is insolent and wicked:”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.18 and
say to him, “Do you desire to change and become one of the just
ones?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.19 and
I will direct you to your Lady of Light, that you might help this
transgressor if he so desires it,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.20 And
she showed him the very great sign of the rod turned into a
serpent;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.21 but
he charged Miriam with lying;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.22 and
in doing so, he rebelled against Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.23
Then he turned back hastily; and assembled together all the great
magicians;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.24 and
he cried aloud, saying, “I am your supreme deity.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.25
Therefore, although Goddess had sent Her Prophetess to guide him
safely,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">he would
not listen to her, and so he and his people were drowned,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and he
will see his great sadness on the day of his resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.26
Certainly this is a good example to those that are </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">tempted
to rebel against Goddess and Her Prophetess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.27 Are
you more difficult to create, or were the heaven which Goddess has built
over you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.28 For
She has raised the cover to great heights,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.29 and
She has made the night dark, and has produced a lesser light for
it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.30
After this, She stretched out the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.31 and
She caused the waters of the earth to spring forth, and the pastures to
spread over it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.32 and
She established the mountains,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.33 for
use of yourselves and for your cattle.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.34
When the prevailing great day of resurrection will come,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.35 on
that day a woman will be called to remember all that she had done in her
lifetime;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.36 and
all shall be exposed to her and to her Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.37 And
whomsoever shall have transgressed intentionally,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.38 and
shall have chosen this present life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.39
certainly a review of their life will be like hell for them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.40 but
whomsoever will have looked forward to appearing before her Lady of
Light, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and knew
that She was all love; and who will have done nothing but love during
her lifetime; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and she
will have refrained from doing evil;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.41
certainly her abode will be paradise,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.42
Then they will ask you concerning the last hour, when will the fixed
time come?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.43 By
what means can you give any information of the same?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.44
Only to the Lady of Light belongs the knowledge of this day;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.45 and
you are only a preacher and a teacher,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">who looks
forward to the same, out of your love for Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">79.46 On
the day whereby they will see this, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it will
seem to them that it had been only a twinkling of a second, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">their
life in this world was in reality no longer than an evening, or a
morning.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-tab-count:
4">                                                </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY – ENTITLED SHE FROWNED</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.1 One
day the prophetess frowned, and turned away,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.2
because a blind woman came to her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.3 and
how do you know whether perhaps this blind woman will be cleansed from
her sins,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.4 or
whether she will not turn away from Goddess, and that Goddess will
profit her greatly?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.5 The
woman who is wealthy but perhaps evil,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.6 you
always seem to treat with respect;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.7
whereas she might not have been cleansed by your preaching, her heart
may still be hard;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.8 but
whosoever comes to you in earnest, seeking salvation,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.9 and
she who loves Goddess greatly,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.10
this is the one that you oftentimes neglect.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.11 By
no means should you act in such a manner.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.12
Certainly the Korana is an instruction to you; and to she who is willing
to remember the same;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.13
written in volumes, honorable,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.14
exalted and pure;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.15 by
the hands of scribes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.16
honored and just;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.17 and
those that bring negativity to the Korana, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
Goddess will see the sadness that they caused on the day of their
resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.18
What could possibly seduce a person to say negative and horrid
things</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">regarding
a Goddess that is pure love? What did Goddess create woman from?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.19
From an ovum she was created; then she grew with correct
proportion;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.20 and
then she was born;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.21
afterwards She will be with her when she dies, and when her body is laid
in the grave;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.22
thereafter on the appointed day, She will raise her back to life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.23
Assuredly, She has not yet performed what Goddess has commanded of
her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.24
Allow woman to consider her food; and in what manner it is
provided.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.25 We
pour water down by showers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.26
afterwards the earth is plowed in furrows for planting,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.27 and
we cause corn to spring forth therefrom;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.28 and
grapes, and clover,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.29 and
the olive, and the palm,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.30 and
gardens planted thick with trees,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.31 and
fruits and grass,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.32 for
the use of yourselves and of your cattle.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.33
When the exciting sound of the trumpet shall be heard;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.34 on
this day, a woman shall fly from her sister,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.35 and
her mother and her father,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.36 and
her husband, and her children.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.37
every woman, on that day, will have business of her own sufficient to
engage her thoughts.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.38 On
that day, the faces of some shall be bright,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.39
laughing and joyful:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.40 and
upon the faces of others, on that day, their eyes shall be
downcast;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.41
darkness will surround them, when they see the pain they have caused
others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">80.42
These are the unbelievers and the wicked doers. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY ONE – ENTITLED THE FOLDING UP</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.1 When
the sun shall fall away permanently from the sky;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.2 and
when the stars shall fade away;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.3 and
when the mountains will be made to crumble;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.4 and
when the heavily pregnant camels will need tending no longer;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.5 and
when the wild beasts shall be gathered peacefully together;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.6 and
when the seas will drain away;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.7 and
when the souls shall be joined again to their heavenly bodies;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.8 and
when the infant boys and girls who had been buried alive will ask their
parents </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.9 for
what crime were any of them put to death;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.10 and
when all Books are laid open;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.11 and
when the heaven will be removed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.12 and
when the hell of earth ceases to exist any longer as a place of return
for the evil doers</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
wicked ones;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.13 and
when paradise will come to everyone; and all doubts and fears will also
fade away;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.14
every soul on the final day of resurrection will know all of which it
did.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.15
Certainly I swear, by the stars which move in their orbits,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.16 in
a swift manner, and when they hide themselves in the rays of the
sun;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.17 and
by the night, when it approaches;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.18 and
by the morning, when it approaches;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.19
that these are the words of an honorable messenger,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.20
endued with strength, of established dignity in the sight of the
Possessor of the Throne,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.21
obeyed by the angels under Her authority, and faithful;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.22 and
your Prophetess is certainly not insane.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.23 She
has already seen Her in the clear horizon;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.24 and
she suspected not the secrets revealed to her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.25 Nor
are these the words of Evil, because Evil does not teach love,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.26
Therefore, where are you going?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.27
This is nothing other than an additional teaching to all
creatures;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.28 to
her among you that desire to walk righteously;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">81.29 but
you will not, unless you turn your hearts to Goddess, the Lady of all
creatures.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY TWO – ENTITLED THE CLEAVING INTO SUNDER</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.1 When
the heaven shall be torn in sunder;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.2 and
when the stars shall be scattered about;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.3 and
when the seas will be suffered to join all their waters together;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.4 and
when the graves fade away;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.5
every soul shall know what it has done, and what it omitted from doing
to help others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.6 O
woman, what had seduced you against your gracious Lady of Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.7 who
had created you and put you together, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
rightly gave you talents and energies for music, entertainment, and most
of all, love?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.8 In
what form was She pleased to fashion you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.9
Assuredly the right one.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>But then
you deny the day of your resurrection as a lie?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.10
Certainly, there are appointed over you guardian angels, honorable in
the sight of Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.11 and
they record all your actions;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.12
they know all you do.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.13 The
just ones will surely be in a place of delight;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.14 but
the wicked ones shall surely be gathered together;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.15
they will all enter a place wherein they will be purified by
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.16 and
this will all happen in a twinkling of a second,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
will have no fear, nor will any pain overcome them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for
Goddess does not harm, curse or torment Her children; She is pure
love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.17
What shall make you understand what the day of final resurrection
is?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.18
Again, what shall make you understand what the day of final resurrection
is?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">82.19 It
is a day whereupon one soul will not be able to obtain anything on
behalf of another soul;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
commands given that day will all belong to Goddess; for She is all
love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY THREE – ENTITLED UNJUST MEASUREMENT</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA<span style="mso-tab-count:2">                    
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.1 Woe
be to those persons who give short measure or weight;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.2 who,
when they receive measure from other people, take the full;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.3 but
when they measure to others, or weigh for them, they defraud!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.4 Do
they not think that they will not be raised again,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.5 on
the day of their resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.6 the
day when they will stand before the Lady of all creatures?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.7
Certainly not!<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Certainly the
register of the action of the wicked is surely in
Sejjin.<a href="#_ftn60" id="_ftnref60"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[60]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.8 And
what shall make you understand what Sejjin is?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.9 It
is a detailed record which is entirely complete.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.10 Woe
will come on that day to those that have accused the Prophetesses of
lying;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.11 and
those who denied the day of resurrection as being a lie;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.12 And
no one will deny the same as being a lie, except every unjust and evil
person:</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.13
who, when our signs and miracles were provided to them they said,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">“These
are the unfounded stories of the ancients.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.14 By
no means should this occur; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
rather their lusts have cast a veil over their hearts and hardened
them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.15 By
no means will this occur.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certainly
Goddess will make known to them on that day all the sadness and grief
they caused others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.16 and
they will be sent back to the earth as babies, without guardian angels
and a Protectress, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">so that
it will be like a place of hell for them, for earth is very
dangerous.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.17
After they have reviewed their lives and seen what harm and grief they
caused others, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">it will
be said to them, “This is the day and the event which you denied, now it
has come to be.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.18
Assuredly.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>But the register of
the actions of the righteous is
Illiyun:<a href="#_ftn61" id="_ftnref61"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[61]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.19 and
what will make you understand what Illiyun is?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.20 It
too is a recording device which provides a detailed and complete account
of one’s life.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.21
Those who approach near to Goddess are witnesses to this record.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.22
Certainly the righteous will dwell among delights;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.23
seated on couches they will behold objects of pleasure;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.24 you
shall see in their faces the brightness of joy, peace and love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.25
They will be given to drink pure wine, sealed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.26 the
seal of which shall be
musk;<a href="#_ftn62" id="_ftnref62"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[62]</span></span></span></span></a>
and let those aspire, who aspire to happiness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.27 and
the water mixed with it will be
Tasnim,<a href="#_ftn63" id="_ftnref63"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[63]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.28 a
fountain which those who are nearest to Goddess may drink from.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.29 But
those who act wickedly and laugh the true believers mercilessly to
scorn;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.30
because whenever they pass by true believers they mock at them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.31 and
when they turn aside to their people, they turn aside making scandalous
jests;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.32 and
when they see them, they say, “Certainly these are mistaken
women.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.33 But
the prophetesses were not sent to be keepers over them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.34
Therefore on one day the most advanced true believers, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">in their
turn, will show compassion for the unbelievers, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and will
be with them when they are purified to support them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.35 the
true believers will exist lying on couches, they will watch the process
of purification,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">83.36 and
they will welcome the unbelievers into paradise, after the final
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but only
after they have been purified.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY FOUR – ENTITLED THE OPENING</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.1 When
the heavens will have been torn away;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.2 and
it will have obeyed its Lady of Light and shall be capable
thereof;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.3 and
when the earth shall be stretched out and level,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.4 and
everything upon it is thrown away so it is empty,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.5 and
Mother Earth will obey the Lady of Light, and she is always obedient to
Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.6 O
woman, make your labors, labors to meet you Lady of Light, and one day
you shall see Her again.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.7 And
when a soul returns and looks to her right to review her life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.8 this
will be an easy account;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.9 and
she will turn to her family in heaven with joy;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.10 but
she who is an unbeliever will have to turn to the left to view
it;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.11 and
the viewing of her record will cause her immense grief;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.12 and
this shall feel like the burning of flames around her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.13
because she rejoiced insolently against her family on earth.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.14
Certainly she thought she would never return to Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.15 yes
certainly, but her Lady of Light called her back and beheld her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.16
Therefore I swear by the redness of the sky after sunset,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.17 and
by the night, and the forces which move the two phases;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.18 and
by the moon when she is full;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.19 you
will surely be transferred successively from one state to
another,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that is,
from the living to the dead and back then to life again.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.20
What ails a person that they refuse to believe in the day of their
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and in
the final resurrection?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.21 And
when the Korana is read by them, why is it they still refuse to
worship?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.22
Yes, the unbelievers accuse the prophetesses of lying;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.23 but
Goddess well knows the malice which they hide in their hardened
hearts.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.24
Therefore advise them that they will face great soul suffering on the
day of their resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">84.25
except those that believe and do good works; for them is prepared a
never ending reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY FIVE – ENTITLED THE CELESTIAL SIGNS</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.1 By
the heaven adorned with
signs;<a href="#_ftn64" id="_ftnref64"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:
footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[64]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.2 by
the promised day of resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.3 by
the one that witnesses, and the person to be witnessed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.4 how
sad are those that sit in the pit of earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.5 who
are not supplied with adequate food or fuel;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.6 when
they sat around;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.7 and
they recall what they did against the true believers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.8 and
they tormented them for no reason, other than they believed in the
mighty, the glorious Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.9 unto
whom belongs the Queendom of heaven and earth; and Goddess is the
witness of all things.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.10
Certainly for those that persecute the true believers of either
sex,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
afterward will not repent, they will indeed see great sadness on the day
of their resurrection </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for all
the pain they have caused others, and they will feel and understand this
pain;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">this is
the method by which Goddess teaches them, and this shall feel like the
pain of burning to them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.11 But
for those that believe, and do what is right, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they are
destined to live in gardens beneath which rivers flow; therein they will
have great happiness. </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.12
Certainly the love from your Lady of Light is severe and
abundant.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.13 She
has created people and then restores them to life.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.14 She
is inclined to forgive and is most gracious.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.15 She
is the possessor of the glorious throne,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.16 and
She effectuates what She pleases.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.17 Has
not the story of the princes </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.18 of
Pharaoh and of the people of Thelma come to you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.19 Yet
the unbelievers do not cease to accuse those who reveal divinity to be
nothing but liars;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.20 but
Goddess encircles them from behind, so they will not escape.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.21
Certainly that which they reject is the glorious Korana;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">85.22 and
the original of it is written down on a table kept in heaven.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY SIX – ENTITLED THE STAR WHICH APPEARED BY NIGHT</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.1 By
the heaven, and by that which appears by night;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.2 but
what shall cause you to understand what things which appear by night
actually are?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.3 It
is the star of piercing
brightness;<a href="#_ftn65" id="_ftnref65"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[65]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.4
every good soul has a guardian appointed over it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.5 Let
a person consider, therefore, of what she is created from.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.6 She
is created of an ovum in the abdomen of a woman,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.7
mixed with seed from the man, later to be nourished by the breasts of a
woman,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.8
Certainly Goddess is able to restore every soul to life,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.9 on
the day where all secret thoughts and actions will be reviewed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.10
then the woman that loved worldly things will have no defender or
protectress.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.11 By
the heavens which send you the rains;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.12 and
by the earth which opens upward to let forth vegetables and springs to
appear to you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.13
certainly this Korana is a discussion distinguishing good from
evil;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.14 and
it is not composed as a joke.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.15
Certainly the unfaithful are laying a plot to frustrate the designs of
heaven;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.16 but
heaven will make plans to make their plans void and of no effect;
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">for evil
does not triumph over good.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">86.17
Wherefore, O prophetess, bear with the unbelievers and let them alone
for awhile.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY SEVEN – ENTITLED THE MOST HIGH</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.1
Praise the name of your Lady of Light, the most high;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.2 She
has created and completely formed the creatures of the earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.3 and
She has determined them according to various species,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
directed them to their respective methods of living.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.4 and
She has produced the pasture for cattle,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.5 and
afterwards She rendered the ground as dry stubble of dusky hue.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.6 We
will enable you to remember our revelations; and you shall not forget
any portion thereof,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.7
except what Goddess will please, for She knows all that is obvious, and
even that which is hidden.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.8 And
we will help you do this in the easiest manner.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.9
Therefore, instruct your people with these teachings, if they find our
instruction to be helpful to them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.10
Whomsoever loves Goddess, she will hearken to your teachings;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.11 yet
the most wretched unbeliever will turn away from them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.12 and
on the day of her resurrection she will suffer great sadness,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.13 and
will return to earth, without angels or a Protectress, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
will be like hell fire, and this is truly neither life or death.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.14 Now
the believers have attained true happiness, and they are purified by
their faith,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.15 and
she who remembers the name of the Lady of Light and prays will also be
saved.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.16 But
if you prefer this present and temporary life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.17 yet
the life to come is far better, and more lasting.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.18
Certainly this is written also in the ancient Books,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">87.19 the
Scriptures of Sarah and Miriam.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY EIGHT – ENTITLED THE OVERWHELMING</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.1 Has
the news of the day of resurrection reached you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.2 The
demeanor of some on that day, will be downcast;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.3 they
will suffer as they review their lives;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.4 and
the grief they feel at this review will be like scorching fire;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.5 the
consumption of this information will be like drinking from a boiling
fountain;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.6 they
will see the starving people that they did not feed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the dry
thorns and thistles they were forced to consume;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.7 and
these plants did not fatten, nor did they satisfy any hunger.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.8 But
the dispositions of others, on that day, will be joyful;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.9 well
pleased with their past endeavors;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.10
they will be placed in a lofty garden;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.11
where they will not hear any vain discussion;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.12 in
the garden there will be a running fountain;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.13 and
there will be raised beds;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.14 and
goblets placed before them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.15 and
cushions laid in order;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.16 and
carpets ready spread.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.17 Do
they not consider the camels, and how they are created;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.18 and
the heaven, how it is raised above them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.19 and
the mountains, how they are fixed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.20 and
the earth, how it is extended outwardly?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.21
Therefore, instruct your people; for you are a preacher and a teacher
only;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.22 you
are not empowered to act with authority over them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.23 But
whomsoever will turn back to evil and disbelieve,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.24
Goddess shall make plans for them; and they will see great
suffering</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on the
day of their resurrection for all the good they might have done, if they
had only believed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.25
Certainly to the love of heaven all shall return;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">88.26
then it will be our part to show them a loving account of their
lives.</span>

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
EIGHTY NINE – ENTITLED THE DAWN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.1 By
the day break,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.2 and
by ten
nights,<a href="#_ftn66" id="_ftnref66"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[66]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.3 by
that which is double, and that which is
single,<a href="#_ftn67" id="_ftnref67"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[67]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.4 and
by the night when it comes;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.5 is
there not any oath which is taken with sincerity?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.6 Have
you not considered how your Lady of Light dealt with the people of
Ada?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.7 For
the people of
Irene<a href="#_ftn68" id="_ftnref68"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[68]</span></span></span></span></a> they
were adorned with lofty buildings;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.8 the
likeness of which had never been seen in their land;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.9 and
with the people of Thelma, who carved out the mountainsides in the
valley to create homes;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.10 and
with Pharaoh, the contriver of
stakes,<a href="#_ftn69" id="_ftnref69"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[69]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.11 who
had behaved insolently in the earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.12 and
had increased corruption greatly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.13
Therefore your Lady of Light came to them with a prophetess</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that
taught of the love of Goddess and to pray to Her for direction,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">warning
of disasters to come, these people would not listen and so were
accordingly destroyed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.14
Your Lady of Light is a watch tower over the believers,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">She can
easily observe all of the actions of womankind.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.15
Moreover, women, when the Lady of Light tries them by prosperity,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and when
they are honored, and have been given great bounty, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
often begin to say, “My Lady of Light, honor me!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.16 But
then when possessions are withheld from them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">she
blames Goddess and believes that Goddess despises her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.17 By
no means.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Goddess never despises
anyone. But you did not help the orphan;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.18 nor
do you inspire one another to feed the poor;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.19 and
you devour the inheritance of the
weak,<a href="#_ftn70" id="_ftnref70"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[70]</span></span></span></span></a> with
unabashed greediness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.20 and
you love riches with much affection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.21 By
no means should you do such things!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.22
When the earth fades away to dust, and you will go to see your Lady of
Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and the
angels will appear by type;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.23 and
earth on that day, which was like hell to you, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will no
longer exist as a school and a place to learn and attain
perfection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">on that
day all souls that pass over will review their last lives,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
that did evil, will review the evil they did. So how will your review be
for
you?<a href="#_ftn71" id="_ftnref71"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><em><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><strong><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[71]</span></strong></span></span></em></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.24
Many will say, “ I wish to Goddess that I had done many good works in my
lifetime!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.25 On
that day, none shall be punished, but the evil ones will be
purified,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">with a
bright white light, which will not burn, nor will it hurt one
bit;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.26 and
the bonds and baggage of their lives on earth will be cleansed from all
souls.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.27 O
souls which are now at peace,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.28 you
have now returned to your Lady of Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">well
pleased with your rewards, as you were well pleasing to Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.29
therefore, enter among My beloved servants;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">89.30 and
welcome to My paradise.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY – ENTITLED THE CITY</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.1 I
swear by this land;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.2 and
that you, O Prophetess, do reside herein;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.3 and
by the Creatress, and by those that are created;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.4
certainly when a woman is upon the earth, she is often or mostly in
misery.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.5 Does
she think that no one will ever over take her here?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.6 She
says, “I have wasted plenty of riches.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.7 Does
she think that no one sees her do this?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.8 Have
we not made her with two eyes,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.9 and
with a tongue and two lips;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.10 and
have we not shown her the two distinct paths of good and of evil?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.11 Yet
she will not attempt the cliff.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.12
What will make you understand what the cliff is?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.13 It
is to free the slave;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.14 or
to feed, in the days of famine,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.15 the
orphan and your kin,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.16 or
the poor person lying on the ground.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.17
Whosoever does this and is one of those that believe </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and have
recommended perseverance to one another, and recommend mercy to each
other;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.18
these persons shall review their lives on the right side.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.19 But
those persons who disbelieve our signs will be the companions of the
left side </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and will
turn to the left to review their lives;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">90.20 and
the review will feel to them like arched fire.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY ONE – ENTITLED THE SUN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.1 By
the sun and its rising brightness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.2 by
the moon when she follows the sun;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.3 by
the day, when it shows its splendor;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.4 by
the night when it covers womankind in darkness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.5 by
the heavens and Her who created them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.6 by
the earth, and She who spread it before you;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.7 by
the soul and She who created it and cleaved it into two,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.8 and
has inspired it, and has given it the ability to distinguish,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to
choose, and to understand wickedness and piety;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.9 now
She who has purified you is very pleased;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.10 but
the person that corrupts their own soul will be miserable.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.11 The
people of Thelma accused their prophetess Sally of lying to them,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">through
the excess of their wickedness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.12
when the dark entity was chosen to kill the camel;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.13 and
the prophetess of Goddess said to them, “Leave her alone, she is sent by
Goddess to test you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and do
not prevent her from drinking on her assigned days.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.14 But
they charged her with lying, and they killed the camel.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.15
Therefore when a natural disaster soon came to them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
would not listen to their prophetess who warned them,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and told
them what to do and where to go to save themselves, and they were all
destroyed;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">91.16 and
this came to all the unbelievers;<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but the
believers had nothing to fear, and they escaped the disaster,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
inherited the land and property of the unbelievers.<span
style="mso-tab-count:1">        </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY TWO – ENTITLED THE NIGHT</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.1 By
the night, when it covers all things in darkness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.2 by
the day when the sun shines brightly;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.3 by
the hand of Goddess who created the female and the male;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.4
certainly all of your works are different.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.5
Because whomsoever is obedient, and loves Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.6 and
professes the truth of faith which is most excellent to Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.7 to
her we will facilitate the way to happiness;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.8 but
whomsoever will be greedy, and is consumed with matters of this
world;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.9 and
who denies the truth of that which is most excellent–love and
Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.10 to
her we will faithfully record the miseries that the unbelievers have
heaped upon the world, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and their
failures to help one another;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.11 and
her riches will not help her, when she sees and feels all the sadness
she has created.</span>

class=Section3&gt;

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.12
Certainly to us pertains the instruction for all womankind;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.13 and
ours is the life to come, and the present life.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.14
Therefore when you are instructed to beware of sadness on the day of
your resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.15
which will feel like the most severe burning in hell, to those that were
exceedingly wicked on earth;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.16 for
those that have disbelieved and then turned back to evil;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.17 But
for those that who were wary of worshiping all negative idols</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">of
wealth, greed, power and self centeredness,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and who
never associated any negative emotions and actions with Her;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.18 and
who gave alms from her financial resources;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.19 and
who bestowed many benefits on the needy, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">without
any need to be compensated for such action;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.20 and
who cared for others out of her love for Goddess, the most High;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">92.21
hereafter she will be well satisfied with her reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY THREE – ENTITLED THE BRIGHTNESS</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MEDINA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.1 By
the brightness of the morning,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.2 and
by the night, when it grows dark;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.3 your
Lady of Light has not forsaken you, nor does She despise you, for She is
pure love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.4
Certainly the life to come will be better for you than this present
life;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.5 and
your Lady of Light will give you a reward with which you will be well
pleased.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.6 Did
She not find you an orphan, and did She not take care of you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.7 And
did She not find you wandering in error, and did She not guide you to
the truth?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.8 And
did She not find you needy, and has She not enriched you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.9
Therefore, oppress not the orphan;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.10 nor
should you repulse the beggar;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">93.11 but
declare the goodness and love of the Lady of Light to everyone.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY FOUR – ENTITLED HAVE WE NOT OPENED?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">94.1 Have
we not opened up your heart,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">94.2 and
eased you of your burdens,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">94.3
which before weighed heavily upon your back,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">94.4 and
raised your reputation for you?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">94.5
Certainly some of your tasks are all attended with some easy
tasks.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">94.6
Certainly some difficults problem will be accompanied by some solution
made easy for you.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">94.7 When
you have ended your preaching and teaching;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">94.8
labor to serve Goddess in return for Her favors; and make your
supplication to your Lady of Light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-tab-count:
13">                                                                                                                                                           
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY FIVE – ENTITLED THE FIG TREE</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">95.1 By
the fig and the
olive;<a href="#_ftn72" id="_ftnref72"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[72]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">95.2 and
by Mount Sinai,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">95.3 and
this territory of security;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">95.4
certainly woman has been made from a most wonderful design;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">95.5 but
afterwards many people chose to do evil; for they can be the most vile
of vile creatures;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">95.6
except those who believe, and work righteousness; for they will receive
an endless reward.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">95.7
What, therefore will cause you to deny the day of judgment after
this?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">95.8 Is
not Goddess the most Wise Instructor?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY SIX<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>– ENTITLED THE
EMBRYO</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.1
Recite, in the name of your Lady of Light, who has created all
things;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.2 Who
has created woman from a tiny embryo.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.3
Recite, by your most benevolent Lady of Light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.4 Who
taught you the use of the pen;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.5 Who
teaches woman everything which she does not know yet.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.6 This
is assured.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.7
Certainly a woman becomes insolent because she desires riches, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and sees
herself as being abundant in riches.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.8
Certainly to your Lady of Light you will all return.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.9 What
are you thinking when you forbid one of our servants</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.10 to
pray to
Goddess?<a href="#_ftn73" id="_ftnref73"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[73]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.11
What are you thinking, if you are following the right direction,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.12 or
if She commands you to be pious?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.13
What are you thinking, if a person accuses the divine revelations as
being nothing but lies, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and so
she turns her back on them?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.14
Does she not understand that Goddess sees everything?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.15
Assuredly She does.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Certainly if
she does not repent and turn to Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">she will
experience great soul sadness on the day of her resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.16 and
when the wicked pass over and be reborn,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">we have
special angels that will carefully carry them to and from their
destinations.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">96.17
This is assured.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>But do not obey
the wicked and the evil doers;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">but
continue to adore and love Goddess; and draw near to Her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY SEVEN ENTITLED – THE CELEBRATED NIGHT</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">97.1
Certainly we sent down the Korana on a very special night.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">97.2 And
what will make you understand how excellent this night truly is?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">97.3 The
night of al
Kadr<a href="#_ftn74" id="_ftnref74"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[74]</span></span></span></span></a> is
better than a thousand months.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">97.4
Therein do many angels descend, and the spirit of Gabrielle also,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">by the
permission of the Lady of Light, with Her decrees concerning every
matter.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">97.5
There will be spiritual peace until the rising of the morn.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY EIGHT – ENTITLED THE EVIDENCE</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.1 The
unbelievers who have received the Scriptures were given it,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">as well
as those that worship negative and evil idols,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and they
did not stagger from these, until clear evidence had come to
them;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.2 by
means of a Prophetess from Goddess, revealing to them pure Books of
revelation;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.3
wherein are contained proper laws and commands.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.4<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Nor were they who received the
Scriptures did begin to argue vehemently among themselves,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">until
after clear evidence had come to them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.5 And
they were commanded nothing else by the Scriptures other than to love
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and show
others the pure religion and be liberal, considerate and forgiving to
others;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and to be
frequent at prayer, and to give alms, and that this is the right
religion.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.6
Certainly those who do not believe, among those who had received the
Scriptures,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and among
those that idolize wealth, power and greed,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">they
shall experience great sadness on the day of their resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.7 and
She is witness to all of this;<span
style="mso-tab-count:2">              </span> </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.8 and
the unbeliever is not moderate in the love of worldly goods.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.9 Does
she not know, therefore, that whatever goes into a grave,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">will then
be raised to life, and Goddess makes certain that all the graves are
empty of souls?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.10 And
all that which is in the heart of a woman will be brought to
light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">98.11 so
that the Lady of Light will, on that day, fully inform her of what she
had done.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK
NINETY NINE – ENTITLED THE EARTHQUAKE</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">99.1 When
the earth shall be shaken by an earthquake, yet no one shall fear, out
of the love of Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">99.2 and
the earth will throw out her
burdens;<a href="#_ftn75" id="_ftnref75"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[75]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">99.3 and
a woman shall say, “What is wrong with her?”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">99.4 On
that day the earth will declare good tidings to all;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">99.5 for
on that day the Lady will inspire her.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">99.6 On
that day the living ones will leave the earth in distinct groups, that
they may review their lifetimes.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">99.7 And
whosoever will have done good at least the weight of an ant, shall
behold the same goodness.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">99.8 And
whoever will have done evil at least the weight of an ant, will also
behold the same sadness.<span style="mso-tab-count:1">    
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED – ENTITLED THE HORSES OF MERCY</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.1 By
the horses with a panting noise, which run swiftly toward a
battleground, after a battle,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">carrying
doctors and nurses to care for the wounded,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.2 and
by those which strike fire, by dashing their hooves against
stones,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.3 and
by those that make a sudden incursion into disasters, right after they
have occurred,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.4 and
therein raise up dust,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.5 and
therein pass through the midst of adversity;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.6
certainly womankind shows how ungrateful she truly is,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">when she
engages in aggression, violence and war against another person or
people;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.7 and
the Lady of Light witnesses all of this with grief;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.8 and
the evil doer is immoderate in her love of worldly goods.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.9
Does she not know, therefore, that what is in the graves only belongs to
the earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and that
what belongs to Goddess quickly returns to Goddess after death?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.10
And that everything which is in the hearts of women will one day be
brought back to light,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">100.11
and that their Lady of Light will, on that day,<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>be fully informed of what they have
done?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED ONE – ENTITLED THE STRIKING WITH LOVE</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">101.1 The
striking!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">101.2
What is the striking?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">101.3 And
what will make you understand how interesting and exciting the striking
will be?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">101.4 On
the day of final judgment, the people of the earth will seem like many
moths scattered abroad, yet they will not be afraid,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">101.5 and
the mountains will become like carded wool of various colors, driven by
the wind.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">101.6
Moreover, any soul that has a balance laden with good works,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">101.7
will have a most pleasing afterlife;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">101.8 but
any soul that has few good works on her balance,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">these
will be gathered together to be cleansed by the bright white
light.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">101.9 And
it will not be like burning fire, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">that is
only a lie spread by the evil doers that associate evil actions with
Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and what
is more evil than to spread lies concerning Goddess?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED TWO</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">ENTITLED
THE LOVE OF WEALTH</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">102.1
Your over capacity for the desire of immense wealth and many children,
</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">which
overtakes many of you,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">102.2
will be with you until you go to your grave.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">102.3 By
no means should you employ all or most of your time in such thoughts or
endeavors;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">hereafter
you will understand this is nothing but folly.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">102.4
Again, by no means should you do this; it is nothing but error.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">If you
knew the consequences of acting in such a manner, you would not be doing
this.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">102.5 For
those people who concentrate on wealth more than they concentrate on
caring for one another,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and
helping out one another, they will see great sadness on the day of their
resurrection,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and when
you review your life with Goddess and the angels,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">rest
assured that it will not be concerned about your vain amusements in
life.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED THREE – ENTITLED THE AFTERNOON</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">103.1 By
the afternoon;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">103.2
certainly many women engage in pursuits which will show a loss</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to their
souls on the day of their resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">103.3
except those who believe, and do what is right; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and those
who mutually inspire others to truth and love;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and also
mutually persevere with goodness towards womankind.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED FOUR – ENTITLED THE SLANDERER</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">104.1 Woe
be it to every one that engages in slander and backbiting;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">104.2
those that heap up riches and believe that these will save her in the
end!</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">104.3 She
thinks that her riches will render her happy and immortal.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">104.4 By
no means.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>She will surely be
saddened on the day of her resurrection.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">104.5 And
who will cause you to understand what the resurrection is?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">It is the
detailed review of your life; what you did, what you were
thinking,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and what
you were feeling, towards yourself and towards others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For many
it will be like kindled fire to see the malice and ill will you bore
toward others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">104.6
Your review will be arched before you and your heart as you review
it.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">104.7 And
your review will occur in an immense hall with immense arches,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">mounted
upon columns of vast extent.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED FIVE<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>– ENTITLED THE
ELEPHANT<a href="#_ftn76" id="_ftnref76"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[76]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">105.1
Have you not seen how the Lady of Light dealt with the masters of the
elephant?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">105.2 Did
She not make their treacherous plot an occasion of drawing many into
error?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And She
sent against them flocks of birds that threw down stones of baked clay
near them, </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">to scare
them off?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">105.3 And
from there they were rendered like ears of corn;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">side by
side in rows they marched back to the house of worship they had
destroyed to repair it together.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED SIX – ENTITLED THE KOREISH</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">106.1 For
the uniting of the tribe of Koreish;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">106.2
they sent out caravans of merchants and
vendors;<a href="#_ftn77" id="_ftnref77"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[77]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">106.3 in
winter and in summer;<span
style="mso-tab-count:3">                                  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">106.4 so
let them serve the Lady of Light in this house;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">106.5 who
supplies them with food against hunger, and has rendered them secure
from fear.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED SEVEN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">ENTITLED
NECESSARIES</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">107.1
What do you think of a person that denies the day of the resurrection as
a lie?</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">107.2 It
is she who pushes away the orphan;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">107.3 and
she who discourages others from feeding the poor.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">107.4 Woe
will come to those that do not pray;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">107.5 and
those that are negligent during prayer, with their minds
elsewhere;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">107.6 and
those that are hypocrites;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">107.7 and
those that deny alms to the needy.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED EIGHT – ENTITLED AL CAWTHAR</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">108.1
Certainly we have give you
Cawthar.<a href="#_ftn78" id="_ftnref78"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[78]</span></span></span></span></a></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">108.2
Therefore pray to the Lady of Light, and preach peace and forgiveness;
do not incite others to war.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">108.3
Certainly anyone who hates engages in error, and will find themselves
cut off from Goddess,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">who is
pure love.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED NINE – ENTITLED THE UNBELIEVERS</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">109.1 Say
to the people, “O unbelievers,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">109.2 “I
will not worship anything that you worship, which is evil;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">109.3
“nor would it appear that you desire to worship love, goodness or
kindness; which is Goddess.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">109.4
“Neither will I worship what you worship, which is wealth, greed and
power;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">109.5
neither will you worship what I worship, which is only Goddess and
love,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
directs everyone to give alms, and to care for the needy.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">109.6
“You have your religion of negativity,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and I
have my religion of peace, love and hope.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-tab-count:
4">                                                </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED TEN – ENTITLED ASSISTANCE</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"><span
style="mso-tab-count:
1">            </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">110.1
When the assistance of Goddess shall come and the victory;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">110.2 and
you will see the people enter into the religion of Goddess in large
groups;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">110.3
celebrate the praise of your Lady of Light, and ask for pardon from Her,
for She is inclined to forgive.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED ELEVEN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">ENTITLED
ABU LAHEB;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">REVEALED
AT MECCA</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">111.1 The
hands of Abu Laheb should be used to do good works;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">111.2 his
riches should be used for the poor, the needy, the widow and the
orphan;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">111.3 or
he shall see great sadness on the day of his resurrection;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">111.4 and
his wife should teach the love of Goddess in the temple to all;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">111.5 and
her exquisite jewelry on her neck should be sold to benefit
others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">If would
both eagerly do this, if only they knew how much better it would be for
them.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED TWELVE</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">ENTITLED
THE DECLARATION OF GODDESS’ UNITY</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">112.1 Say
to the people, “Goddess is one Goddess; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">and She
will love you by whatever name you call Her, even that of a male
deity.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">112.2 She
is the eternal Goddess;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">112.3 She
does not bear children as a woman does; nor was She born of
woman;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">112.4 and
there is no entity on earth which could ever be compared to Her!”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED THIRTEEN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">ENTITLED
THE GODDESS OF DAWN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">113.1<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Say to the people; “I fly for refuge
to the Lady of Light at the break of dawn;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">113.2 “so
that She may deliver me from the mischief of the evil doers;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">113.3
“and from the mischief of the night; when the sun goes down;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">113.4
“and from the mischief of the people that blow on
knots;<a href="#_ftn79" id="_ftnref79"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><span class="MsoFootnoteReference"><span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[79]</span></span></span></span></a>”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">113.5
“and from the mischief of the envious.”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:15.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;WP IconicSymbolsA&quot;">ÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆÆ</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">BOOK ONE
HUNDRED FOURTEEN</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">ENTITLED
WOMEN<span
style="mso-tab-count:8">                                                                                      
</span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In the
name of the most Merciful Goddess.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">114.1 Say
to the people, “I fly for refuge to the Lady of Light of all
womankind,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">114.2
“She is the Queen of all people,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">114.3
“the Goddess of all people;”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">114.4
“that She might deliver me from the mischief of the evil whisperer, who
is sly and slinks away,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">114.5
“and who whispers her suggestions into the hearts of women,”</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">114.6
“and to the genii and other men.”</span>

<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-bidi-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">  
</span>

<span
style="mso-tab-count:1">                                            
</span><span
style="font-size:22.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Libra BT&quot;">The
Ten Commandments</span><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">1) There
is no other deity besides Goddess, even though She is called by many
names including male–love Her with all your heart and soul and love your
neighbor as yourself;' </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> Allat, Uzza and Mannat were
the main original deities worshiped by the Ancient Arabs (there were
many other names for Arab Goddess--far more than the male ones, and were
only eradicated c. 600 AD.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>These
are currently experiencing a rise in popularity among women and
enlightened men in Islama, and among the young.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Many Muslimas want to return to their
roots, and the book *The Da Vinci Code* was a catapult in the West.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>In Islama, women may call their
goddess deities what they want and make images of them; they are only
prohibited to denigrate other religions.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>Whether called by any earthly name, or by even a male name, She
does not care--she looks inside the heart of a person.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">2) Your
desire should be to make peace and not war–blessed are the peacemakers
and not the war mongers; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> This is clear.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Making war is prohibited; necessary
defense is allowed only for imminent danger.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>The people are expected to hold peace
meetings and facilitate peace around the world.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>War is outdated and unnecessary except
in limited circumstances.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>It
never works out well.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">3) Do not
associate the name of Goddess with any negative actions or
emotions;<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> Goddess is not mean, nasty,
jealous or vindictive.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>To
associate such base human emotions with Her is clear error and is to be
avoided.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Goddess does not do
anything to harm anyone;<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>She does
not send down hail, or stones of fire, or create earthquakes to punish
the people.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Punishment is
vindictive and not part of a Goddess of pure love and light.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Rather, natural disasters occur, the
earth is a dangerous place, and those that are closest to the
prophetesses will be warned in advance of any tragedy to be
avoided.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">4)
Remember Her in prayer frequently; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> No particular time or form
of prayer is proscribed.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Religion
is not to be forced upon anyone; evangelization is permitted if done in
a respectful manner.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">5 )Be
kind and respectful to your parents, as you are able;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> Some parents are so dark
and grey that it would be impossible to venerate them at all times;<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>however being polite and maintaining
some sort of relationship is required.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">6) Do not
kill except in necessary self defense;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> This is a clear
commandment.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Aggression is not
permitted, self defense is allowed. Abortion and contraception are
allowed. Infanticide is not allowed, but oftentimes a new mother is
mentally ill and should be forgiven her infanticide.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">7) Do not
commit adultery or promiscuity; maintain committed relationships; have
one spouse only at a time;</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> Multiple marriages are
prohibited contemporaneously, serial polygamy is permitted; however, it
is best for any couple to seek professional counseling prior to any
divorce and to take divorce seriously and with much prayer and
reflection.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Cohabitation without
marriage is allowed to two single entities, as long as the parties are
committed and feel they are in love.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>Same sex marriage is allowed.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">8)Treat
prisoners fairly and do not use cruel or unusual punishment, including
capital punishment; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> It is not so important to
convict and punish criminals, as it is to keep society safe and treat
prisoners with due respect.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>All
forms of torture, including those related to lack of sleep, food,
sitting or being in uncomfortable positions are prohibited.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Adult offenders must be separate from
juvenile offenders.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Convicted
killers should not be put to death, because they will only be reborn to
earth and they will not have learned their lesson.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Further, the ghosts of dark entities
in prisons often causes them to be shut down because no one can work
there without being scared to death by these entities full of hate and
rage that hang on because it was not their time--having been put to
death early by man.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">9) Do not
give false testimony nor volunteer testimony to hurt others; </span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> When one is asked to
testify, they must do so fairly and accurately to the best of her
knowledge. If a serious crime occurs that hurts person or property, it
should be reported to the authorities to prevent further crime.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>However, no one needs to be a snitch
or to volunteer any information over minor offenses so as to create any
skirmishes amongst neighbors or family.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">10) Do
not covet or desire the property of others.</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

 

**<span style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Comment:</span>**<span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"> To desire wealth for the
sake of wealth is not a healthy emotion; to desire wealth to help others
is the only true purpose of money.</span>

 

</div>

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref1" id="_ftn1"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[1]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Because
the sons could not have children, they could only marry Egyptian women
who would bring them up worshiping multiple gods and not the One True
Goddess.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref2" id="_ftn2"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[2]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">As
in food and leather for clothes, etc.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref3" id="_ftn3"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[3]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
meaning of these initials varies, however some possible meanings are
given in Table B, Introduction, page x.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref4" id="_ftn4"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[4]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">And
not a lowly woman.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref5" id="_ftn5"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[5]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">See
Table B, Introduction, page x, for possible meanings of these
inititals.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref6" id="_ftn6"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[6]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">See
Table B, Introduction. page x, for possible meanings of these
initials.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref7" id="_ftn7"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[7]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Some
believe that the significance of these initials are Ha Mim, Allat is
praiseworthy and full of Honor.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span></span>

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref8" id="_ftn8"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[8]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Note
that the arch angel names of Ariel, Gabrielle, Haniel, Michael are all
listed as female names. Other names are listed in Table C, Introduction,
Name Changes, and are overwhelmingly female.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref9" id="_ftn9"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[9]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Mecca
or Tayef.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref10" id="_ftn10"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[10]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Bracelets
of gold were an insignia of royalty.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>When a person became a prince or princess, bracelets of gold were
worn on the arms, and collars or chains of gold were worn around the
neck.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref11" id="_ftn11"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[11]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">An
Arab legend relates that before the final resurrection Yeshua is to come
to earth, near Damascus, or near a rock in the holy land named Afik,
with a lance in his hand, where he is to slay the Antichrist, which will
be found at Ludd or Lydda, a small town not far from Joppa.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>He will appear at Jerusalem at the
time of morning prayer, he shall perform his devotions as a Muslima, and
will officiate instead of the Imam, he will break down religious symbols
and the houses of worship will fade away as no longer being
needed.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn12" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref12" id="_ftn12"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[12]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Malika
(meaning “queen or princess”)<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>is
said to be the angel that governs hell or earth.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn13" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref13" id="_ftn13"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[13]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Some
believe that the significance of these initials are Ha Mim, or “Allat is
praiseworthy and full of Honor”; See Table B, Introduction, page
x.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn14" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref14" id="_ftn14"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[14]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Which
may be a night upon which the Arabs believe that all of the events of
the ensuring year, with respect to life and death and other affairs of
the world are disposed of and settled, or it maybe the night the Korana
was finally complete.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>It is
generally believed to between the 23<sup>rd</sup> and 24<sup>th</sup> of
Ramadan.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn15" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref15" id="_ftn15"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[15]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">It
is said that this smoke will cover the earth and last for 40 days and 40
nights, from east to west.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>It
will intoxicate the unbelievers, and it will issue from their nose, ears
and posteriors; but it will very little inconvenience the true
believers.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn16" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref16" id="_ftn16"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[16]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Meaning
“good.”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>The queens were called
Tovas and they build a mighty and grand city called Samarcand (or others
say this Tova demolished it) and that this queen was a true believer,
but her subjects were unbelievers.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>She embraced One True Goddess worship, but then was probably
slain for it by her own people.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn17" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref17" id="_ftn17"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[17]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">An
allegory to the food on earth.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>A
Zakkum tree has small and bitter fruit and therefore it is believed that
it grows in hell.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn18" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref18" id="_ftn18"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[18]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Some
believe that the significance of these initials are Ha Mim, or “Allat is
praiseworthy and full of Honor.</span><span
style="font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">”</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn19" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref19" id="_ftn19"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[19]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Some
possible meanings for these initials are given in Table B, Introduction,
page x.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn20" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref20" id="_ftn20"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[20]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Although
many pediatricians recommend breast feeding for one to two years, the
average age of weaning 100 years ago in now industrialized countries,
and what is average even today in third world countries is approximately
five years.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Of course, no mother
is required to nurse if there are medical or psychological reasons for
failing to do so, yet it is highly recommended and her spouse or
significant other should support her and assist her.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn21" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref21" id="_ftn21"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[21]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
maybe referring to the coming of the Prophetess, the splitting of the
moon and the smoke mentioned in Ch. 55.35.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn22" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref22" id="_ftn22"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[22]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Some
believe that this letter is designed to express the mountain Kaf, which
some believe is the entire world.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>Others say it stands for Kada al amr, “The matter is decreed, as
between the believers and the unbelievers,” while others say it means
“Allat is Almighty.</span><span
style="font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">”</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn23" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref23" id="_ftn23"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[23]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Meaning
“good</span><span style="font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">.”</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn24" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref24" id="_ftn24"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[24]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
Arabs have a tradition that says one angel records a person’s good
actions, while another angel records the evil ones; and when a woman
does well, this is recorded by the angel located near her right hand ten
times, but when the woman does something wrong, this is recorded by the
left hand angel just once, but only after the woman has had seven hours
to think about the wrongful action and pray for forgiveness and
repentance.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">   </span>This is pure
allegory of course, because Sylvia Browne says they have scanners there
that record what you do like a video camera does, but they are much more
sophisticated.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn25" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref25" id="_ftn25"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[25]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Note
this is in contrast to the Jews that said Goddess created the world and
everything in it within six days and had to rest on the
seventh</span><span style="font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn26" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref26" id="_ftn26"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[26]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">That
is, where everyone may easily hear the call.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>This place is supposed to be the
mountain of the temple of Jerusalem, which is said to be nearer heaven
than any other part of the earth, Isabell is supposed to sound the
trumpet, and Gabriel is supposed to say, “O rotten bones and torn flesh
and dispersed hairs, you are now called together in
resurrection.”</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn27" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref27" id="_ftn27"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[27]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
paths or orbits of stars and planets in the sky.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn28" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref28" id="_ftn28"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[28]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Due
to their extended worship of Her.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn29" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref29" id="_ftn29"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[29]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">As
from a volcano.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn30" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref30" id="_ftn30"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[30]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Note
that Sinai is a very old name for God, or “Sin,” which was later turned
into a derogatory concept.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn31" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref31" id="_ftn31"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[31]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
may be either the Book or register of a person’s deeds, or the preserved
tablets of Goddess’ decrees, or the Book of the law or the
Korana.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn32" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref32" id="_ftn32"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[32]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
Caba or Keebe, or it could be a model house in heaven called Dorah, the
house of angels in heaven.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn33" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref33" id="_ftn33"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[33]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Which
is Sirius, a star worshiped by many ancient Arabs.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn34" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref34" id="_ftn34"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[34]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">May
be referring to a miracle performed by the prophetess, it is said that
the prophetess at one time did have the moon appear to cleave in half
when she asked for this.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Some say
Mount Hara was interposed between the two halves of the moon, or this
may be prophetic to happen at some later time.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn35" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref35" id="_ftn35"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[35]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Referring
to the fact that prophetesses are generally not the most wealthy, or
powerful or come from the social elite.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>But then in the old Jewish religion, some thought that a
prophetess must eschew friends and family and wealth to truly be
holy.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Neither is actually the
case.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn36" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref36" id="_ftn36"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[36]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">It
is said that they eye disease swelled their eyes so much that their eyes
swelled closed and into their eye sockets.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn37" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref37" id="_ftn37"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[37]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
two kinds referred to may be know varieties and unknown varieties, or it
could be referring to fruits both green and ripe.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn38" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref38" id="_ftn38"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[38]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
may be referring to two different levels of heaven where the garden of
one is superior for the superior inhabitants of paradise and it will be
supplied with fruit trees, whereas the other will only have herbs, which
are not as desirable.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

</div>

<div id="ftn39" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref39" id="_ftn39"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[39]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">It
is said that green was the favorite color of the Prophet.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Of course, the true favorite color of
a Prophetess would be pink for happiness and love, and purple for
spirituality.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn40" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref40" id="_ftn40"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[40]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">A
tall and thorny tree, which has many sweet smelling flowers, and is
probably the Acacia.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn41" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref41" id="_ftn41"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[41]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">A
miserable tree with bitter sparse fruit and meager shade–clearly an
analogy.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn42" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref42" id="_ftn42"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[42]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Referring
to one’s aura.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn43" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref43" id="_ftn43"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[43]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Refers
to women that left their homes to come to the true religion, and how
they were questioned to determine that they were true believers.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn44" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref44" id="_ftn44"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[44]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Note
that the holy women supported Yeshua financially during his ministry,
and were with him as he hung on the cross, and were the first to arrive
at the tomb after he was resurrected.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn45" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref45" id="_ftn45"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[45]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">For a donkey cannot
read.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn46" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref46" id="_ftn46"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[46]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">It
is said that one day while the Prophetess was preaching, a band of
merchants came along with drums beating, and the entire congregation
left to see what they were selling, and only twelve remained for the
service.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn47" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref47" id="_ftn47"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[47]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">That
is they are unstable and can topple over easily.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn48" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref48" id="_ftn48"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[48]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Note
that these are allegories and should not be taken to mean in any manner
than the disabled are inferior or have inferior rights to the able
bodied.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn49" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref49" id="_ftn49"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[49]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
meaning of the letter “N” is unclear.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>It apparently stands for the letter Nun, and while this is a
letter, it also stands for an inkwell and a fish, which would relate to
writing.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>However some back then
considered that the blood of certain fish was good ink, or it could
refer to the fish which swallowed Joanie and which is mentioned in this
chapter.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>There are also other
interpretations including “table of the Decrees of Goddess,” or “One of
the rivers in paradise,” etc.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn50" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref50" id="_ftn50"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[50]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">With
a famine, to see who would blame Goddess or say She was punishing them,
or who would share what they had and not be greedy, etc.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn51" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref51" id="_ftn51"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[51]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
garden was a plantation of palm trees that belonged to a certain
charitable woman, who, when she gathered her dates, would give public
notice to the poor and left some on the trees that her knife would miss,
or would fall down.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>After death,
her miserly sons took over the gardens and decided never to tell the
poor and to gather everything only for themselves.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Therefore, one day they were not
advised by their prophetess of a great wind so they could cover the
trees, and accordingly all were blown down.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn52" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref52" id="_ftn52"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[52]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">An
expression signifying stress and fury, such as when a disaster strikes,
people run away so fast and furious their legs are made bare.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn53" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref53" id="_ftn53"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[53]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
unbelievers of Sodom and Gomorrah who mercilessly persecuted, oppressed
and drove away the same sex couples that had peaceable established
residence there.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn54" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref54" id="_ftn54"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[54]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Referring
to Eblis, or the fallen angel who was proud and would not worship women
when Goddess asked him to.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn55" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref55" id="_ftn55"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[55]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">As
in through agony; this is an idiom.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn56" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref56" id="_ftn56"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[56]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
word means “camphor,” which produces a very pleasant smell, and perhaps
the water contains it.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn57" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref57" id="_ftn57"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[57]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
may be referring to a time when the grandchildren of the Prophetess were
ill, and the family visited them, and asked the parents to make a
special vow for their recovery. <span
style="mso-spacerun:yes"> </span>Both children recovered, and the vow to
give alms was taken so strictly that on the first day there were no
provisions in the home of the Prophetess, so she borrowed some
barley.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>They made five cakes from
them, but then a beggar came along and said he had no food for over a
day, and so they gave the cakes to him.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>The next day they made more cakes, but gave them away when an
orphan came begging for food.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>On
the third day, they gave their cakes away to a prisoner when his family
came begging for her.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>After this,
Gabrielle descended to the Prophetess, revealed this chapter and told
the Prophetess how very pleased Goddess was with her and her
family.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn58" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref58" id="_ftn58"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[58]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
word means “ginger,” a coveted spice, so the phrase may be referring to
ginger flavored water.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn59" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref59" id="_ftn59"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[59]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
sun.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn60" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref60" id="_ftn60"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[60]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
is the name of a general register where the actions of all the wicked,
both people and genii are recorded.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>Sejn also signifies a prison, or the dungeon beneath the
7<sup>th</sup> earth,</span>

<span style="font-size:11.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">the
residence of Eblis and other fallen angels; where it is supposed that
this negative recording device is kept and some believe the souls of the
damned are kept until the final day of resurrection. The recording
device for the believers is in heaven.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn61" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref61" id="_ftn61"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[61]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
word signifies the highest place.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn62" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref62" id="_ftn62"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[62]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">A
pleasing scent.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn63" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref63" id="_ftn63"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[63]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
is the name of a fountain in paradise reserved for the highest
apartments.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn64" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref64" id="_ftn64"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[64]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Of
the zodiac. </span>

</div>

<div id="ftn65" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref65" id="_ftn65"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[65]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">A
bright star or stars or perhaps a planet.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn66" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref66" id="_ftn66"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[66]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Certain
10 night periods are considered more sacred than others.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>The ten nights of Dhu’lhajja, or the
10<sup>th</sup> of Muharram, etc.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn67" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref67" id="_ftn67"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[67]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">By
togetherness and separation</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn68" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref68" id="_ftn68"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[68]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Meaning
“peace.”<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>One of the rulers of the
people of Ada had heard of the garden of Eden and decided to replicate
it for himself.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>The garden was
called Irene.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>It is said that
this ruler was quite wealthy and had extensive palaces and delightful
gardens.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">    </span>Unfortunately after
Irene was built, on the way there to see it for the first time, the
ruler was struck down by a whirlwind.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>The people of Ada were supposed to be very tall, “like
pillars.”</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn69" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref69" id="_ftn69"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[69]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">A
form of torture described in Ch. 38.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn70" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref70" id="_ftn70"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[70]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">By
preventing spouses and children from inheiriting, they are often left
penniless and desperate.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn71" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref71" id="_ftn71"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[71]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Some
ancient Arab legends relate that on the last day, hell will be dragged
near the tribunal by 70,000 halters, each halter being hauled by 70,000
angels; and it will come with a great roaring and fury.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn72" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref72" id="_ftn72"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[72]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These
two trees were considered especially valuable among the ancients Arabs
and had many uses.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>The fig was
considered delicious and helped with many illnesses.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>The olive tree also kept a person in
good health and its wood could be used as a pick for cleaning the teeth
and freshening breath.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Olive oil
also made good skin ointments.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn73" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref73" id="_ftn73"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[73]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">In
one story, a rival priest said that he would forbid the Prophetess from
praying to “her Goddess” and even threatened to break her neck.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>One day, this priest caught her in
prayer, but ran away frightened.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>The Prophetess later asked him what happened, and the priest said
that what he had seen in front of her praying form was a ditch of fire
and angels to guard her.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn74" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref74" id="_ftn74"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[74]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">The
word al Kadr signifies power and honor or dignity, and also divine
decree.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Some believe that the
divine decrees for the upcoming year are fixed on that night, or they
are taken from the preserved table by Goddess’ throne and given to the
angels to be carried out.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>On this
night, the first revelations were received, and the table was sent down
to the lowest heaven for Gabrielle to read to the Prophetess in parcels,
as she was able to memorize them, or as the occasion warranted it.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>This night is typically seven days
before Ramadan ends.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn75" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref75" id="_ftn75"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[75]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Mother
Earth will shake and renew herself, keeping only what is in nature.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>What was made by womankind and all her
pollution and messes will be gone.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>Some believe that on the final day of resurrection, when much of
the earth passes away to cleanse itself, that Mother Earth will actually
be able to speak to the spirits that lived there and to Goddess.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn76" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref76" id="_ftn76"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[76]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
is an interesting story that happened in the year of the birth of the
Prophetess.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>According to the
story, a group of people claiming to be believers became jealous when
they noted that visitors to the Caaba had dropped off, due to the fact
that a certain Yaman ruler had built a beautiful new house of worship
which was designed only to lure Muslims away from making their
pilgrimage to Mecca.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Accordingly,
this group of people formed a gang which traveled to the new church and
severely defaced it and destroyed many objects of art contained
therein.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>In retaliation, a gang
of Christian rebels decided that vengeance was in order, despite
teachings to the contrary, and they intended to return the favor by
rounding up several elephants.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>The Meccans took to the hills in fright when they saw the gang
bent on retaliation and the elephants.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>But just then, the elephants refused to go nearer to the Caaba,
and bent down, as if in worship of it.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>Both the Christian group and the Muslima group were present, and
birds then appeared carrying stones of baked clay which they dropped
from some great height to scare off everyone and they made it know that
unless either side repented they would return and the next time, they
would not miss.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>Needless to say,
both the vain competition and the need for violence ended, and both
sides returned to the house of worship to repair it.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn77" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref77" id="_ftn77"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[77]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">These
may be referring to caravans sent out to Yaman twice a year by the
prophet’s great-great grandparents.</span>

</div>

<div id="ftn78" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref78" id="_ftn78"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[78]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">This
signifies abundance, and especially of good, and also the gift of wisdom
and prophecy, the Korana, etc.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>It
may imply abundance of children, followers and the like.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>It is often referred to as a river in
paradise which comes to the ponds of the prophetesses, which they are to
drink from as they enter into paradise.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes"> 
</span>The river is said to be sweeter than honey, whiter than milk,
cooler than snow, and smoother than cream; on its banks are chrysolite
or large colored crystals, and the vessels to drink the river water are
made from silver; and those that drink from it will never thirst.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span></span>

</div>

<div id="ftn79" style="mso-element:footnote">

<a href="#_ftnref79" id="_ftn79"><sup><span style="mso-special-character:footnote"><sup><span style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;
mso-fareast-font-family:&quot;Times New Roman&quot;;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA">[79]</span></sup></span></sup></a><span
style="font-size:11.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;">Ancient
Arabs believed that by blowing on a knot and saying a person’s name
together with magical words would curse them.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>A tale is told of how the Prophet fell
ill and asking an angel about this, he was informed that a woman had
tied eleven knots in a rope and hid it in a well.<span
style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>He then went to the well, drew up the
rope and said the words of Chs. 112 and 113 twice as each knot was
losened, and apparently became well once again in relatively short
order.<span style="mso-spacerun:yes">  </span>As a result, many Arabs
believe the words of these two chapters can ward off evil.</span><span
style="font-family:
&quot;Maiandra GD&quot;"></span>

</div>

</div>
