[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tot03)  [Next](tot05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Talks on Truth*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson III The I AM in Its Kingdom 

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world  
Like a Colossus, and we petty men  
Walk under his huge legs, and peep about  
To find ourselves dishonorable graves.  
Men at some time are masters of their fates;  
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,  
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.  
--Shakespeare  
</span>

</div>

IDEAS ARE hinged; they swing in and they swing out. Not everyone has
observed this. But everyone must observe it, and note also the swing of
his particular ideas. An idea that swings in has a mission. It is of
Spirit, and has power to do far beyond an idea that swings out and
dissipates its forces in the whirl of the periphery. On the inner side,
ideas behold the great wisdom and attach themselves to it; then they
lose their identity as limited things and take on the unlimited.

2\. A single idea born of wisdom is irresistible.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

No one can estimate the power for good that is in an idea generated in
the center of the home of ideas, the inner man. When an idea comes from
that great galaxy of supreme ideas it goes forth in strength and
harmony. It is a perfect sphere with no point liable to friction or
collision.

3\. A man once conceived the idea of building a ship, water-tight above
and below. He put his idea into visibility and sent the ship forth on
the waves. At first it rode the sea with comparative safety; but storms
came, the waves dashed against it, and it went down. Why? Because he had
not ballasted it. It was secure above and below from the elements, but
it was not equalized in the rolling waves.

4\. You are daily, hourly conceiving ideal ships and sending them out
upon the waves of the angry sea of human thoughts. They are apparently
water-tight; they carry your highest aspirations and desires. You look
longingly for their return, but they do not come. Why is it? They were
staunchly built according to human plans. But something was lacking. You
failed to put your soul into them. They were shells, without depth or
hold or cargo of love.

5\. All the mental ships that you send out upon the turbulent seas of
human thought must be ballasted with your heart's love or they will
eventually founder. They may float safely for a season, but the reefs
wait for them in the distance, and you may watch in vain for their
return.

6\. I AM is expressed through I will; it is the business of I AM to know
when the I will activities are ideally true. In its right relation in
Being, I

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

AM never possesses or owns anything. All things in the universe are its
to use, but it must not claim them as personal property.

7\. If the wheel that rests in the water and communicates energy to the
machinery of the mill should suddenly become possessed with conscious
volition and proceed to dip out a portion of the stream as its
individual property, it would well represent the position of the I AM
that attempts to separate its powers and capacities from universal Mind.

8\. The I AM is pure Spirit, without parts or passions. It is the prism
through which the white light of Being is focused and refracted on the
screen of visibility in many colors.

9\. But the I AM is not inertia--it is ever spurred on by an original
impulse to know. Knowing is not complete as long as a single factor of
Being is left out by him who seeks to know.

10\. The I AM has its being in heaven; its home is in the realm of
perfect ideals, the Christ within, but it has its freedom. It loves to
be. To be is to enjoy. To enjoy is for the time to be that which we
enjoy. When you are absorbed in the recital of an interesting story, you
are lost to all else. The I AM is for the moment identified with that
which it enjoys. Here is the solution of a great mystery--how the I AM
ever came to separate itself from its sphere of wisdom.

11\. But it is wonderfully simple when you understand it. You are
demonstrating the so-called fall of man every time you lose yourself in
the whirl of sense pleasure. The mission of the I AM is happiness.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

It seeks joy and bliss; they are set before it in unstinted measure, and
it revels in their intoxicating draughts, but the mastery of the higher
mind should ever be maintained.

12\. But sensations of pleasure originate in and depend for their
vitality upon the central I AM, and when man follows things and forgets
the source, he eventually finds the pleasure waning. The impetus grows
less and less until that which in the beginning was pleasure becomes so
slow of action that its inertia leaves the impression of pain.

13\. "Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness" are the inherent
birthright of every one of us. We exist to that end, and by our constant
effort to attain perpetual joy we recognize it as our natural state.

14\. That our efforts are not always crowned with success should cause
us to pause and consider. Have we not left out some factor necessary to
happiness? If so, what is it?

15\. We think of heaven as a place of unending happiness, and we have
been taught that it is somewhere in the skies. But in the geography of
the universe, heaven has not been authoritatively marked. Jesus Christ,
of all those claiming intimate acquaintance with spiritual things, gave
heaven definite location. He often referred to the Father dwelling in
Him; He also told others that the Spirit of God dwelt in them. As a
climax He definitely located heaven "within you."

16\. This statement has always been looked upon by the world's people as
a figure of speech, and

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

even metaphysicians who have delved into the abstractions of mind have
had vague ideas about there being such a place as heaven within them.
They have said it was a state, a condition.

17\. So it is, but it is also a place. It is not outside your body
today, and inside it tomorrow, nor is it possible for heaven to exist
anywhere but right at the center of what seems to you to be the
physical. This insistence upon the location of heaven is a startling
proposition to those who have postulated mind as universal, without
bounds.

18\. We are seeking to get into the kingdom of heaven where all things
shall be added, and it is proper that we should know where that kingdom
is. All that we really know about ourselves at present comes to us by
comparison with the "things which appear." We have a body, which we
clearly perceive is moved by an invisible principle called mind. We have
never seen this mind or felt it or sensed it in any way.

19\. We know that certain combinations of thought produce effects upon
the sense nature. The action takes place from the center of
consciousness, the physical body. Then, so far as we are concerned, the
mystery of Being is wrapped in and around that which we are wont to call
clay. Do not mistake the proposition and assume that the physical man as
he now appears to your comprehension is the summum bonum of existence.
This is not the claim. The claim is that to your consciousness the
corporeal man surrounds and gives definite place to that which you
seek--"the kingdom of God . . . within you."

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

20\. The argument is frequently brought forward that the "lesser cannot
contain the greater." This is but a play upon words, so far as the
relations of mind are concerned. We know that in Being there can be no
greater and no lesser. Mind is not a thing; Mind is. It is that which,
through orderly process, produces the thing. This orderly process, we
have learned by observation, is from an invisible center to a visible
circumstance. So if anywhere in the universe you behold a form, you may
know that within that form there is a potential center from which spring
all its qualities. That the invisible cause is or is not confined to
that form is not essential to the proposition. So far as the sentient
identity of the form itself is concerned, its source of intelligence and
life is always within, and it can never know anything about its cause
except from that center.

21\. When an astronomer sees a system of planets describing geometric
circles, he knows without looking that there is at the center of those
circles a power which holds them in place. Every atom in the human body
is like a miniature planet revolving about its own invisible center, and
all the atoms revolve about a great center within. I have discovered
this to be an absolute fact in my own experience. I have, by persistent
practice, learned to drop my attention from the head to a point under
the heart. This is separating the I AM from the personal, or limited
consciousness, and connecting it with the universal, or spiritual
consciousness, with which it forms a union at the point mentioned. When
my I AM touches this inner center there springs into its

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

consciousness a wonderful vibration, and to every part of the body
strong currents of energy are transmitted. At this point I seem to be in
touch with all creation; the barriers of form are as nothing; there is
only a great sea of throbbing life.

22\. I am but a novice in this inner exploration, but I have penetrated
far enough to know that it is the undiscovered country for which all are
seeking. I have not only found the invisible center of my consciousness,
but many subcenters, and so many marvelous things in connection
therewith that I could not, for lack of comparisons, describe them, even
if I knew a language that would convey to the natural man a conception
of their marvels and the joy and the satisfaction that they give to the
soul.

23\. I have proved to my own satisfaction that when Jesus said, "The
kingdom of God is within you," He meant it literally and not
figuratively. There is within every one a place, a conscious sphere of
mind, having all the attractions described or imagined as belonging to
heaven. My most exalted ideas of the joys of heaven never anticipated
the ecstatic thrill that suffuses my whole being while I rest in Spirit
at this center within. In the redemption of man from sin, the outer
thoughts are made to conform to the inner ideas. This is regeneration,
in which man is saved from his evil thoughts--Satan--and permanently
united with his good thoughts--Christ. This is my work and your work--to
conform to the within.

24\. It seems marvelous that we should be so totally unconscious of this
undiscovered country right

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

under our heart. When I drop down there and feel its sweetness and
light, and the inner voice tells me that this heaven exists in everyone
else, as it does in me, I cannot comprehend how we have been so long
ignorant of it. Yet I know that before the discovery of the circulation
of the blood, men knew nothing about the intricate canal system within
their own bodies. Then why should it be improbable that still deeper
within exists another realm on a different plane?

25\. But this kingdom within is not material--it is spiritual. In it is
the seat of the king, and when we become sufficiently acquainted with
it, we shall be able to reign from the throne that was prepared for us
from the beginning.

26\. This inner country is the domain of that superior wisdom which we
term the Christ. Jesus called this place of wisdom the Father within
Him, and to it He ascribed all His power and wisdom.

27\. It is not created for our especial benefit, nor do we evolve it
through thinking! it is that Word which was in the beginning with God,
which is with God, which is God; we simply recognize it, and through
recognition we realize its presence.

28\. The theory that we are progressing from a lower to a higher state
is not tenable when viewed from this inner place of understanding. When
we touch its shining shore, we suddenly seem to know that we are at home
again; that there has somehow been a departure, a separation of the I AM
from its rightful place in the bosom of the Father.

29\. That man has wandered away from and lost

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

consciousness of his wisdom sphere, is claimed by all ancient teachers
of inner truths. The banishment of Adam from the Garden of Eden is an
allegory based upon this truth, and the four Gospels reiterate again and
again that the mission of Jesus of Nazareth was to find that which was
lost; not that the real man is lost or in condemnation, but the I, the
man identity, has gone "into another country" and is lost to his
spiritual consciousness.

30\. That this sphere of wisdom is present in what has come to be known
as the subjective consciousness of man is demonstrated in a certain
measure in hypnotic experiments. The I of the hypnotized subject is
temporarily separated from the external and thrown onto the internal
plane, where it functions in marvelous manner in matters pertaining to
mental action. This has given rise to the theory of two egos, the
subjective and the objective.

31\. The fact is that there is but one ego, one I, and its domain of
consciousness is not limited to the things of sense, but is meant to
range all creation from the within to the without. Instead of
considering these sporadic cases of a higher sense in man as abnormal,
we should know that they are normal and that the limitations and
ignorance of the five-sense man is the abnormal.

32\. The regaining of this lost consciousness is a matter that rests
between God and man. We cannot get into this "kingdom" through such
artificial means as mesmerism, hypnotism, mediumship, or any other
"short cut" to spirituality.

33\. The I AM can never be coerced or robbed of

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

its perfect freedom, and all attempts in that line will meet with final
disaster. When we have once decided to return to the Father's house, to
regain this lost estate within, it is an easy road. It may seem hard at
the start, because we have to throw away so much baggage, but it grows
easier as we get closer and closer to the great heart of the loving
Father. A Helper has been provided, the "Spirit of truth . . . shall
guide you into all the truth"; all we have to do is to seek honestly and
sincerely to enter in. "Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened unto you." This promise is to everyone.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 4](tot05.md)
