[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tot04)  [Next](tot06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Talks on Truth*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson IV How Shall the Dead Be Raised? 

AS DISCIPLES of Jesus Christ, we are commanded to "raise the dead." To
understand this part of our mission clearly, we should acquaint
ourselves with the philosophy of death; we should know what it is and
how it came about.

2\. Death is defined by Webster as "cessation of all vital functions
without capability of resuscitation." This, like all definitions derived
from sense observations, is quite incomplete. It gives us no idea of the
relation that death bears to its polar opposite, life; and no idea of
the process through which life passes in order to appear absent in that
which has "cessation of all vital functions." Following this to a final
analysis, we find that we must understand life before we can apprehend
that appearance of its absence in a form called death.

3\. In this, as in all other investigations of Truth on the basis of the
correct premise, we find that we can never get at any right relation by
examining the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

negative side only. One could not correct the errors in a mathematical
calculation without first understanding the rules governing numbers.
Some people think they can learn how to be healthy by studying disease;
but they get further and further into disease when they study it as an
entity. The study of health as a real principle involved in the being of
man leads to the discovery of its foundation--mental harmony.

4\. In metaphysics the beginning students insist upon having evil
explained to them--how it originated, and why it has place in
existence--when good is the origin of all that is. They worry and they
play their thoughts upon this question until in sheer desperation they,
as a rule, give it up. The tangle of a good God and a bad Devil will not
straighten itself out from their plane of perception. The trouble is
that they do not know enough about the good. They want to know all about
the evil without first being acquainted with the positive side of the
question. They are like children who know nothing about the harmony of
music, yet insist upon a full explanation of discords before they will
go on with their lessons. To know about evil we must first become
thoroughly familiar with good.

5\. We find in our investigation of the character and the place of death
that by studying death alone we can get no clue that will lead us to
even a single fact. It has no foundation in itself. Every definition we
can frame implies that death is the absence of something, and we are
forced to inquire into that which is absent before we can know the
meaning of the condition that the absence seems to cause.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

6\. When we have made ourselves familiar with life, we shall know all
about death without studying it at all. We shall know it from its true
standpoint--absolute negation--as that which might be if life were not
all. Those who worry over the cause of evil always find, when they drop
their investigations from the negative standpoint and go over to the
positive and make themselves familiar with the good, that all their
questions are answered by the good itself, because it and it only can
explain all the vagaries that arise in the consciousness where good is
not constantly recognized.

7\. A study of life reveals it to be an expression of Being that gives
rise to animation, vivacity, vigor, energy. We learn that life may
appear in a form in superabundance, accompanied by but little
intelligence. We perceive that the character of life is determined by
the intelligence that it exercises. We find that the life expressed in
and through our own body requires the husbanding, directing power of our
intelligence. But life stimulates the lower as well as the higher
faculties. Right here many people do not exercise wisdom in their
living. They think that because life stimulates the faculties, each of
these should be gratified as it desires. The desires of the animal man
are thus permitted their full exercise; the share of life force that
should go to the intellectual and spiritual man is wasted, and he is
robbed of his sustenance because he does not understand the law of his
being.

8\. We find that life is a principle; that it is inherent in Being,
everywhere present at all times;

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

that it is manifest to consciousness through vehicles; that these
vehicles are animated by life according to their capacity or power to
express it; that that capacity or power of expression is governed by the
idea of life that is infused into it by the generative energy of the I
AM.

9\. Electricity, for example, is everywhere as invisible potentiality.
It may be brought into expression and use through a motor. Some people
think that the size of an electric motor is the measure of its power.
This is not true. It is the character of the coiled wires within that
measures its capacity. Fine wire closely wound gives power to the motor.
So a fine, intense, high perception of life, accompanied by a burning
desire to express it in its purity, marks the highest form of the
animated vehicle of God's vitality.

10\. Man is the highest expression of God; he manifests God's life
through his body. Physiologists long ago discovered that it is not the
size of the body, nor its beauty, that determines its vitality, but the
fineness of its texture.

11\. Electricity is our best illustration of universal life. The
greatest electrician in the world does not know the real character of
electricity. He knows many ways to transform that universal energy into
light, heat, power, and so on. Man's body is the greatest of all
transformers of life; in other words, what science has named
electricity. The cell centers are the transformers and man, the I AM, is
the directive agent. Infinite Mind expresses life in "waves and nothing
but waves" according to Sir James Jeans. In the 1st chapter of Genesis
it is written, "The

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters." Isaac Leeser, in his
"Twenty-four Books of the Holy Scriptures," translates it thus: "The
spirit of God was waving over the face of the waters," thus confirming
the latest scientific conclusions. All the potentialities of Being are
epitomized in this universal energy, the source of all existence. To the
man who manipulates it outside of his body in mechanical devices it is
electricity. To the metaphysician who concentrates it in the nerve and
brain centers in his organism it is God-Mind, the "Father abiding in me"
of Jesus.

12\. Life in the body is governed by the hold that the I AM has on the
idea of life. Its character is also tempered by the conservation that
judgment and discretion exercise with respect to the other factors of
expression. But let the idea of life be firmly grasped and put into
practical use through thought and word, and the other factors fall into
line.

13\. The energy generated by a dynamo is expressed through action, and a
suitable medium for its exercise must be provided. We find a parallel to
this in our own life. Thinking and speaking are our methods of creating
energy, and our body is the vehicle acted upon by the energy developed.
We must think life into the living. Jesus at the raising of Lazarus
first "lifted up his eyes." He thus, through mental dynamics, connected
His idea of the universality of life with universal life itself, and He
was able to say, "I thank thee that thou heardest me. . . . And when he
had thus spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth."

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

14\. This event shows that we are to do more than merely perceive the
omnipresence of life; to fulfill the whole law of manifestation we must
speak life into visibility.

15\. Yet again, we may perceive the truth that life is everywhere
waiting to be spoken into all forms, and with a clear understanding of
this truth we may speak the words of life and yet not get the
anticipated results. What is the reason?

16\. Going deeper into the factors constituting Being, we discover that
life or energy must have substance through which to make itself manifest
to consciousness. If we have wasted our substance in riotous living, our
word is made fruitless because of lack of material upon which to work.

17\. We should be as careful of the stored-up substance of the
consciousness, of which the body is the lower stratum, as we are of the
thoughts and words that we express. If our substance is being wasted in
the lusts of the flesh, our word will lack in life-giving quality. Jesus
cast out of His consciousness the limitations of matter; He mastered the
appetites and the passions of the animal man and dissolved all fear of
evil.

18\. Jesus demonstrated the law of God, and His word was with power. He
became the Word of God incarnate, because He fulfilled all the
requirements of the law.

19\. This fulfillment is the privilege of every man. Whoever dedicates
his whole life to the supreme good and by devotion, right thinking,
right doing, right acting, pure living, and pure speaking

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

fulfills the law, may have all the power of Jesus. God is no respecter
of persons, but He requires an exact observance of the law to the least
jot and tittle.

20\. So we say that we cannot explain death without first having an
acquaintance with life, an acquaintance with life that carries with it
an acquaintance with God. We must go back to the supreme cause before we
can get a complete explanation of the origin of an effect.

21\. In the matter of life, we discover by following the clues given us
in our own experience that they point to intelligence as well as to
force. In other words, life falls far short of its mission if it is not
equalized by intelligence. Yet thousands who are seeking health, which
means more life, have no especial desire to become acquainted with God.
Many think that health and fullness of life may be had without God, and
when asking the help of a metaphysician they often stipulate that they
shall be given no religious doctrines with the treatments. They might
with like consistency engage a locomotive without an engineer. All the
ills and discords of humanity may be traced to one error--the
indiscriminate and thoughtless use of life separated from intelligence.

22\. What men need above all else in this day is more wisdom--more
discretion in the use of the life that they have. More life with the
same old destructive ignorance in using it would but add to their
misery. Yet God does not dictate what shall be man's choice in this or
in any other act. If man finds the law through which life is made
manifest in his consciousness,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

he may use it blindly and ignorantly if he so elects. But he must also
abide by the results, and this is where man sets up his wail of sorrow;
he does not like to reap his sowing.

23\. Death came into our world through the ignorant use of life, and
death can be put out only by a wise use of life. Death is the result of
a wrong concept of life and its use. In the beginning of man's
experiments with the powers of Being, he had no concept of death. His
consciousness was intact and his unfoldment in wisdom was gradual and
orderly. But his desire to experiment predominated. Sensation was sweet
and enticing; it absorbed so much of his attention that he forgot
wisdom--he "hid" from his Lord--and the result is separation from his
Eden, the divine harmony of the law.

24\. When there is disorder in the working parts of a machine, it breaks
down or flies to pieces. That is just what occurred in man's body. When
intelligence was no longer present in its full complement in his
consciousness, there was lack of harmony, and this resulted in such
disorder that the parts flew asunder--soul and body separated, and man
named the dissolution death. Then in its train the fear caused by this
dissolution was imaged in man's mind, and he made it a secondary cause.
So we find the mere belief in death in the world today slaying its
thousands.

25\. In raising the dead there are, then, two factors to deal with. The
idea of the reality of death and the fear of death have both become
destructive beliefs in the race consciousness, and they must be

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

taken up and dissolved. The total unreality of death must be portrayed
to the deluded consciousness. The omnipresence and the omnipotence of
life are beyond dispute, and there can be no question that death is a
condition set up in human consciousness alone. God is not dead; He does
not recognize or countenance death; neither does man, when freed from
its delusion. Jesus said, "Follow me; and leave the dead to bury their
own dead."

26\. The first step in demonstrating over death is to get the belief
entirely out of the mind that it is God-ordained, or that it is of force
or effect anywhere in the realm of pure Being.

27\. The next step is to live so harmoniously that the whole
consciousness will be not only resurrected from its belief in death but
so vivified and energized with the idea of undying life that it cannot
dissolve or separate.

28\. We regard the apostle's words "dead through your trespasses and
sins" as metaphorical. But an analysis of man, in the supermundane part
of his being, reveals that sin or departure from divine law in the use
of a faculty actually results in its death. That is, after violent
exercise of a power there is such a reaction that it goes into a
comatose state or "sleep of death." Death is the failure on the part of
man to sustain harmonious life in the body.

29\. Death and sleep are brothers in a metaphysical sense. The life
action is never wholly withdrawn from all parts of a form, but in the
experience named death there is such cessation of

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

vitality that dissolution of the outer shell takes place. Jesus
pronounced death to be sleep, and said that the sleeper could be
awakened when the vitality was restored in divine order. Jesus said that
Lazarus was asleep, and added: "I go, that I may awake him out of
sleep."

30\. But His disciples did not see deeply, and took it for granted that
Lazarus had merely fallen into a trance or prolonged sleep, and said,
"Lord, if he is fallen asleep, he will recover." "Then Jesus therefore
said unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead." Paul frequently referred to
those who had dissolved the body as brethren who had "fallen asleep."
The Lord told Daniel, "But go thou thy way till the end be; for thou
shalt rest, and shalt stand in thy lot, at the end of the days."

31\. Our poets in their inspired moments have caught this truth, and our
literature is replete with references to the "sleep of death." Hamlet,
in his soliloquy, opens to us in a remarkable way the metaphysics of
death:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">To die, to sleep;  
To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub:  
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,  
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,  
Must give us pause.  
</span>

</div>

32\. We are not afraid to go to sleep at night, yet every time we lie
down and fall into unconsciousness of the body, we are enacting in a
small way the sleep of death. In one case the soul leaves the body for a
few hours and again takes it up; in

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the other the soul leaves the body to mortal dissolution, yet it does
not fail to return in due time and take up a body--so long as it
believes in the limitation of sense. In the sleep of a single night, the
one with a clear conscience rests peacefully and is strengthened for
another day's experience. But the guilty, anxious, worried sleeper is
haunted by distressing dreams.

33\. The experience of the death-sleeper is similar. If his life has
been according to the Golden Rule, he "wraps the drapery of his couch
about him, and lies down to pleasant dreams"; his soul basks in the
sunshine of a world Elysian and his hope of heaven is for a season
fulfilled.

34\. This, however, is but the rest that prepares him for another day's
experience in the workshop of Being. This process is repeated again and
again, until man discovers that there is a law of living that obviates
this repeated "sleep of death." That law is revealed to all who seek to
do the will of God and fulfill the law of life.

35\. Here is where we find ourselves today. We know that this law of
life is based on mind action and that through the mind we may resurrect
ourselves from the dead.

36\. As we explore the mental realm, which is our causative thought, we
find it filled with a legion of narrow beliefs, foolish, ignorant
beliefs, selfish beliefs, and discordant beliefs. These we have lumped
together and denominated "mortal mind," or "carnal mind."

37\. It is here that we first do our raising of

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

the dead. Each of these beliefs of mortality is a sin. The meaning of
"sin" is "missing the mark," and these sense limitations miss the mark
of divine Truth. The light of Truth must be turned into our
consciousness and each of these sleepers must be awakened. Some of them
may seem for a time to be beyond our power to resurrect; our most
sanguine thoughts may lack faith at the prospect, and may cry out:
"Lord, by this time the body decayeth."

38\. But the Christ power is with us. "Said I not unto thee, that, if
thou believedst, thou shouldest see the glory of God?"

39\. All things are possible to them that believe in the power of God
within, waiting to be made manifest at their word. Then send forth that
word and say to every sleeping belief of sense: "Lazarus, come forth."

40\. If you do not believe in the power of Spirit to resurrect your
consciousness from its tomb of earthly superstitions, of course you may
make no effort to do it. But if you have faith that it can be done, you
can do it.

41\. Beliefs of every kind take up their abode in the consciousness and
make a home there. If you believe in old age and bodily decrepitude and
decay, you will find that all the little cells throughout your organism
are carrying in their depths just such pictures, as the clear waters of
the lake reflect the trees and the clouds. If you want these obedient
little cells of your soul and your body to reflect pictures of health
and vigor undying, hold before them, in

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the heaven of your mind, clear images of these perfect states. Not only
hold such images before them, but demand that they express those images
perfectly. And do not forget to conserve your bodily energies by pure,
careful thinking and living, in order that you may have the transparent
substance in which your true thought images may be planted and, in their
course, brought to fruitage.

42\. Many who are faithful in holding right mental images do not get
results, because they lack a receptacle; they let the lusts of the flesh
dissipate all the clear water of life, and their good thoughts and their
good words are returned to them void. Guard all the powers of your being
if you would resurrect them from the dead. They do not stand alone, but
are dependent on one another, and must all be brought into subjection to
the Christ of God. Paul said, "Every man that striveth in the games
exerciseth self-control in all things."

43\. The resurrection of the dead is the sure and certain work of the
true Christian. We know that Jesus is the example that we are to follow,
and we say with Paul:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">If the dead are not raised, neither hath Christ
been  
raised: and if Christ hath not been raised, your faith is  
vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also that are  
fallen asleep in Christ have perished. . . .  
But now hath Christ been raised from the dead, the  
firstfruits of them that are asleep. For since by man came  
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For  
as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made  
alive. . . . The last enemy that shall be abolished is  
death.  
</span>

</div>

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 5](tot06.md)
