[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlt06)  [Next](dlt08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

### CHAPTER V.

### THE ANTECEDENTS OF THE GOSPEL TEACHING: THE APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE.

WE must now show by quotations from the Apocalyptic literature that the
eschatological teaching of the Old Testament prophets was continued,
being both developed and elaborated during the two centuries immediately
preceding the Christian Era. The divisions of this chapter will
correspond with those of chap. ii., so that the teaching of the two
classes of literature may be easily compared. It will be the more
necessary to give quotations in full here, owing to the fact that
editions of the works belonging to this class of literature are not
easily available on account of their cost.

#### §i. *The Signs which precede the End*.

In *Ethiopic Enoch* i. 5-7 we read that, on the appearance of the Holy
and Great One, "every

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

one will be smitten with fear, and the watchers will quake, and great
fear and trembling will seize them unto the ends of the earth. And the
high mountains will be shaken, and the high hills will be made low, and
will melt like wax before the flame. And the earth will be rent and all
that is upon the earth will perish . . . .;" the "watchers" (*‘îrîn*)
are mentioned for the first time in Dan. iv. 13, 17, 23 (iv. 10, 14, 20
in the Aramaic); in *Slavonic Enoch* xviii. 1 they are called "angels";
strictly speaking, the fallen angels are meant, though in *Ethiopic
Enoch* lxxi. 7 "it designates the archangels" (Charles *in loc.*). In
later passages of this book similar ideas occur, thus xcix. 4. 5: "In
those days (*i.e.* immediately before the Advent of the Messiah) nations
shall rise up, and the Kindreds of the Gentiles will lift themselves up
on that day of destruction. In that day shall they who suffer want go
and hew their children in pieces and cast them away." A "sign" of a
different kind is recorded in c. 1, 2: "And in those days the fathers
together with their sons will be smitten in one place, brothers will
fall in death one with another until it streams with their blood like a
river. For a man will not withhold his hand from slaying his sons and
his sons' sons,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

and the sinner will not withhold his hand from his honoured brother:
from dawn till sunset they will slay one another." Another
characteristic passage is cii. 1, 2: "And in those days when he brings a
grievous fire upon you, whither will ye flee and where will ye find
deliverance. . . .? And all the luminaries will quake with direst fear,
and all the earth will be affrighted and tremble and be alarmed." In one
of the fragments from the *Apocalypse of Noah*, preserved in this book
(lxxx. 4-8), we read: "And the moon will alter her order and not appear
at her (appointed) time . . . . and many chiefs of the superior stars
will err, and these will alter their orbits and tasks, and will not
appear at the seasons prescribed to them . . . ." The third book of *The
Sibylline Oracles* contains several passages describing the signs of the
"last times"; only one or two need be cited here. In verses 71 ff. the
approach of the terrors of the great God are spoken of, then in 83-85 it
goes on to say that the firmament will fall to the earth and into the
ocean, and a mighty cascade of fire will flow down incessantly and burn
up earth and sea. In verses 184 ff. the wickedness of men in those days
is described, this being one of the signs of the approaching end; and
this will be

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

followed "in those days" by oppression and confusion among men, and the
general break-up of society. Among the "signs" that are spoken of in
this book are fiery swords which shall fall from heaven upon the earth,
and burning torches which will drop among men (verses 669 ff.). The most
striking passage, however, is the following (verses 796-806): "But I
will tell thee of a sure sign whereby thou mayest know when the end of
all things is coming upon the earth; when swords appear in the star-lit
heavens towards evening and towards morning; then will a dust-storm
descend from heaven upon the whole earth, and the splendour of the sun
will disappear from the heavens at midday, and the moonbeams will become
visible on earth. Another sign will be bloody drops upon rocks; in the
clouds ye will see a battle . . . thus God who dwells in the heavens
will bring about the end of all things." The teaching of *The Testaments
of the Twelve Patriarchs* on this subject may be illustrated by a few
quotations; Levi iv. 1 runs: . . . . "When the rocks are being rent, and
the sun quenched, and the waters dried up, and the fire cowering, and
all creation troubled, and the invisible spirits melting away, and Hades
taketh the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

spoils through the visitations of the Most High, men will be unbelieving
and persist in their iniquity." Judah xxii. 1, 2: "And the Lord shall
bring upon them divisions one against another. And there shall be
continued wars in Israel; and among men of another race shall my kingdom
be brought to an end, until the salvation of Israel shall come." That,
as in the case of the Old Testament prophets, the Apocalyptic writers
often based their eschatological prophecies upon the historical
conditions of their own times is what one would expect. Professor
Charles remarks on the passage cited: "During the civil wars in the
reign of Alexander Jannaus 50,000 Jews are said to have perished. From
the death of Alexander to the accession of Herod Palestine was hardly
ever free from civil strife." (See, further, Schürer, *The Jewish People
in the Time of Jesus Christ*, I. i. pp. 301-307, etc.) In Asher vii. 2,
the signs of the coming of the "last times" are thus referred to: "For I
know that ye shall sin, and be delivered into the hands of your enemies,
and your soul shall be made desolate, and your holy places destroyed,
and ye shall be scattered unto the four corners of the earth. And ye
shall be set at nought in the dispersion as

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

useless water, until the Most High shall visit the earth. . . ." (*Cf.*
also Naph. viii. 1 ff.) The Book of Jubilees also has several passages
which speak of the signs of the "last times," *e.g.*, xxiii. 12 ff.,
where it says that "in those days there will be plague upon plague,
wound upon wound, sadness upon sadness, evil rumour upon evil rumour,
and many similar terrible punishments, one after another; sickness,
destruction, frost, hail, snow, fever, cold, stiffness, drought, death,
sword, imprisonment, and every kind of sorrow and sickness. And all this
will come upon the evil generation that sins upon the earth. . . ." A
long passage of similar content follows; see also xxxvi. 10 ff. *The
Ascension of Isaiah*, which is to a large extent of Christian origin,
evidently, however, utilises much earlier material; a passage from a
work called *The Testament of Hezekiah*, which has been incorporated
into the *Ascension*, <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) runs: ". . .
And at his word the sun will rise at night, and he will make the moon to
appear at the sixth hour" (iv. 5.); a description of the Second Advent
follows later on. Of more interest, because of its greater details, is a
poetic passage in *The Assumption of Moses*, x. 1-10, one of the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

most striking descriptions of the "last things" which we possess; it
tells first of the impending Advent, and then goes on (verses 4-6):
"Then shall the earth quake and it shall be shaken unto the ends
thereof, and the high mountains shall be brought low, and shall be
shaken, and the valley shall sink down. The sun shall no more give her
light, and shall be turned into darkness. The horns of the moon shall be
broken, and shall be wholly turned into blood. And the course of the
stars shall be brought into confusion. The sea shall withdraw into the
abyss, and the wells shall cease, and the rivers shall dry up." With
these words it will be interesting to compare Isa. ii. 19, xiii. 10;
Ezek. xxxvi. 7; Joel ii. 10, iii. 4, iv. 15; *Pss. of Sol.* xvii. 21;
*Test. xii. Patr.*, Levi iv. 4; *iv. Esdras* vi. 24; *Sib. Orac.* v.
158, 159. The Syriac *Apocalypse of Baruch* has a large amount of
material of which only a few selected passages can find a place here; in
xxv. 2 ff. it says: "This, therefore, shall be the sign (*i.e.*, of the
coming of the Most High at the end of the days); numbing fear shall take
hold of the inhabitants of the earth, they shall fall into many grievous
troubles (*cf.* Dan. xii. 1), yea, shall fall into terrible torments.
And when, owing to their great

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

sorrows, they will say in their hearts, 'Give no more thought to the
mighty of the earth,' and when they shall give up all hope, then shall
that 'time' commence." Chap. xxvii. of this book enumerates the sorrows
that are to come upon men in "those days"; there are to be twelve
periods into which these sorrows will be divided, each period being
characterised by special terrors; the first will initiate the beginning
of travail, in the second will follow the murder of the great ones of
the earth, in the third the death of many men, in the fourth the sending
out of the sword (*cf.* for this expression Jer. xxv. 16, 27), in the
fifth hunger and drought, in the sixth revolutions and terrors, in the
seventh . . . . (part of the text has fallen out here), in the eighth
many apparitions and meetings with demons, in the ninth the falling of
fire from heaven, in the tenth robbery and oppression, in the eleventh
wicked deeds and self-indulgence, and in the twelfth a repetition and
mixing up of all the foregoing. These woes which are to precede the
coming of the Messiah are again dealt with in xlviii. 25-41, and in lxx.
2-10. Lastly, in *iv. Esdras* a long account of these "signs" is given
in chaps. v., vi.; to give but one or two

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

passages out of many: "Then shall the sun shine suddenly at night-time,
and the moon in the day-time; blood will flow down from the trees; the
stones will cry aloud; the nations shall rise up. . . . In many places
abysses will open up, and fire will break forth; the wild beasts will
leave their haunts; women will bear mis-shapen monsters; sweet water
will turn salt; friends will suddenly fight against one another" (v.
4-9). Very important, too, in this connection is ix. 1 ff.: ". . . And
when thou seest that a part of the signs which have been announced are
past, then wilt thou understand that the time has come in which the Most
High will punish the earth that He has created, when there shall appear
in the world:

Revolution in the lands,  
Disquietude among the peoples,  
Devices of the nations, <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)  
Fightings among princes,  
Enmity among rulers, <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23)--

then wilt thou understand that these are the things that the Most High
spoke of since the days which were from the beginning. . . ." See the
whole passage, which is very suggestive all through.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

#### §ii. *The Advent of Jehovah the Judge*.

The thought of the end of the age and that of the actual Advent belong
of course together, one presupposes the other; and therefore we shall
not expect to find in every passage dealing with the approach of God, or
of the Messiah, <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) the direct statement
that this approach heralds the end of all things; nor shall we expect to
find in every passage dealing with the "end of the age" a direct
statement of the actual Advent. The whole cycle of eschatological
ideas--and this cannot be too strongly insisted upon--was public
property, and therefore very familiar to the people in general; the vast
mass of eschatological literature which must once have existed
illustrates this fact. We must now deal with a few passages which embody
the two ideas of the "end of the age" and of the actual Advent, the
preceding signs of which have been referred to in the foregoing section.
These may be prefaced by a few words from the book of Daniel; this book
exercised a good deal of influence on the Apocalyptic literature, of

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

which (so far as we know) it is the earliest example in the stricter
sense. In Dan. viii. 19, we read: And he said, *Behold, I will make thee
know what shall be in the latter time of the indignation; for it
belongeth to the appointed time of the end* (*cf.* the visions in chaps.
vii., viii.). More pointed is xi. 40, where again historical conditions
form the basis of eschatological thought: *And at the time of the end
shall the king of the south contend with him; and the king of the north
shall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with
horsemen, and with many ships; and he shall enter into the countries,
and shall overflow and pass through*. The reference here is evidently to
the "end of the age," both from the opening expression, as well as on
account of the words which come later on and belong to the same passage:
*And there shall be a time of trouble such as never was since there was
a nation*. The actual appearing of the Almighty is spoken of in *Eth.
Enoch* i. 3, 4, 9: "Concerning the elect I spake, and uttered a parable
concerning them: the Holy and Great One will come forth from His
dwelling, the God of the world. And going from thence He will tread on
Mount Sinai and appear with His hosts, and in the strength of His might
appear from

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Heaven. . . . And to! He comes with ten
thousands of (His) holy ones to execute judgement upon them . . . .;"
this is from the earliest portion of the book, but *The Book of the
Similitudes* also refers to the Advent, *e.g.*, xxxviii. 2: "And when
the Righteous One shall appear before the eyes of the elect righteous
whose works are wrought in dependence on the Lord of spirits . . . ."
See also xxxix. 6: "In that place did mine eyes behold the 'Chosen One'
(*i.e.*, the Messiah) <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) of
righteousness and faithfulness; in his days shall righteousness reign."
So, too, in the other portion of this work, called "The Book of
Celestial Physics," the Advent is clearly referred to in the words: "And
the Lord of Spirits seated him (*i.e.*, the Messiah) on the throne of
his glory and the spirit of righteousness was poured out upon him, and
the word of his mouth slew all the sinners, and all the unrighteous were
destroyed before his face. And there will stand up in that day all the
kings, and the mighty, and the exalted, and those who hold the earth,
and they will see and recognise him how he sits on the throne of

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

his glory" (lxxii. 2 ff.; see the whole chapter); the passage is
especially interesting when compared with *The Book of Enoch* proper,
for as will have been seen above, in i. 3 ff., it is God Himself, the
"Holy and Great One," who is the central figure in the Advent, while in
the passage just quoted it is the Messiah who takes up this position.
One other passage from this portion of the book is worth quoting: "And
he sat on the throne of his glory, and the sum of judgement was
committed unto him, the Son of Man, and he caused the sinners and those
who have led the world astray to pass away and be destroyed from off the
face of the earth . . ." (lxix. 27 ff.).

Turning now to *The Sibylline Oracles*, we find the expectation of the
approach of the "last times" expressed thus: "When will that day come,
and the judgement of the immortal God, the Great King? . . . For (that
day) shall come in the which the smell of brimstone will be evident to
all men" (iii. 55-61). In another passage of this book it is not the
immortal God who is to come, but a King whom He will send from Heaven:
"And then will God send a King from Heaven to judge each one with blood
and the glow of fire. But there is a royal stock,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

whose seed will not perish, but will in the fulness of time reign and
rear up a new Temple of God" (iii. 286-290). A similar passage occurs in
iii. 625-658: "And then God will send a King from the rising up of the
sun (*i.e.*, from the east) who will put an end to the terrible war on
the whole earth, some he will slay, with others he will make a covenant.
And this all will he do not by following his own counsel, but by
following the righteous purposes of the great God. And the Temple of the
great God will stand forth in rich splendour, with gold and silver and
purple. . . ." This mention of the Temple is interesting; we shall refer
to it again in dealing with the Gospel teaching on the subject. It is
spoken of also in a passage in *The Book of Jubilees* i. 29 ff.: "And
the Angel of the presence who went before the hosts of Israel, took the
tables of the divisions of the year . . . from the day of the new
creation, when Heaven and earth and all creatures shall be renewed like
the powers of the Heavens and like every creature of the earth, until
the Sanctuary of God in Jerusalem on Mount Zion shall be made. . . ."
(See, further, xxiii. 27 ff.) The thought of the "last times" is
frequent in *The Testaments* 

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

*of the Twelve Patriarchs*, and, as in the Old Testament, it is, as a
rule, present historical conditions which form the point of attachment
to which are joined eschatological prophecies; various expressions are
used to denote the end, *e.g.*: "the consummation of the times" (Reuben
vi. 8); "the end of the ages" (Levi x. 2; Benj. xi. 3); "the last times"
(Issachar vi. 1); "the time of consummation" (Zebulon ix. 9), etc. It is
by no means always that the Personal appearance of God or the Messiah is
specifically mentioned, although this is always understood; herein the
*Testaments* are at one with most of the Apocalyptic literature. The
mention of God Himself as the Messianic ruler occurs, however, in,
*e.g.*, Zebulon viii. 8: "And after these things there shall arise unto
you the Lord himself, the light of righteousness, and ye shall see (the
place) which the Lord shall choose. Jerusalem is its name." (*Cf.* Mal.
iv. 2.) With this should be compared Levi xviii. 2-14, which is also an
eschatological passage, but the place of the Almighty is taken by
another here: "Then shall the Lord raise up a new priest. And to him all
the words of the Lord shall be revealed; and he shall execute a
righteous judgement upon the earth for a multitude of

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

days. And his star shall arise in heaven as of a King, lighting up the
light of knowledge as the sun the day, and he shall be magnified in the
world . . . .;" but more frequently it is God Himself who is represented
as the central figure in the Advent, thus Simeon vi. 5-7: ". . . For the
Lord God shall appear on earth, and save the sons of men. . . ." (See
also Levi ii. 11, Naphthali viii. 3, and Asher vii. 3.) In this last
passage it tells of how the Most High shall visit the earth, coming
Himself, and breaking the head of the dragon in the water. These are
only a very few passages from this most interesting work. In *The Book
of Jubilees* the personality of the central figure at the Advent is not
described, but may be inferred from such a passage as xxiii. 29-31,
which is eschatological: ". . . And then will God heal his servants . .
. and the righteous shall behold and give thanks, and they shall rejoice
in all eternity, and shall see all the judgement upon their enemies and
all their curse. And their bones shall rest in the earth, and their
spirit shall have great joy, and they shall understand that it is God
who commands judgement, and who shows mercy upon hundreds and thousands,
even upon all that love him." But this book does not offer

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

a great deal which is appropriate in the present connection; the same
must be said of *The Ascension of Isaiah*, though here and there some
interesting evidence is forthcoming, thus in *The Testament of
Hezekiah*, which is incorporated in this book, we read that "the Lord
will come with his angels and with the armies of the holy ones from the
seventh heaven with the glory of the seventh heaven . . ." (iv. 14 ff.);
from the same portion of the book the following may also be cited: "And
there will be much slander and vain-glory at the approach of the Lord,
and the Holy Spirit will withdraw from many" (*cf.* verse 30); this,
however, is evidently Christian, though on comparing it with other
pre-Christian passages, one can see that it is based on earlier
material. Considerably more material is contained in the Syriac
*Apocalypse of Baruch*; here we read, for example, in xxix. 1 ff: ". . .
Then shall the Messiah begin to reveal himself;" in xxx. 3: "For every
one knows that the time has come of which it is said that it is the end
of the times." But the fullest account in this book is contained in
chap. lxxxiii. This begins: "For the Most High shall surely cause his
times to come quickly, he shall surely cause his periods to commence; he

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

shall surely judge those who are in his world. . . . But the end of the
world shall then show forth the great might of the Ruler, for all men
shall be brought to judgement . . ." (see the whole chapter). It is
important to note how in this book the limitation in time of the
Messianic rule is taught; it is said, for example, in xxx. 1: "And after
that, when the time of the Advent of the Messiah has been accomplished,
he will return unto heaven in glory." This limited duration seems
implied again in xl. 1-4: ". . . And they shall bring him (*i.e.*, the
last evil ruler) up to Mount Zion, and my Messiah will question him
concerning all his evil deeds, and he will gather together and lay
before him all the deeds of his followers. And after that he (*i.e.*,
the Messiah) will slay him, but the remnant of my people, even those who
are found in the land which I have chosen, will he protect; and his rule
shall last continually, for ever, until the world, which is condemned to
destruction, comes to an end, and until the times which have been
referred to, have been completed." In some respects *iv. Esdras* is the
most important among Apocalyptic writings; the Advent of the Messiah is
described in xiii. 2-13, which contains the

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Vision of the Man ascending out of the sea";
this passage is sufficiently important to be quoted in full. The
following is a translation of the Latin text edited by Bensley:--"And
behold, from the sea a great wind arose and stirred up all its waves.
And I looked, and behold that wind caused to ascend from the heart of
the sea as it were the likeness of a man. I looked, and behold this man
flew with the clouds of heaven. And whithersoever he turned his face and
gazed, there all things trembled when they were seen by him. And
whithersoever the voice went forth out of his mouth, there all that
heard his voice melted away as wax melts when it feels the fire. And
after these things I looked, and behold a multitude of men that could
not be numbered, were gathered together from the four winds of heaven,
in order to come against the man who had ascended out of the sea. And I
looked, and behold he hewed out for himself a great mountain, and flew
upon it. But I sought to discover the region or the locality out of
which the mountain had been hewn, but I could not. And after this I
looked, and behold, all they that were gathered together against him in
order to fight against him,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

were greatly afraid; nevertheless they dared to fight. And behold, when
he observed the onslaught of the approaching multitude, he raised not
his hand, nor did he clutch his sword, nor any other warlike weapon; I
only saw how that he sent forth out of his mouth as it were a fiery
stream, and from his lips flaming breath; and from his tongue there came
out a storm of sparks; these were all mixed up together, the fiery
stream, the flaming breath and the overwhelming storm. And these struck
against the approaching multitude which had prepared to fight, and
burned the whole of it, so that suddenly nothing was seen of the
miserable multitude but the dust of ashes and the smell of smoke. And
when I saw this I was terrified. And after this I saw that man
descending from the mountain and calling unto him another, a peaceful
multitude. And there were nigh unto him the figures of many men, some of
them joyful, others sad; some of them bound, others led those whom they
brought as offerings." In this passage there are a number of *traits*
which are very much older than the book in which they have been
embodied, <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) but

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the Vision purports to describe the Advent of the Messiah, the
annihilation of his enemies, *i.e.*, the wicked, and the blessedness of
his followers, *i.e.*, the good; the Messianic reign of peace is then to
be inaugurated. The interpretation of the Vision, as given in verses 21
ff. of the same chapter, should also be read.

#### §iii. *The Judgement on the Wicked*.

This subject plays a very prominent part in the Old Testament as well as
in the later literature; but here it is, of course, only in connection
with eschatological thought that it is to be considered. The passages in
which mention is made of the final lot of the Wicked are many in number
in *Eth. Enoch*; only a small selection need be cited. In i. 9, we read:
"And lo! He comes with ten thousands of His holy ones to execute
judgement upon them, and He will destroy the ungodly, and will convict
all flesh of all that the sinners and ungodly have wrought and ungodly
committed against Him;" and so in many other passages. The place in
which the Wicked are to suffer punishment is also mentioned; it is said
in x. 12-14: "When all their sons have slain one another, and they have
seen the destruction

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

of their beloved ones, bind them fast under the hills of the earth for
seventy generations, till the day of their judgement and of their
consummation, till the judgement which is for ever and ever is
consummated. In those days they will be led off to the abyss of fire; in
torment and in prison will they be confined for ever and ever . . .;"
these are the words of the Lord spoken to Michael the Archangel. (See
also xxii. 1-13; xvii. 1-5.) In lxiii. 10 (from the portion of this book
known as *The Book of Celestial Physics*) the Wicked speak of their own
punishment in these words: "Our souls are satisfied with the mammon of
unrighteousness, but this does not prevent us from descending into the
flame of the pain of Sheol." In *The Book of Similitudes* there are
likewise frequent references to the doom of the Wicked (see xli. 1, 2.;
xlv. 6; xlviii. 8-10; lvi. 8; lxii. 2; lxix. 27, 28). Passages dealing
with the subject from other books of this class of literature are the
following (only one example from each book is given): *The Sibylline
Oracles* iii. 689 ff.: "And God shall judge all men with war and sword,
and fire, and overflowing rain, and brimstone shall descend from heaven
. . . mourning and the cry of battle will be over the whole earth, when
men

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

will perish, and cascades will run with blood, yea, the earth herself
will drink of the blood of those that perish." In speaking of the "seven
heavens" it says in *The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs*, Levi iii.
2: "The second has fire, snow, ice ready for the day of the ordinance of
the Lord in the righteous judgement of God. In it are all the spirits of
the retributions for vengeance on the lawless." With this *cf.* Sir.
xxxix. 28-30; xl. 9, 10. In *The Psalms of Solomon* xv. 12, 13, we read:
"And in the Lord's Day of Judgement the sinners shall be destroyed for
ever, when God will punish the earth with His judgement: . . . the
sinners will go into everlasting destruction." So, too, in *The Book of
Jubilees* xxxvi. 10, 11: "And in the day of confusion and curse and of
wrath and indignation will He (God) burn, in the fire that burns and
destroys, his (*i.e.* the wicked) land and his city and all that is his,
like as He (God) burned Sodom; and he (*i.e.* the wicked man) shall be
blotted out of the book of remembrance <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) of the children of men, and shall not be
written in the book of life, <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) but in
that of those who are destined to destruction; and he shall

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

go to the eternal curse, in order that their judgement may be daily
renewed for ever in shame and in perdition and in wrath, and in sorrow
and in sickness." In *Slav. Enoch* x. 1-6 a vivid description is given
of the place where the Wicked are to dwell eternally; after enumerating
the various kinds of sinners, it says: "For all these this place is
prepared for an eternal inheritance." (*Cf.* vii. if .; lxi. 6 ff.) A
very curious conception is contained in *The Ascension of Isaiah* iv.
18, according to which the final punishment of the Wicked will not
consist in torment, but in an annihilation resulting in absolute
non-existence; this idea is contained in a passage from *The Testament
of Hezekiah*, incorporated into this book: ". . . . And the Beloved will
cause fire to go forth from Him, and it will consume all the godless,
and they will be as though they had not been created." Once more, in
*The Assumption of Moses* x. 3, we read: "For the Heavenly One will rise
up from His throne, and will come forth from His holy
dwelling-place <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) in indignation and in
wrath because of His children." The whole passage needs to be read in
order to realise to the full its eschatological character. Then we have
in the Syriac

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Apocalypse of Baruch* xxx. 4, 5, these words:
"But the souls of the godless, when they shall see all this, will perish
for fear; for they shall know that (the time of) their torment has come
upon them, and that their destruction is at hand." (See also xliv. 15,
and the whole of li.) Lastly, in *iv. Esdras* vi. 18-20, we read:
"Behold, days are coming in the which I will come near to punish the
inhabitants of the earth, when I shall come to make
[inquisition](errata.htm#1) concerning the iniquity of the evil doers. .
. ." (See also xi. 37, 38.)

On comparing the ideas on this subject with those contained in the Old
Testament, the process of development will be sufficiently obvious.

#### §iv. *The Blessedness of the Righteous*.

This subject, like the preceding, occupies a very prominent place in the
literature we are considering; it will be sufficient here, too, to give
a single example from each work in order to show how uniform the
teaching on the subject is. *Eth. Enoch* i. 8: "But to the righteous He
will give peace, and He will protect the elect, and grace will be upon
them, and they will all belong to God, and it will be well with them,
and they will be

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

blessed, and the light of God will shine upon them." (See, too, xcix. 10
ff.; c. 5; cii. 4; ciii. 1 ff.) In *The Book of Similitudes* lxii.
13-16, we read: "And the righteous and elect will be saved on that day .
. . and there shall be your garments, garments of life, before the Lord
of Spirits; and your garments will not grow old, and your glory will not
pass away before the Lord of Spirits." (See, too, xli. 1, 2; xlv. 4; 1.
l; lviii. 3-6; lxix. 26.) *Sibylline Oracles* iii. 580-582: "In
righteousness and in joy shall they inherit the cities and the fruitful
fields, for they have attained to the Law of the Most High. They shall
become prophets themselves, raised up by the Immortal One, and shall
bring great joy to all men." <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) (See,
further, verses 702-731, 767-784.) *The Testaments of the Twelve
Patriarchs*, Levi xviii. 12, 13: "And Beliar shall be bound by Him, and
He shall give power to His children to tread upon the evil spirits. And
the Lord shall rejoice in His children, and be well pleased in His
beloved ones for ever." (See also Judah xxv. 3-5; Dan. v. 12, 13.) *The
Psalms of Solomon* xv. 13: "But they who fear the Lord shall then find
mercy and shall live in the grace of their God" (*cf.* xviii. 6-9). *The
Book of Jubilees* xxiii. 29: "And all their days shall they fulfil in
peace

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

and joy, and they shall live, for there will be no Satan and no Evil One
to destroy them, but all their days will be days of blessing and
salvation;" the succeeding verses are to the same effect. *Slav. Enoch*
lxv. 8: "There shall be one eternity, and all the just who shall escape
the great judgement of the Lord shall be gathered together in eternal
life, and for ever and ever the just shall be gathered together, and
they shall be eternal." (See also lxi. 1 ff; lxvi. 7.) *The Ascension of
Isaiah* (*The Testament of Hezekiah*) iv. 15-17: "And He will give rest
to the godly whom He shall find in the body in this world. . . . But the
saints will come with the Lord <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) with
their garments which are stored up on high in the seventh heaven; with
the Lord will they come, whose spirits are clothed, they will descend
and be present in the world, and He will strengthen those that have been
found in the body, together with the saints, in the garments of the
saints, <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32) and the Lord will minister
to those who have kept watch in this world." <span
id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33) *The Assumption of Moses* x. i: "And then
shall appear his rule over all creatures; then shall the devil come to
an end, and with him sorrow shall be taken

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

away" (*cf.* verses 8-10). The Syriac *Apocalypse of Baruch* has many
passages of a similar kind, *e.g.*, li. 7-12: ". . . . For they shall
dwell in the high places of that world, and they shall be like the
angels <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) and shall be comparable with
the stars. . . . And then shall the glory of the righteous be greater
than that of the angels. . . ." (See, further, xxix. 6-8, xliv. 13-15,
and the beautiful passage lxxiii. 1-7.) Finally, *iv. Esdras* vi. 25-28:
"And whosoever remaineth after all these things that I foretold to thee,
shall be saved and shall see my salvation, and shall behold the end of
my world. Then shall appear the men who were aforetime taken up and who
have not tasted of death since their birth; then shall the heart of
those who inhabit the earth be turned and be changed to a new
spirit. <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35) . . ." (See also xiii. 39,
40.) By those who "have not tasted death" are meant Enoch and Elijah,
and possibly Moses, in view of the words in Deut. xxxvi. 6: *No man
knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day*; as regards Enoch, see *Slav.
Enoch* ii. 4: "And now, my children, let no one seek me till the Lord
brings me back to you."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[82:1](dlt07.htm#fr_21) See Charles's edition,
pp. xxxvi.--xliii.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[85:1](dlt07.htm#fr_22) *Cf.* Ezek. xxxviii. 10.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[85:2](dlt07.htm#fr_23) The poetic form of these
lines suggests ancient material.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[86:1](dlt07.htm#fr_24) On this point see *The
Evolution of the Messianic Idea*, pp. 230 ff.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[88:1](dlt07.htm#fr_25) See Luke ix. 35: *This
is my Son, my chosen; hear ye him*; xxiii. 35: *Let him save himself if
this is the Christ of God, his chosen*. (*Cf.* Isa. xliii. 1, 2; *Eth.
Enoch* xl. 5; xlv. 3, 4; xlix. 2, 4; li. 3, 5.)

<span id="fn_26"></span>[96:1](dlt07.htm#fr_26) See further on this,
*The Messianic Teaching of iv. Esdras* in "The International Journal of
Apocrypha," pp. 11 ff. (Jan. 1908).

<span id="fn_27"></span>[99:1](dlt07.htm#fr_27) *Cf.* Mal. iii. 16.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[99:2](dlt07.htm#fr_28) *Cf.* Ps. lxix. 28.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[100:1](dlt07.htm#fr_29) *Cf.* Mic. i.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[102:1](dlt07.htm#fr_30) *Cf.* Dan. xii. 3.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[103:1](dlt07.htm#fr_31) *Cf.* 1 Thess. iii. 13;
2 Thess. i. 10.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[103:2](dlt07.htm#fr_32) *Cf.* Luke xxiv. 4.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[103:3](dlt07.htm#fr_33) *Cf.* 1 Thess. v. 6;
Rev. xvi. 15.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[104:1](dlt07.htm#fr_34) *Cf.* Luke xx. 36: *For
they are equal to the angels; and are sons of God, being sons of the
resurrection*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[104:2](dlt07.htm#fr_35) *Cf.* Ezek. xxxvi. 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Some Further Eschatological Elements in the
Apocalyptic Literature](dlt08)
