[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlt07)  [Next](dlt09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

### SOME FURTHER ESCHATOLOGICAL ELEMENTS IN THE APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE.

IN chap. iii. we referred briefly to some points of subsidiary
importance belonging to the Eschatological Drama. The first of these,
namely *Theophanies*, was mentioned because the details of the later
eschatological conceptions are apparently based upon much that we read
in the Old Testament concerning divine appearances. This fact lies in
the natural order of things; for the Apocalyptists, in creating their
mental pictures of what was to take place in the "last times," were
necessarily very much influenced by what they had read and studied in
the Scriptures. But in the Apocalyptic literature there is only one
Theophany which is spoken of, that of the "last times"; there is nothing
parallel to the other divine appearances which are described in the Old
Testament; nevertheless,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

the conceptions concerning the final great Theophany, as contained in
the Apocalyptic literature, are based upon, and receive their colouring,
in the main, from the various Theophanic descriptions of the Old
Testament; this subject, as far as the Apocalyptic literature is
concerned, has been dealt with in §§i. ii. of the preceding chapter, and
need not be further treated here. But the other matters spoken of in
chap. iii. require some further attention here, as they recur in the
Apocalyptic writings.

#### §i. *The Gathering of the Gentiles*.

We saw, in dealing with the Old Testament presentation of this subject,
that two entirely different attitudes were taken up with regard to the
Gentiles; there was the *Particularist* attitude, which, in its narrow
nationalism, regarded all non-Jews as outside the pale of divine
recognition, and which saw in the gathering of the Gentiles in the "last
times" the great occasion for their final destruction. On the other
hand, there was the *Universalist* attitude, which, in its wider outlook
upon the world, taught that the divine mercy was not

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

restricted in its action to the Jewish nation, but that the Gentile
world would also be embraced in the number of those who would be
accepted by God, and that therefore in the "last times" the gathering of
the Gentiles would take place in order that their salvation, too, might
be proclaimed. These two attitudes also figure in the Apocalyptic
literature. The different works incorporated into *The Ethiopic Book of
Enoch* are almost wholly Universalistic in character; <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) the two great divisions of mankind are not
Jew and Gentile, but the righteous and the sinners, the differentiation
between Jew and Gentile scarcely ever occurs in the eschatological
portions, a notable exception to this, however, will be noted presently.
To give one or two illustrations of this, in xci. 14 we read: "And after
that, in the ninth week, the righteous judgement will be revealed to the
whole world, and all the works of the godless will vanish from the whole
earth, and the world will be written down for destruction, and all
mankind will look to the path of uprightness." Likewise in *The Book of
Similitudes* xxxviii. 2 "And when the Righteous One shall appear before
the eyes of

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

the elect righteous whose works are wrought in dependence on the Lord of
Spirits, and light will appear to the righteous and the elect who dwell
on the earth--where then will be the dwelling of the sinners, and where
the resting-place of those who have denied the Lord of Spirits? It had
been good for them if they had not been born." Still more pointed is
xlviii. 4, 5: "He will be a staff to the righteous on which they will
support themselves and not fall, and He will be the light of the
Gentiles <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) and the hope of those who
are troubled of heart. All who dwell on the earth will fall down and bow
the knee before Him, and will bless and laud and celebrate with song the
Lord of Spirits." A feature which occurs both in the Old Testament and
in the Apocalyptic literature is that the wicked will in the final issue
be delivered into the hand of the righteous, in order, presumably, that
these may take their vengeance on the former; see, *e.g.*, *Eth. Enoch*
xci.: "And after that there will be another week, the eighth, that of
righteousness, and a sword will be given to it that judgement and
righteousness may be executed on those who commit oppression, and
sinners will be delivered into

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the hands of the righteous." An instance of the superiority of Israel
over the Gentiles, the only one in the book, <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) is found in l. 2-5: "And on the day of
affliction, evil will gather over the sinners, but the righteous will be
victorious in the name of the Lord of Spirits: and He will cause the
Gentiles (literally 'the others') to witness (this judgement) that they
may repent and forego the works of their hands. They will have no honour
through the name of the Lord of Spirits, yet through His name will they
be saved, and the Lord of Spirits will have compassion on them, for His
compassion is great. And He is righteous in His judgement, and in the
presence of His glory and in His judgement no unrighteousness shall
maintain itself; whosoever repents not before Him will perish. And from
henceforth He will show no mercy to them, saith the Lord of Spirits." As
pointed out by Professor Charles in commenting on this passage, the
Gentiles who repent will be saved as by fire; they will not have the
abundant entering in of the Jews; when once the Judgement arrives the
lot of the Gentiles is finally fixed. In *The Sibylline Oracles* the
spirit is, upon the whole,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Universalistic, but the superiority of Israel is
sometimes distinctly asserted, as, *e.g.*, in iii. 194 ff: "And then
shall the people of the great God become strong again, and they shall
direct into the way of life (literally 'they shall be the sign-post of
life to') all those who are mortal." The Universalistic spirit, again,
is still more strongly marked in *The Testaments of the Twelve
Patriarchs*; in Levi xviii. (the whole chapter is eschatological) verse
9, we read: "And in his (*i.e.*, the Messiah's) priesthood the Gentiles
shall be multiplied in knowledge upon the earth, and enlightened through
the grace of the Lord . . .;" again in Naph. viii. 3: "For through their
tribes shall God appear on earth, to save the race of Israel, and to
gather together the righteous from among the Gentiles." In the following
verse, however, the superiority of the Israelites seems to be implied,
for it continues: "If ye work that which is good, my children, both men
and angels shall bless you; and God shall be glorified among the
Gentiles through you . . .;" but the normal attitude of this book
towards the Gentiles and their lot in the "last times" is unquestionably
reflected in such a passage as Asher vii. 3: "Until the Most High shall
visit the earth, coming Himself. . . He

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

shall save Israel and all the Gentiles." (*Cf.* Benj. ix. 2.) In *The
Assumption of Moses* this subject is only slightly touched upon; a
Particularist attitude is revealed in x. 7: "For the Most High God, Who
alone is eternal, shall arise and shall come forth manifestly in order
to punish the Gentiles and to destroy all their idols." The verses which
follow speak of the glorification of Israel, see the next section on
this. In the Syriac *Apocalypse of Baruch* it is taught that the
gathering of the Gentiles in the "last times" is in the main for their
destruction, those who are saved will owe their salvation to the fact of
their not having been the enemies of Israel. In lxxii. 2 ff., for
example, it says: "After the signs of which thou hast already been
told--when the Gentiles shall be thrown into con-fusion, and the time of
my Messiah shall have come--then shall He call for all the Gentiles, and
some He shall preserve alive and some He shall destroy. This is
therefore what shall come from Him upon the Gentiles who shall be
preserved alive: every people that has not known Israel and has not
down-trodden the family of Jacob, this shall be preserved alive . . .
but all those who have set themselves over you or have otherwise known
you, these

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

all shall be delivered over to the sword." As regards *iv. Esdras*, the
teaching of this book on the subject will already have been gathered
from the long extract given in §ii. of the preceding chapter, to which
reference should be made. (See also *iv. Esdras* vii. 33 ff.) On the
whole, therefore, the feeling of the Apocalyptic writers seems to have
been that some non-Israelitish nations would be saved in the "last
times," and that their being gathered together in "that Day" would not
be wholly for destruction. The best Apocalyptic works and those which
most probably reflect in the truest way the normal attitude of the
Apocalyptic Movement in this particular respect, such as *The Book of
Enoch* and *The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs*, are frankly
Universalistic, and in them is adumbrated the Gospel teaching on this
point.

#### §ii. *The Ingathering of Israel*.

One of the main ideas which come to the fore in connection with this
subject is that the Israelites scattered all over the world are to be
brought together to the Holy Land for the purpose of enjoying the time
of bliss which is to follow the signs of the "last times"; but, as

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

will have been seen in the preceding section, the Apocalyptic writers
realise that the fact of being an Israelite is not in itself sufficient
to save him from the divine wrath in the "last times" if in other
respects he is not worthy to be a partaker of the bliss to come; and
therefore they divide men into the *righteous* and the *wicked*, not
into *Israel* and the *Gentiles*; and the object, then, of the
ingathering of Israel is that they should be differentiated, the
faithful being destined to life, the wicked to destruction. It is worth
while recalling in this connection the words of the Baptist in Luke iii.
7 ff. . . . *Ye offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the
wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and
begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father; for I
say unto you that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto
Abraham*. . . . This thought is, without doubt, based upon the prophetic
teaching of the need of national purification; only the righteous, even
among those of the seed of Israel, may look forward to happiness when
the "last times" are past. But a further thought, already noticed in
passing in the preceding section, in connection with this subject is
that the ingathering

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

of Israel is to serve as a means whereby the righteous among the
Gentiles may also be brought in. This, as we have seen, is also to be
traced to prophetic influence; and it reveals an intermediate position
between the Particularist and Universalist attitudes. These three
thoughts must now be briefly illustrated. It will be obvious that the
first thought referred to--that of the ingathering of Israel for the
purpose of insuring their bliss after the "last times," without a
consideration of their worthiness but simply because they are of the
seed of Abraham--is not one that we should expect to find prominently
expressed in the Apocalyptic literature; it came to the fore in somewhat
later times, as we shall see in the next chapter; but the Apocalyptists
were too Universalistic and too much influenced by the spirit of the
prophets to express this thought unconditionally. Perhaps the pious
writer of the ninth psalm in *The Psalms of Solomon* comes nearest to
it, but the passage to be cited is preceded by words which show the
writer's conviction that repentance is indispensable to those who would
have final recognition from God: "And now, Thou art God, and we are the
nation that Thou lovest; look upon us and have mercy,

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

oh God of Israel, for we are thine, and turn not away Thy compassion
from us, that they (*i.e.*, the Gentiles) may not overcome us. For Thou
hast chosen the seed of Abraham above all nations, and hast laid Thy
name upon us, oh Lord, and wilt not cast us off for ever. Thou didst
make a covenant with our fathers for our sakes, and we hope in Thee that
Thou wilt grant peace to our heart. The mercy of the Lord shall be upon
the house of Israel for ever and ever" (ix. 8-11). This passage, it is
true, is not strictly eschatological, but it displays a spirit which is
inclined to regard the Israelites as the recipients of eternal mercy
just because they are of the seed of Abraham; but Psalms xi., xvii., and
xviii. of the book should also be consulted. The thought of the
destruction of wicked Israelites in the "last times" and the salvation
of the upright finds expression in *The Testaments of the Twelve
Patriarchs*, Benj. ix. 1: "And I believe that there will be also
evil-doings among you, from the words of Enoch the righteous; that ye
shall commit fornication with the fornication of Sodom, and shall
perish, all save a few, and shall renew wanton deeds with women; and the
Kingdom of the Lord shall not be among you, for straightway He

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

shall take it away." The purification of Israel preparatory to their
inheriting the Kingdom is spoken of, for example, in the same book,
Asher vii. 5-7: "For I have known that ye shall assuredly be
disobedient, and assuredly act ungodly, not giving heed to the law of
God, but to the commandments of men, being corrupted through wickedness.
And therefore shall ye be scattered as Gad and Dan, my brethren, and ye
shall know not your own lords, tribe and tongue. But the Lord will
gather you together in faith through His tender mercy, and for the sake
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob." <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39) For an
example illustrating the thought that Israel is to be the means whereby
in the last day others shall be saved, see *Sibylline Oracles* iii. 194
ff quoted in §i. of this chapter, <span id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40)
and *cf.* *Eth. Enoch* xc. 30.

#### §iii. *The Resurrection of the Dead*.

The beginnings of the belief in this doctrine are to be sought in the
Old Testament (see chap. iii. §iv.), but we find it greatly developed

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

in the Apocalyptic literature; the fact that it forms an integral part
of eschatological teaching is the reason of its mention here. According
to the older view the Messianic Kingdom, *i.e.*, the time of bliss which
follows the "last times," was to come after the Resurrection and the
Judgement; but the later and more widely held view was that a temporary
Messianic Kingdom would be established on the earth which would be
followed by the Last Judgement and the Resurrection. The Messiah Himself
was to judge the nations, who, together with their guardian-angels and
stars, are destined to be cast into Gehenna.

In later times belief in a universal Resurrection became prevalent (see
below, chap. vii. §v.). In illustrating this belief in the Apocalyptic
literature we turn, as usual, first to *Eth. Enoch*; in the rather
difficult ninetieth chapter a general resurrection, including Gentiles
as well as Israelites, seems to be implied in verse 33, where it says:
"And all that had been destroyed and dispersed, and all the beasts of
the field, and all the birds of the heaven assembled in that house, and
the Lord of the sheep rejoiced with great joy because they were all good
and had returned to His house." According

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

to xci. 10 it is only the righteous who attain to the Resurrection: "And
the righteous one (used collectively) shall arise from the sleep
(*i.e.*, of death), and Wisdom will rise up and will be accorded to
them." In xlii. 1 it is said that Wisdom had before withdrawn to the
heavens because there was no place on earth where she could dwell. In
*The Book of Similitudes* there is some tin-certainty as to whether the
Resurrection is to be a general one, or whether it is only the righteous
who shall attain to it; thus in li. 1, 2, the reference is to a general
Resurrection, but only the righteous are chosen for eternal life, the
wicked are personally destined for eternal punishment: "And in those
days will the earth also give back those who are treasured up within it,
and Sheol also will give back that which it has received, and Hell will
give back that which it owes. <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) And He
will choose the righteous and holy from among them; for the day of their
redemption has drawn nigh" (*cf.* . lxi. 5). Professor Charles holds
that the resurrection here is a resurrection of all Israel, but not of
the Gentiles, because no Jewish book before *iv. Esdras* teaches
*indubitably* the doctrine of

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

a general resurrection; the whole history of Jewish thought points to a
restricted belief in this matter. In *The Testaments of the Twelve
Patriarchs* it is a belief in the resurrection of the righteous in
Israel that is taught; thus we read in Simeon vi. 7: "Then shall I arise
in joy, and will bless the Most High because of His marvellous works"
(see the whole passage). See also Judah xxv. 1; Zeb. x. 2; but in Benj.
x. 6-8, on the other hand, we have this remarkable passage: "Then shall
ye see Enoch, Noah, and Shem, and Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, rising
on the right hand in gladness. Then shall we also rise, each one over
our tribe, worshipping the King of heaven. Then also all men shall rise,
some unto glory and some unto shame. And the Lord shall judge Israel
first, for their uprighteousness. And then shall He judge all the
Gentiles. . . . " <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) It is to be noted
that the wicked as well as the righteous rise, according to this
passage; that is a considerable development upon earlier teaching. In
*Slav. Enoch* there does not appear to be any direct reference to a
resurrection, but apparently it is to be implied in those passages in
which a blessed immortality

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

of the just is referred to, *e.g.*, i. 2: "Now, therefore, my children,
in patience and meekness accomplish the number of your days, and ye
shall inherit the endless life which is to come." (*Cf.* xxii. 8; lxv. 6
ff.) A very interesting passage is lxi. 2, 3: "For in the world to come,
I know all things, how that there are many mansions prepared for men. .
. . Blessed are all those who shall go to the mansions of the blessed."
One is irresistibly reminded of the words in John xiv. 2: *In my
Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so I would have told
you; for I go to prepare a place for you*.

At the same time it must be said that this book offers very little of a
specifically eschatological character.

In *The Psalms of Solomon* the Resurrection of the righteous in Israel
at the last day is plainly taught, *e.g.*, iii. 12: "But they that fear
the Lord shall arise unto eternal life; their life shall be in light,
and it will never cease" (*cf.* xiii. 11; xiv. 3). In the Syriac
*Apocalypse of Baruch* the Resurrection is referred to several times,
*e.g.*, xxx. 1: "And after that, when the time of the Advent of the
Messiah is completed, he shall return in glory into the heavens. And
then shall all

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

those arise who slept having their hope in him" (*cf.* xlii. 7; xlix.
1-3). Lastly, we turn to *iv. Esdras*, but here it must be remembered
that the possibility of Christian influence regarding this subject has
to be reckoned with. In vii. 32, 33, we read: "The earth gives up again
they that rest in her, the dust returns them that sleep in her, the
chambers deliver up the souls that were committed unto them. The Most
High appears upon the Judgement-seat . . .;" it is clear that a
universal Resurrection of all mankind is here referred to. (*Cf.* also
viii. 53, 54.)

It will thus be seen that there are two tendencies in the Apocalyptic
literature regarding a belief in the Resurrection; some-times it seems
to be restricted to Israel, at other times a wider view is taken, and
all mankind is embraced; then again, sometimes it is taught that the
righteous only rise from the dead, and at other times that the good and
the bad rise, the former entering into eternal life, the latter into
eternal death. It is, however, scarcely necessary to emphasise the fact
that this belief falls short of the Christian doctrine of the
Resurrection of the body.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

#### §iv. *The Messianic Banquet*.

Whatever may have been the origin of this idea, it may be regarded as
very probable that it received an *impetus* in course of time from the
holding of kingly banquets; Jewish conceptions regarding the Messianic
Era were to a large extent materialistic, based in many particulars upon
what men saw to be in vogue among earthly rulers; this was very natural,
for, after all, the Jewish belief in a Messiah pictured him as a
temporal sovereign, generally speaking, and his Kingdom was conceived of
as an earthly one, though more perfect than any other could ever be. In
accordance, therefore, with these materialistic ideas was the belief
that the Messianic ruler would furnish a Banquet for his people. This
Banquet is referred to in *Eth. Enoch* (*The Book of Similitudes*) lxii.
14: "And the Lord of Spirits will abide over them, and with that Son of
Man will they eat and lie down and rise up for ever and ever." (See also
xxv. 4, 5.) Possibly a reference is also contained to it in *The
Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs*, Levi xviii. 11: "And He shall give
to the saints to eat from

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

the tree of life;" but judging from the later Jewish teaching on the
subject (see below, chap. vii.) it was the carcase of Leviathan which
was to be consumed at the Messianic Banquet. The most detailed account
of this Banquet in the Apocalyptic literature is contained in the Syriac
*Apocalypse of Baruch* xxix. 3-8, where it says: ". . . . Then will the
Messiah begin to manifest Himself. And Behemoth will show himself from
his land, and Leviathan will ascend from the sea; and these two mighty
sea-monsters, whom I created on the fifth day of the work of Creation
and have reserved until that time (*i.e.*, the Messianic Era), shall
then be for food for all those who are left." The following verses then
go on to describe the fruitfulness of the earth and the abundance of
food which shall be brought forth in order that they who have hungered
may hunger no more. In this connection *Eth. Enoch* lx. 7, 8, is of
interest: "And on that day will two monsters be parted, a female monster
named Leviathan, to dwell in the depths of the ocean over the fountains
of the waters. But the whale is called Behemoth, who occupies with his
breast a waste wilderness named Dêndâin, on the east of the garden where
the elect and righteous dwell."

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

\[paragraph continues\] See also *Sibylline Oracles*, Proœm. 87, iii.
746; and *iv. Esdras* vi. 49-52: "Then didst Thou preserve two living
creatures, the one Thou calledst Behemoth, and the other Thou calledst
Leviathan . . . and Thou hast kept them to be devoured of whom Thou wilt
and when." In each of these passages the thought of the Messianic
Banquet is probably present.

#### SUMMARY OF THE TEACHING IN THE APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE.

It will have been seen that the Apocalyptic literature continues, and in
some respects develops, the eschatological teaching of the Old
Testament. Thus the signs which precede the end are described very much
in the same way as in the prophetical books; there is more fulness of
detail in the later literature, and not infrequently the descriptions
become somewhat fantastic and exaggerated; but in the main points the
teaching of the two classes of literature is identical--the terrifying
physical phenomena, darkness on the earth and awful portents in the sun,
moon and stars, great terror among men, wars among the nations, the
nearest ties of relationship broken by strife

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

and murder. Then, again, we find a striking similarity of teaching in
the fact that the central figure in the Eschatological Drama is
sometimes stated to be God Himself, at other times the Messiah, who, in
*The Book of Enoch*, is often spoken of as the Son of Man; the
expression "the throne of His glory" is often used in the same book in
connection with the Advent. Jerusalem is to be the centre of the new
Kingdom which is to be founded, <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)
though this is not always stated, any more than it is in the Old
Testament accounts. Thirdly, the punishment of the Wicked in that day is
often described, and here again with more detail than in the Old
Testament; it is also noteworthy that as regards this point the
Apocalyptic literature is, as a rule, more general; that is to say, the
Universalistic attitude is, upon the whole, more pronounced. The same
applies to the fourth point, namely, the blessedness of the Righteous;
although Israel is often singled out as the people of Jehovah for whom
the Kingdom is to be prepared, yet, for the most part, it is taught that
righteous men, irrespective of race, will enjoy the happiness of the
Hereafter. The idea of the forerunner also finds expression

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

here. As in the Old Testament so in this later literature present
historical conditions are frequently used as the basis of eschatological
teaching. Then, as regards the subsidiary points, the various
descriptions of the gathering of the Gentiles exhibit precisely the same
marks as in the Old Testament, though, upon the whole, the
Particularistic attitude, with some exceptions, is less marked in this
later literature; we also find the feature that the Israelite nation is
to be the medium of salvation for the Gentiles; but as in the Old
Testament, so here, the gathering of the Gentiles is sometimes described
as about to take place in order that they may be destroyed by Jehovah,
or His army, and that the Israelites may rejoice over their
discomfiture; these varying standpoints are partly conditioned by
historical circumstances, and partly by the two tendencies already
referred to. The subject of the Ingathering of Israel is treated in very
much the same way as in the Old Testament, excepting that, upon the
whole, the Universalistic attitude predominates. The belief in the
Resurrection is greatly developed in the Apocalyptic literature, though
the teaching as to when it is to take place, whether before or after the
establishment of the Messianic

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kingdom, is not uniform; in like manner, there
is a difference of view as to whether there is to be a general
Resurrection, *i.e.*, of both good and bad, or whether it is to be
restricted to the former; also as to whether it is to be for all men or
for the Israelites only. The details about the Messianic Banquet are, as
we should rather expect, given much more fully here than in the Old
Testament.

It will thus be seen that in essentials the eschatological teaching of
the Apocalyptic literature is in entire agreement with that of the Old
Testament, the differences being almost entirely due to the fact that
development has taken place in the later writings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[107:1](dlt08.htm#fr_36) *The Book of Celestial
Physics* does not come into consideration here.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[108:1](dlt08.htm#fr_37) *Cf.* Luke ii. 32.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[109:1](dlt08.htm#fr_38) Charles shows, however,
that this passage is an interpolation, see his edition, pp. 138 ff.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[116:1](dlt08.htm#fr_39) This passage belongs,
according to Charles, to the first century B.C.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[116:2](dlt08.htm#fr_40) Page [110](#page_110).

<span id="fn_41"></span>[118:1](dlt08.htm#fr_41) *Cf.* Rev. xx. 13.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[119:1](dlt08.htm#fr_42) The interpolations are
omitted, *see* Charles's edition.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[125:1](dlt08.htm#fr_43) On this point see
further below, chap. x.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Eschatological Teaching in Rabbinical
Literature](dlt09)
