[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mes11)  [Next](mes13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002CVTTRU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts*, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and
Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, \[1881\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

*Genealogy of Jelālu-’d-Dīn, Rūmī*.

<span class="smallcaps">On</span> his father's side, the remote ancestor
of Jelālu-’d-Dīn, during Islāmic times, was Abū-Bekr, the dearest and
most faithful friend of Muhammed the Arabian lawgiver, and his successor
in the government of the community of Islām, as the first of the long
line of Caliphs.

Like Muhammed himself, Abū-Bekr was of the tribe of Quraysh, which
claims descent, through Ishmael, from Abraham, the chosen Friend of God,
and Father of the faithful. The stem of Abū-Bekr's branch of the tribe
unites with that of Muhammed in Murra, ancestor to Muhammed in the
seventh degree, and to Abū-Bekr in the sixth.

Abū-Bekr was, furthermore, one of Mohammed's fathers-in-law, as his
daughter ‘Ā’isha was the Prophet's only virgin bride.

A son or grandson of Abū-Bekr is said to have been among the Arabian
conquerors of Khurāsān during the caliphate of ‘Uthmān (Osmān), about
<span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 25 (<span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 647), and to have settled at Balkh (the
capital of the ancient Bactria), where his family flourished until after
the birth of Jelālu-’d-Dīn. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_34)

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

At an uncertain period subsequent to <span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span>
491 (<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1097), a daughter of one of the
Kh’ārezmian kings of Central Asia was given in marriage to
Jelālu-’d-Dīn's great-great-grandfather, whose name is either not
mentioned by Eflākī, or I have missed it. She gave birth to Jelāl's
great-grandfather, Ahmed, surnamed El-Khatībī (as being, apparently, a
son or descendant, or a client, of a public preacher, Khatīb).

Nothing more is mentioned of Ahmed by Eflākī, than that he had a son
Huseyn, surnamed Jelālu-’d-Dīn, who married a daughter of a certain
Khurrem-Shāh, King of Khurāsān, and became grandfather, by her, to the
author of the Mesnevī. His son, Mohammed, surnamed Bahā’u-’d-Dīn, styled
Sultānu-’l-‘Ulemā, and commonly known as Bahā’u-’d-Dīn Veled, or shorter
as Bahā Veled, appears also to have married a lady, by whom he had three
children, a daughter and two sons.

Bahā Veled's eldest child, his daughter, was married off, and remained
at Balkh, when Bahā Veled, his mother, and two sons left it, a year or
so before it was taken and devastated by Jengīz Khān in <span
class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 608 (<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>
1211). His elder son is not again mentioned by Eflākī after their
departure from Balkh. Neither is the mother of his children once
mentioned. But his own mother, the princess, was alive, and was still
with him in about <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1230; after which,
she too is not again mentioned.

Bahā Veled's youngest child, his most celebrated son Mohammed, surnamed
Jelālu-’d-Dīn, Mevlānā, Khudāvendgār, and Rūmī, the principal personage
of these memoirs, the founder of the order of the Mevlevī dervishes, and
author of the Mesnevī, had four children, three boys and a girl, by two
wives. His eldest son was killed

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

in the broil that caused the murder of his father's friend Shemsu-’d-Dīn
of Tebrīz. His youngest son is not taken further notice of; but his
daughter was married off to a local prince, and left Qonya.

His second son, and eventually his successor as Principal or Abbot of
his order, was named Muhammed, and surnamed Bahā’u-'Dīn. He is commonly
known as Sultan Veled.

Sultan Veled had six children, a boy and two girls by his wife Fātima,
daughter of Sheykh Ferīdūn the Gold- beater, and three boys, of whom two
were twins, by two slave women. The daughters married well, and all his
sons, or three of them, succeeded him as Abbot, one after the other. The
eldest was Mīr ‘Ārif (Chelebī Emīr ‘Ārif), the second was named ‘Ābid,
the third Zāhid, and the fourth Wāhid.

Chelebī Emīr ‘Arif, the eldest, and Eflākī's patron, had two sons and a
daughter. His eldest son, Emīr ‘Ālim, surnamed Shāh-zāda, succeeded
eventually to the primacy after his uncles. With him, Eflākī's memoir is
brought to a close.

Such was the natural line of this dynasty of eminent men. But Eflākī has
also given the links of a spiritual series, through whom the mysteries
of the dervish doctrines were handed down to and in the line of
Jelālu-’d-Dīn.

In the anecdote No. 79, of chapter iii., the account is given of the
manner in which the prophet Muhammed confided those mysteries to his
cousin, son-in-law, and afterwards his fourth successor, as Caliph, ‘Alī
son of Abū-Tālib, the "Victorious Lion of God."

‘Alī communicated the mysteries to the Imām Hasan of Basra, who died in
<span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 110 (<span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 728); Hasan taught them to Habīb the
Persian, <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_35) who confided them to Dāwūd

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

of the tribe of Tayyi’,—Et-Tā’ī (mentioned by D’Herbelot, without a
date, as Davud Al Thai; he died <span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 165,
<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 781).

Dāwūd transmitted them to Ma‘rūf of Kerkh (who died <span
class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 200, <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>
815); he to Sirrī the merchant of damaged goods (Es-Saqatī?; died <span
class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 253, <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>
867); and he to the great Juneyd (who died in about <span
class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 297—<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>
909). Juneyd's spiritual pupil was Shiblī (died <span
class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 334, <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>
945) who taught Abu-‘Amr Muhammed, son of Ibrāhīm Zajjāj (the Glazier),
of Nīshāpūr (who died in <span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 348—<span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 959) and his pupil was Abū-Bekr, son of
‘Abdu-’llāh, of Tūs, the Weaver, who taught Abū-Ahmed (Muhammed son of
Muhammed, El-Gazālī (who died <span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span>
504—<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1110), and he committed those
mysteries to Ahmed el-Khatībī, Jelāl's great-grandfather, who consigned
them to the Imām Sarakhsī (who died in <span
class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 571—<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>
1175).

Sarakhsī was the spiritual teacher of Jelāl's father Bahā Veled, who
taught the Seyyid Burhānu-’d-Dīn Termīzi, the instructor of Jelāl. He
again passed on the tradition to Shemsu-’d-Dīn of Tebrīz, the teacher of
Jelāl's son, Sultan Veled, who himself taught the Emīr ‘Ārif.

At the same time that the mysteries were thus being gradually
transmitted to Jelālu-’d-Dīn and his successors by these links, they
were also being diffused in thousands of other channels, and are at this
day widely diffused over the world of Islām, which daily boasts of its
living saints and their miracles. These latter are perhaps not less
veracious that those continually blazoned forth by the Church of Rome,
and by its Eastern sisters. We, too, have our spiritualists. Credulity
will never forsake mankind and prodigies will never be lacking for the
credulous to place faith in. There is much that is human in man, all the
world over.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[132:1](mes12.htm#fr_35) A genealogy is given in
the Turkish preface to my copy of the Mesnevī, which traces the descent
of Jelālu-’d-Dīn Mohammed from Abū-Bekr in ten degrees, as
follows:—"Jelālu-’d-Dīn, son of Bahā’u-’d-Dīn, son of Huseyn, son of
Ahmed, son of Mevdūd, son of Sābit (Thābit), son of Museyyeb, son of
Mutahhar, son of Hammād, son of ‘Abdu-’r-Rahmān, son of ‘Abū-Bekr." Now,
Abdu-’r-Rahmān, the eldest of all the sons of Abū-Bekr, died and was
buried at Mekka in <span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 53(<span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 672), and <span id="page_133">p.
133</span> Jelālu-’d-Dīn was born at Balkh in <span
class="smallcaps">a.h.</span> 604 (<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>
1207). Between these two there are nine degrees of descent given, for a
period of 535 years, or 66 years for each life after the birth of the
next link. This alone suffices to show that the genealogy is not to be
depended on. Supposing the names given to be true, many other links must
be missing; as many, probably, as those given.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[134:1](mes12.htm#fr_36) Habīb the Persian, a
wealthy man, converted to Islam by one word from Hasan of Basra, whose
devoted disciple he became. He died <span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span>
106 (<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 724).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](mes13)
