[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060228)  [Next](1060230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xii"></span> <span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="vii.xii-Page_290"></span><span id="vii.xii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>Sermon X.</span>

<span id="vii.xii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xii-p2.1"></span>\[LX. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xii-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019)<span id="vii.xii-p3.2"></span>,
“Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth,” etc. An exhortation to
alms-deeds.*

<span id="vii.xii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xii-p4.1"></span>Every</span> man who is in any trouble, and his
own resources fail him, looks out for some prudent person from whom he
may take counsel, and so know what to do. Let us suppose then the whole
world to be as it were one single man. He seeks to escape evil, yet is
slow in doing good; and as in this way tribulations thicken, and his own
resources fail, whom can he find more prudent to receive counsel from
than Christ? By all means, at least, let him find a better, and do what
he will. But if he cannot find a better, let him come to Him whom he may
find everywhere: let him consult, and take advice from Him, keep the
good commandment, escape the great evil. For present temporal ills of
which men are so sore afraid, under which they murmur exceedingly, and
by their murmuring offend Him who is correcting them, so that they find
not His saving Help; <span id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095) present
ills I say without a doubt are but passing; either they pass through us,
or we pass through them; either they pass away whilst we live, or they
are left behind us when we die. Now that is not in the matter of
tribulation great, which in duration is short. Whosoever thou art that
art thinking of to-morrow, thou dost not recall the remembrance of
yesterday. When the day after to-morrow comes, this to-morrow also will
be yesterday. But now if men are so disquieted with anxiety to escape
temporal tribulations which pass, or rather fly over, what thought ought
they to take that they may escape those which abide and endure without
end?

<span id="vii.xii-p6"></span>2. A hard condition is the life of man.
What else is it to be born, but to enter on a life of toil? Of our toil
that is to be, the infant’s very cry is witness. From this cup <span
id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096) of sorrow no one may be excused.
The cup that Adam hath pledged, must be drunk. We were made, it is true,
by the hands of Truth, but because of sin we were cast forth upon days
of vanity. “We were made after the image of God,” <span
id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097) but we <span
id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098) disfigured it by sinful
transgression. Therefore does the Psalm remind us how we were made, and
to what a state we have come. For it says, “Though a man walk in the
image <span id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099) of God.” See, what he
was made. Whither hath he come? Hearken to what follows, “Yet will he be
disquieted in vain.” <span id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100) He walks
in the image of truth, and will be disquieted in the counsel of vanity.
Finally, see his disquiet, see it, and as it were in a glass, be
displeased with thyself. “Though,” he says, “man walk in the image of
God,” and therefore be something great, “yet will he be disquieted in
vain;” and as though we might ask, How I pray thee, how is man
disquieted in vain? “He heapeth up treasure,” saith he, “and knoweth not
for whom he doth gather it.” See then, this man, that is the whole human
race represented as one man, who is without resource in his own case,
and hath lost counsel and wandered out of the way of a sound mind;
“Heapeth up treasure, and knoweth not for whom he doth gather it.” What
is more mad, what more unhappy? But surely he is doing it for himself?
Not so. Why not for himself? Because he must die, because the life of
man is short, because the treasure lasts, but he who gathereth it,
quickly passeth away. As pitying therefore the man who “walketh in the
image of God,” who confesseth things that are true, yet followeth after
vain things, he saith, “He will be disquieted in vain.” I grieve for
him; “he heapeth up treasure, and knoweth not for whom he doth gather
it.” Doth he gather it for himself? No. Because the man dies whilst the
treasure endures. For whom then? If thou hast any good counsel, give it
to me. But counsel hast thou none to give me, and so thou hast none for
thyself. Wherefore if we are both without it, let us both seek it, let
us both receive it, and both consider the matter together. He is
disquieted, he heapeth up treasure, he thinks, and toils, and is kept
awake by anxiety. All day long art thou harassed by labour, all night
agitated by fear. That thy coffer may be filled with money, thy soul is
in a fever of anxiety.

<span id="vii.xii-p12"></span>3. I see it, I am grieved for thee; thou
art disquieted, and as He who cannot deceive, assures us, “Thou art
disquieted in vain.” For thou art heaping up treasures: supposing that
all thy undertakings succeed, to say nothing of losses, of so great
perils and deaths in the prosecution of every several kind of gain (I
speak not of deaths of the body, but of evil thoughts, for that gold may
come in, uprightness <span id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101) goeth
out; that thou mayest be clothed outwardly, thou art made naked within),
but to pass over these, and other such things in silence, to pass by all
the things that are against thee, let us think only of the favourable
circumstances. See, thou art laying up treasures, gains flow into thee
from every quarter, and thy money runs like fountains; everywhere where
want presseth, there doth abundance flow. Hast thou not heard, “If
riches increase, set not your heart upon them?”  <span
id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102) Lo, <span id="page_291">p.
291</span> <span id="vii.xii-Page_291"></span>thou art getting, thou art
disquieted, not fruitlessly indeed, still in vain. “How,” thou wilt ask
“am I disquieted in vain? I am filling my coffers, my walls will scarce
hold what I get, how then am I disquieted in vain?” “Thou art heaping up
treasure, and dost not know for whom thou gatherest it.” Or if thou dost
know, I pray thee tell me. I will listen to thee. For whom is it? If
thou art not disquieted in vain, tell me for whom thou art heaping up
thy treasure? “For myself,” thou sayest. Dost thou dare say so, who must
so soon die? “For my children.” Dost thou dare say this of them who must
so soon die? It is a great duty of natural affection <span
id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103) (it will be said) for a father to
lay up for his sons; rather it is a great vanity, one who must soon die
is laying up for those who must soon die also. If it is for thyself, why
dost thou gather, seeing thou leavest all when thou diest. This is the
case also with thy children; they will succeed thee, but not to abide
long. I say nothing about what sort of children they may be, whether
haply debauchery may not waste what covetousness hath amassed. So
another by dissoluteness  <span id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104)
squanders what thou by much toil hast gathered together. But I pass over
this. It may be they will be good children, they will not be dissolute,
they will keep what thou hast left, will increase what thou hast kept,
and will not dissipate what thou hast heaped together. Then will thy
children be equally vain with thyself, if they do so, if in this they
imitate thee their father. I would say to them what I said just now to
thee. I would say to thy son, to him for whom thou art saving I would
say, “Thou art heaping up treasure, and knowest not for whom thou dost
gather it.” For as thou knewest not, so neither doth he know. If the
vanity hath continued in him, hath the truth lost its power with respect
to him?

<span id="vii.xii-p17"></span>4. I forbear to urge, that it may be even
during thy life thou art but laying up for thieves. In one night may
they come and find all ready the gathering of so many days and nights.
It may be thou art laying up for a robber, or a highwayman. I will say
no more on this, lest I call to mind and re-open the wound of past
sufferings. How many things which an empty vanity hath heaped together,
hath the cruelty of an enemy found ready to its hand. It is not my place
to wish for this: but it is the concern of all to fear it. May God avert
it! May His own scourges be sufficient. May He to whom we pray, spare
us! But if He ask thee for whom are we laying by, what shall we answer?
How then, O man, whosoever thou art, that are heaping up treasure in
vain, how wilt thou answer me, as I handle this matter with thee, and
with thee seek counsel in a common cause? For thou didst speak and make
answer, “I am laying up for myself, for my children, for my posterity.”
I have said already how many grounds of fear there are, even as to those
children themselves. But I pass over the consideration, that thy
children may so live as to be a curse <span
id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105) to thee, and as thine enemy would
wish them; grant that they live as the father himself would have them.
Yet how many have fallen into those mischances, I have declared, and
reminded you of already. Thou didst shudder at them, though thou didst
not amend thyself. For what hast thou to answer but this, “Perhaps it
may not be so”? Well, I said so too; perhaps I say thou art but laying
up for the thief, or robber, or highwayman. I did not say certainly, but
perhaps. Where there is a perhaps, there is a perhaps-not; so then thou
knowest not what will be, and therefore thou “art disquieted in vain.”
Thou seest now how truly spake the Truth, how vainly vanity is
disquieted. Thou hast heard and at length learnt wisdom, because when
thou sayest, “Perhaps it is for my children,” but dost not dare to say,
“I am sure that it is for my children,” thou dost not in fact know for
whom thou art gathering riches. So then, as I see, and have said
already, thou art thyself without resource; thou findest nothing
wherewith to answer me, nor can I to answer thee.

<span id="vii.xii-p19"></span>5. Let us both therefore seek and ask for
counsel. We have opportunity of consulting not any wise man, but Wisdom
Herself. Let us then both give ear to Jesus Christ, “to the Jews a
stumbling stone, and to the Gentiles foolishness, but to them who are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God and the Wisdom of
God.” <span id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) Why art thou preparing
a strong defence for thy riches? Hear the Power of God, nothing is more
strong than He. Why art thou preparing wise counsel <span
id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107) to protect thy riches? Hear the
Wisdom of God, nothing is more Wise than He. Peradventure when I say
what I have to say, thou wilt be offended, and so thou wilt be a Jew,
“because to the Jews is Christ an offence.” Or peradventure, when I have
spoken, it will appear foolish to thee, and so wilt thou be a Gentile,
“for to the Gentiles is Christ foolishness.” Yet thou art a Christian,
thou hast been called. “But to them who are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ is the Power of God and the Wisdom of God.” Be not sad
then when I have said what I have to say; be not offended; mock not my
folly, as you deem it, with an air of disdain. <span
id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108) Let us give ear. For what I am
about to say, Christ hath said. If thou despise the herald, yet fear
<span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span id="vii.xii-Page_292"></span>the
Judge. What shall I say then? The reader of the Gospel has but just now
relieved me from this embarrassment. I will not read anything fresh, but
will recall only to your recollection what has just been read. Thou wast
seeking counsel, as failing in thine own resources; see then what the
Fountain of right counsel saith, the Fountain from whose streams is no
fear of poison, fill from It what thou mayest.

<span id="vii.xii-p23"></span>6. “Lay not up for yourselves treasures on
earth, where moth and rust doth destroy, and where thieves break through
and steal: But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where no thief
approacheth, nor moth corrupteth: For where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also.” <span id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) What
more dost thou wait for? The thing is plain. The counsel is open, but
evil desire lies hid; nay, not so, but what is worse, it too lies open.
For plunder does not cease its ravages; avarice does not cease to
defraud; maliciousness does not cease to swear falsely. And all for
what? that treasure may be heaped together. To be laid up *where*? In
the earth, and rightly indeed, *by* earth *for* earth. For to the man
who sinned and who pledged us, as I have said, our cup of toil, was it
said, “Earth thou art, and to earth shalt thou return.” <span
id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110) With good reason is the treasure in
earth, because the heart is there. Where then is that, “we lift them up
unto the Lord?” Sorrow for your case, ye who have understood me; and if
ye sorrow truly, amend yourselves. How long will ye be applauding and
not doing? What ye have heard is true, nothing truer. Let that then
which is true be done. One God we praise, yet we change not, that we may
not in this very praise be disquieted in vain.

<span id="vii.xii-p26"></span>7. Therefore, “Lay not up for yourselves
treasures on earth;” whether ye have found by experience how what is
laid up in the earth is lost, or whether ye have not so experienced it,
yet do ye too fear lest ye should do so. Let experience reform him whom
words will not reform. One cannot rise up now, one cannot go out, but
all together with one voice are crying, “Woe to us, the world is
falling.” <span id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111) If it be falling,
why dost thou not remove? If an architect were to tell thee, that thy
house would soon fall, wouldest thou not remove before thou didst
indulge in thy vain lamentations? The Builder of the world telleth thee
the world will soon fall, and wilt thou not believe it? Hear the voice
of Him who foretelleth it, hear the counsel of Him who giveth thee
warning. The voice of prediction is, “Heaven and earth shall pass
away.” <span id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112) The voice of warning
is, “Lay not up for yourselves treasure on earth.” <span
id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113) If then thou dost believe God in
His prediction; if thou despise not His warning, let what He says be
done. He who has given thee such counsel doth not deceive thee. Thou
shalt not lose what thou hast given away, but shalt follow what thou
hast only sent before thee. Therefore my counsel is, “Give to the poor,
and thou shalt have treasure in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) Thou shalt not remain without
treasure; but what thou hast on earth with anxiety, thou shalt possess
in heaven free from care. Transport thy goods then. I am giving thee
counsel for keeping, not for losing. “Thou shalt have,” saith He,
“treasure in heaven, and come, follow Me,” that I may bring thee to thy
treasure. This is not a wasting, but a saving. Why do men keep silence?
Let them hear, and having at last by experience found what to fear, let
them do that which will give them no cause of fear, let them transport
their goods to heaven. Thou puttest wheat in the low ground; <span
id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) and thy friend comes, who knows the
nature of the corn and the land, and instructs thy unskilfulness, and
says to thee, “What hast thou done?” Thou hast put the corn in the flat
soil, in the lower land; the soil is moist; it will all rot, and thou
wilt lose thy labour. Thou answerest, What then must I do? Remove it, he
says, into the higher ground. Dost thou then give ear to a friend who
gives thee counsel about thy corn, and despisest thou God who gives thee
counsel about thine heart? Thou fearest to put thy corn in the low
earth, and wilt thou lose thy heart in the earth? Behold the Lord thy
God when He giveth thee counsel touching thine heart, saith, “Where thy
treasure is, there will thy heart be also.” <span
id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116) Lift up, saith He, thine heart to
heaven, that it rot not in the earth. It is His counsel, who wisheth to
preserve thy heart, not to destroy it.

<span id="vii.xii-p33"></span>8. If then this be so, what must be their
repentance who have not done thereafter? How must they now reproach
themselves! We might have had in heaven what we have now lost in earth.
The enemy has broken up our house; but could he break heaven open? He
has killed the servant who was set to guard; but could he kill the Lord
who would have kept them, “where no thief approacheth, neither moth
corrupteth.” How many now are saying, “There we might have had, and hid
our treasures safe, where after a little while we might have followed
them securely. Why have we not hearkened to our Lord? Why have we
despised the admonitions of the Father, and so have experienced the
invasion of the enemy?” If then this be good counsel, let us not be slow
in taking heed to it; and if what we have must be <span id="page_293">p.
293</span> <span id="vii.xii-Page_293"></span>transported, let us
transfer it into that place, from whence we cannot lose it. What are the
poor to whom we give, but our <span id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117)
carriers, <span id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118) by whom we convey
our goods from earth to heaven? Give then: thou art but giving to thy
carrier, he carrieth what thou givest to heaven. How, sayest thou, does
he carry it to heaven? For I see that he makes an end of it by eating.
No doubt, he carries it, not by keeping it, but by making it his food.
What? Hast thou forgotten, “Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the
kingdom; for I was an hungred, and ye gave Me meat:” and,” Inasmuch as
ye did it to one of the least of Mine, ye did it to Me.” <span
id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119) If thou hast not despised the
beggar that standeth before thee, consider to Whom what thou gavest him
hath come. “Inasmuch,” saith he, “as ye did it to one of the least of
Mine, ye did it to Me.” He hath received it, who gave thee wherewith to
give. He hath received it, who in the end will give His Own Self to
thee.

<span id="vii.xii-p37"></span>9. For this have I at divers times called
to your remembrance, Beloved, and I confess to you it astonishes me much
in the Scriptures of God, and I ought repeatedly to call your attention
to it. I pray you to think of what our Lord Jesus Christ Himself saith,
that at the end of the world, when He shall come to judgment, He will
gather together all nations before Him, and will divide men into two
parts; that He will place some at His right hand, and others on His
left; and will say to those on the right hand, “Come, ye blessed of My
Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.” But to those on the left, “Depart ye into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels.” Search out the reasons either
for so great a reward, or so great a punishment. “Receive the kingdom,”
and “Go into everlasting fire.” Why shall the first receive the kingdom?
“For I was an hungred, and ye gave Me meat.” Why shall the other depart
into everlasting fire? “For I was hungry, and ye gave Me no meat.” What
meaneth this, I ask? I see touching those who are to receive the
kingdom, that they gave as good and faithful Christians, not despising
the words of the Lord, and with sure trust hoping for the promises they
did accordingly; because had they not done so, this very barrenness
would not surely have accorded with their good life. For it may be they
were chaste, no cheats, nor drunkards, and kept themselves from evil
works. Yet if they had not added good works, they would have remained
barren. For they would have kept, “Depart from evil,” but they would not
have kept, “and do good.” <span id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120)
Notwithstanding, even to them He doth not say, “Come, receive the
kingdom,” for ye have lived in chastity; ye have defrauded no man, ye
have not oppressed any poor man, ye have invaded no one’s landmark, ye
have deceived no one by oath. He said not this, but, “Receive the
kingdom, because I was an hungred, and ye gave Me meat.” How excellent
is this above all, when the Lord made no mention of the rest, but named
this only! And again to the others, “Depart ye into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels. How many things could He urge
against the ungodly, were they to ask, “Why are we going into
everlasting fire!” Why? Do ye ask, ye adulterers, menslayers, cheats,
sacrilegious blasphemers, unbelievers. Yet none of these did He name,
but, “Because I was hungry, and ye gave Me no meat.”

<span id="vii.xii-p39"></span>10. I see that you are surprised as I am.
And indeed it is a marvellous thing. But I gather as best I can the
reason of this thing so strange, and I will not conceal it from you. It
is written, “As water quencheth fire, so alms quencheth sin.” <span
id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121) Again it is written, “Shut up alms
in the heart of a poor man, and it shall make supplication for thee
before the Lord.” <span id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) Again it is
written, “Hear, O king, my counsel, and redeem thy sins by alms.” <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123) And many other testimonies of the
Divine oracles are there, whereby it is shown that alms avail much to
the quenching and effacing of sins. Wherefore to those whom He is about
to condemn, yea, rather to those whom He is about to crown, He will
impute alms only, as though He would say, “It were a hard matter for me
not to find occasion to condemn you, were I to examine and weigh you
accurately and with much exactness to scrutinize your deeds; but, “Go
into the kingdom, for I was hungry, and ye gave Me meat.” Ye shall
therefore go into the kingdom, not because ye have not sinned, but
because ye have redeemed your sins by alms. And again to the others, “Go
ye into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.” They
too, guilty as they are, old in their sins, late in their fear for them,
in what respect, when they turn their sins over in their mind, could
they dare to say that they are undeservedly condemned, that this
sentence is pronounced against them undeservedly by so righteous a
Judge? In considering their consciences, and all the wounds of their
souls, in what respect could they dare to say, We are unjustly
condemned. Of whom it was said before in Wisdom, “Their own iniquities
shall convince them to their face.” <span
id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124) Without doubt they will see that
they are justly condemned for their sins and wickednesses; yet it will
be as though He said to them, “It is not in conse<span id="page_294">p.
294</span> <span id="vii.xii-Page_294"></span>quence of this that ye
think, but ‘because I was hungry, and ye gave Me no meat.’” For if
turning away from all these your deeds, and turning to Me, ye had
redeemed all those crimes and sins by alms, those alms would now deliver
you, and absolve you from the guilt of so great offences; for, “Blessed
are the merciful, for to them shall be shown mercy.” <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125) But now go away into everlasting
fire. “He shall have judgment without mercy, who hath showed no
mercy.” <span id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126)

<span id="vii.xii-p46"></span>11. O that I may have induced you, my
brethren, to give away your earthly bread, and to knock for the
heavenly! The Lord is that Bread. He saith, “I am the Bread of
life.” <span id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127) But how shall He give
to thee, who givest not to him that is in need? One is in need before
thee, and thou art in need before Another, and since thou art in need
before Another, and another is in need before thee, that other is in
need before him who is in need himself. For He before whom thou art in
need, needeth nothing. Do then to others as thou wouldest have done to
thee. For it is not in this case as with those friends who are wont to
upbraid in a way one another with their kindnesses; as, “I did this for
thee,” and the other answers, “and I this for thee,” that He wishes us
to do Him some good office, because He has first done such an office for
us. He is in want of nothing, and therefore is He the very Lord. I said
unto the Lord, “Thou art my God, for Thou needest not my goods.” <span
id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) Notwithstanding though He be the
Lord, and the Very Lord, and needeth not our goods, yet that we might do
something even for Him, hath He vouchsafed to be hungry in His poor. “I
was hungry,” saith He, “and ye gave Me meat. Lord, when saw we Thee
hungry? Forasmuch as ye did it to one of the least of Mine, ye did it to
Me.” <span id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) To be brief then, let
men hear, and consider as they ought, how great a merit it is to have
fed Christ when He hungereth, and how great a crime it is to have
despised Christ when He hungereth.

<span id="vii.xii-p50"></span>12. Repentance for sins changes men, it is
true, for the better; but it does not appear as if even it would profit
ought, if it should be barren of works of mercy. This the Truth
testifieth by the mouth of John, who said to them that came to him, “O
generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to
come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance; And say not we
have Abraham to our father; for I say unto you, that God is able of
these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. For now is the axe laid
unto the root of the trees. Every tree therefore that bringeth not forth
good fruit shall be cut down, and cast into the fire.” <span
id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130) Touching this fruit he said above,
“Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance.” Whoso then bringeth not forth
these fruits, hath no cause to think that he shall attain <span
id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) pardon for his sins by a barren
repentance. Now what these fruits are, he showeth afterwards himself.
For after these his words the multitude asked him, saying, “What shall
we do then?” That is, what are these fruits, which thou exhortest us
with such alarming force to bring forth? “But he answering said unto
them, he that hath two coats, let him give to him that hath none; and he
that hath meat, let him do likewise.” My brethren, what is more plain,
what more certain, or express than this? What other meaning then can
that have which he said above, “Every tree that bringeth not forth good
fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into the fire;” but that same which
they on the left shall hear, “Go ye into everlasting fire, for I was
hungry, and ye gave Me no meat.” So then it is but a small matter to
depart from sins, if thou shalt neglect to cure what is past, as it is
written, “Son, thou hast sinned, do so no more.” And that he might not
think to be secure by this only, he saith, “And for thy former sins pray
that they may be forgiven thee.” <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) But what will it profit thee to
pray for forgiveness, if thou shalt not make thyself meet to be heard,
by not bringing forth fruits meet for repentance, that thou shouldest be
cut down as a barren tree, and be cast into the fire? If then ye will be
heard when ye pray for pardon of your sins, “Forgive, and it shall be
forgiven you; Give, and it shall be given you.” <span
id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[290:2096](1060229.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="vii.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p5"></span> *Salvatorem*.

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[290:2097](1060229.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="vii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p7"></span> *Convivio*.

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[290:2098](1060229.htm#fr_2097) <span
id="vii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p8"></span> [Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span id="vii.xii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[290:2099](1060229.htm#fr_2098) <span
id="vii.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p9"></span> *Detrivimus*.

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[290:2100](1060229.htm#fr_2099) <span
id="vii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p10"></span> St. Ambrose, *ad loc.*, observes that
*Dei* is not in the Greek but explains “in imagine” in the same sense,
as does St. Augustin, *ad loc.*, where he had not “*Dei*.” It seems a
sort of gloss. It occurs in Cassiod. *Anon. de Trin*. ap. St. Ambrose.

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[290:2101](1060229.htm#fr_2100) <span
id="vii.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p11"></span> [Ps.
39.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)<span id="vii.xii-p11.1"></span>,
Sept. (xxxix. 6, English version).

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[290:2102](1060229.htm#fr_2101) <span
id="vii.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p13"></span> *Fides*.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[290:2103](1060229.htm#fr_2102) <span
id="vii.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p14"></span> [Ps. lxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#010)<span id="vii.xii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[291:2104](1060229.htm#fr_2103) <span
id="vii.xii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p15"></span> *Pietas*.

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[291:2105](1060229.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="vii.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p16"></span> *Fluendo*.

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[291:2106](1060229.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="vii.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p18"></span> *Pœnaliter*.

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[291:2107](1060229.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="vii.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p20"></span> [1 Cor.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="vii.xii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[291:2108](1060229.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="vii.xii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p21"></span> *Argumenta*.

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[291:2109](1060229.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="vii.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p22"></span> *Ore torto*.

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[292:2110](1060229.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="vii.xii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p24"></span> [Matt. vi.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019)<span id="vii.xii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[292:2111](1060229.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="vii.xii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p25"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/sep/gen003.htm#019)<span id="vii.xii-p25.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[292:2112](1060229.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="vii.xii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p27"></span> From this and the preceding sections it
would appear as if this Sermon was written at a time of some great
public trouble, probably when the barbarians were ravaging Africa.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[292:2113](1060229.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="vii.xii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p28"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035)<span id="vii.xii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[292:2114](1060229.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="vii.xii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p29"></span> [Matt. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019)<span id="vii.xii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[292:2115](1060229.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="vii.xii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p30"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="vii.xii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[292:2116](1060229.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="vii.xii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p31"></span> *In terra*.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[292:2117](1060229.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="vii.xii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p32"></span> [Matt. vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021)<span id="vii.xii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[293:2118](1060229.htm#fr_2117) <span
id="vii.xii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p34"></span> *Vide* Sermon 18. 4, and Sermon 38. 9.

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[293:2119](1060229.htm#fr_2118) <span
id="vii.xii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p35"></span> *Laturarii*.

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[293:2120](1060229.htm#fr_2119) <span
id="vii.xii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p36"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="vii.xii-p36.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[293:2121](1060229.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="vii.xii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p38"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014)<span id="vii.xii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[293:2122](1060229.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="vii.xii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p40"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
3.30](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#030)<span id="vii.xii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[293:2123](1060229.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="vii.xii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p41"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
29.12](../../../bib/vul/sir029.htm#012)<span id="vii.xii-p41.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[293:2124](1060229.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="vii.xii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p42"></span> [Dan.
4.27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027)<span id="vii.xii-p42.1"></span>,
Sept. (iv. 27, English version).

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[293:2125](1060229.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="vii.xii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p43"></span> [Wisdom
4.20](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#020)<span id="vii.xii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[294:2126](1060229.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="vii.xii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p44"></span> [Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)<span id="vii.xii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[294:2127](1060229.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="vii.xii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p45"></span> [Jas. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013)<span id="vii.xii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[294:2128](1060229.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="vii.xii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p47"></span> [John vi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035)<span id="vii.xii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[294:2129](1060229.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="vii.xii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p48"></span> [Ps.
16.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)<span id="vii.xii-p48.1"></span>,
Sept. (xvi. 2, English version).

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[294:2130](1060229.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="vii.xii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p49"></span> [Matt. xxv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)<span id="vii.xii-p49.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[294:2131](1060229.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="vii.xii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p51"></span> [Luke iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007)<span id="vii.xii-p51.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[294:2132](1060229.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="vii.xii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p52"></span> *Mereri*.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[294:2133](1060229.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="vii.xii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p53"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
21.1](../../../bib/apo/sir021.htm#001)<span id="vii.xii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[294:2134](1060229.htm#fr_2133) <span
id="vii.xii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p54"></span> [Luke
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038)<span id="vii.xii-p54.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XI](1060230)
