[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060258)  [Next](1060260) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xlii"></span> <span id="vii.xlii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xlii-p1.1"></span>Sermon XL.</span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xlii-p2.1"></span>\[XC. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xlii-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002)<span id="vii.xlii-p3.2"></span>,
etc., about the marriage of the king’s son; against the Donatists, on
charity. Delivered at Carthage in the Restituta*. <span
id="fr_2984"></span>[2985](#fn_2984)

<span id="vii.xlii-p5"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xlii-p5.1"></span>All</span> the faithful <span
id="fr_2985"></span>[2986](#fn_2985) know the marriage of the king’s
son, and his feast, and the spreading <span
id="fr_2986"></span>[2987](#fn_2986) of the Lord’s Table is open to them
all <span id="fr_2987"></span>[2988](#fn_2987) who will. But it is of
importance to each one to see how he approaches, even when he is not
forbidden to approach It. For the Holy Scriptures teach us that there
are two feasts of the Lord; one to which the good and evil come, the
other to which the evil come not. So then the feast, of which we have
just now heard when the Gospel was being read, has both good and evil
guests. All who excused themselves from this feast are evil; but not all
those who entered in are good. You therefore who are the good guests at
this feast do I address, who have in your minds the words, “He that
eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to
himself.” <span id="fr_2988"></span>[2989](#fn_2988) All you who are
such do I address, that ye look not for the good without, that ye bear
with the evil within.

<span id="vii.xlii-p10"></span>2. I do not doubt that ye wish to hear,
Beloved, who they are of whom I have spoken in my address, that they
should not look for the good without, and should bear with the evil
within. If all within are evil, whom do I address? If all within are
good, whom did I advise them to bear with being evil? Let me first then
with the Lord’s assistance get out of this difficulty as best I can. If
you consider good perfectly and strictly <span
id="fr_2989"></span>[2990](#fn_2989) speaking, none is good but God
Alone. Ye have the Lord saying most plainly, “Why callest thou Me good?
there is none Good but One, that is, God.” <span
id="fr_2990"></span>[2991](#fn_2990) How then can that marriage feast
have good and bad guests, if “none is good but God Alone”? In the first
place ye ought to know, that after a certain sort we are all evil. Yes,
doubtless after a certain sort are we all evil; but after no sort are we
all good. For can we compare ourselves with the Apostles, to whom the
Lord Himself said, “If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts
unto your children?” <span id="fr_2991"></span>[2992](#fn_2991) If we
consider the Scriptures, there was but one evil one among the twelve
Apostles, with reference to whom the Lord said in a certain place, “And
ye are clean, but not all.” <span id="fr_2992"></span>[2993](#fn_2992)
But yet in addressing them all together, He said, “If ye being evil.”
Peter heard this, John heard this, Andrew heard this, all the rest of
the eleven Apostles heard it. What did they hear? “If ye being evil know
how to give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall your
Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask Him?” When
they heard that they were evil, they were in despair; but when they
heard that God in heaven was their Father, they revived. “Ye being
evil;” what then is due to the evil, but punishment? “How much more
shall your Father which is in heaven?” What is due to children but
reward. In the name of “evil” is the dread of punishment; in the name of
“children” is the hope of heirs.

<span id="vii.xlii-p15"></span>3. According to a certain respect then
they were evil, who after another respect were good. For to them to whom
it is said, “Ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto your
children;” is added immediately, “How much more shall your Father which
is in heaven?” He is then the Father of the evil, but not of those who
are to be left so; because He is the Physician of them who are to be
cured. According to a certain sort then they were evil. And yet those
guests of the Householder at the King’s marriage, were not I suppose of
that number of whom it was said, “they invited good and bad,” <span
id="fr_2993"></span>[2994](#fn_2993) that they should be reckoned among
the number of the bad, who we have heard were shut out in his person who
was found not to have a wedding garment. According to a certain respect,
I repeat they were bad, who yet were good; and according to a certain
respect they were good, who yet were bad. Hear John according to what
respect they were bad: “If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us.” <span
id="fr_2994"></span>[2995](#fn_2994) Behold after what respect they were
bad: because they had sin. According to what respect were they good? “If
we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” <span
id="fr_2995"></span>[2996](#fn_2995) If <span id="page_393">p.
393</span> <span id="vii.xlii-Page_393"></span>then we should say, on
the principle of this interpretation which ye have now heard me bring,
as I think, out of the sacred Scriptures, viz. that the same men are
both after a certain manner, good, and after a certain manner bad; if we
should wish to receive according to this sense the words, “they invited
good and bad,” the same persons, that is, at once good and bad; if we
should wish so to receive them, we are not permitted so to do, by reason
of that one who was found “not having a wedding garment,” and who was
not merely “cast forth,” so as to be deprived of that feast, but so as
to be condemned in the punishment of everlasting darkness.

<span id="vii.xlii-p19"></span>4. But one will say, What of one man?
what strange, what great matter is it, if one among the crowd “not
having a wedding garment” crept in unperceived to the servants of the
Householder? Could it be said because of that one, “they invited good
and bad”? Attend therefore, my Brethren, and understand. That one man
represented one class; for they were many. Here some diligent hearer may
answer me, and say, “I have no wish for you to tell me your guesses; I
wish to have it proved to me that that one represented many.” <span
id="fr_2996"></span>[2997](#fn_2996) By the Lord’s present help, I will
prove it clearly; nor will I search far, that I may be able to prove it.
God will assist me in His own words in this place, and will furnish you
by my ministry with a plain proof of it. “The Master of the house came
in to see the guests.” <span id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997) See,
my Brethren, the servants’ business was only to invite and bring in the
good and bad; see that it is not said, that the servants took notice of
the guests, and found among them a man which had not on a wedding
garment, and spoke to him. This is not written. The Master of the house
saw him, the Master of the house discovered, the Master of the house
inspected, the Master of the house separated him out. It was not right
to pass over this. But I have undertaken to establish another point, how
that that one signifies many. “The Master of the house” then “came in to
see the guests, and He found there a man which had not on a wedding
garment. And He saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not
having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.” <span
id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998) For He who questioned him was One,
to whom he could give no feigned reply. The garment that was looked for
is in the heart, not on the body; for had it been put on externally, it
could not have been concealed even from the servants. Where that wedding
garment must be put on, hear in the words, “Let thy priests be clothed
with righteousness.” <span id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999) Of that
garment the Apostle speaks, <span id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000)
“If so be that we shall be found clothed, and not naked.” <span
id="fr_3001"></span>[3002](#fn_3001) Therefore was he discovered by the
Lord, who escaped the notice of the servants. Being questioned, he is
speechless: he is bound, cast out, and condemned one by many. I have
said, Lord, that Thou teachest us that in this Thou dost give warning to
all. Recollect then with me, my Brethren, the words which ye have heard,
and ye will at once discover, at once determine, that that one was many.
True it was one man whom the Lord questioned, to one He said, “Friend,
how camest thou in hither?” It was one who was speechless, and of that
same one was it said, “Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer
darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” <span
id="fr_3002"></span>[3003](#fn_3002) Why? “For many are called, but few
chosen.” <span id="fr_3003"></span>[3004](#fn_3003) How can any one
gainsay this manifestation of the truth? “Cast him,” He saith, “into
outer darkness.” “Him,” that one man assuredly, of whom the Lord saith,
“for many are called, but few chosen.” So then it is the few who are not
cast out. He was it is true but one man “who had not the wedding
garment. Cast him out.” But why is he cast out? “For many are called,
but few chosen.” Leave alone the few, cast out the many. It is true,
that man was but one. Yet undoubtedly that one not only was many, but
those many in numbers far surpassed the number of the good. For the good
are many also; but in comparison of the bad, they are few. In the crop
there is much wheat; compare it with the chaff, and the grains of corn
are few. The same persons considered in themselves are many, in
comparison with the bad are few. How do we prove that in themselves they
are many? “Many shall come from the East and from the West.” Whither
shall they come? To that feast, into which both good and bad enter. But
speaking of another feast, He subjoined, “and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.” <span
id="fr_3004"></span>[3005](#fn_3004) That is the feast to which the bad
shall not approach. Be that feast which now is, received worthily, that
we may attain to the other. The same then are many, who are also few; in
themselves many; in comparison with the bad few. Therefore what saith
the Lord? He found one, and said, “Let the many be cast out, the few
remain.” For to say, “many are called, but few chosen,” is nothing else
than to show plainly who in this present feast are accounted to be such,
as to be brought to that other feast, where no bad men shall come.

<span id="vii.xlii-p29"></span>5. What is it then? I would not that ye
all who approach the Lord’s Table which is in this life, should be with
the many who are to be shut out, but with the few who are to be
reserved. And how shall ye be able to attain to this? Take “the wedding
garment.” Ye will say, “Explain <span id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span
id="vii.xlii-Page_394"></span>this ‘wedding garment’ to us.” Without a
doubt, that is the garment which none but the good have, who are to be
left at the feast, reserved unto that other feast to which no bad man
approaches, who are to be brought safely thither by the grace of the
Lord; these have “the wedding garment.” Let us then, my Brethren, seek
for those among the faithful who have something which bad men have not,
and this will be “the wedding garment.” If we speak of sacraments, ye
see how that these are common to the bad and good. Is it Baptism?
Without Baptism it is true no one attaineth to God; but not every one
that hath Baptism attaineth to Him. I cannot therefore understand
Baptism, the Sacrament itself that is, to be “the wedding garment;” for
this garment I see in the good, I see in the bad. Peradventure it is the
Altar, or That which is received at the Altar. But no; we see that many
eat, and “eat and drink judgment to themselves.” What is it then? Is it
fasting? The wicked fast also. Is it running together to the Church? The
wicked run thither also. Lastly, is it miracles? Not only do the good
and bad perform them, but sometimes the good perform them not. See,
among the ancient people Pharaoh’s magicians wrought miracles, the
Israelites did not; among the Israelites, Moses only and Aaron wrought
them; the rest did not, but saw, and feared, and believed. <span
id="fr_3005"></span>[3006](#fn_3005) Were the magicians of Pharaoh who
did miracles, better men than the people of Israel who could not do
them, and yet that people were the people of God. In the Church itself,
hear the Apostle, “Are all prophets? Have all the gifts of healing? Do
all speak with tongues?” <span id="fr_3006"></span>[3007](#fn_3006)

<span id="vii.xlii-p32"></span>6. What is that “wedding garment” then?
This is the wedding garment: “Now the end of the commandment,” says the
Apostle, “is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and
of faith unfeigned.” <span id="fr_3007"></span>[3008](#fn_3007) This is
“the wedding garment.” Not charity of any kind whatever; for very often
they who are partakers together of an evil conscience seem to love one
another. They who commit robberies together, who love the hurtful arts
of sorceries, and the stage together, who join together in the shout of
the chariot race, or the wild beast fight; these very often love one
another; but in these there is no “charity out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. The wedding garment” is such
charity as this. “Though I speak with the tongues of men and of Angels,
and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, and a tinkling
cymbal.” <span id="fr_3008"></span>[3009](#fn_3008) Tongues have come in
alone, and it is said to them, “How came ye in hither not having a
wedding garment?” “Though,” said he, “I have the gift of prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and though I have all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing.” See, these are the miracles of men who very often have not
“the wedding garment.” “Though,” he says, “I have all these, and have
not Christ, I am nothing.” Is then “the gift of prophecy” nothing? is
then “the knowledge of mysteries” <span
id="fr_3009"></span>[3010](#fn_3009) nothing? It is not that these are
nothing; but “I,” if I have them, “and have not charity, am nothing.”
How many good things profit nothing without this one good thing! If then
I have not charity, though I bestow alms freely upon the poor, though I
have come to the confession of Christ’s Name even unto blood and fire,
these things may be done even through the love of glory, and so are
vain. Because then they may be done even from the love of glory, and so
be vain, and not through the rich charity of a godly affection, he names
them all also in express terms, and do thou give ear to them; “though I
distribute all my goods for the use of the poor, and though I give my
body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.” <span
id="fr_3010"></span>[3011](#fn_3010) This then is “the wedding garment.”
Question yourselves; if ye have it, ye may be without fear in the Feast
of the Lord. In one and the same man there exist two things, charity and
desire. Let charity be born in thee, if it be yet unborn, and if it be
born, be it nourished, fostered, increased. But as to that desire,
though in this life it cannot be utterly extinguished; “for if we say
that we have no sin we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us;”
 <span id="fr_3011"></span>[3012](#fn_3011) but in so far as desire is
in us, so far we are not without sin: let charity increase, desire
decrease; that the one, that is, charity, may one day be perfected, and
desire be consumed. Put on “the wedding garment:” you I address, who as
yet have it not. Ye are already within, already do ye approach to the
Feast, and still have ye not yet the garment to do honour to the
Bridegroom; “Ye are yet seeking your own things, not the things which
are Jesus Christ’s.”  <span id="fr_3012"></span>[3013](#fn_3012) For
“the wedding garment” is taken in honour of the union, the union, that
is, of the Bridegroom to the Bride. Ye know the Bridegroom; it is
Christ. Ye know the Bride; it is the Church. Pay honour <span
id="fr_3013"></span>[3014](#fn_3013) to the Bride, pay honour to the
Bridegroom. If ye pay due honour to them both, ye will be their
children. Therefore in this make progress. Love the Lord, and so learn
to love yourselves; that when by loving the Lord ye shall have loved
yourselves, ye may securely love your neighbour as yourselves. For when
I find a man that does not love himself, how shall I commit his
neighbour whom he should love as himself to him? And who is <span
id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span id="vii.xlii-Page_395"></span>there,
you will say, who does not love himself? Who is there? See, “He that
loveth iniquity hateth his own soul.” <span
id="fr_3014"></span>[3015](#fn_3014) Does he love himself, who loves his
body, and hates his soul to his own hurt, to the hurt of both his body
and soul? And who loves his own soul? He that loveth God with all his
heart and with all his mind. To such an one I would at once entrust his
neighbour. “Love your neighbour as yourselves.”

<span id="vii.xlii-p41"></span>7. One may say, “Who is my neighbour?”
Every man is your neighbour. Had we not all the same two parents?
Animals of every species are neighbours one to the other, the dove to
the dove, the leopard to the leopard, the asp to the asp, the sheep to
the sheep, and is not man neighbour to man? Call to mind the ordering of
the creation. God spake, the waters brought forth swimming creatures,
great whales, fish, birds, and such like things. Did all the birds come
of one bird? Did all vultures come of one vulture? Did all doves come of
one dove? Did all snakes come of one snake? or all gilt-heads of one
gilt-head? <span id="fr_3015"></span>[3016](#fn_3015) or all sheep of
one sheep? No, the earth assuredly brought forth all these kinds
together. But when it came to man, the earth did not bring forth man.
One father was made for us; not even two, father and mother: one father,
I say, was made for us, not even two, father and mother; but out of the
one father came the one mother; the one father came from none, but was
made by God, and the one mother came out of him. Mark then the nature of
our race: we flowed out of one fountain; and because that one was turned
to bitterness, we all became from a good, a wild olive tree. And so
grace came also. One begat us unto sin and death, yet as one race, yet
as neighbours one to another, yet as not merely like, but related to
each other. There came *One* against *one*; against the one who
scattered, One who gathereth. Thus against the one who slayeth, is the
One who maketh alive. “For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive.”  <span id="fr_3016"></span>[3017](#fn_3016) Now as
whosoever is born of the first, dieth; so whosoever believeth in Christ
is made alive. Provided, that is, that he have “the wedding garment,”
and be invited as one who is to remain, and not to be cast out.

<span id="vii.xlii-p44"></span>8. So then, my Brethren, have charity. I
have explained it to be this garment, this “wedding garment.” Faith is
praised, it is plain, it is praised: but what kind of faith this is, the
Apostle distinguishes. For certain who boasted of faith, and had not a
good conversation, the Apostle James rebukes and says, “Thou believest
there is one God, thou doest well; the devils also believe and
tremble.” <span id="fr_3017"></span>[3018](#fn_3017) Call to mind with
me whereupon Peter was praised, whereupon called blessed. Was it because
he said, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God”? <span
id="fr_3018"></span>[3019](#fn_3018) He who pronounced Him blessed,
regarded not the sound of the words, but the affection of the heart. For
would ye know that Peter’s blessedness lay not in these words? The
devils also said the same. “We know Thee who Thou art, the Son of
God.” <span id="fr_3019"></span>[3020](#fn_3019) Peter confessed Him to
be “the Son of God;” the devils confessed Him to be “the Son of God.”
“Distinguish, my lord, distinguish between the two.” I do make a plain
distinction. Peter spake in love, the devils from fear. And again Peter
says, “I am with Thee, even unto death.” <span
id="fr_3020"></span>[3021](#fn_3020) The devils say, “What have we to do
with Thee?” So then thou who art come to the feast, glory not of faith
only. Distinguish well the nature of this faith; and then in thee is
recognised “the wedding garment.” Let the Apostle make the distinction,
let him teach us; “neither circumcision availeth anything, nor
uncircumcision, but faith.” <span id="fr_3021"></span>[3022](#fn_3021)
Tell us, what faith? do not even the devils believe and tremble? I will
tell thee, he says, and listen, I will now draw the distinction, “But
faith which worketh by love.” What faith, then, and of what kind? “That
which worketh by love.” “Though I have all knowledge,” he says, “and all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing.” Have faith with love; for love without faith ye cannot have.
This I warn, this I exhort, this in the name of the Lord I teach you,
Beloved, that ye have faith with love; for ye may possibly have faith
without love. I do not exhort you to have faith, but love. For ye cannot
have love without faith; the love I mean of God and your neighbour;
whence can it come without faith? How doth he love God, who doth not
believe on God? How doth the fool love God, “who saith in his heart,
there is no God”? <span id="fr_3022"></span>[3023](#fn_3022) Possible it
is that ye may believe that Christ hath come and not love Christ. But it
is not possible that ye should love Christ, and yet say that Christ hath
not come.

<span id="vii.xlii-p51"></span>9. So then, have faith with love. This is
the “wedding garment.” Ye who love Christ, love one another, love your
friends, love your enemies. Let not this be hard to you. What then do ye
lose thereby, when ye gain so much? What? dost thou ask of God as some
great favour, that thine enemy may die? This is not “the wedding
garment.” Turn thy thoughts to the Bridegroom Himself hanging upon the
Cross for thee, and praying to His Father for His enemies; “Father,”
saith He, “forgive them, for they know not what they do.” <span
id="fr_3023"></span>[3024](#fn_3023) Thou hast seen the Bridegroom
speaking thus; see too <span id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="vii.xlii-Page_396"></span>the friend of the Bridegroom, a guest
“with the wedding garment.” Look at the blessed Stephen, how he rebukes
the Jews as though in rage and resentment, “Ye stiffnecked and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye have resisted the Holy Ghost. Which
of the Prophets have not your fathers killed?” <span
id="fr_3024"></span>[3025](#fn_3024) Thou hast heard how severe he is
with his tongue. And at <span id="fr_3025"></span>[3026](#fn_3025) once
thou art prepared to speak against any one; and I would it were against
him who offendeth God, and not who offendeth thee. One offendeth God,
and thou dost not rebuke him; he offendeth thee, and thou criest out;
where is that “wedding garment”? Ye have heard therefore how Stephen was
severe; now hear how he loved. He offended those whom he was rebuking,
and was stoned by them. And as he was being overwhelmed and bruised to
death by the hands of his furious persecutors on every side, and the
blows of the stones, he first said, “Lord Jesus Christ, receive my
spirit.” <span id="fr_3026"></span>[3027](#fn_3026) Then after he had
prayed for himself standing, he bent the knee for them who were stoning
him, and said, “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge; let me die in my
body, but let not these die in their souls. And when he had said this,
he fell asleep.” <span id="fr_3027"></span>[3028](#fn_3027) After these
words he added no more; he spake them and departed; his last prayer was
for his enemies. Learn ye hereby to have “the wedding garment.” So do
thou too bend the knee, and beat thy forehead against the ground, and as
thou art about to approach the Table of the Lord, the Feast of the Holy
Scriptures, do not say, “O that mine enemy might die! Lord, if I have
deserved ought of Thee, slay mine enemy.” Because if so be that thou
sayest so, dost thou not fear lest He should answer thee, “If I should
choose to slay thine enemy, I should first slay thee. What! dost thou
glory because thou hast now come invited hither? Think only what thou
wast but a little while ago. Hast thou not blasphemed Me? hast thou not
derided Me? didst thou not wish to wipe out My Name from off the earth?
Yet now thou dost applaud thyself because thou hast come invited hither!
If I had slain thee when thou wast Mine enemy, how could I have made
thee My friend? Why, by thy wicked prayers dost thou teach Me to do,
what I did not in thine own case?” Yea rather God saith to thee, “Let me
teach thee to imitate Me. When I was hanging on the Cross, I said,
‘Forgive them, for they know not what they do.’ <span
id="fr_3028"></span>[3029](#fn_3028) This lesson I taught My brave
soldier. Be thou My recruit against the devil. In no other way wilt thou
fight at all unconquerably, unless thou dost pray for thine enemies. Yet
by all means ask this, yea ask this very thing, ask that thou mayest
persecute thine enemy; but ask it with discernment; distinguish well
what thou askest. See, a man is thine enemy; answer me, what is it in
him which is at enmity with thee? Is it in this, that he is a man, that
he is at enmity with thee? No. What then? That he is evil. In that he is
a man, in that he is that I made him, he is not at enmity with thee.” He
saith to thee, “I did not make man evil; he became evil by disobedience,
who obeyed the devil <span id="fr_3029"></span>[3030](#fn_3029) rather
than God. What he has made himself, is at enmity with thee; in that he
is evil, he is thine enemy; not in that he is a man. For I hear the word
“man,” and “evil;” the one is the name of nature, the other of sin; the
sin I cure; and the nature I preserve.” And so thy God saith to thee,
“See, I do avenge thee, I do slay thine enemy; I take away that which
makes him evil, I preserve that which constitutes him a man: now if I
shall have made him a good man, have I not slain thine enemy, and made
him thy friend?” So ask on what thou art asking, not that the men may
perish, but that these their enmities may perish. For if thou pray for
this, that the man may die; it is the prayer of one wicked man against
another; and when thou dost say, “Slay the wicked one,” God answereth
thee, “Which of you?”

<span id="vii.xlii-p59"></span>10. Extend your love then, and limit it
not to your wives and children. Such love is found even in beasts and
sparrows. Ye know the sparrows and the swallows how they love their
mates, how together they hatch their eggs, and nourish their young
together, by a sort of free <span id="fr_3030"></span>[3031](#fn_3030)
and natural kindliness, and with no thought of a return. For the sparrow
does not say, “I will nourish my young, that when I am grown old, they
may feed me.” He has no such thought; he loves and feeds them, for the
love of them; displays the affection of a parent, and looks for no
return. And so, I know, I am sure, do ye love your children. “For the
children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the
children.” <span id="fr_3031"></span>[3032](#fn_3031) Yea upon this plea
it is that many of you excuse your covetousness, that ye are getting for
your children, and are laying by for them. <span
id="fr_3032"></span>[3033](#fn_3032) But I say, extend your love, let
this love grow; for to love wives and children, is not yet that “wedding
garment.” Have faith to Godward. First love God. Extend yourselves out
to God; and whomsoever ye shall be able, draw on to God. There is thine
enemy: let him be drawn to God. There is a son, a wife, a servant; let
them be all drawn to God. There is a stranger; let him be drawn to God.
There is an enemy; let him be drawn to God. Draw, <span id="page_397">p.
397</span> <span id="vii.xlii-Page_397"></span>draw on thine enemy; by
drawing him on he shall cease to be thine enemy. So let charity be
advanced, so be it nourished, that being nourished it may be perfected;
so be “the wedding garment” put on; so be the image of God, after which
we were created, by this our advancing, engraven anew in us. For by sin
was it bruised, and worn away. How is it bruised? how worn away? When it
is rubbed against the earth? And what is, “When it is rubbed against the
earth”? When it is worn by earthly lusts. For “though man  <span
id="fr_3033"></span>[3034](#fn_3033) walketh in this image, yet is he
disquieted in vain.” <span id="fr_3034"></span>[3035](#fn_3034) Truth is
looked for in God’s image, not vanity. By the love of the truth then be
that image, after which we were created, engraven anew, and His Own
tribute rendered to our Cæsar. For so ye have heard from the Lord’s
answer, when the Jews tempted Him, as He said, “Why tempt ye Me, ye
hypocrites; show Me the tribute money,” <span
id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035) that is, the impress and
superscription of the image. Show me what ye pay, what ye get ready,
what is exacted of you. And “they showed Him a denarius;” and “He asked
whose image and superscription it had.” They answered, “Cæsar’s.” So
Cæsar looks for his own image. It is not Cæsar’s will that what he
ordered to be made should be lost to him, and it is not surely God’s
will that what He hath made should be lost to Him. Cæsar, my Brethren,
did not make the money; the masters of the mint <span
id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036) make it; the workmen have their
orders, he issues his commands to his ministers. His image was stamped
upon the money; on the money was Cæsar’s image. And yet he requires what
others have stamped; he puts it in his treasures; he will not have it
refused him. Christ’s coin is man. In him is Christ’s image, in him
Christ’s Name, Christ’s gifts, Christ’s rules of duty. <span
id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2984"></span>[392:2985](1060259.htm#fr_2984) <span
id="vii.xlii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p4"></span> The great Church in Carthage where the
bodies of the Martyr Sts. Perpetua and Felicitas lay. See Ben. ed. in
Sermon xix. note.

<span id="fn_2985"></span>[392:2986](1060259.htm#fr_2985) <span
id="vii.xlii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p6"></span> *Baptized fideles*.

<span id="fn_2986"></span>[392:2987](1060259.htm#fr_2986) <span
id="vii.xlii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p7"></span> *Apparatus*.

<span id="fn_2987"></span>[392:2988](1060259.htm#fr_2987) <span
id="vii.xlii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p8"></span> *Voluntati omnium*.

<span id="fn_2988"></span>[392:2989](1060259.htm#fr_2988) <span
id="vii.xlii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p9"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span id="vii.xlii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2989"></span>[392:2990](1060259.htm#fr_2989) <span
id="vii.xlii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p11"></span> *Liquido*.

<span id="fn_2990"></span>[392:2991](1060259.htm#fr_2990) <span
id="vii.xlii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p12"></span> [Matt. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017)<span id="vii.xlii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2991"></span>[392:2992](1060259.htm#fr_2991) <span
id="vii.xlii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p13"></span> [Matt. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011)<span id="vii.xlii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2992"></span>[392:2993](1060259.htm#fr_2992) <span
id="vii.xlii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p14"></span> [John xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010)<span id="vii.xlii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2993"></span>[392:2994](1060259.htm#fr_2993) <span
id="vii.xlii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p16"></span> [Matt. xxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#010)<span id="vii.xlii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2994"></span>[392:2995](1060259.htm#fr_2994) <span
id="vii.xlii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p17"></span> [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)<span id="vii.xlii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2995"></span>[392:2996](1060259.htm#fr_2995) <span
id="vii.xlii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p18"></span> [1 John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009)<span id="vii.xlii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2996"></span>[393:2997](1060259.htm#fr_2996) <span
id="vii.xlii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p20"></span> Serm. xlv. (xcv. Ben.) 6.

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[393:2998](1060259.htm#fr_2997) <span
id="vii.xlii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p21"></span> [Matt. xxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#011)<span id="vii.xlii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[393:2999](1060259.htm#fr_2998) <span
id="vii.xlii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p22"></span> [Matt. xxii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#012)<span id="vii.xlii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[393:3000](1060259.htm#fr_2999) <span
id="vii.xlii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p23"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span id="vii.xlii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[393:3001](1060259.htm#fr_3000) <span
id="vii.xlii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p24"></span> See note, Serm. viii. (lviii. Ben.) 13
(xi.).

<span id="fn_3001"></span>[393:3002](1060259.htm#fr_3001) <span
id="vii.xlii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p25"></span> [2 Cor. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#003)<span id="vii.xlii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3002"></span>[393:3003](1060259.htm#fr_3002) <span
id="vii.xlii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p26"></span> [Matt. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013)<span id="vii.xlii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3003"></span>[393:3004](1060259.htm#fr_3003) <span
id="vii.xlii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p27"></span> [Matt. xxii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014)<span id="vii.xlii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3004"></span>[393:3005](1060259.htm#fr_3004) <span
id="vii.xlii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p28"></span> [Matt. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)<span id="vii.xlii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3005"></span>[394:3006](1060259.htm#fr_3005) <span
id="vii.xlii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p30"></span> [Exod.
vii](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#000)<span id="vii.xlii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3006"></span>[394:3007](1060259.htm#fr_3006) <span
id="vii.xlii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p31"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029)<span id="vii.xlii-p31.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3007"></span>[394:3008](1060259.htm#fr_3007) <span
id="vii.xlii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p33"></span> [1 Tim. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="vii.xlii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3008"></span>[394:3009](1060259.htm#fr_3008) <span
id="vii.xlii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p34"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="vii.xlii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3009"></span>[394:3010](1060259.htm#fr_3009) <span
id="vii.xlii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p35"></span> *Sacramentorum*.

<span id="fn_3010"></span>[394:3011](1060259.htm#fr_3010) <span
id="vii.xlii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p36"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span id="vii.xlii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3011"></span>[394:3012](1060259.htm#fr_3011) <span
id="vii.xlii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p37"></span> [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)<span id="vii.xlii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3012"></span>[394:3013](1060259.htm#fr_3012) <span
id="vii.xlii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p38"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="vii.xlii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3013"></span>[394:3014](1060259.htm#fr_3013) <span
id="vii.xlii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p39"></span> *Deferte*.

<span id="fn_3014"></span>[395:3015](1060259.htm#fr_3014) <span
id="vii.xlii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p40"></span> [Ps.
11.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005)<span id="vii.xlii-p40.1"></span>,
Sept. (xi. 5, English version).

<span id="fn_3015"></span>[395:3016](1060259.htm#fr_3015) <span
id="vii.xlii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p42"></span> *Aurata*.

<span id="fn_3016"></span>[395:3017](1060259.htm#fr_3016) <span
id="vii.xlii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p43"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="vii.xlii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3017"></span>[395:3018](1060259.htm#fr_3017) <span
id="vii.xlii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p45"></span> [Jas. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019)<span id="vii.xlii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3018"></span>[395:3019](1060259.htm#fr_3018) <span
id="vii.xlii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p46"></span> [Matt. xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)<span id="vii.xlii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3019"></span>[395:3020](1060259.htm#fr_3019) <span
id="vii.xlii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p47"></span> [Matt.
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029), [Mark
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024)<span id="vii.xlii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3020"></span>[395:3021](1060259.htm#fr_3020) <span
id="vii.xlii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p48"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#035)<span id="vii.xlii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3021"></span>[395:3022](1060259.htm#fr_3021) <span
id="vii.xlii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p49"></span> [Gal. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006)<span id="vii.xlii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3022"></span>[395:3023](1060259.htm#fr_3022) <span
id="vii.xlii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p50"></span> [Ps. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001)<span id="vii.xlii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3023"></span>[395:3024](1060259.htm#fr_3023) <span
id="vii.xlii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p52"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="vii.xlii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3024"></span>[396:3025](1060259.htm#fr_3024) <span
id="vii.xlii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p53"></span> [Acts
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#052)<span id="vii.xlii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3025"></span>[396:3026](1060259.htm#fr_3025) <span
id="vii.xlii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p54"></span> *Adhuc*.

<span id="fn_3026"></span>[396:3027](1060259.htm#fr_3026) <span
id="vii.xlii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p55"></span> [Acts vii.
59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059)<span id="vii.xlii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3027"></span>[396:3028](1060259.htm#fr_3027) <span
id="vii.xlii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p56"></span> [Acts vii.
60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060)<span id="vii.xlii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3028"></span>[396:3029](1060259.htm#fr_3028) <span
id="vii.xlii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p57"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="vii.xlii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3029"></span>[396:3030](1060259.htm#fr_3029) <span
id="vii.xlii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p58"></span> *Zabulo*; Lactant. *De Mort. Pers.* 16.

<span id="fn_3030"></span>[396:3031](1060259.htm#fr_3030) <span
id="vii.xlii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p60"></span> *Grata*.

<span id="fn_3031"></span>[396:3032](1060259.htm#fr_3031) <span
id="vii.xlii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p61"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014)<span id="vii.xlii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3032"></span>[396:3033](1060259.htm#fr_3032) <span
id="vii.xlii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p62"></span> *Vid*. Serm. xxxvi. (lxxxvi. Ben.) 11
(ix., x.).

<span id="fn_3033"></span>[397:3034](1060259.htm#fr_3033) <span
id="vii.xlii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p63"></span> Serm. x. (lx. Ben.) 2, etc.

<span id="fn_3034"></span>[397:3035](1060259.htm#fr_3034) <span
id="vii.xlii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p64"></span> [Ps.
39.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)<span id="vii.xlii-p64.1"></span>,
Sept. (xxxix. 6 English version).

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[397:3036](1060259.htm#fr_3035) <span
id="vii.xlii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p65"></span> [Matt.
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#019)<span id="vii.xlii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[397:3037](1060259.htm#fr_3036) <span
id="vii.xlii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p66"></span> *Monetarii*.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[397:3038](1060259.htm#fr_3037) <span
id="vii.xlii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlii-p67"></span> *Officia*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XLI](1060260)
