[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060266)  [Next](1060268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.l"></span> <span id="vii.l-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.l-p1.1"></span>Sermon XLVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.l-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.l-p2.1"></span>\[XCVIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.l-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.l-p3.1"></span>*[Luke vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#002)<span id="vii.l-p3.2"></span>, etc.;
on the three dead persons whom the Lord raised.*

<span id="vii.l-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.l-p4.1"></span>The</span> miracles of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ make indeed an impression on all who hear of, and believe them;
but on different men in different ways. For some amazed at His miracles
done on the bodies of men, have no knowledge to discern the greater;
whereas some admire the more ample fulfilment in the souls of men at the
present time of those things which they hear of as having been wrought
on their bodies. The Lord Himself saith, “For as the Father raiseth up
the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom He
will.” <span id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190) Not of course that the
Son “quickeneth” some, the Father others; but the Father and the Son
“quicken” the same; for the Father doeth all things by the Son. Let no
one then who is a Christian doubt, that even at the present time the
dead are raised. Now all men have eyes, wherewith they can see the dead
rise again in such sort, as the son of that widow rose, of whom we have
just read out of the Gospel; <span id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191)
but those eyes wherewith men see the dead in heart rise again, all men
have not, save those who have risen already in heart themselves. It is a
greater miracle to raise again one who is to live for ever, than to
raise one who must die again.

<span id="vii.l-p7"></span>2. The widowed mother rejoiced at the raising
again of that young man; of men raised again in spirit day by day does
Mother Church rejoice. He indeed was dead in the body but they in soul.
His visible death was bewailed visibly; their death invisible was
neither enquired into nor perceived. He sought them out who had known
them to be dead; He Alone knew them to be dead, who was able to make
them alive. For if the Lord had not come to raise the dead, the Apostle
would not have said, “Rise, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee light.” <span
id="fr_3192"></span>[3193](#fn_3192) You hear of one asleep in the
words, “Rise, thou that sleepest;” but understand it of one dead when
you hear, “And arise from the dead.” Thus they who are even dead in the
body <span id="fr_3193"></span>[3194](#fn_3193) are often said to be
asleep. And certainly they all are but asleep, in respect of Him who is
able to awaken them. For in respect of thee, a dead man is dead indeed,
seeing he will not awake, beat or prick or tear him as thou wilt. But in
respect of Christ, he was but asleep to whom it was said, “Arise,” <span
id="fr_3194"></span>[3195](#fn_3194) and he arose forthwith. No one can
as easily awaken another in bed, as Christ can in the tomb.

<span id="vii.l-p11"></span>3. Now we find that three dead persons were
raised by the Lord “visibly,” thousands “invisibly.” Nay, who knows even
how many dead He raised visibly? For all the things that He did are not
written. John tells us this, “Many other things Jesus did, the which if
they should be written, I suppose that the whole world could not contain
the books.” <span id="fr_3195"></span>[3196](#fn_3195) So then there
were without doubt many others raised: but it is not without a meaning
that the three are expressly recorded. For our Lord Jesus Christ would
that those things which He did on the body should be also spiritually
understood. For He did not merely do miracles for the miracles’ sake;
but in order that the things which He did should inspire wonder in those
who saw them, and convey truth to them who understand. As he who sees
letters in an excellently written manuscript, and knows not how to read,
praises indeed the transcriber’s <span
id="fr_3196"></span>[3197](#fn_3196) hand, and admires the beauty of the
characters; <span id="fr_3197"></span>[3198](#fn_3197) but what those
characters mean or signify he does not know; and by the sight of his
eyes he is a praiser of the work, but in his mind has no comprehension
of it; whereas another man both praises the work, and is capable of
understanding it; such an one, I mean, who is not only able to see what
is common to all, but who can read also; which he who has never learned
cannot. So they who saw Christ’s miracles, and understood not what they
meant, and what they in a manner conveyed to those who had
understanding, wondered only at the miracles themselves; whereas others
both wondered at the miracles, and attained to the meaning of them. Such
ought we to be in the school of Christ. For he who says that Christ only
worked miracles, for the miracles’ sake, may say too that He was
ignorant that it was not the time for fruit, when He sought figs upon
the fig-tree. <span id="fr_3198"></span>[3199](#fn_3198) For it was not
the time for that fruit, as the Evangelist testifies; and yet being
hungry He sought for fruit upon the tree. Did not Christ know, what any
peasant knew? What the dresser of the tree knew, did not the tree’s
Creator know? So then when being hungry He sought fruit on the tree, He
signified that He was <span id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span
id="vii.l-Page_414"></span>hungry, and seeking after something else than
this; and He found that tree without fruit, but full of leaves, and He
cursed it, and it withered away. What had the tree done in not bearing
fruit? What fault of the tree was its fruitlessness? No; but there are
those who through their own will are not able to yield fruit. And
barrenness is “their” fault, whose fruitfulness is their will. The Jews
then who had the words of the Law, and had not the deeds, were full of
leaves, and bare no fruit. This have I said to persuade you, that our
Lord Jesus Christ performed miracles with this view, that by those
miracles He might signify something further, that besides that they were
wonderful and great, and divine in themselves, we might learn also
something from them.

<span id="vii.l-p16"></span>4. Let us then see what He would have us
learn in those three dead persons whom He raised. He raised again the
dead daughter of the ruler of the synagogue, for whom when she was sick
petition was made to Him, that He would deliver her from her sickness.
And as He is going, it is announced that she is dead; and as though He
would now be only wearying Himself in vain, word was brought to her
father, “Thy daughter is dead, why weariest thou the Master any
further?”  <span id="fr_3199"></span>[3200](#fn_3199) But He went on,
and said to the father of the damsel, “Be not afraid, only
believe.” <span id="fr_3200"></span>[3201](#fn_3200) He comes to the
house, and finds the customary funeral obsequies already prepared, and
He says to them, “Weep not, for the damsel is not dead, but
sleepeth.” <span id="fr_3201"></span>[3202](#fn_3201) He spake the
truth; she was asleep; asleep, that is, in respect of Him, by whom she
could be awakened. So awakening her, He restored her alive to her
parents. So again He awakened that young man, the widow’s son, <span
id="fr_3202"></span>[3203](#fn_3202) by whose case I have been now
reminded to speak with you, Beloved, on this subject, as He Himself
shall vouchsafe to give me power. Ye have just heard how he was
awakened. The Lord “came nigh to the city; and behold there was a dead
man being carried out” already beyond the gate. Moved with compassion,
for that the mother, a widow and bereaved of her only son, was weeping,
He did what ye have heard, saying, “Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.
He that was dead arose, and began to speak, and He restored him to his
mother.” <span id="fr_3203"></span>[3204](#fn_3203) He awakened Lazarus
likewise from the tomb. And in that case when the disciples with whom He
was speaking knew that he was sick, He said (now “Jesus loved him”),
“Our friend Lazarus sleepeth.” They thinking of the sick man’s healthful
sleep; say, “Lord, if he sleep he is well.” “Then said Jesus,” speaking
now more plainly, I tell you, “our friend Lazarus is dead.” <span
id="fr_3204"></span>[3205](#fn_3204) And in both He said the truth; “He
is dead in respect of you, he is asleep in respect of Me.”

<span id="vii.l-p23"></span>5. These three kinds of dead persons, are
three kinds of sinners whom even at this day Christ doth raise. For that
dead daughter of the ruler of the synagogue was within in the house, she
had not yet been carried out from the secresy of its walls into public
view. There within was she raised, and restored alive to her parents.
But the second was not now indeed in the house, but still not yet in the
tomb, he had been carried out of the walls, but not committed to the
ground. He who raised the dead maiden who was not yet carried out,
raised this dead man who was now carried out, but not yet buried. There
remained a third case, that He should raise one who was also buried; and
this He did in Lazarus. There are then those who have sin inwardly in
the heart, but have it not yet in overt act. A man, for instance, is
disturbed by any lust. For the Lord Himself saith, “Whosoever looketh on
a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in
his heart.” <span id="fr_3205"></span>[3206](#fn_3205) He has not yet in
body approached her, but in heart he has consented; he has one dead
within, he has not yet carried him out. And as it often happens, as we
know, as men daily experience in themselves, when they hear the word of
God, as it were the Lord saying, “Arise;” the consent unto sin is
condemned, they breathe again unto saving health and righteousness. The
dead man in the house arises, the heart revives in the secret of the
thoughts. This resurrection of a dead soul takes place within, in the
retirement of the conscience, as it were within the walls of the house.
Others after consent proceed to overt act, carrying out the dead as it
were, that that which was concealed in secret, may appear in public. Are
these now, who have advanced to the outward act, past hope? Was it not
said to the young man in the Gospel also, “I say unto thee, Arise”? Was
he not also restored to his mother? So then he too who has committed the
open act, if haply admonished and aroused by the word of truth, he rise
again at the Voice of Christ, is restored alive. Go so far he could,
perish for ever he could not. But they who by doing what is evil,
involve themselves even in evil habit, so that this very habit of evil
suffers them not to see that it is evil, become defenders of their evil
deeds; are angry when they are found fault with; to such a degree, that
the men of Sodom of old said to the righteous man who reproved their
abominable design, “Thou art come to sojourn, not to give laws.” <span
id="fr_3206"></span>[3207](#fn_3206) So powerful in that place was the
habit of abominable filthiness, that profligacy now passed for
right<span id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="vii.l-Page_415"></span>eousness, and the hinderer of it was found
fault with rather than the doer. Such as these pressed down by a
malignant habit, are as it were buried. Yea, what shall I say, Brethren?
In such sort buried, as was said of Lazarus, “By this time he
stinketh.” <span id="fr_3207"></span>[3208](#fn_3207) That heap placed
upon the grave, is this stubborn force of habit, whereby the soul is
pressed down, and is not suffered either to rise, or breathe again.

<span id="vii.l-p27"></span>6. Now it was said, “He hath been dead four
days.” <span id="fr_3208"></span>[3209](#fn_3208) So in truth the soul
arrives at that habit, of which I am speaking by a kind of four-fold
progress. For there is first the provocation as it were of pleasure in
the heart, secondly consent, thirdly the overt act, fourthly the habit.
For there are those who so entirely throw off things unlawful from their
thoughts, as not even to feel any pleasure in them. There are those who
do feel the pleasure, and do not consent to them; death is not yet
perfected, but in a certain sort begun. To the feeling of pleasure is
added consent; now at once is that condemnation incurred. After the
consent, progress is made unto the open act; the act changes into a
habit; and a sort of desperate condition is produced, so as that it may
be said, “He hath been dead four days, by this time he stinketh.”
Therefore, the Lord came, to whom of course all things were easy; yet He
found in that case as it were a kind of difficulty. He “groaned” <span
id="fr_3209"></span>[3210](#fn_3209) in the spirit, He showed that there
is need of much and loud remonstrance to raise up those who have grown
hard by habit. Yet at the voice of the Lord’s cry, the bands of
necessity were burst asunder. The powers of hell trembled, and Lazarus
is restored alive. For the Lord delivers even from evil habits those who
“have been dead four days;” for this man in the Gospel, “who had been
dead four days,” was asleep only in respect of Christ whose will it was
to raise him again. But what said He? Observe the manner of his arising
again. He came forth from the tomb alive, but he could not walk. And the
Lord said to the disciples; “Loose him, and let him go.” <span
id="fr_3210"></span>[3211](#fn_3210) “He” raised him from death, “they”
loosed him from his bonds. Observe how there is something which
appertaineth to the special Majesty of God who raiseth up. A man
involved in an evil habit is rebuked by the word of truth. How many are
rebuked, and give no ear! Who is it then who deals within with him who
does give ear? Who breathes life into him within? Who is it who drives
away the unseen death, gives the life unseen? After rebukes, after
remonstrances, are not men left alone to their own thoughts, do they not
begin to turn over in their minds how evil a life they are living, with
how very bad a habit they are weighed down? Then displeased with
themselves, they determine to change their life. Such have risen again;
they to whom what they have been is displeasing have revived: but though
reviving, they are not able to walk. These are the bands of their guilt.
Need then there is, that whoso has returned to life should be loosed,
and let go. This office hath He given to the disciples to whom He said,
“Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven
also.” <span id="fr_3211"></span>[3212](#fn_3211)

<span id="vii.l-p32"></span>7. Let us then, dearly Beloved, in such wise
hear these things, that they who are alive may live; they who are dead
may live again. Whether it be that as yet the sin has been conceived in
the heart, and not come forth into open act; let the thought be repented
of, and corrected, let the dead within the house of conscience arise. Or
whether he has actually committed what he thought of; let not even thus
his case be despaired of. The dead within has not arisen, let him arise
when “he is carried out.” Let him repent him of his deed, let him at
once return to life; let him not go to the depth of the grave, let him
not receive the load of habit upon him. But peradventure I am now
speaking to one who is already pressed down by this hard stone of his
own habit, who is already laden with the weight of custom, who “has been
in the grave four days already, and who stinketh.” Yet let not even him
despair; he is dead in the depth below, but Christ is exalted on high.
He knows how by His cry to burst asunder the burdens of earth, He knows
how to restore life within by Himself, and to deliver him to the
disciples to be loosed. Let even such as these repent. For when Lazarus
had been raised again after the four days, no foul smell remained in him
when he was alive. So then let them who are alive, still live; and let
them who are dead, whosoever they be, in which kind soever of these
three deaths they find themselves, see to it that they rise again at
once with all speed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[413:3191](1060267.htm#fr_3190) <span
id="vii.l-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p5"></span> [John v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span id="vii.l-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[413:3192](1060267.htm#fr_3191) <span
id="vii.l-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p6"></span> [Luke vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012)<span id="vii.l-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3192"></span>[413:3193](1060267.htm#fr_3192) <span
id="vii.l-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p8"></span> [Eph. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span id="vii.l-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3193"></span>[413:3194](1060267.htm#fr_3193) <span
id="vii.l-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p9"></span> *Visibiliter*.

<span id="fn_3194"></span>[413:3195](1060267.htm#fr_3194) <span
id="vii.l-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p10"></span> [Luke vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#014)<span id="vii.l-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3195"></span>[413:3196](1060267.htm#fr_3195) <span
id="vii.l-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p12"></span> [John xxi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)<span id="vii.l-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3196"></span>[413:3197](1060267.htm#fr_3196) <span
id="vii.l-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p13"></span> *Antiquarii*.

<span id="fn_3197"></span>[413:3198](1060267.htm#fr_3197) <span
id="vii.l-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p14"></span> *Apicum*.

<span id="fn_3198"></span>[413:3199](1060267.htm#fr_3198) <span
id="vii.l-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p15"></span> *Vid*. Serm. xxxix. (lxxxix. Ben.). [Mark
xi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#013)<span id="vii.l-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3199"></span>[414:3200](1060267.htm#fr_3199) <span
id="vii.l-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p17"></span> [Mark v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#035)<span id="vii.l-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3200"></span>[414:3201](1060267.htm#fr_3200) <span
id="vii.l-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p18"></span> [Mark v.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#036)<span id="vii.l-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3201"></span>[414:3202](1060267.htm#fr_3201) <span
id="vii.l-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p19"></span> [Mark v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#039)<span id="vii.l-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3202"></span>[414:3203](1060267.htm#fr_3202) <span
id="vii.l-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p20"></span> [Luke vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012)<span id="vii.l-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3203"></span>[414:3204](1060267.htm#fr_3203) <span
id="vii.l-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p21"></span> [Luke
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#015)<span id="vii.l-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3204"></span>[414:3205](1060267.htm#fr_3204) <span
id="vii.l-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p22"></span> [John xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011)<span id="vii.l-p22.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3205"></span>[414:3206](1060267.htm#fr_3205) <span
id="vii.l-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p24"></span> [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="vii.l-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3206"></span>[414:3207](1060267.htm#fr_3206) <span
id="vii.l-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p25"></span> [Gen. xix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#009)<span id="vii.l-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3207"></span>[415:3208](1060267.htm#fr_3207) <span
id="vii.l-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p26"></span> [John xi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)<span id="vii.l-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3208"></span>[415:3209](1060267.htm#fr_3208) <span
id="vii.l-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p28"></span> [John xi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)<span id="vii.l-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3209"></span>[415:3210](1060267.htm#fr_3209) <span
id="vii.l-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p29"></span> [John xi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#038)<span id="vii.l-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3210"></span>[415:3211](1060267.htm#fr_3210) <span
id="vii.l-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p30"></span> [John xi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)<span id="vii.l-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3211"></span>[415:3212](1060267.htm#fr_3211) <span
id="vii.l-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.l-p31"></span> [Matt. xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span id="vii.l-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XLIX](1060268)
