[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060273)  [Next](1060275.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lvii"></span> <span id="vii.lvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lvii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LV.</span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lvii-p2.1"></span>\[CV. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lvii-p3.1"></span>*[Luke xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p3.2"></span>,
“Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight,”
etc.*

<span id="vii.lvii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lvii-p4.1"></span>We</span> have heard our Lord, the Heavenly
Master, and most faithful Counsellor exhorting us, who at once exhorteth
us to ask, and giveth when we ask. We have heard Him in the Gospel
exhorting us to ask instantly, and to knock even after the likeness of
intrusive importunity. For He has set before us, for the sake of
example, “If any of you had a friend, and were to ask of him at night
for three loaves, <span id="fr_3339"></span>[3340](#fn_3339.md) when a
friend out of his way had come to him, and he had nothing to set before
him; and he were to answer that he was now at rest, and his servants
with him, and that he must not be disturbed by his entreaties; but the
other were to be instant and persevering in knocking, and not being
alarmed in modesty to depart, but compelled by necessity to continue on;
that he would rise, though not for friendship’s sake, at least for the
other’s importunity, and would give him as many as he wished.” And how
many did he wish? He wished for no more than three. To this parable
then, the Lord adjoined an exhortation, and urged us earnestly to ask,
seek, knock, till we receive what we ask, and seek, and knock for,
making use of an example from a contrary <span id="page_431">p.
431</span> <span id="vii.lvii-Page_431"></span>case; as of that “judge
who neither feared God, nor regarded man,” <span
id="fr_3340"></span>[3341](#fn_3340.md) and yet when a certain widow
besought him day by day, overcome by her importunity, he gave her that
which he could not in kindness give her, against his will. But our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is in the midst of us a Petitioner, with God a Giver,
would not surely exhort us so strongly to ask, if He were not willing to
give. Let then the slothfulness of men be put to shame; He is more
willing to give, than we to receive; He is more willing to show mercy,
than we to be delivered from misery; and doubtless if we shall not be
delivered, we shall abide in misery. For the exhortation He giveth us,
He giveth only for our own sakes.

<span id="vii.lvii-p7"></span>2. Let us awake, and believe Him who
exhorteth us, obey Him who promiseth us, and rejoice in Him who giveth
unto us. For peradventure, some time or other some friend out of his way
has come to us too, and we have found nothing to set before him; and
under the experience of this necessity, we have received both for
ourselves and him. For it cannot be, but that some one of us hath fallen
in with a friend who asked him something, which he could not answer; and
then he has discovered that he has it not, when he is pressed to give
it. A friend has come to thee “out of the way,” out, that is, of the
life of this world, in which all men are passing along as strangers, and
no one abides here as possessor; but to every man it is said, “Thou hast
been refreshed, pass on, go on thy way, give place to the next
comer.” <span id="fr_3341"></span>[3342](#fn_3341.md) Or perhaps from an
evil “way,” that is, from an evil life, some friend of thine wearied
out, and not finding the truth, by the hearing and perceiving of which
he may be made happy, but exhausted amid all the lust and poverty of the
world, comes to thee, as to a Christian, and says, “Give me an account
of this, make me a Christian.” And he asks what it may be thou didst not
know through the simplicity of thy faith; and so thou hast not whereby
to recruit him in his hunger, and reminded thus thou discoverest thine
own indigence; and when thou wishest to teach thou art forced to learn;
and whilst thou dost blush before him who asked thee, as not finding in
thyself what he was seeking for, thou art compelled to seek, that thou
mayest be thought worthy <span id="fr_3342"></span>[3343](#fn_3342.md) to
find.

<span id="vii.lvii-p10"></span>3. And where shouldest thou seek. Where
but in the books of the Lord? Peradventure what he has asked is
contained in the book, but it is obscure. Perhaps the Apostle has
declared it in some Epistle: declared it in such wise, that thou canst
read, but canst not understand it: thou art not permitted to pass on.
For the interrogator urges thee; Paul himself, or Peter, or any of the
Prophets thou art not allowed to ask. For this family is now at rest
with their Lord, and intense is the ignorance of this life, that is, it
is midnight, and thy hungry friend is urgent upon thee. A simple faith
haply sufficed thee, him it suffices not. Is he then to be abandoned? Is
he to be cast out of thy house? Therefore unto the Lord Himself, unto
Him with whom the family is at rest, knock by prayer, ask, be instant.
He will not, as that friend in the parable, arise and give thee as
overcome by importunity. He wisheth to give; thou for thy knocking hast
not yet received; knock on; He wisheth to give. And what He wisheth to
give, He deferreth, that thou mayest long the more for it when deferred,
lest if given quickly it should be lightly esteemed.

<span id="vii.lvii-p11"></span>4. But when thou hast gotten the three
loaves, that is, to feed on and understand the Trinity, thou hast that
whereby thou mayest both live thyself, and feed others. Now thou needest
not fear the stranger who comes out of his way to thee, but by taking
him in mayest make him a citizen of the household: nor needest thou fear
lest thou come to the end of it. That Bread will not come to an end, but
it will put an end to thine indigence. It is Bread, God the Father, and
it is Bread, God the Son, and it is Bread, God the Holy Ghost. The
Father Eternal, the Son Coeternal with Him, and the Holy Ghost
Coeternal. The Father Unchangeable, the Son Unchangeable, the Holy Ghost
Unchangeable. The Father Creator, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The
Father the Shepherd and the Giver of life, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. The Father the Food and Bread eternal, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. Learn, and teach; live thyself, and feed others. God who giveth
to thee, giveth thee nothing better than Himself. O thou greedy one,
what else wast thou seeking for? Or if thou seek for aught else, what
will suffice thee whom God doth suffice not?

<span id="vii.lvii-p12"></span>5. But necessary it is that thou have
charity, that thou have faith, that thou have hope; that that which is
given may be sweet unto thee. And these same, faith, hope, charity, are
three. And these too are gifts of God. For faith we have received from
Him; “As God,” saith he, “hath distributed to every one the measure of
faith.” <span id="fr_3343"></span>[3344](#fn_3343.md) And hope we have
received from Him, to whom it is said, “Wherein Thou hast caused me to
hope.” <span id="fr_3344"></span>[3345](#fn_3344.md) And charity we have
received from Him, of whom it is said, “The charity of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which hath been given to
us.” <span id="fr_3345"></span>[3346](#fn_3345.md) Now these three are
likewise in some measure different; but all gifts of God. For “there
abide these three, faith, hope, charity; but the greatest <span
id="page_432">p. 432</span> <span id="vii.lvii-Page_432"></span>of these
is charity.” <span id="fr_3346"></span>[3347](#fn_3346.md) In those loaves
it is not said that any one loaf was greater than the others; but simply
that three loaves were asked for, and were given.

<span id="vii.lvii-p17"></span>6. See other three things: “Who is there
of you, whom if his son ask a loaf, will he give him a stone? Or who is
there of you of whom if his son ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?
or if he ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion? If ye then, being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask
him!” <span id="fr_3347"></span>[3348](#fn_3347.md) Let us then again
consider these three things, if haply there be not here those three,
“faith, hope, charity; but the greatest of these is charity.” Set down
then these three things, a loaf, a fish, an egg; the greatest of these
is a loaf. Therefore in these three things do we well understand charity
by “the loaf.” On which account He has opposed a stone to a loaf;
because hardness is contrary to charity. By “a fish” we understand
faith. A certain holy man has said, and we are glad to say it too; “The
‘good fish’ is a godly faith.” It lives amidst the waves, and is not
broken or dissolved by the waves. Amidst the temptations and tempests of
this world, liveth godly faith; the world rages, yet it is uninjured.
Observe only that serpent is contrary to faith. For My faith is she
betrothed to whom it is said in the Song of Songs, “Come from Lebanon,
My spouse, coming and passing over to Me from the beginning of faith.”
 <span id="fr_3348"></span>[3349](#fn_3348.md) Therefore betrothed too,
because faith is the beginning of betrothal. For something is promised
by the bridegroom, and by this plighted faith is he held bound. Now to
the fish the Lord opposed the serpent, to faith the devil. Wherefore to
this betrothed one does the Apostle say, “I have betrothed you to One
Husband, to present you a chaste virgin to Christ.” And, “I fear lest as
the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds also should
be corrupted from the purity which is in Christ;” <span
id="fr_3349"></span>[3350](#fn_3349.md) that is, which is in the faith of
Christ. For he says, “That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith.” <span id="fr_3350"></span>[3351](#fn_3350.md) Therefore let not the
devil corrupt our faith, let him not devour the fish.

<span id="vii.lvii-p22"></span>7. There remains hope, which, as I think,
is compared to an egg. For hope has not yet arrived at attainment; and
an egg is something, but not yet the chicken. So then quadrupeds give
birth to young ones, but birds to the hope of young. Hope therefore
exhorts us to this, to despise things present, to wait for things to
come; “forgetting those things which are behind,” let us, with the
Apostle,” reach forth unto those things which are before.”  <span
id="fr_3351"></span>[3352](#fn_3351.md) For so he says; “But one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, reaching forth unto those
things which are before, I follow on earnestly unto the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” Nothing then is so hostile to
hope, as to “look back,” to place hope, that is, in those things which
flit by and pass away; but in those things should we place it, which are
not yet given, but which sometime will be given, and will never pass
away. But when the world is deluged by trials, <span
id="fr_3352"></span>[3353](#fn_3352.md) as it were the sulphureous rain of
Sodom, the example of Lot’s wife must be feared. For she “looked
behind;” <span id="fr_3353"></span>[3354](#fn_3353.md) and in the spot
where she looked behind, there did she remain. She was turned into salt,
that she might season the wise by her example. Of this hope the Apostle
Paul speaketh thus; “For we are saved in hope; but hope that is seen is
not hope; for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for: but if we hope
for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. For what a
man seeth, why doth he yet hope for.” <span
id="fr_3354"></span>[3355](#fn_3354.md) It is an egg, and not as yet the
chicken. And it is covered with a shell; it is not seen because it is
covered; let it be with patience waited for; let it feel the warmth,
that it may come to life. Press on, “reach forth unto the things which
are before, forget the past. For the things which are seen, are
temporal. Not looking back,” says he, “at the things which are seen, but
at the things which are not seen. For the things which are seen are
temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal.” <span
id="fr_3355"></span>[3356](#fn_3355.md) Unto those things which are not
seen then extend thy hope, wait, endure. Look not back. Fear “the
scorpion” for thine “egg.” See how he wounds with the tail, which he has
behind him. Let not then the “scorpion” crush thine “egg,” let not this
world crush thy hope (so to say) with its poison, therefore against
thee, because behind. How loudly does the world talk to thee, what an
uproar does it make behind thy back, that thou mayest look back! that
is, that thou mayest place thy hope in present things (and yet not even
present, for they cannot be called present which have no fixedness), and
mayest turn thy mind away from that which Christ hath promised, and not
yet given, but who, seeing He is faithful, will give it, and mayest be
content to look for rest in a perishing world.

<span id="vii.lvii-p28"></span>8. For this cause does God mingle
bitternesses with the felicities of earth, that another felicity may be
sought, in whose sweetness there is no deceit; yet by these very
bitternesses does the world endeavour to turn thee away from thy longing
pursuit after the things “which are be<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>
<span id="vii.lvii-Page_433"></span>fore,” and to turn thee back. For
these bitternesses, for these tribulations dost thou murmur and say,
“See, all things are perishing in Christian times.” What complaint is
this! God hath not promised me that these things shall not perish;
Christ hath not promised me this. The Eternal hath promised things
eternal: if I believe, from a mortal, I shall be made eternal. What
noise is this, O world <span id="fr_3356"></span>[3357](#fn_3356.md)
impure! what murmuring is this! Why art thou trying to turn me back?
Perishing as thou art, thou wishest to detain me; what wouldest thou do,
if thou hadst any permanence? Whom wouldest thou not beguile by thy
sweetness, if with all thy bitternesses thou dost impose thy false
nourishment <span id="fr_3357"></span>[3358](#fn_3357.md) upon us? For me,
if I have hope, if I hold fast my hope, my “egg” has not been wounded by
the “scorpion.” “I will bless the Lord at all times, His praise shall be
ever in my mouth.” <span id="fr_3358"></span>[3359](#fn_3358.md) Be the
world prosperous, or be the world turned upside down; “I will bless the
Lord,” who made the world. Yes, verily, I will bless Him. Be it well
with me according to the flesh, or be it ill according to the flesh, “I
will bless the Lord at all times, His praise shall be ever in my mouth.”
For if I bless when it is well, and blaspheme when it is ill with me; I
have received the “scorpion’s” sting, being pricked “I have looked
back;” which be far from us. “The Lord gave, the Lord hath taken away:
it is done, as the Lord pleased; blessed be the name of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3359"></span>[3360](#fn_3359.md)

<span id="vii.lvii-p33"></span>9. The city which has given us birth
according to the flesh still abideth, God be thanked. O that it may
receive a spiritual birth, and together with us pass over unto eternity!
If the city which has given us birth according to the flesh abide not,
yet that which has given us birth according to the Spirit abides for
ever. “The Lord doth build up Jerusalem.” <span
id="fr_3360"></span>[3361](#fn_3360.md) Has He by sleeping brought His
building to ruin, or by not keeping it, let the enemy into it? “Except
the Lord keep the city, he that keepeth it waketh but in vain.” <span
id="fr_3361"></span>[3362](#fn_3361.md) And what “city”? “He that keepeth
Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.” <span
id="fr_3362"></span>[3363](#fn_3362.md) What is Israel, but the seed of
Abraham? What the seed of Abraham, but Christ? “And to thy seed,” he
says, “which is Christ.” <span id="fr_3363"></span>[3364](#fn_3363.md) And
to us what says he? “But ye are Christ’s, therefore Abraham’s seed,
heirs according to the promise.” <span
id="fr_3364"></span>[3365](#fn_3364.md) “In thy seed,” saith He, “shall all
nations be blessed.” <span id="fr_3365"></span>[3366](#fn_3365.md) The holy
city, the faithful city, the city on earth a sojourner, hath its
foundation in heaven. O faithful one, do not corrupt thy hope, do not
lose thy charity, “gird up thy loins,” light, and hold out thy lamps
before thee; “wait for the Lord, when He will return from the
wedding.” <span id="fr_3366"></span>[3367](#fn_3366.md) Why art thou
alarmed, because the kingdoms of the earth are perishing? Therefore hath
a heavenly kingdom been promised thee, that thou mightest not perish
with the kingdoms of the earth. For it was foretold, foretold
distinctly, that they should perish. For we cannot deny that it was
foretold. Thy Lord for whom thou art waiting, hath told thee, “Nation
shall rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.” <span
id="fr_3367"></span>[3368](#fn_3367.md) The kingdoms of the earth have
their changes; He will come of whom it is said, “and of His kingdom
there shall be no end.” <span id="fr_3368"></span>[3369](#fn_3368.md)

<span id="vii.lvii-p43"></span>10. They who have promised this to
earthly kingdoms have not been guided by truth, but have lied through
flattery. A certain poet of theirs has introduced Jupiter speaking, and
he says of the Romans;

<span id="vii.lvii-p44"></span>To them no bounds of empire I assign,

<span id="vii.lvii-p45"></span>Nor term of years to their immortal
line. <span id="fr_3369"></span>[3370](#fn_3369.md)

<span id="vii.lvii-p47"></span>Most certainly truth makes no such
answer. This empire which thou hast given “without term of years,” is it
on earth, or in heaven? On earth assuredly. And even if it were in
heaven, yet “heaven and earth shall pass away.” <span
id="fr_3370"></span>[3371](#fn_3370.md) Those things shall pass away which
God hath Himself made; how much more rapidly shall that pass away which
Romulus founded! Perhaps if we had a mind to press Virgil on this point,
and tauntingly to ask him why he said it; he would take us aside
privately, and say to us, “I know this as well as you, but what could I
do who was selling words to the Romans, if by this kind of flattery I
did not promise something which was false? And yet even in this very
instance I have been cautious, when I said, ‘I assigned to them an
empire without term of years,’ I introduced their Jupiter to say it. I
did not utter this falsehood in my own person, but put upon Jupiter the
character of untruthfulness: as the god was false, the poet was false.
For would ye know that I well knew the truth of it? In another place,
when I did not introduce this stone, called Jupiter, but spoke in my own
person, I said,

<span id="vii.lvii-p49"></span>‘Th’ impending ruin of the Roman
state.’ <span id="fr_3371"></span>[3372](#fn_3371.md)

<span id="vii.lvii-p51"></span>See how I spoke of the impending ruin of
the state. I spoke of its impending ruin. I did not suppress it.” When
he spoke in truth he was not silent as to its ruin; when in flattery, he
promised that it should abide for ever.

<span id="vii.lvii-p52"></span>11. Let us not then faint, my Brethren:
an end there will be to all earthly kingdoms. If that end be now, God
knoweth. For peradventure it is not yet, and we, through some infirmity,
or mercifulness, or misery, are wishing that it may <span
id="page_434">p. 434</span> <span id="vii.lvii-Page_434"></span>not be
yet; nevertheless will it not therefore some day be? Fix your hope in
God, desire the things eternal, wait for the things eternal. Ye are
Christians, Brethren, we are all Christians. Christ did not come down
into the flesh that <span id="fr_3372"></span>[3373](#fn_3372.md) we might
live softly; let us endure rather than love the things present; manifest
is the harm of adversity, deceitful is the soft blandishment of
prosperity. Fear the sea, even when it is a calm. On no account let us
hear in vain, “Let us lift up our hearts.” Why place we our hearts in
the earth, when we see that the earth is being turned upside down? We
cannot but exhort you, that ye may have something to say and answer in
defence of your hope against the deriders and blasphemers of the
Christian name. Let no one by his murmuring turn you back from waiting
for the things to come. All who by reason of these adversities blaspheme
our Christ, are the “scorpion’s” tail. Let us put our egg under the
wings of that Hen of the Gospel, which crieth out to that false and
abandoned city, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered
thy children together, even as a hen her chickens, and thou wouldest
not!” <span id="fr_3373"></span>[3374](#fn_3373.md) Let it not be said to
us, “How often would I, and thou wouldest not!” For that hen is the
Divine Wisdom; but assumed flesh to accommodate Itself to its chickens.
See the hen with feathers bristling, with wings hanging down, with voice
broken, and tremulous, and faint, and languid, accommodating herself to
her little ones. Our egg then, that is, our hope, let us place beneath
the wings of this Hen.

<span id="vii.lvii-p55"></span>12. Ye have noticed, it may be, how a hen
will tear a scorpion in pieces. O then that the Hen of the Gospel would
tear in pieces and devour these blasphemers, creeping out of their
holes, and inflicting hurtful stings, would pass them over into Her
Body, and turn them into an egg. Let them not be angry; we seem to be
excited; but we do not return curses for curses. “We are cursed, and we
bless, being defamed, we entreat.” <span
id="fr_3374"></span>[3375](#fn_3374.md) But “let him not speak of Rome, it
is said of me: O that he would hold his tongue about Rome;” as though I
were insulting it, and not rather entreating the Lord for it, and
exhorting you all, unworthy as I am. Be it far from me to insult it! The
Lord avert this from my heart, and from the grief of my conscience. Have
we not had many brethren there? have we not still? Does not a large
portion of the pilgrim city Jerusalem live there? has it not endured
there temporal afflictions? but it has not lost the things eternal. What
can I say then, when I speak of Rome, but that is false, which they say
of our Christ, that He is Rome’s destroyer, and that the gods of wood
and stone were her defenders? Add what is more costly, “gods of brass.”
Add what is costlier still, “of silver and gold:” the “idols of the
nations are silver and gold.” <span id="fr_3375"></span>[3376](#fn_3375.md)
He did not say, “stone;” he did not say, “wood;” he did not say, “clay;”
but, what they value highly, “silver and gold.” Yet these silver and
golden idols “have eyes, and see not.” <span
id="fr_3376"></span>[3377](#fn_3376.md) The gods of gold, of wood, are as
regards their costliness unequal; but as to “having eyes, and seeing
not,” they are equal. See to what sort of guardians learned men have
entrusted Rome, to those “who have eyes, and see not.” Or if they were
able to preserve Rome, why did they first perish themselves? They say;
“Rome perished at the same time.” Nevertheless they perished. “No,” they
say, “they did not perish themselves, but their statues.” Well, how then
could they keep your houses, who were not able to keep their own
statues? Alexandria once lost such gods as these. Constantinople some
time since, ever since it was made a grand city, for it was made so by a
Christian Emperor, lost its false gods; and yet it has increased, and
still increases, and remains. And remain it will, as long as God
pleases. For we do not to this city either promise an eternal duration
because we say this. Carthage remains now in its possession of the Name
of Christ, yet once on a time its goddess Cælestis <span
id="fr_3377"></span>[3378](#fn_3377.md) was overthrown; because celestial
she was not, but terrestrial.

<span id="vii.lvii-p60"></span>13. And that which they say is not true,
that immediately on losing her gods Rome has been taken <span
id="fr_3378"></span>[3379](#fn_3378.md) and ruined. It is not true at all;
their images were overthrown before; and even so were the Goths with
Rhadagaisus <span id="fr_3379"></span>[3380](#fn_3379.md) conquered.
Remember, my Brethren, remember; it is no long time since, but a few
years, call it to mind. When all the images in the city of Rome had been
overthrown, Rhadagaisus king of the Goths came with a large army, much
more numerous than that of Alaric was. Rhadagaisus was a Pagan; he
sacrificed to Jupiter every day. Everywhere it was announced, that
Rhadagaisus did not cease from sacrificing. Then said they all, “Lo, we
do not sacrifice, he does sacrifice, we, who are not allowed to
sacrifice must be conquered by him who does sacrifice.” But God making
proof that not even temporal deliverance, nor the preservation of these
earthly kingdoms, consist in these sacrifices, Rhadagaisus, by the
Lord’s help, was marvellously overcome. Afterwards came other Goths who
did not sacrifice, they came, who though they were not Catholics in the
Christian faith, were yet <span id="page_435">p. 435</span> <span
id="vii.lvii-Page_435"></span>hostile and opposed to idols, and they
took Rome; they conquered those who put their trust in idols, who were
still seeking after the idols they had lost, and desiring still to
sacrifice to the lost gods. And amongst them too were some of our
brethren, and these were afflicted also: but they had learnt to say, “I
will bless the Lord at all times.” <span
id="fr_3380"></span>[3381](#fn_3380.md) They were involved in the
afflictions of their earthly kingdom: but they lost not the kingdom of
heaven; yea, rather, they were made the better for obtaining it through
the exercise of tribulations. And if they did not in their tribulations
blaspheme, they came out as sound vessels from the furnace, and were
filled with the blessing of the Lord. Whereas those blasphemers, who
follow and long after earthly things, who place their hope in earthly
things, when these they have lost, whether they will or no, what shall
they retain? where shall they abide? Nothing without, nothing within; an
empty coffer, an emptier conscience. Where is their rest? where their
salvation? where their hope? Let them then come, let them give over
blaspheming, let them learn to adore; let the scorpions with their
stings be devoured by the Hen, let them be turned into His body who
makes them pass over into it; let them on earth be exercised, in heaven
be crowned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3339"></span>[430:3340](1060274.htm#fr_3339.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p5"></span> [Luke xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3340"></span>[431:3341](1060274.htm#fr_3340.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p6"></span> [Luke xviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3341"></span>[431:3342](1060274.htm#fr_3341.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p8"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
29.27](../../../bib/apo/sir029.htm#027.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3342"></span>[431:3343](1060274.htm#fr_3342.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p9"></span> *Merearis*.

<span id="fn_3343"></span>[431:3344](1060274.htm#fr_3343.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p13"></span> [Rom. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3344"></span>[431:3345](1060274.htm#fr_3344.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p14"></span> [Ps. cxix.
49](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#049.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3345"></span>[431:3346](1060274.htm#fr_3345.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p15"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3346"></span>[432:3347](1060274.htm#fr_3346.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3347"></span>[432:3348](1060274.htm#fr_3347.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p18"></span> [Luke xi.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.lvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3348"></span>[432:3349](1060274.htm#fr_3348.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p19"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.8](../../../bib/sep/sol004.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p19.1"></span>,
Sept. See on St. Cyprian, Ep. p. 278, note *n*.

<span id="fn_3349"></span>[432:3350](1060274.htm#fr_3349.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p20"></span> [2 Cor.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3350"></span>[432:3351](1060274.htm#fr_3350.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p21"></span> [Eph. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3351"></span>[432:3352](1060274.htm#fr_3351.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p23"></span> [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3352"></span>[432:3353](1060274.htm#fr_3352.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p24"></span> As by the irruption of the barbarian
tribes.

<span id="fn_3353"></span>[432:3354](1060274.htm#fr_3353.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p25"></span> [Gen. xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#026.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3354"></span>[432:3355](1060274.htm#fr_3354.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p26"></span> [Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3355"></span>[432:3356](1060274.htm#fr_3355.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p27"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3356"></span>[433:3357](1060274.htm#fr_3356.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p29"></span> *Munde immunde*.

<span id="fn_3357"></span>[433:3358](1060274.htm#fr_3357.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p30"></span> *Alimenta mentiris*.

<span id="fn_3358"></span>[433:3359](1060274.htm#fr_3358.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p31"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3359"></span>[433:3360](1060274.htm#fr_3359.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p32"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/sep/job001.htm#021.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p32.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_3360"></span>[433:3361](1060274.htm#fr_3360.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p34"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3361"></span>[433:3362](1060274.htm#fr_3361.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p35"></span> [Ps. cxxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3362"></span>[433:3363](1060274.htm#fr_3362.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p36"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3363"></span>[433:3364](1060274.htm#fr_3363.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p37"></span> [Gal. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3364"></span>[433:3365](1060274.htm#fr_3364.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p38"></span> [Gal. iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3365"></span>[433:3366](1060274.htm#fr_3365.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p39"></span> [Gen.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md), [Gen.
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md)<span
id="vii.lvii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3366"></span>[433:3367](1060274.htm#fr_3366.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p40"></span> [Luke
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#036.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3367"></span>[433:3368](1060274.htm#fr_3367.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p41"></span> [Mark xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3368"></span>[433:3369](1060274.htm#fr_3368.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p42"></span> [Luke i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3369"></span>[433:3370](1060274.htm#fr_3369.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p46"></span> Virg. *Æneid*, i. 282–283 (Dryden).

<span id="fn_3370"></span>[433:3371](1060274.htm#fr_3370.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p48"></span> [Luke xxi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#033.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3371"></span>[433:3372](1060274.htm#fr_3371.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p50"></span> *Georg*. ii. 489.

<span id="fn_3372"></span>[434:3373](1060274.htm#fr_3372.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p53"></span> *Ad delicias*.

<span id="fn_3373"></span>[434:3374](1060274.htm#fr_3373.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p54"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3374"></span>[434:3375](1060274.htm#fr_3374.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p56"></span> [1 Cor.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3375"></span>[434:3376](1060274.htm#fr_3375.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p57"></span> [Ps. cxv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3376"></span>[434:3377](1060274.htm#fr_3376.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p58"></span> [Ps. cxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3377"></span>[434:3378](1060274.htm#fr_3377.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p59"></span> Tutelary goddess of Carthage. *De Civit.
Dei*, ii. 4 and 26; [Ps. 62](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.lvii-p59.1"></span>, § 7, 98, § 14. Tert. *Apol*. i. 12, 24.

<span id="fn_3378"></span>[434:3379](1060274.htm#fr_3378.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p61"></span> By Alaric, Gibbon, vol. 4, 109, etc.

<span id="fn_3379"></span>[434:3380](1060274.htm#fr_3379.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p62"></span> King of the Goths, who invaded Italy,
<span class="c13"><span id="vii.lvii-p62.1"></span>A.D.</span> 406, four
years before the taking of Rome by Alaric, 410, Gibbon, *Rom. Emp*. vol.
4, 31–38.

<span id="fn_3380"></span>[435:3381](1060274.htm#fr_3380.md) <span
id="vii.lvii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvii-p63"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.lvii-p63.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LVI](1060275.md)
