[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060230)  [Next](1060232.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xiv"></span> <span id="vii.xiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Sermon XII.</span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xiv-p2.1"></span>\[LXII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xiv-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p3.2"></span>, “I
am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof,” etc., and of the
words of the apostle,* <span id="vii.xiv-p3.3"></span>*[1 Cor. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p3.4"></span>,
“For if a man see thee who hast knowledge sitting at meat in an idol’s
temple,” etc.*

<span id="vii.xiv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xiv-p4.1"></span>We</span> have heard, as the Gospel was being
read, the praise of our faith as manifested in humility. For when the
Lord Jesus promised that He would go to the Centurion’s house to heal
His servant, He answered, “I am not worthy that Thou shouldest come
under my roof: but speak the word only, and he shall be healed.” <span
id="fr_2162"></span>[2163](#fn_2162.md) By calling himself unworthy, he
showed himself worthy for Christ to come not into his house, but into
his heart. Nor would he have said this with so great faith and humility,
had he not borne Him in his heart, of whose coming into his house he was
afraid. For it were no great happiness for the Lord Jesus to enter into
his house, and yet not to be in his heart. For this Master of humility
both by word and example, sat down even in the house of a certain proud
Pharisee, by name Simon; <span id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163.md) and
though He sat down in his house, there was no place in this heart,
“where the Son of Man could lay His Head.” <span
id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164.md)

<span id="vii.xiv-p8"></span>2. For so, as we may understand from the
words of the Lord Himself, did He call back from His discipleship a
certain proud man, who of his own accord was desirous to go with Him.
“Lord, I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest.” <span
id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165.md) And the Lord seeing in his heart
what was invisible, said, “Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
have nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His Head.” <span
id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166.md) That is, in thee, guile like the
fox doth dwell, and pride as the birds of heaven. But the Son of Man
simple as opposed to guile, lowly as opposed to pride, hath not where to
lay His Head; and this very laying, not the raising up of the head,
teaches <span id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span
id="vii.xiv-Page_299"></span>humility. Therefore doth He call back this
one who was desirous to go, and another who refused He draweth onward.
For in the same place He saith to a certain man, “Follow Me.” And he
said, “I will follow Thee, Lord, but let me first go and bury my
father.” <span id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167.md) His excuse was
indeed a dutiful one: and therefore was he the more worthy to have his
excuse removed, and his calling confirmed. What he wished to do was an
act of dutifulness; but the Master taught him what he ought to prefer.
For He wished him to be a preacher of the living word, to make others
live. But there were others by whom that first necessary office might be
fulfilled. “Let the dead,” He saith, “bury their dead.” When unbelievers
bury a dead body, the dead bury the dead. The body of the one hath lost
its soul, the soul of the others hath lost God. For as the soul is the
life of the body; so is God the life of the soul. As the body expires
when it loses the soul, so doth the soul expire when it loses God. The
loss of God is the death of the soul: the loss of the soul the death of
the body. The death of the body is necessary; the death of the soul
voluntary.

<span id="vii.xiv-p12"></span>3. The Lord then sat down in the house of
a certain proud Pharisee. He was in his house, as I have said, and was
not in his heart. But into this centurion’s house He entered not, yet He
possessed his heart. Zacchæus again received the Lord both in house and
heart. <span id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168.md) Yet the centurion’s
faith is praised for its humility. For he said, “I am not worthy that
Thou shouldest come under my roof;” <span
id="fr_2169"></span>[2170](#fn_2169.md) and the Lord said, “Verily I say
unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel;” <span
id="fr_2170"></span>[2171](#fn_2170.md) according to the flesh, that is.
For he too was an Israelite undoubtedly according to the spirit. The
Lord had come to fleshly Israel, that is, to the Jews, there to seek
first for the lost sheep, among this people, and of this people also He
had assumed His Body. “I have not found there so great faith,” He saith.
We can but measure the faith of men, as men can judge of it; but He who
saw the inward parts, He whom no man can deceive, gave His testimony to
this man’s heart, hearing words of lowliness, and pronouncing a sentence
of healing.

<span id="vii.xiv-p16"></span>4. But whence did he get such confidence?
“I also,” saith he, “am a man set under authority, having soldiers under
me: and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and
he cometh: and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.” <span
id="fr_2171"></span>[2172](#fn_2171.md) I am an authority to certain who
are placed under me, being myself placed under a certain authority above
me. If then I a man under authority have the power of commanding, what
power must Thou have, whom all powers serve? Now this man was of the
Gentiles, for he was a centurion. At that time the Jewish nation had
soldiers of the Roman empire among them. There he was engaged in a
military life, according to the extent of a centurion’s authority, both
under authority himself, and having authority over others; as a subject
obedient, ruling others who were under him. But the Lord (and mark this
especially, Beloved, as need there is you should), though He was among
the Jewish people only, even now announced beforehand that the Church
should be in the whole world, for the establishment of which He would
send Apostles; Himself not seen, yet believed on by the Gentiles: by the
Jews seen, and put to death. For as the Lord did not in body enter into
this man’s house, and still, though in body absent, yet present in
majesty, healed his faith, and his house; so the same Lord also was in
body among the Jewish people only: among the other nations He was
neither born of a Virgin, nor suffered, nor walked, nor endured His
human sufferings, nor wrought His divine miracles. None of all this took
place in the rest of the nations, and yet was that fulfilled which was
spoken of Him, “A people whom I have not known, hath served Me.” And how
if it did not know Him? “Hath obeyed Me by the hearing of the
ear.” <span id="fr_2172"></span>[2173](#fn_2172.md) The Jewish nation knew,
and crucified Him; the whole world besides heard and believed.

<span id="vii.xiv-p19"></span>5. This absence, so to say, of His body,
and presence of His power among all nations, He signified also in the
instance of that woman who had touched the edge of His garment, when He
asketh, saying, “Who touched Me?” <span
id="fr_2173"></span>[2174](#fn_2173.md) He asketh, as though He were
absent; as though present, He healeth. “The multitude,” say the
disciples, “press Thee, and sayest Thou, Who touched Me?” For as if He
were so walking as not to be touched by anybody at all, He said, “Who
touched Me?” And they answer, “The multitude press Thee.” And the Lord
would seem to say, I am asking for one who touched, not for one who
pressed Me. In this case also is His Body now, that is, His Church. The
faith of the few “touches” it, the throng of the many “press” it. For ye
have heard, as being her children, that Christ’s Body is the Church, and
if ye will, ye yourselves are so. This the Apostle says in many places,
“For His body’s sake, which is the Church;” <span
id="fr_2174"></span>[2175](#fn_2174.md) and again, “But ye are the body of
Christ, and members in particular.” <span
id="fr_2175"></span>[2176](#fn_2175.md) If then we are His body, what His
body then suffered in the crowd, that doth His Church suffer now. It is
pressed by many, touched by few. The flesh presses it, faith <span
id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span id="vii.xiv-Page_300"></span>touches
it. Lift up therefore your eyes, I beseech you, ye who have wherewithal
to see. For ye have before you something to see. Lift up the eyes of
faith, touch but the extreme border of His garment, it will be
sufficient for saving health.

<span id="vii.xiv-p23"></span>6. See ye how that which ye have heard out
of the Gospel was at that time to come is now present. Therefore, said
He, on occasion of the commendation of the Centurion’s faith, as in the
flesh an alien, but of the household in heart, “Therefore I say unto
you, Many shall come from the east and west.” <span
id="fr_2176"></span>[2177](#fn_2176.md) Not all, but “many;” yet they shall
“come from the East and West;” the whole world is denoted by these two
parts. “Many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven; but the
children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness.” “But the
children of the kingdom,” the Jews, namely. And how “the children of the
kingdom”? Because they received the Law; to them the Prophets were sent,
with them was the temple and the Priesthood; they celebrated the figures
of all the things to come. Yet of what things they celebrated the
figures, they acknowledged not the presence. And, “Therefore the
children of the kingdom,” He saith, shall go into outer darkness, there
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.” And so we see the Jews
reprobate, and Christians called from the East and West, to the heavenly
banquet, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, where the bread
is righteousness, and the  <span id="fr_2177"></span>[2178](#fn_2177.md)
cup wisdom.

<span id="vii.xiv-p26"></span>7. Consider then, brethren, for of these
are ye; ye are of this people, even then foretold, and now
exhibited. <span id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178.md) Yes, verily, ye
are of those who have been called from the East and West, to sit down in
the kingdom of heaven, not in the temple of idols. Be ye then the Body
of Christ, not the pressure of His Body. Ye have the border of His
garment to touch, that ye may be healed of the issue of blood, that is,
of carnal pleasures. Ye have, I say, the border of the garment to touch.
Look upon the Apostles as the garment, by the texture of unity clinging
closely to the sides of Christ. Among these Apostles was Paul, as it
were the border, the least and last; as he saith himself, “I am the
least of the Apostles.” <span id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179.md) In a
garment the last and least thing is the border. The border is in
appearance contemptible, yet is it touched with saving efficacy. <span
id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180.md) “Even to this hour we both hunger
and thirst, and are naked and buffeted.” <span
id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181.md) What state so low, so contemptible
as this! Touch then, if thou art suffering from a bloody flux. There
will go power out of Him whose garment it is, and it will heal thee. The
border was proposed to you just now to be touched, when out of the same
Apostle there was read, “For if any one see him which hath knowledge sit
at meat in an idol’s temple, shall not the conscience of him who is
weak, be emboldened to eat things offered to idols? And through thy
knowledge shall thy weak brother perish, for whom Christ died!” <span
id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182.md) How think ye may men be deceived by
idols, which they suppose are honoured by Christians? A man may say,
“God knows my heart.” Yes, but thy brother did not know thy heart. If
thou art weak, beware of a still greater weakness; if thou art strong,
have a care of thy brother’s weakness. They who see what you do, are
emboldened to do more, so as to desire not only to eat, but also to
sacrifice there. And lo, “Through thy knowledge the weak brother
perisheth.” Hear then, my brother; if thou didst disregard the weak,
wouldest thou disregard a brother also? Awake. What if so thou sin
against Christ Himself? For attend to what thou canst not by any means
disregard. “But,” saith he, “when ye sin so against the brethren, and
wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.” <span
id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183.md) Let them who disregard these words,
go now, and sit at meat in the idol’s temple; will they not be of those
who press, and do not touch? And when they have been at meat in the
idol’s temple, let them come and fill the Church; not to receive saving
health, but to make a pressure there.

<span id="vii.xiv-p33"></span>8. But thou wilt say, I am afraid lest I
offend those above me. By all means be afraid of offending them, and so
thou wilt not offend God. For thou who art afraid lest thou offend those
above thee, see whether there be not One above him whom thou art afraid
of offending. By all means then be loth to offend those above thee. This
is an established rule with thee. But then is it not plain, that he must
on no account be offended, who is above all others? Run over now the
list of those above thee. First are thy father and mother, if they are
educating thee aright; if they are bringing thee up for Christ; they are
to be heard in all things, they must be obeyed in every command; let
them enjoin nothing against one above themselves, and so let them be
obeyed. And who, thou wilt say, is above him who begat me? He who
created thee. For man begets, but God creates. How it is that man
begets, he does not know; and what he shall beget, he does not know. But
He who saw thee that He might make thee, before that he whom He made
existed, is surely above thy father. Thy country again should be above
thy very parents; so that whereinsoever thy <span id="page_301">p.
301</span> <span id="vii.xiv-Page_301"></span>parents enjoin aught
against thy country, they are not to be listened to. And whatsoever thy
country enjoin against God, it is not to be listened to. For if thou
wilt be healed, if after the issue of blood, if after twelve years’
continuance in that disease, if after having spent thine all upon
physicians, and not having received health, thou dost wish at length to
be made whole; O woman, whom I am addressing as a figure of the Church,
thy father enjoineth thee this, and thy people that. But thy Lord saith
to thee, “Forget thine own people, and thy father’s house.” <span
id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184.md) For what good? for what advantage?
with what useful result? “Because the King hath desired thy beauty.” He
hath desired what He made, since when deformed He loved thee, that He
might make thee beautiful. For thee unbelieving, and deformed, He shed
His Blood, and He made thee faithful and beauteous, He hath loved His
own gifts in thee. For what didst thou bring to thy spouse? What didst
thou receive for dowry from thy former father, and former people? Was it
not the excesses  <span id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185.md) and the
rags of sins? Thy rags He cast away, thy robe impure <span
id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186.md) He tore asunder. He pitied thee
that He might adorn thee. He adorned thee, that He might love thee.

<span id="vii.xiv-p37"></span>9. What need of more, Brethren. Ye are
Christians, and have heard, that “If ye sin against the brethren, and
wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.” Do not disregard
it, if ye would not be wiped out of the book of life. How long shall I
go about to speak in bright and pleasing terms to you, what my grief
forceth me to speak in some sort, and will not suffer me to keep secret?
Whosoever they are who are minded to disregard these things, and sin
against Christ, let them only consider what they are doing. We wish the
rest of the Heathen to be gathered in; and ye are stones in their way:
they have a wish to come; they stumble, and so return. For they say in
their hearts, Why should we leave the gods whom the very Christians
worship as we do? God forbid, thou wilt say, that I should worship the
gods of the Gentiles. I know, I understand, I believe thee. But what
account art thou making of the consciences of the weak which thou art
wounding? What account art thou making of their price, if thou disregard
the purchase? Consider for how great a price was the purchase made.
“Through thy knowledge,” saith the Apostle, “shall the weak brother
perish;” that knowledge which thou professest to have, in that thou
knowest that an idol is nothing, and that in thy mind thou art thinking
only of God, and so sittest down in the idol’s temple. In this knowledge
the weak brother perisheth. And lest thou shouldest pay no regard to the
weak brother, he added, “for whom Christ died.” If thou wouldest
disregard him, yet consider his Price, and weigh the whole world in the
balance with the Blood of Christ. And lest thou shouldest still think
that thou art sinning against a weak brother, and so esteem it after
that he had heard that he was “Peter,” a trivial fault, and of small
account, he saith, “Ye sin against Christ.” For men are in the habit of
saying, I sin against man; am I sinning against God?” Deny then that
Christ is God. Dost thou dare deny that Christ is God? Hast thou learned
this other doctrine, when thou didst sit at meat in the idol’s temple?
The school of Christ doth not admit that doctrine. I ask; Where
learnedst thou that Christ is not God? The Pagans are wont to say so.
Seest thou what bad associations <span
id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187.md) do? Seest thou, “that evil
communications corrupt good manners?” <span
id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188.md) There thou canst not speak of the
Gospel, and thou dost hear others talking of idols. There thou losest
the truth that Christ is God; and what thou dost drink in there, thou
vomitest out in the Church. It may be thou art bold enough to speak
here; bold enough to mutter among the crowds; “Was not then Christ a
man? Was He not crucified?” This hast thou learned of the Pagans. Thou
hast lost thy soul’s health, thou hast not touched the border. On this
point then touch again the border, and receive health. As I taught thee
to touch it in this that is written, “Whoso seeth a brother sit at meat
in the idol’s temple;” <span id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189.md) touch
it also concerning the Divinity of Christ. The same border said of the
Jews, “Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever.” <span
id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190.md) Behold, against Whom, even the Very
God, thou dost sin, when thou sittest down with false gods.

<span id="vii.xiv-p42"></span>10. It is no god, you will say; because it
is the tutelary genius of Carthage. As though if it were Mars or
Mercury, it would be a god. But consider in what light it is esteemed by
them; not what it is in itself. For I know also as well as thou, that it
is but a stone. If this “genius” be any ornament, let the citizens of
Carthage live well; and they themselves will be this “genius” of
Carthage. But if the “genius” be a devil, ye have heard in that same
Scripture, “The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to
devils, and not to God; and I would not that ye should have fellowship
with devils.” <span id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191.md) We know well
that it is no God; would that they knew it too! but because of those
weak ones who do not know it, their conscience ought not to be wounded.
It is this that the Apostle warns us of. For that they regard that
statue as something divine, and take it for a god, the altar is <span
id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span id="vii.xiv-Page_302"></span>witness.
What does the altar there, if it be not accounted a god? Let no one tell
me; it is no deity, it is no God. I have said already, “Would that they
only knew this, as we all do.” But how they regard it, for what they
take it, and what they do about it, that altar is witness. It is
convincing against the intentions of all who worship there, grant that
it may not be convincing also against those who sit at meat with them!

<span id="vii.xiv-p44"></span>11. Yes, let not Christians press the
Church, if the Pagans do. She is the Body of Christ. Were we not saying,
that the Body of Christ was pressed, and not touched. He endured those
who pressed Him; and was looking out for those who “touched” Him. And,
Brethren, I would that if the Body of Christ be pressed by Pagans, by
whom it is wont to be pressed; that at least Christians would not press
the Body of Christ. Brethren, it is my business to speak to you, my
business it is to speak to Christians; “For what have I to do to judge
them that are without?” <span id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192.md) the
Apostle himself saith. Them we address in another way, as being weak.
With them we must <span id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193.md) deal
softly, that they may hear the truth; in you the corruption must be cut
out. If ye ask whereby the Pagans are to be gained over, whereby they
are to be illuminated, and called to salvation; forsake their
solemnities, forsake their trifling shows; and then if they do not
consent to our truth, let them blush at their own scantiness.

<span id="vii.xiv-p47"></span>12. If he who is over thee be a good man,
he is thy nourisher; if a bad man, he is thy tempter. Receive the
nourishment in the one case with gladness, and in the temptation show
thyself approved. Be thou gold. Regard this world as the furnace of the
goldsmith; in one narrow place are there things, gold, chaff, fire. To
the two former the fire is applied, the chaff is burned, and the gold
purified. A man has yielded to threats, and been led away to the idol’s
temple: Alas! I bewail the chaff; I see the ashes. Another has not yet
yielded to threats nor terrors; has been brought before the judge, and
stood firm in his confession, and has not bent down to the idol image:
what does the flame with him? Does it not purify the gold? Stand, fast
then, Brethren, in the Lord; greater in power, is He who hath called
you. Be not afraid of the threats of the ungodly. Bear with your
enemies; in them ye have those for whom ye may pray; let them by no
means terrify you. This is saving health, draw out in this feast here
from this source; here drink that wherewith ye may be satisfied, and not
in those other feasts, that only whereby ye may be maddened. Stand fast
in the Lord. Ye are silver, ye shall be gold. This similitude is not our
own, it is out of Holy Scripture. Ye have read and heard, “As gold in
the furnace hath He tried them, and received them as a
burnt-offering.” <span id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194.md) See what ye
shall be among the treasures of God. Be ye rich as touching God, not as
if to make Him rich, but as to become rich from Him. Let Him replenish
you; admit nought else into your heart.

<span id="vii.xiv-p49"></span>13. Do we lift up ourselves unto pride, or
tell you to be despisers against the powers ordained? Not so. Do ye
again who are sick on this point, touch also that border of the garment?
The Apostle himself saith, “Let every soul be subject unto the higher
powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God. He then who resisteth the power, resisteth the
ordinance of God.” <span id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195.md) But what
if it enjoin what thou oughtest not to do? In this case by all means
disregard the power through fear of Power. Consider these several grades
of human powers. If the magistrate <span
id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196.md) enjoin anything, must it not be
done? Yet if his order be in opposition to the Proconsul, thou dost not
surely despise the power, but choosest to obey a greater power. Nor in
this case ought the less to be angry, if the greater be preferred.
Again, if the Proconsul himself enjoin anything, and the Emperor another
thing, is there any doubt, that disregarding the former, we ought to
obey the latter? So then if the Emperor enjoin one thing, and God
another, what judge ye? Pay me tribute, submit thyself to my allegiance.
Right, but not in an idol’s temple. In an idol’s temple He forbids it.
Who forbids it? A greater Power. Pardon me then: thou threatenest a
prison, He threateneth hell. Here must thou at once take to thee thy
“faith as a shield, whereby thou mayest be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the enemy.” <span id="fr_2197"></span>[2198](#fn_2197.md)

<span id="vii.xiv-p53"></span>14. But one of these powers is plotting,
and contriving evil designs against thee. Well: he is but sharpening the
razor wherewith to shave the hair, but not to cut the head. Ye have but
just now heard this that I have said in the Psalm, “Thou hast worked
deceit like a sharp razor.” <span id="fr_2198"></span>[2199](#fn_2198.md)
Why did He compare the deceit of a wicked man in power to a razor?
Because it does not reach, save to our superfluous parts. As hairs on
our body seem as it were superfluous, and are shaven off without any
loss of the flesh; so whatsoever an angry man in power can take from
thee, count only among thy superfluities. He takes away thy poverty; can
he take away thy wealth? Thy poverty is thy wealth in thy heart. Thy
superfluous things only hath he power to take away, these only hath he
power to injure, even though he had license given him so far as to hurt
the body. Yea even this life itself to those whose thoughts are of
another life, this present life, I say, may be reckoned <span
id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span id="vii.xiv-Page_303"></span>among the
things superfluous. For so the Martyrs have despised it. They did not
lose life, but they gained Life.

<span id="vii.xiv-p55"></span>15. Be sure, Brethren, that enemies have
no power against the faithful, except so far as it profiteth them to be
tempted and proved. Of this be sure, Brethren, let no one say ought
against it. Cast all your care upon the Lord, throw yourselves wholly
and entirely upon Him. He will not withdraw Himself that ye should fall.
He who created us, hath given us security touching our very hairs.
“Verily I say unto you, even the hairs of your head are all numbered.”
 <span id="fr_2199"></span>[2200](#fn_2199.md) Our hairs are numbered by
God; how much more is our conduct known to Him to whom our hairs are
thus known? See then, how that God doth not disregard our least things.
For if He disregarded them, He would not create them. For He verily both
created our hairs, and still taketh count of them. But thou wilt say,
though they are preserved at present, perhaps they will perish. On this
point also hear His word, “Verily I say unto you, there shall not an
hair of your head perish.”  <span id="fr_2200"></span>[2201](#fn_2200.md)
Why art thou afraid of man, O man, whose place is in the Bosom of God?
Fall not out of His Bosom; whatsoever thou shall suffer there, will
avail to thy salvation, not to thy destruction. Martyrs have endured the
tearing of their limbs, and shall Christians fear the injuries of
Christian times? He who would do thee an injury now, can only do it in
fear. He does not say openly, come to the idol-feast; he does not say
openly, come to my altars, and banquet there. And if he should say so,
and thou wast to refuse, let him make a complaint of it, let him bring
it as an accusation and charge against thee: “He would not come to my
altars, he would not come to my temple, where I worship.” Let him say
this. He does not dare; but in his guile he contrives another attack.
Make ready thy hair; he is sharpening the razor; he is about to take off
thy superfluous things, to shave what thou must soon leave behind thee.
Let him take off what shall endure, if he can. This powerful enemy, what
has he taken away? what great thing has he taken away? That which a
thief or housebreaker could take: in his utmost rage, he can but take
what a robber can. Even if he should have license given him to the
slaying of the very body, what does he take away, but what the robber
can take? I did him too much honour, when I said, “a robber.” For be the
robber who and what he may, he is a man. He takes from thee what a
fever, or an adder, or a poisonous mushroom can take. Here lies the
whole power of the rage of men, to do what a mushroom can! Men eat a
poisonous mushroom, and they die. Lo! in what frail estate is the life
of man; which sooner or later thou must abandon; do not struggle then in
such wise for it, as that thou shouldest be abandoned thyself.

<span id="vii.xiv-p58"></span>16. Christ is our Life; think then of
Christ. He came to suffer, but also to be glorified; to be despised, but
to be exalted also; to die; but also to rise again. If the labour alarm
thee, see its reward. Why dost thou wish to arrive by softness at that
to which nothing but hard labour can lead? Now thou art afraid, lest
thou shouldest lose thy money; because thou earnest thy money with great
labour. If thou didst not attain to thy money, which thou must some time
or other lose, at all events when thou diest, without labour, wouldest
thou desire without labour to attain to the Life eternal? Let that be of
higher value in thine eyes, to which after all thy labours thou shalt in
such sort attain as never more to lose it. If this money, to which thou
hast attained after all thy labours on such condition as that thou must
some time lose it, be of high value with thee; how much more ought we to
long after those things which are everlasting!

<span id="vii.xiv-p59"></span>17. Give no credit to their words, neither
be afraid of them. They say that we are enemies of their idols. May God
so grant, and give all into our power, as He hath already given us that
which we have broken down. For this I say, Beloved, that ye may not
attempt to do it, when it is not lawfully in your power to do it; for it
is the way of ill-regulated men, and the mad Circumcelliones, <span
id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201.md) both to be violent when they have
no power, and to be ever eager in their wishes to die without a cause.
Ye heard what we read to you, all of you who were present in the
Mappalia. <span id="fr_2202"></span>[2203](#fn_2202.md) “When the land
shall have been given into your power” (he saith first, “into your
power,” and so enjoined what was to be done); “then,” saith he, “ye
shall destroy their altars, and break in pieces their groves, and hew
down all their images.” <span id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203.md) When
we shall have got the power, do this. When the power has not been given
us, we do not do it; when it is given, we do not neglect it. Many Pagans
have these abominations on their own estates; do we go and break them in
pieces? No, for our first efforts are that the idols in their hearts
should be broken down. When they too are made Chris<span
id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span id="vii.xiv-Page_304"></span>tians
themselves, they either invite us to so good a work, or anticipate us.
At present we must pray for them, not be angry with them. If very
painful feelings excite us, it is rather against Christians, it is
against our brethren, who will enter into the Church in such a mind, as
to have their body there, and their heart anywhere else. The whole ought
to be within. If that which man seeth is within, why is that which God
seeth without?

<span id="vii.xiv-p63"></span>18. Now ye may know, Dearly Beloved, that
these unite their murmurings with Heretics and with Jews. Heretics,
Jews, and Heathens have made a unity against Unity. Because it has
happened, that in some places the Jews have received chastisement
because of their wickednesses; they charge and suspect us, or pretend,
that we are always seeking the like treatment for them. Again, because
it has happened that the heretics <span
id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204.md) in some places have suffered the
penalty of the laws for the impiety and fury of their deeds of violence;
they say immediately that we are seeking by every means some harm for
their destruction. Again, because it has been resolved that laws should
be passed against the Heathen, yea for them rather, if they were only
wise. (For as when silly boys are playing with the mud, and dirtying
their hands, the strict master comes, shakes the mud out of their hands,
and holds out their book; so has it pleased God by the hands of princes
His subjects to alarm their childish, foolish hearts, that they may
throw away the dirt from their hands, and set about something useful.
And what is this something useful with the hands, but, “Break thy bread
to the hungry, and bring the houseless poor into thy house”? <span
id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205.md) But nevertheless these children
escape from their master’s sight, and return stealthily to their mud,
and when they are discovered they hide their hands that they may not be
seen.) Because then it has so pleased God, they think that we are
looking out for the idols everywhere, and that we break them down in all
places where we have discovered them. How so? Are there not places
before our very eyes in which they are? Or are we indeed ignorant where
they are? And yet we do not break them down, because God has not given
them into our power. When does God give them into our power? When the
masters of these things shall become Christians. The master of a certain
place has just lately wished this to be done. If he had not been minded
to give the place itself to the Church, and only had given orders that
there should be no idols on his property; I think that it ought to have
been executed with the greatest devotion, that the soul of the absent
Christian brother, who wishes on his land to return thanks to God, and
would not that there should be anything there to God’s dishonour, might
be assisted by his fellow-Christians. Added to this, that in this case
he gave the place itself to the Church. And shall there be idols in the
Church’s estate? Brethren, see then what it is that displeases the
Heathens. It is but a little matter with them that we do not take them
away from their estates, that we do not break them down: they would have
them kept up even in our own places. We preach against idols, we take
them away from the hearts of men; we are persecutors of idols; we openly
profess it. Are we then to be the preservers of them? I do not touch
them when I have not the power; I do not touch them when the lord of the
property complains of it; but when he wishes it to be done, and gives
thanks for it, I should incur guilt if I did it not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2162"></span>[298:2163](1060231.htm#fr_2162.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p5"></span> [Matt. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[298:2164](1060231.htm#fr_2163.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p6"></span> [Luke vii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[298:2165](1060231.htm#fr_2164.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p7"></span> [Luke ix.
58](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#058.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[298:2166](1060231.htm#fr_2165.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p9"></span> [Luke ix.
57](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#057.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[298:2167](1060231.htm#fr_2166.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p10"></span> [Matt. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[299:2168](1060231.htm#fr_2167.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p11"></span> [Luke ix.
59](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#059.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[299:2169](1060231.htm#fr_2168.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p13"></span> [Luke xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2169"></span>[299:2170](1060231.htm#fr_2169.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p14"></span> [Matt. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2170"></span>[299:2171](1060231.htm#fr_2170.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p15"></span> [Matt. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2171"></span>[299:2172](1060231.htm#fr_2171.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p17"></span> [Matt. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2172"></span>[299:2173](1060231.htm#fr_2172.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p18"></span> [Ps.
18:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043.md),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p18.1"></span>,
Sept. (xviii. 43, 44, English version).

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[299:2174](1060231.htm#fr_2173.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p20"></span> [Luke viii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#045.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[299:2175](1060231.htm#fr_2174.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p21"></span> [Col. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2175"></span>[299:2176](1060231.htm#fr_2175.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p22"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2176"></span>[300:2177](1060231.htm#fr_2176.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p24"></span> [Matt. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2177"></span>[300:2178](1060231.htm#fr_2177.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p25"></span> *Potus*.

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[300:2179](1060231.htm#fr_2178.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p27"></span> *Præsentato*.

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[300:2180](1060231.htm#fr_2179.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p28"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[300:2181](1060231.htm#fr_2180.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p29"></span> *Salute*.

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[300:2182](1060231.htm#fr_2181.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p30"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[300:2183](1060231.htm#fr_2182.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p31"></span> [1 Cor.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[300:2184](1060231.htm#fr_2183.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p32"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[301:2185](1060231.htm#fr_2184.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p34"></span> [Ps. xlv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[301:2186](1060231.htm#fr_2185.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p35"></span> *Luxurias*.

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[301:2187](1060231.htm#fr_2186.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p36"></span> *Cilicium*.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[301:2188](1060231.htm#fr_2187.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p38"></span> *Mensæ*.

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[301:2189](1060231.htm#fr_2188.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p39"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[301:2190](1060231.htm#fr_2189.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p40"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[301:2191](1060231.htm#fr_2190.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p41"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[301:2192](1060231.htm#fr_2191.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p43"></span> [1 Cor. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[302:2193](1060231.htm#fr_2192.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p45"></span> [1 Cor. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[302:2194](1060231.htm#fr_2193.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p46"></span> *Blandiendum*.

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[302:2195](1060231.htm#fr_2194.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p48"></span> [Wisdom
3.6](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[302:2196](1060231.htm#fr_2195.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p50"></span> [Rom.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[302:2197](1060231.htm#fr_2196.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p51"></span> Curator.

<span id="fn_2197"></span>[302:2198](1060231.htm#fr_2197.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p52"></span> [Eph. vi.
16.](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2198"></span>[302:2199](1060231.htm#fr_2198.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p54"></span> [Ps.
52.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p54.1"></span>,
Sept. (lii. 2, English version).

<span id="fn_2199"></span>[303:2200](1060231.htm#fr_2199.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p56"></span> [Matt. x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2200"></span>[303:2201](1060231.htm#fr_2200.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p57"></span> [Luke xxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#018.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[303:2202](1060231.htm#fr_2201.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p60"></span> By the Donatists called Agonistici (St.
Augustin, *In Ps*. 133. 6), and by the Catholics Circilliones, or
Circumcelliones, that is, *Vagrants*. *Circumcelliones dicti sunt, quia
circum cellas vagantur, solent enim ire hac illac nusquam habentes
pedes* (*In Ps*. 132. 3). They were of a very licentious and abandoned
character, and in their fanaticism they would often commit suicide, to
which the text may suppose to refer (*Lib. de Hæres*. c. 69; *Brev.
Coll. cum Donat*. viii. \[14\]). They exercised extreme cruelty against
the Catholics (*Cont. Cresc. Don*. lib. 3, xliii. \[47\], xlvi. \[50\]).
Their form of salutation was *Deo laudes* (*Cont. lit. Petil*. lib. 2,
lxv. \[146\]), which St. Augustin (*In Ps*. 133, 6) says was more feared
than the roaring of a lion. For the time of their origin see *Opt*. lib.
3.

<span id="fn_2202"></span>[303:2203](1060231.htm#fr_2202.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p61"></span> A place where St. Cyprian’s body was
buried outside the walls of Carthage. Macrius in his *Hierolexicon* (ad
verb) thinks it ought to be written *Mapalia*, i.e. *domus rurales*.

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[303:2204](1060231.htm#fr_2203.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p62"></span> [Deut.
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001.md), [Deut.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[304:2205](1060231.htm#fr_2204.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p64"></span> This refers doubtless to the laws against
the Donatists. The Emperor Honorius issued an edict against them <span
class="c13"><span id="vii.xiv-p64.1"></span>A.D.</span> 405, and another
<span class="c13"><span id="vii.xiv-p64.2"></span> A.D.</span> 410, and
<span class="c13"><span id="vii.xiv-p64.3"></span>A.D.</span> 412, and
again <span class="c13"><span id="vii.xiv-p64.4"></span>A.D</span> 414,
on occasion of the death of Marcellinus, and to prevent any advantage
which the Donatists might derive from his death. For he had been judge
in the conference between the Catholics and Donatists, granted by the
Emperor at the request of the deputies of the council of Carthage, four
years before (Fleury, *H. E.* B. xxii., cxxvi.): and to him had been
entrusted the execution of the laws issued against the Donatists for the
maintenance of the Catholic religion.

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[304:2206](1060231.htm#fr_2205.md) <span
id="vii.xiv-p64.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p65"></span> [Isa. lviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.xiv-p65.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XIII](1060232.md)
