[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060267)  [Next](1060269.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.li"></span> <span id="vii.li-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.li-p1.1"></span>Sermon XLIX.</span>

<span id="vii.li-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.li-p2.1"></span>\[XCIX. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.li-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.li-p3.1"></span>*[Luke vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037.md)<span id="vii.li-p3.2"></span>, “And
behold, a woman who was in the city, a sinner,” etc. On the remission of
sins, against the Donatists.*

<span id="vii.li-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.li-p4.1"></span>Since</span> I believe that it is the will of
God that I should speak to you on the subject whereof we are now
reminded by the words of the Lord out of the Holy Scriptures, I will by
His assistance deliver to you, Beloved, a Sermon touching the remission
of sins. For when the Gospel was being read, ye gave most earnest heed,
and the story was reported, and represented <span id="page_416">p.
416</span> <span id="vii.li-Page_416"></span>before the eyes of your
heart. For ye saw, not with the body, but with the mind, the Lord Jesus
Christ “sitting at meat in the Pharisee’s house,” <span
id="fr_3212"></span>[3213](#fn_3212.md) and when invited by him, not
disdaining to go. Ye saw too a “woman” famous in the city, famous indeed
in ill fame, “who was a sinner,” without invitation force her way into
the feast, where her Physician was at meat, and with an holy
shamelessness seek for health. She forced her way then, as it were
unseasonably as regarded the feast, but seasonably as regarded her
expected blessing; for she well knew under how severe a disease she was
labouring, and she knew that He to whom she had come was able to make
her whole; she approached then, not to the Head of the Lord, but to His
Feet; and she who had walked long in evil, sought now the steps of
Uprightness. First she shed tears, the heart’s blood; and washed the
Lord’s Feet with the duty of confession. She wiped them with her hair,
she kissed, she anointed them: she spake by her silence; she uttered not
a word, but she manifested her devotion.

<span id="vii.li-p6"></span>2. So then because she touched the Lord, in
watering, kissing, washing, anointing His feet; the Pharisee who had
invited the Lord Jesus Christ, seeing He was of that kind of proud men
of whom the Prophet Isaiah says, “Who say, Depart far from me, touch me
not, for I am clean;” <span id="fr_3213"></span>[3214](#fn_3213.md) thought
that the Lord did not know the woman. This he was thinking with himself,
and saying in his heart, “This man if He were a prophet, would have
known what woman this is that” hath approached His feet. He supposed
that He did not know her, because He repelled her not, because He did
not forbid her to approach Him, because He suffered Himself to be
touched by her, sinner as she was. For whence knew he, that He did not
know her? But what if He did know, O thou Pharisee, inviter and yet
derider of the Lord! Thou dost feed the Lord, yet by whom thou art to be
fed thyself, thou dost not understand. Whereby knowest thou, that the
Lord did not know what that woman had been, save because she was
permitted to approach Him, save because by His sufferance she kissed His
Feet, save because she washed, save because she anointed them? For these
things a woman unclean ought not to be permitted to do with the Feet
that are clean? So then had such a woman approached that Pharisee’s
feet, he would have been sure to say what Isaiah says of such; “Depart
from me, touch me not, for I am clean.” But she approached the Lord in
her uncleanness, that she might return clean: she approached sick, that
she might return whole: she approached Him, confessing, that she might
return professing Him.

<span id="vii.li-p8"></span>3. For the Lord heard the thoughts of the
Pharisee. Let now the Pharisee understand even by this, whether He was
not able to see her sins, who could hear his thoughts. So then He put
forth to the man a parable concerning two men, who owed to the same
creditor. For He was desirous to heal the Pharisee also, that He might
not eat bread at his house for nought; He hungered after him who was
feeding Him, He wished to reform him, to slay, to eat him, to pass him
over into His Own Body; just as to that woman of Samaria, He said, “I
thirst.” What is, “I thirst”? I long for thy faith. Therefore are the
words of the Lord in this parable <span
id="fr_3214"></span>[3215](#fn_3214.md) spoken; and there is this double
object in them, both that that inviter might be cured together with
those who ate at the table with Him, who alike saw the Lord Jesus
Christ, and were alike ignorant of Him, and that that woman might have
the assurance her confession merited, and not be pricked any more with
the stings of her conscience. “One,” said He, “owed five hundred
denarii, and the other fifty; He forgave them both: which loved him
most?” He to whom the parable was proposed answered, what of course
common reason obliged him to answer. “I suppose, Lord, he to whom he
forgave most. Then turning to the woman he said unto Simon, Seest thou
this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest Me no water for My
feet: she hath washed My feet with tears, and wiped them with her hairs.
Thou gavest Me no kiss: this woman since the time she came in, hath not
ceased to kiss My feet. My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this
woman hath anointed My feet with ointment. Therefore I say, her many
sins are forgiven her, for she loved much. But to whom little is
forgiven, the same loveth little.” <span
id="fr_3215"></span>[3216](#fn_3215.md)

<span id="vii.li-p11"></span>4. Here arises a difficulty which must in
real truth be resolved, and which requires your fixed attention,
Beloved, lest haply my words may not be equal to the removing and
clearing of the whole obscurity of it by reason of the stress of time;
especially as this flesh of mine exhausted by its heat, now longs to be
recruited, and demanding its due, and clogging the eagerness of the soul
gives proof of that which is said, “The spirit indeed is willing, but
the flesh is weak.” <span id="fr_3216"></span>[3217](#fn_3216.md) Cause
there is for fear, yea great cause for fear, lest by these words of the
Lord, there steal over the minds of those who understand them not
aright, who indulge their fleshly lusts, and are loth to be brought away
from them into liberty, that sentiment which, even as the Apostles
preached, sprung up in the tongues of slanderous men, of whom the
Apostle Paul says, “And as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil <span
id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span id="vii.li-Page_417"></span>that good
may come.”  <span id="fr_3217"></span>[3218](#fn_3217.md) For a man may
say, “If ‘he to whom little is forgiven, loveth little;’ and he to whom
more is forgiven, loveth more; and it is better to love more, than to
love less; it is right that we should sin much, and owe much which we
may desire to be forgiven us, that so we may love Him the more who
forgiveth us our large debts. For that woman in the Gospel who was a
sinner, in the same proportion as she owed more, loved the more Him who
forgave her her debts, as the Lord Himself saith, ‘Her many sins are
forgiven her, for she loved much.’ Now why did she love much, but
because she owed much? And afterwards He added and subjoined, ‘But to
whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little.’ Is it not better,” he
may say, “that much should be forgiven me, than less, that thereupon I
may love my Lord the more”? Ye see no doubt the great depth of this
difficulty; ye see it, I am sure. Ye see too my stress of time; yes,
this also do ye see and feel.

<span id="vii.li-p14"></span>5. Accept then a few words. If I shall not
do justice to the magnitude of the question, lay up for a time <span
id="fr_3218"></span>[3219](#fn_3218.md) what I shall say at present, and
hold me a debtor for some future time. Suppose now two men, that by the
clearer force of examples ye may think upon what I have proposed to you.
One of them is full of sins, has lived most wickedly for a length of
time; the other of them has committed but few sins; they come both to
grace, are both baptized, they enter debtors, they go out free; more has
been forgiven to one, less to the other. I ask, how much does each love?
If I shall find that he loves most, to whom the most sins have been
forgiven, it is to his greater advantage that he has sinned much, his
much iniquity was to his greater advantage, that so his love might not
be lukewarm. I ask the other how much he loves, I find less; for if I
find that he too loves, as much as the other, to whom much has been
forgiven, how shall I make answer to the words of the Lord, how shall
that be true which the Truth hath said, “To whom little is forgiven, the
same loveth little”? “See,” a man says, “but little has been forgiven
me, I have not sinned much; yet I love as much as he, to whom much has
been forgiven.” Dost thou speak truth, or Christ? Has thy lie been
forgiven thee to this end, that thou shouldest fix the charge of lying
on Him who forgave thee? If little has been forgiven thee, thou lovest
little. For if but little has been forgiven thee, and thou lovest very
much, thou contradictest Him who said, “To whom little is forgiven, the
same loveth little.” Therefore I give the more credit to Him, who
knoweth thee better than thou dost know thyself. If thou dost suppose
that but little hath been forgiven thee, it is certain that thou lovest
but little. “What then,” says he, “ought I to do? Ought I to commit many
sins, that there may be many which He shall be able to forgive me, that
I may be able to love more?” It presses me sore, but may the Lord, who
hath proposed this saying of truth to us, deliver me out of this strait.

<span id="vii.li-p16"></span>6. This was spoken on account of that
Pharisee who thought that he had either no sins, or but few. Now unless
he had had some love, he would not have invited the Lord. But how little
was it! He gave Him no kiss, not so much as water for His Feet, much
less tears; he did not honour Him with any of those offices of respect,
with which that woman did, who well knew what need she had of being
cured, and by whom she might be cured. O Pharisee, therefore dost thou
love but little, because thou dost fondly think that but little is
forgiven thee; not because little really is forgiven thee, but because
thou thinkest that that which is forgiven is but little. “What then?” he
says; “Am I who have never committed murder, to be reckoned a murderer?
Am I who have never been guilty of adultery, to be punished for
adultery? Or are these things to be forgiven me, which I have never
committed?” See: once more suppose two persons, and let us speak to
them. One comes with supplication, a sinner covered over with thorns as
a hedgehog, and timid exceedingly as a hare. But the rock is the
hedgehog’s and the hare’s refuge. <span
id="fr_3219"></span>[3220](#fn_3219.md) He comes then to the Rock, he finds
refuge, he receives succour. The other has not committed many sins; what
shall we do for him that he may love much? what shall we persuade him?
Shall we go against the words of the Lord, “To whom little is forgiven,
the same loveth little”? Yes, most truly so, to whom little is really
forgiven. But O thou who sayest that thou hast not committed many sins:
why hast thou not? by whose guidance? God be thanked, that by your
movement and voice ye have made signs that ye have understood me. Now
then, as I think, the difficulty has been solved. The one has committed
many sins, and so is made a debtor for many; the other through God’s
guidance has committed but few. To Him to whom the one ascribes what He
hath forgiven, does the other also ascribe what he hath not committed.
Thou hast not been an adulterer in that past life of thine, which was
full of ignorance, when as yet thou wast not enlightened, as yet
discerned not good and evil, as yet believed not on Him, who was guiding
thee though thou didst not know Him. Thus doth thy God speak to thee: “I
was guiding thee for Myself, I was keeping thee for Myself. That thou
mightest <span id="page_418">p. 418</span> <span
id="vii.li-Page_418"></span>not commit adultery, no enticers were near
thee; that no enticers were near thee, was My doing. Place and time were
wanting; that they were wanting again, was My doing. Or enticers were
nigh thee, and neither place nor time was wanting; that thou mightest
not consent, it was I who alarmed thee. Acknowledge then His grace, to
whom thou also owest it, that thou hast not committed the sin. The other
owes me what was done, and thou hast seen forgiven him; and thou owest
to me what thou hast not done.” For there is no sin which one man
commits, which another man may not commit also, if He be wanting as a
Director, by whom man was made.

<span id="vii.li-p18"></span>7. Now then seeing I have resolved this
profound difficulty, as best I could in so short a space of time (or if
I have not resolved it yet, let me be held, as I have already said, a
debtor for the rest); let us now rather consider briefly that question
of the remission of sins. Christ was supposed to be but a man both by
him who invited Him, and by them who sat as guests at the table with
Him. But that woman who was a sinner had seen something more than this
in the Lord. For why did she all those things, but that her sins might
be forgiven her? She knew then that He was able to forgive sins; and
they knew that no man was able to forgive them. And we must believe that
they all, they who were at the table, that is, and that woman who
approached to the Feet of the Lord, all knew that no man could forgive
sins. Forasmuch then as they all knew this; she who believed that He
could forgive sins, understood Him to be more than man. So when He had
said to the woman, “Thy sins are forgiven thee;” they immediately said,
“Who is this that forgiveth sins also?” Who is this, whom the woman who
was a sinner already knew? Thou who sittest at the table as if in sound
health, knowest not thy Physician; because it may be through a stronger
fever thou hast even lost thy reason. For thus the frantic patient as he
laughs is bewailed by those who are in health. Nevertheless, ye do well
to know, and hold fast that truth; yea, hold it fast, that no man is
able to forgive sins. This woman who believed that she could be forgiven
by Christ, believed Christ not to be man only, but God also. “Who,” say
they, “is this that forgiveth sins also?” And the Lord did not tell them
as they said, “Who is this?” “It is the Son of God, the Word of God;” He
did not tell them this, but suffering them to abide for a while still in
their former opinion, He really solved the question which had excited
them. For He who saw them at the table, heard their thoughts, and
turning to the woman, He said, “Thy faith hath made thee whole.” Let
these who say, “Who is this that forgiveth sins also?” who think me to
be but a man, think me but a man. For thee “thy faith hath made thee
whole.”

<span id="vii.li-p19"></span>8. The Good Physician not only cured the
sick then present, but provided also for them who were to be hereafter.
There were to be men in after times, who should say, “It is I <span
id="fr_3220"></span>[3221](#fn_3220.md) who forgive sins, I who justify, I
who sanctify, I who cure whomsoever I baptize.” Of this number are they
who say, “Touch me not.” <span id="fr_3221"></span>[3222](#fn_3221.md) Yes,
so thoroughly are they of this number, that lately, in our
conference, <span id="fr_3222"></span>[3223](#fn_3222.md) as ye may read in
the records of it, when a place was offered them by the
commissary, <span id="fr_3223"></span>[3224](#fn_3223.md) that they should
sit with us, they thought it right to answer, “It is told us in
Scripture with such not to sit,” lest of course by the contact of the
seats, our contagion (as they think) should reach to them. See if this
is not, “Touch me not, for I am clean.” But on another day, when I had a
better opportunity, I represented to them this most wretched vanity,
when there was a question concerning the Church, how that the evil in it
do not contaminate the good: I answered them, because they would not on
this account sit with us, and said that they had been so advised by the
Scripture of God, seeing forsooth that it is written, “I have not sat in
the council of vanity;” <span id="fr_3224"></span>[3225](#fn_3224.md) I
said, “If ye will not sit with us, because it is written, ‘I have not
sat in the council of vanity;’ why have ye entered this place with us,
since it is written in the following words, ‘And with them that do
iniquity I will not enter in’?” So then in that they say, “Touch me not,
for I am clean,” they are like to that Pharisee, who had invited the
Lord, and who thought that He did not know the woman, simply because He
did not hinder her from touching His Feet. But in another respect the
Pharisee was better, because whereas he supposed Christ to be but a man,
he did not believe that by a man sins could be forgiven. There was shown
then a better understanding in Jews than heretics. What said the Jews?
“‘Who is this that forgiveth sins also?’ Does any man dare to usurp this
to himself?” What on the other hand says the heretic? “It is I who
forgive, I cleanse, I sanctify.” Let not me, but Christ, answer him: “O
man, when I was thought by the Jews to be but a man, I gave forgiveness
of sins to faith. (It is not I, but Christ who answereth thee.) And
thou, O heretic, mere man as thou art, dost say, “Come, <span
id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span id="vii.li-Page_419"></span>O woman, I
will make thee whole.” Whereas when I was thought to be but a man, I
said, “Go, woman, thy faith hath made thee whole.”

<span id="vii.li-p25"></span>9. They answer, “knowing not,” as the
Apostle says, “either what they speak, or whereof they affirm:” <span
id="fr_3225"></span>[3226](#fn_3225.md) they answer and say, “If men do not
forgive sins, then that is false which Christ saith, ‘Whatsoever ye
shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven also.’” <span
id="fr_3226"></span>[3227](#fn_3226.md) But thou dost not know why this is
said, and in what sense this is said. The Lord was about to give to men
the Holy Spirit, and He wished it to be understood that sins are
forgiven to His faithful by His Holy Spirit, and not by men’s deserts.
For what art thou, O man, but an invalid who hast need of healing.
Wouldest thou make thyself my physician? Together with me, seek the
Physician. For that the Lord might show this more plainly, that sins are
forgiven by the Holy Spirit, which He hath given to His faithful ones,
and not by men’s deserts, after He had risen from the dead, He saith in
a certain place, “Receive ye the Holy Ghost;” <span
id="fr_3227"></span>[3228](#fn_3227.md) and when He had said, “Receive ye
the Holy Ghost,” He subjoined immediately, “Whosesoever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them;” <span id="fr_3228"></span>[3229](#fn_3228.md)
that is, the Spirit remits them, not ye. Now the Spirit is God. God
therefore remits, not ye. But what are ye in regard to the Spirit? “Know
ye not that ye are the temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwelleth in
you?” <span id="fr_3229"></span>[3230](#fn_3229.md) And again, “Know ye not
that your bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost which is in you,
which ye have of God?” <span id="fr_3230"></span>[3231](#fn_3230.md) So
then God dwelleth in His holy temple, that is in His holy faithful ones,
in His Church; by them doth He remit sins; because they are living
temples.

<span id="vii.li-p32"></span>10. But He who remitteth by man, can also
remit even without man. For He who is able to give by another, hath no
less the power to give by Himself. To some He gave by the ministry of
John. By whom did He give to John himself? With good reason, as God
wished to show this, and to attest this truth, when certain in Samaria
had had the Gospel preached to them, <span
id="fr_3231"></span>[3232](#fn_3231.md) and had been baptized, and baptized
by Philip the Evangelist, one of the seven deacons that were first
chosen, they did not receive the Holy Ghost, though they had been
baptized. Tidings were brought to the disciples who were at Jerusalem,
and they came to Samaria, <span id="fr_3232"></span>[3233](#fn_3232.md) in
order that they who had been baptized, might by imposition of their
hands receive the Holy Ghost. And so it was; “They came and laid their
hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_3233"></span>[3234](#fn_3233.md) For the Holy Ghost was at that time
given in such sort, that He even visibly showed Himself to have been
given. For they who received Him spake with the tongues of all nations;
to signify that the Church among the nations was to speak in the tongues
of all. So then they received the Holy Ghost, and He appeared evidently
to be in them. Which when Simon saw, supposing that this power was of
men, he wished it might be his also. What he thought to be of men, he
wished to buy of men. “How much money,” says he, “will ye take of me,
that by imposition of my hands the Holy Ghost may be given?” Then Peter
says to him with execration, “Thou hast neither part nor lot in this
faith. For thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with
money. Thy money perish with thee; <span
id="fr_3234"></span>[3235](#fn_3234.md) and the rest which he spake in the
same place suitably to the occasion.

<span id="vii.li-p37"></span>11. Now why I have wished to bring this
subject before you, give heed, Dearly Beloved. It was meet that God
should first show that He worketh by the ministry of men; but afterwards
by Himself, lest men should think, as Simon thought, that it was man’s
gift, and not God’s. Though the disciples themselves knew this well
already. For there were one hundred and twenty <span
id="fr_3235"></span>[3236](#fn_3235.md) men collected together, when
without the imposition of any hand the Holy Ghost came upon them. For
who had laid hands on them at that time? And yet He came, and filled
them first. After that offence of Simon, what did God do? See Him
teaching, not by words but by things. That same Philip, who had baptized
the men, and the Holy Ghost had not come upon them, unless the Apostles
had met together and laid their hands upon them, baptized the officer,
that is, the eunuch of queen Candace, who had worshipped in Jerusalem,
and returning thence was reading in his chariot Isaiah the
Prophet, <span id="fr_3236"></span>[3237](#fn_3236.md) and understood it
not. Philip being admonished went up to his chariot, explained the
Scripture, unfolded the faith, preached Christ. <span
id="fr_3237"></span>[3238](#fn_3237.md) The eunuch believed on Christ, and
said when they came unto a certain water, “See water, who doth hinder me
to be baptized? Philip said to him, Dost thou believe on Jesus Christ?
He answered, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Immediately
he went down with him into the water.” <span
id="fr_3238"></span>[3239](#fn_3238.md) When the mystery and sacrament of
Baptism had been accomplished, that the gift of the Holy Ghost might not
be thought to be of men, there was no waiting, as in the other case, for
the Apostles to come, but the Holy Ghost <span
id="fr_3239"></span>[3240](#fn_3239.md) came forthwith. Thus was Simon’s
thought destroyed, lest in such a thought he might have followers.

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span id="vii.li-Page_420"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p43"></span>12. Again, another more wonderful example.
Peter came to Cornelius the centurion, <span
id="fr_3240"></span>[3241](#fn_3240.md) to a Gentile man, uncircumcised: he
began to preach Christ Jesus both to him, and to those who were with
him. “While Peter was yet speaking,” <span
id="fr_3241"></span>[3242](#fn_3241.md) I do not say, when as yet he had
not laid on his hands, but when he had not even yet baptized them, and
when they who were with Peter were in doubt whether the uncircumcised
ought to be baptized (for there had arisen an offence between the Jews
who believed, and those who had been brought to the faith from among the
Gentiles, between the Jews, that is, and the Christians who were
baptized though uncircumcised), that God might take away this question,
“while Peter was speaking, the Holy Ghost came,” filled Cornelius,
filled them who were with him. And by this very attestation of so great
a thing, as it were a loud voice came to Peter, “Why dost thou doubt of
water? Already I am here.”

<span id="vii.li-p46"></span>13. So then let every soul which is to be
delivered from her manifold wickedness by the grace of the Lord, to be
cleansed as it were in the Church from her filthy prostitution, believe
with all assurance, approach the Feet of the Lord, seek His Footsteps,
confess in pouring out tears upon them, and wipe them with her hair. The
Feet of the Lord are the preachers of the Gospel. The woman’s hair is
all superfluous possessions. Let her wipe the Feet with her hair, yea by
all means wipe them, let her do works of mercy; and when she has wiped
them, let her kiss them, let her receive peace, that she may have love.
She has approached to such an one, has been baptized by such an one as
the Apostle Paul: from him let her hear, “Be ye followers of me, even as
I also am of Christ.” <span id="fr_3242"></span>[3243](#fn_3242.md) But she
has been baptized by another, by one “who seeks his own things, not the
things which are Jesus Christ’s:” <span
id="fr_3243"></span>[3244](#fn_3243.md) let her hear from the Lord, “Do
what they say, but do not what they do.” <span
id="fr_3244"></span>[3245](#fn_3244.md) So let her assurance be in Him,
whether she meet with a good Evangelist, or with one who acts not as he
speaks. For she hears from the Lord with firm assurance, “O woman, go
thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3212"></span>[416:3213](1060268.htm#fr_3212.md) <span
id="vii.li-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p5"></span> [Luke vii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036.md)<span id="vii.li-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3213"></span>[416:3214](1060268.htm#fr_3213.md) <span
id="vii.li-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p7"></span> [Isa. lxv.
5](../../../bib/sep/isa065.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.li-p7.1"></span>, Sept.

<span id="fn_3214"></span>[416:3215](1060268.htm#fr_3214.md) <span
id="vii.li-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p9"></span> [John iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.li-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3215"></span>[416:3216](1060268.htm#fr_3215.md) <span
id="vii.li-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p10"></span> [Luke vii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#041.md)<span id="vii.li-p10.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3216"></span>[416:3217](1060268.htm#fr_3216.md) <span
id="vii.li-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p12"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041.md)<span id="vii.li-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3217"></span>[417:3218](1060268.htm#fr_3217.md) <span
id="vii.li-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p13"></span> [Rom. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.li-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3218"></span>[417:3219](1060268.htm#fr_3218.md) <span
id="vii.li-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p15"></span> *Interim*.

<span id="fn_3219"></span>[417:3220](1060268.htm#fr_3219.md) <span
id="vii.li-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p17"></span> [Ps.
104.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018.md)<span id="vii.li-p17.1"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.li-p17.2"></span>χοιρογρυλλίοις</span>, Sept. (civ. English
version).

<span id="fn_3220"></span>[418:3221](1060268.htm#fr_3220.md) <span
id="vii.li-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p20"></span> The Donatists, holding the validity of
Baptism to depend on the holiness of the minister, made it, in fact,
man’s act, man’s gift. St. Augustin answers, Baptism is Christ’s, not
man’s, and that “as His, it availeth equally to whom, however unequal
they through whom, it is given.” Ep. 93<span id="vii.li-p20.1"></span>,
*ad Vinc. Don* § 47. See other passages, Tract. 67, on Holy Baptism, p.
192 sqq.

<span id="fn_3221"></span>[418:3222](1060268.htm#fr_3221.md) <span
id="vii.li-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p21"></span> [Isa. lxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.li-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3222"></span>[418:3223](1060268.htm#fr_3222.md) <span
id="vii.li-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p22"></span> The Collatio Carthag. of which part of the
acts remain. See also St. Augustin, *Brev. Coll. c. Don*. and *Ad Don.
post Collat*. In it the Donatists being entirely confuted by St.
Augustin, larger numbers than before joined the Church. Poss. *Vit*. c.
13.

<span id="fn_3223"></span>[418:3224](1060268.htm#fr_3223.md) <span
id="vii.li-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p23"></span> *Cognitore*. Marcellinus, see Serm. xiii.
(lxiii. Ben) 18 (xii.) note.

<span id="fn_3224"></span>[418:3225](1060268.htm#fr_3224.md) <span
id="vii.li-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p24"></span> [Ps. xxvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.li-p24.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_3225"></span>[419:3226](1060268.htm#fr_3225.md) <span
id="vii.li-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p26"></span> [1 Tim. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.li-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3226"></span>[419:3227](1060268.htm#fr_3226.md) <span
id="vii.li-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p27"></span> [Matt. xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018.md)<span id="vii.li-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3227"></span>[419:3228](1060268.htm#fr_3227.md) <span
id="vii.li-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p28"></span> [John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md)<span id="vii.li-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3228"></span>[419:3229](1060268.htm#fr_3228.md) <span
id="vii.li-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p29"></span> [John xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023.md)<span id="vii.li-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3229"></span>[419:3230](1060268.htm#fr_3229.md) <span
id="vii.li-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p30"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.li-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3230"></span>[419:3231](1060268.htm#fr_3230.md) <span
id="vii.li-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p31"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019.md)<span id="vii.li-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3231"></span>[419:3232](1060268.htm#fr_3231.md) <span
id="vii.li-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p33"></span> [Acts viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.li-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3232"></span>[419:3233](1060268.htm#fr_3232.md) <span
id="vii.li-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p34"></span> [Acts viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.li-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3233"></span>[419:3234](1060268.htm#fr_3233.md) <span
id="vii.li-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p35"></span> [Acts viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017.md)<span id="vii.li-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3234"></span>[419:3235](1060268.htm#fr_3234.md) <span
id="vii.li-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p36"></span> [Acts viii.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#019.md)<span id="vii.li-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3235"></span>[419:3236](1060268.htm#fr_3235.md) <span
id="vii.li-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p38"></span> [Acts i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015.md)<span id="vii.li-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3236"></span>[419:3237](1060268.htm#fr_3236.md) <span
id="vii.li-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p39"></span> [Acts viii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#028.md)<span id="vii.li-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3237"></span>[419:3238](1060268.htm#fr_3237.md) <span
id="vii.li-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p40"></span> [Acts viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.li-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3238"></span>[419:3239](1060268.htm#fr_3238.md) <span
id="vii.li-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p41"></span> [Acts viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#036.md)<span id="vii.li-p41.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3239"></span>[419:3240](1060268.htm#fr_3239.md) <span
id="vii.li-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p42"></span> St. Augustin probably conceives of the
presence of the Holy Ghost, which “caught away Philip,” as sanctifying
the Eunich. “He went on his way rejoicing,” his Baptism being perfected.
St Augustine is followed by the Gloss Ord.

<span id="fn_3240"></span>[420:3241](1060268.htm#fr_3240.md) <span
id="vii.li-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p44"></span> [Acts x.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.li-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3241"></span>[420:3242](1060268.htm#fr_3241.md) <span
id="vii.li-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p45"></span> [Acts x.
44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044.md)<span id="vii.li-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3242"></span>[420:3243](1060268.htm#fr_3242.md) <span
id="vii.li-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p47"></span> [1 Cor.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#016.md), [1 Cor.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.li-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3243"></span>[420:3244](1060268.htm#fr_3243.md) <span
id="vii.li-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p48"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021.md)<span id="vii.li-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3244"></span>[420:3245](1060268.htm#fr_3244.md) <span
id="vii.li-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.li-p49"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.li-p49.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon L](1060269.md)
