[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060284)  [Next](1060286.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxviii"></span> <span id="vii.lxviii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxviii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXVI.</span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxviii-p2.1"></span>\[CXVI. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxviii-p3.1"></span>*[Luke xxiv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#036.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p3.2"></span>,
“He himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, peace be
unto you,” etc.*

<span id="vii.lxviii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxviii-p4.1"></span>The</span> Lord appeared to His disciples
after His resurrection, as ye have heard, and saluted them, saying,
“Peace be unto you.” <span id="fr_3553"></span>[3554](#fn_3553.md) This is
peace indeed, and the salutation of salvation: for the very word
salutation has received its name from salvation. <span
id="fr_3554"></span>[3555](#fn_3554.md) And what can be better than that
Salvation Itself should salute man? For Christ is our Salvation. He is
our Salvation, who was wounded for us, and fixed by nails to the tree,
and being taken down from the tree, was laid in the sepulchre. And from
the sepulchre He arose, with His wounds healed, His scars kept. For this
He judged expedient for His disciples, that His scars should be kept,
where by the wounds of their hearts might be healed. What wounds? The
wounds of unbelief. For He appeared to their eyes, exhibiting real
flesh, and they thought they saw a spirit. It is no light wound, this
wound of the heart. Yea, they have made a malignant heresy who have
abided in this wound. But do we suppose that the disciples had not been
wounded, because they were so quickly healed? Only, Beloved, suppose, if
they had continued in this wound, to think that the Body which had been
buried, could not rise again, but that a spirit in the image of a body,
deceived the eyes of men: if they had continued in this belief, yea,
rather in this unbelief, not their wounds, but their death would have
had to be bewailed.

<span id="vii.lxviii-p7"></span>2. But what said the Lord Jesus? “Why
are ye troubled, and why do thoughts ascend into your hearts?” <span
id="fr_3555"></span>[3556](#fn_3555.md) If thoughts ascend into your heart,
the thoughts come from the earth. But it is good for a man, not that a
thought should ascend into his heart, but that his heart should itself
ascend upwards, where the Apostle would have believers place their
hearts, to whom he said, “If ye be risen with Christ, mind those things
which are above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God. Seek
those things which are above, not the things which are upon the earth.
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ
your life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in
glory.” <span id="fr_3556"></span>[3557](#fn_3556.md) In what glory? The
glory of the resurrection. In what glory? Hear the Apostle saying of
this body, “It is sown in dishonour, it shall rise in glory.” <span
id="fr_3557"></span>[3558](#fn_3557.md) This glory the Apostles were
unwilling to assign to their Master, their Christ, their Lord: they did
not believe that His Body could rise from the sepulchre: they thought
Him to be a Spirit, though they saw His flesh, and they believed not
their very eyes. Yet we believe them who preach but do not show Him. Lo,
they believed not Christ who showed Himself to them. Malignant wound!
Let the remedies for these scars come forth. “Why are ye troubled, and
why do thoughts ascend into your hearts? See My hands and My feet,”
where I was fixed with the nails. “Handle and see.” But ye see, and yet
do not see. “Handle and see.” What? “That a spirit hath not flesh and
bones, as ye see me have. When He had thus spoken,” so it is written,
“He showed them His hands and His feet.” <span
id="fr_3558"></span>[3559](#fn_3558.md)

<span id="vii.lxviii-p12"></span>3. “And while they were yet in
hesitation, and wondered for joy.” <span
id="fr_3559"></span>[3560](#fn_3559.md) Now there was joy already, and yet
hesitation continued. For a thing incredible had taken place, yet taken
place it had. Is it at this day a thing incredible, that the Body of the
Lord rose again from the sepulchre? The whole cleansed world <span
id="fr_3560"></span>[3561](#fn_3560.md) has believed it; whoso has not
believed it, has remained in his uncleanness. Yet at that time it was
incredible: and persuasion was addressed not to the eyes only, but to
the hands also, that by the bodily senses faith might descend into their
heart, and that faith so descending into their heart might be preached
throughout the world to them who neither saw nor touched, and yet
without doubting believed. “Have ye,” saith He, “anything to eat?” How
much doeth the good Builder still to build up the edifice of faith? He
did not hunger, yet He asked to eat. And He ate by an act of His power,
not through necessity. So then let the disciples acknowledge the verity
of His body, which the world has acknowledged at their preaching.

<span id="vii.lxviii-p15"></span>4. If haply there be any heretics who
still in their hearts maintain that Christ exhibited Himself to sight,
but that Christ’s was not very flesh; let them now lay aside that error,
and let the <span id="page_457">p. 457</span> <span
id="vii.lxviii-Page_457"></span>Gospel persuade them. We do but blame
them for entertaining this conceit: He will damn them if they shall
persevere in it. Who art thou who dost not believe that a body laid in
the sepulchre could rise again? If thou art a Manichee, who dost not
believe that He was crucified either, because thou dost not believe that
He was even born, thou declarest that all that He showed was false. He
showed what was false, and dost thou speak the truth? Thou dost not lie
with thy mouth, and did He lie in His body? Lo thou dost suppose that He
appeared unto the eyes of men what He really was not, that He was a
spirit, not flesh. Hear Him: He loves thee, let Him not condemn thee.
Hear Him speaking: lo, He speaks to thee, thou unhappy one, He speaks to
thee, “Why art thou troubled, and why do thoughts ascend into thine
heart?” “See,” saith He, “My hands and My feet. Handle and see, because
a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see Me have.” This spake the
Truth, and did He deceive? It was a body then, it was flesh; that which
had been buried, appeared. Let doubting perish, and meet praise ensue.

<span id="vii.lxviii-p16"></span>5. He showed himself then to the
disciples. What is “Himself”? The Head of His Church. The Church was
foreseen by Him as in thee to be throughout the world, by the disciples
it was not yet seen. He showed the Head, He promised the Body. For what
did He add next? “These are the words which I spake to you, while I was
yet with you.” <span id="fr_3561"></span>[3562](#fn_3561.md) What is this,
“While I was yet with you”? Was He not with them then when He was
speaking to them? What is, “when I was yet with you”? was with you as
mortal, which now I am not. I was with you when I had yet to die. What
is, “with you”? With you who were to die, Myself to die. Now I am no
more with you: for I am with those who are to die, Myself to die no more
for ever. This then is what I said to you. What? “That all things must
be fulfilled which are written in the Law, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms concerning Me.” <span id="fr_3562"></span>[3563](#fn_3562.md) I
told you that all things must be fulfilled. “Then opened He their
understanding.” <span id="fr_3563"></span>[3564](#fn_3563.md) Come then, O
Lord, employ Thy keys, open, that we may understand. Lo, Thou dost tell
all things, and yet are not believed. Thou art thought to be a spirit,
art touched, art rudely handled, <span
id="fr_3564"></span>[3565](#fn_3564.md) and yet they who touch Thee
hesitate. Thou dost admonish them out of the Scriptures, and yet they
understand Thee not. Their hearts are closed, open, and enter in. He did
so. “Then opened He their understanding.” Open, O Lord, yea, open the
heart of him who is in doubt concerning Christ. Open “his” understanding
who believes that Christ was a phantom. “Then opened He their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures.”

<span id="vii.lxviii-p21"></span>6. And “He said unto them.” What? “That
thus it behoved. That thus it is written, and thus it behoved.” What?
“That Christ should suffer, and rise from the dead the third day.” <span
id="fr_3565"></span>[3566](#fn_3565.md) And this they saw, they saw Him
suffering, they saw Him hanging, they saw Him with them alive after His
resurrection. What then did they not see? The Body, that is, the Church.
Him they saw, her they saw not. They saw the Bridegroom, the Bride yet
lay hid. Let him promise her too. “Thus it is written, and thus it
behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day.” This
is the Bridegroom, what of the Bride? “And that repentance and remission
of sins should be preached in His Name among all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem.” <span id="fr_3566"></span>[3567](#fn_3566.md) This the
disciples did not yet see: they did not yet see the Church throughout
all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. They saw the Head, and they
believed the Head touching the Body. By this which they saw, they
believed that which they saw not. We too are like to them: we see
something which they saw not, and something we do not see which they did
see. What do we see, which they saw not? The Church throughout all
nations. What do we not see, which they saw? Christ present in the
flesh. As they saw Him, and believed concerning the Body, so do we see
the Body; let us believe concerning the Head. Let what we have
respectively seen help us. The sight of Christ helped them to believe
the future Church: the sight of the Church helps us to believe that
Christ has risen. Their faith was made complete, and ours is made
complete also. Their faith was made complete from the sight of the Head,
ours is made complete by the sight of the Body. Christ was made known to
them “wholly,” and to us is He so made known: but He was not seen
“wholly” by them, nor by us has He been “wholly” seen. By them the Head
was seen, the Body believed. By us the Body has been seen, the Head
believed. Yet to none is Christ lacking: in all He is complete, though
to this day His Body remains imperfect. The Apostles believed; through
them many of the inhabitants of Jerusalem believed; Judæa believed.
Samaria believed. Let the members be added on, the building added on to
the foundation. “For no other foundation can any man lay,” says the
Apostle, “than that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus.” <span
id="fr_3567"></span>[3568](#fn_3567.md) Let the Jews rage madly, and be
filled with jealousy: Stephen be stoned, Saul keep the raiment of them
who stone him, Saul, one day to be the Apostle Paul. <span
id="fr_3568"></span>[3569](#fn_3568.md) Let Stephen be killed, the Church
of Jerusalem dispersed in confusion: out of it go forth burning brands,
and <span id="page_458">p. 458</span> <span
id="vii.lxviii-Page_458"></span>spread themselves and spread their
flame. For in the Church of Jerusalem, as it were burning brands were
set on fire by the Holy Spirit, when they had all one soul, and one
heart to God-ward. <span id="fr_3569"></span>[3570](#fn_3569.md) When
Stephen was stoned, that pile suffered persecution: the brands were
dispersed, and the world was set on fire.

<span id="vii.lxviii-p27"></span>7. And then intent on his furious
schemes, that Saul received letters from the chief of the priests, and
began his journey in his cruel rage, breathing out slaughter, thirsting
for blood, to drag bound and to hurry off to punishment whomsoever he
could, and from every quarter that he could, and to satiate himself with
the shedding of their blood. But where was God, where was Christ, where
He that had crowned Stephen? Where, but in heaven? Let Him now look on
Saul, and mock him in his fury, and call from heaven, “‘Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou Me?’ <span id="fr_3570"></span>[3571](#fn_3570.md) I am in
heaven, and thou in earth, and yet thou persecutest Me. Thou dost not
touch the body, but my members thou art treading down. Yet what art thou
doing? What art thou gaining? ‘It is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks.’ Kick as thou wilt, thou only distressest thyself. Lay aside thy
fury then, recover soundness. Lay aside evil counsel, seek after good
succour.” By that voice he was struck to the earth. Who was struck to
the earth? The persecutor. Lo, by that one word was he overcome. After
what wast thou going, after what was thy fury carrying thee? Those whom
thou wast seeking out, now thou followest; whom thou wast persecuting,
now for them thou sufferest persecution. He rises up the preacher, who
was struck to the earth, the persecutor. He heard the Lord’s voice. He
was blinded, but in the body only, that he might be enlightened in
heart. He was brought to Ananias, catechised on sundry points, baptized,
and so came forth an Apostle. Speak then, preach, preach Christ, spread
His doctrine, O thou goodly leader of the flock, <span
id="fr_3571"></span>[3572](#fn_3571.md) but lately a wolf. See him, mark
him, who once was raging. “But for me, God forbid that I should glory,
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world has been
crucified to me and I to the world.” <span
id="fr_3572"></span>[3573](#fn_3572.md) Spread the Gospel: scatter with thy
mouth what thou hast conceived in thine heart. Let the nations hear, let
the nations believe; let the nations multiply, let the Lord’s empurpled
spouse spring forth from the blood of Martyrs. And from her how many
have come already, how many members have cleaved to the Head, and cleave
to Him still and believe! They were baptized, and others shall be
baptized, and after them shall others come. Then I say, at the end of
the world shall the stones be joined to the foundation, living stones,
holy stones, that at the end the whole edifice may be built by that
Church, yea by this very Church which now sings the new song, while the
house is in building. For so the Psalm itself says, “When the house was
in building after the captivity;” and what says it, “Sing unto the Lord
a new song, sing unto the Lord all the earth.” <span
id="fr_3573"></span>[3574](#fn_3573.md) How great a house is this! But when
does it sing the new song? When it is in building. When is it dedicated?
At the end of the world. Its foundation has been already dedicated,
because He hath ascended into heaven, and dieth no more. When we too
shall have risen to die no more, then shall we be dedicated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3553"></span>[456:3554](1060285.htm#fr_3553.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p5"></span> [Luke xxiv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#036.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3554"></span>[456:3555](1060285.htm#fr_3554.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p6"></span> *Salutatio a salute*.

<span id="fn_3555"></span>[456:3556](1060285.htm#fr_3555.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p8"></span> [Luke xxiv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#038.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3556"></span>[456:3557](1060285.htm#fr_3556.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p9"></span> [Col. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p9.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3557"></span>[456:3558](1060285.htm#fr_3557.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p10"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
43](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#043.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3558"></span>[456:3559](1060285.htm#fr_3558.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p11"></span> [Luke xxiv.
38-40](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#038.md)<span
id="vii.lxviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3559"></span>[456:3560](1060285.htm#fr_3559.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p13"></span> [Luke xxiv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3560"></span>[456:3561](1060285.htm#fr_3560.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p14"></span> *Totus hoc credidit* mundus, *qui non
credidit remansit* immundus.

<span id="fn_3561"></span>[457:3562](1060285.htm#fr_3561.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p17"></span> [Luke xxiv.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3562"></span>[457:3563](1060285.htm#fr_3562.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p18"></span> [Luke xxiv.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3563"></span>[457:3564](1060285.htm#fr_3563.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p19"></span> [Luke xxiv.
45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3564"></span>[457:3565](1060285.htm#fr_3564.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p20"></span> *Ulsaris*.

<span id="fn_3565"></span>[457:3566](1060285.htm#fr_3565.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p22"></span> [Luke xxiv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3566"></span>[457:3567](1060285.htm#fr_3566.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p23"></span> [Luke xxiv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3567"></span>[457:3568](1060285.htm#fr_3567.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p24"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3568"></span>[457:3569](1060285.htm#fr_3568.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p25"></span> [Acts vii.
58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3569"></span>[458:3570](1060285.htm#fr_3569.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p26"></span> [Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3570"></span>[458:3571](1060285.htm#fr_3570.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p28"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3571"></span>[458:3572](1060285.htm#fr_3571.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p29"></span> *Aries*.

<span id="fn_3572"></span>[458:3573](1060285.htm#fr_3572.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p30"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.lxviii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3573"></span>[458:3574](1060285.htm#fr_3573.md) <span
id="vii.lxviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxviii-p31"></span> [Ps.
96.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.lxviii-p31.1"></span>, Sept. (xcvi. 1, English version).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXVII](1060286.md)
