[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060009)  [Next](1060011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.</span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p2"></span>11. Hence also the sevenfold operation of
the Holy Ghost, of which Isaiah speaks, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) seems to me to correspond to these stages
and sentences. But there is a difference of order: for there the
enumeration begins with the more excellent, but here with the inferior.
For there it begins with wisdom, and closes with the fear of God: but
“the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” And therefore, if we
reckon as it were in a gradually ascending series, there the fear of God
is first, piety second, knowledge third, fortitude fourth, counsel
fifth, understanding sixth, wisdom seventh. The fear of God corresponds
to the humble, of whom it is here said, “Blessed are the poor in
spirit,” *i.e.* those not puffed up, not proud: to whom the apostle
says, “Be not high-minded, but fear;” <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) *i.e.* be not lifted up. Piety <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) corresponds to the meek: for he who
inquires piously honours Holy Scripture, and does not censure what he
does not yet understand, and on this account does not offer resistance;
and this is to be meek: whence it is here said, “Blessed are the meek.”
Knowledge corresponds to those that mourn who already have found out in
the Scriptures by what evils they are held chained which they ignorantly
have coveted as though they were good and useful. Fortitude corresponds
to those hungering and thirsting: for they labour in earnestly desiring
joy from things that are truly good, and in eagerly seeking to turn away
their love from earthly and corporeal things: and of them it is here
said, “Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness.”
Counsel corresponds to the merciful: for this is the one remedy for
escaping from so great evils, that we forgive, as we wish to be <span
id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span id="v.ii.iv-Page_7"></span>ourselves
forgiven; and that we assist others so far as we are able, as we
ourselves desire to be assisted where we are not able: and of them it is
here said, “Blessed are the merciful.” Understanding corresponds to the
pure in heart, the eye being as it were purged, by which that may be
beheld which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, and what hath not entered
into the heart of man: <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) and of them
it is here said, “Blessed are the pure in heart.” Wisdom corresponds to
the peacemakers, in whom all things are now brought into order, and no
passion is in a state of rebellion against reason, but all things
together obey the spirit of man, while he himself also obeys God: and of
them it is here said, “Blessed are the peacemakers.” <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)

<span id="v.ii.iv-p8"></span>12. Moreover, the one reward, which is the
kingdom of heaven, is variously named according to these stages. In the
first, just as ought to be the case, is placed the kingdom of heaven,
which is the perfect and highest wisdom of the rational soul. Thus,
therefore, it is said, “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven:” as if it were said, “The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom.” To the meek an inheritance is given, as it were
the testament of a father to those dutifully seeking it: “Blessed are
the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.” To the mourners comfort, as
to those who know what they have lost, and in what evils they are sunk:
“Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.” To those
hungering and thirsting, a full supply, as it were a refreshment to
those labouring and bravely contending for salvation: “Blessed are they
which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled.” To the merciful mercy, as to those following a true and
excellent counsel, so that this same treatment is extended toward them
by one who is stronger, which they extend toward the weaker: “Blessed
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.” To the pure in heart is
given the power of seeing God, as to those bearing about with them a
pure eye for discerning eternal things: “Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God.” To the peacemakers the likeness of God is
given, as being perfectly wise, and formed after the image of God by
means of the regeneration of the renewed man: “Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.” And those
promises can indeed be fulfilled in this life, as we believe them to
have been fulfilled in the case of the apostles. For that all-embracing
change into the angelic form, which is promised after this life, cannot
be explained in any words. “Blessed,” therefore, “are they which are
persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.” This eighth sentence, which goes back to the starting-point,
and makes manifest the perfect man, is perhaps set forth in its meaning
both by the circumcision on the eighth day in the Old Testament, and by
the resurrection of the Lord after the Sabbath, the day which is
certainly the eighth, and at the same time the first day; and by the
celebration of the eight festival days which we celebrate in the case of
the regeneration of the new man; and by the very number of Pentecost.
For to the number seven, seven times multiplied, by which we make
forty-nine, as it were an eighth is added, so that fifty may be made up,
and we, as it were, return to the starting-point: on which day the Holy
Spirit was sent, by whom we are led into the kingdom of heaven, and
receive the inheritance, and are comforted; and are fed, and obtain
mercy, and are purified, and are made peacemakers; and being thus
perfect, we bear all troubles brought upon us from without for the sake
of truth and righteousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[6:32](1060010.htm#fr_31) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p3"></span> [Isa.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)<span id="v.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[6:33](1060010.htm#fr_32) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p4"></span> [Rom. xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span id="v.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[6:34](1060010.htm#fr_33) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p5"></span> Augustin follows the Septuagint, which has
“piety” instead of “the fear of the Lord” in the last clause of [Isa.
xi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="v.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[7:35](1060010.htm#fr_34) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p6"></span> [Isa.
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004), [1 Cor.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="v.ii.iv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[7:36](1060010.htm#fr_35) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p7"></span> This is guarded against misconstruction in
the *Retract*. I. xix. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](1060011)
