[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060066)  [Next](1060068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—A Statement of Augustin’s Reason
for Undertaking This Work on the Harmony of the Evangelists, and an
Example of the Method in Which He Meets Those Who Allege that Christ
Wrote Nothing Himself, and that His Disciples Made an Unwarranted
Affirmation in Proclaiming Him to Be God.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii-p2"></span>10. Those sacred chariots of the
Lord, <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md) however, in which He is
borne throughout the earth and brings the peoples under His easy yoke
and His light burden, are assailed with calumnious charges by certain
persons who, in impious vanity or in ignorant temerity, think to rob of
their credit as veracious historians those teachers by whose
instrumentality the Christian religion has been disseminated all the
world over, and through whose efforts it has yielded fruits so plentiful
that unbelievers now scarcely dare so much as to mutter their slanders
in private among themselves, kept in check by the faith of the Gentiles
and by the devotion of all the peoples. Nevertheless, inasmuch as they
still strive by their calumnious disputations to keep some from making
themselves acquainted with the faith, and thus prevent them from
becoming believers, while they also endeavour to the utmost of their
power to excite agitations among others who have already attained to
belief, and thereby give them trouble; and further, as there are some
brethren who, without detriment to their own faith, have a desire to
ascertain what answer can be given to such questions, either for the
advantage of their own knowledge or for the purpose of refuting the vain
utterances of their enemies, with the inspiration and help of the Lord
our God (and would that it might prove profitable for the salvation of
such men), we have undertaken in this work to demonstrate the errors or
the rashness of those who deem themselves able to prefer charges, the
subtilty of which is at least sufficiently observable, against those
four different books of the gospel which have been written by these four
several evangelists. And in order to carry out this design to a
successful conclusion, we must prove that the writers in question do not
stand in any antagonism to each other. For those adversaries are in the
habit of adducing this as the palmary <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540.md) allegation in all their vain
objections, namely, that the evangelists are not in harmony with each
other.

<span id="vi.iv.vii-p5"></span>11. But we must first discuss a matter
which is apt to present a difficulty to the minds of some. I refer to
the question why the Lord has written nothing Himself, and why He has
thus <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="vi.iv.vii-Page_82"></span>left us to the necessity of accepting the
testimony of other persons who have prepared records of His history. For
this is what those parties—the pagans more than any <span
id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541.md) —allege when they lack boldness enough
to impeach or blaspheme the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, and when they
allow Him—only as a man, however—to have been possessed of the most
distinguished wisdom. In making that admission, they at the same time
assert that the disciples claimed more for their Master than He really
was; so much more indeed that they even called Him the Son of God, and
the Word of God, by whom all things were made, and affirmed that He and
God are one. And in the same way they dispose of all other kindred
passages in the epistles of the apostles, in the light of which we have
been taught that He is to be worshipped as one God with the Father. For
they are of opinion that He is certainly to be honoured as the wisest of
men; but they deny that He is to be worshipped as God.

<span id="vi.iv.vii-p7"></span>12. Wherefore, when they put the question
why He has not written in His own person, it would seem as if they were
prepared to believe regarding Him whatever He might have written
concerning Himself, but not what others may have given the world to know
with respect to His life, according to the measure of their own
judgment. Well, I ask them in turn why, in the case of certain of the
noblest of their own philosophers, they have accepted the statements
which their disciples left in the records they have composed, while
these sages themselves have given us no written accounts of their own
lives? For Pythagoras, than whom Greece in those days <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) did not possess any more illustrious
personage in the sphere of that contemplative virtue, is believed to
have written absolutely nothing, whether on the subject of his own
personal history or on any other theme whatsoever. And as to Socrates,
to whom, on the other hand, they have adjudged a position of supremacy
above all others in that active virtue by which the moral life is
trained, so that they do not hesitate also to aver that he was even
pronounced to be the wisest of men by the testimony of their deity
Apollo,—it is indeed true that he handled the fables of Æsop in some few
short verses, and thus made use of words and numbers of his own in the
task of rendering the themes of another. But this was all. And so far
was he from having the desire to write anything himself, that he
declared that he had done even so much only because he was constrained
by the imperial will of his demon, as Plato, the noblest of all his
disciples, tells us. That was a work, also, in which he sought to set
forth in fair form not so much his own thoughts, as rather the ideas of
another. What reasonable ground, therefore, have they for believing,
with regard to those sages, all that their disciples have committed to
record in respect of their history, while at the same time they refuse
to credit in the case of Christ what His disciples have written on the
subject of His life? And all the more may we thus argue, when we see how
they admit that all other men have been excelled by Him in the matter of
wisdom, although they decline to acknowledge Him to be God. Is it,
indeed, the case that those persons whom they do not hesitate to allow
to have been by far His inferiors, have had the faculty of making
disciples who can be trusted in all that concerns the narrative of their
careers, and that He failed in that capacity? But if that is a most
absurd statement to venture upon, then in all that belongs to the
history of that Person to whom they grant the honour of wisdom, they
ought to believe not merely what suits their own notions, but what they
read in the narratives of those who learned from this sage Himself those
various facts which they have left on record on the subject of His life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_539"></span>[81:540](1060067.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii-p3"></span> *Has Domini sanctas quadrigas*.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[81:541](1060067.htm#fr_540.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii-p4"></span> Reading either *palmam suæ vanitatis
objicere*, or with several <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.vii-p4.1"></span>mss.</span> *palmare*, etc.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[82:542](1060067.htm#fr_541.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii-p6"></span> *Vel maxime pagani*.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[82:543](1060067.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="vi.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.vii-p8"></span> Six <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> omit the *tunc*, at that
time.—<span class="c13"><span id="vi.iv.vii-p8.2"></span>Migne</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](1060068.md)
