[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060088)  [Next](1060090.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.—Of the Question Why the
Heathen Should Refuse to Worship the God of Israel; Even Although They
Deem Him to Be Only the Presiding Divinity of the Elements?</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxix-p2"></span>45. What do they say of this God of
Sabaoth, which term, by interpretation, means the God of powers or of
armies, inasmuch as the powers and the armies of the angels serve Him?
What do they say of this God of Israel; for He is the God of that people
from whom came the seed wherein all the nations were to be blessed? Why
is He the only deity excluded from worship by those very persons who
contend that all the gods ought to be worshipped? Why do they refuse
their belief to Him who both proves other gods to be false gods, and
also overthrows them? I have heard one of them declare that he had read,
in some philosopher or other, the statement that, from what the Jews did
in their sacred observances, he had come to know what God they
worshipped. “He is the deity,” said he, “that presides over those
elements of which this visible and material universe is constructed;”
when in the Holy Scriptures of His prophets it is plainly shown that the
people of Israel were commanded to worship that God who made heaven and
earth, and from whom comes all true wisdom. But what need is there for
further disputation on this subject, seeing that it is quite sufficient
for my present purpose to point out how they entertain any kind of
presumptuous opinions regarding that God whom yet they cannot deny to be
a God? If, indeed, He is the deity that presides over the elements of
which this world consists, why is He not worshipped in preference to
Neptune, who presides over the sea only? Why not, again, in preference
to Silvanus, who presides over the fields and woods only? Why not in
preference to the Sun, who presides over the day only, or who also rules
over the entire heat of heaven? Why not in preference to the Moon, who
presides over the night only, or who also shines pre-eminent for power
over moisture? Why not in preference to Juno, who is supposed to hold
possession of the air only? For certainly those deities, whoever they
may be, who preside over the parts, must necessarily be under that Deity
who wields the presidency over all the elements, and over the entire
universe. But this Deity prohibits the worship of all those deities.
Why, then, is it that these men, in opposition to the injunction of One
greater than those deities, not only choose to worship them, but also
decline, for <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span
id="vi.iv.xxix-Page_96"></span>their sakes, to worship Him? Not yet have
they discovered any constant and intelligible judgment to pronounce on
this God of Israel; neither will they ever discover any such judgment,
until they find out that He alone is the true God, by whom all things
were created.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX](1060090.md)
