[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060280)  [Next](1060282) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxiv"></span> <span id="vii.lxiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxiv-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXII.</span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxiv-p2.1"></span>\[XCII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxiv-p3.1"></span>*[Luke xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxiv-p3.2"></span>, “A
certain man made a great supper,” etc.*

<span id="vii.lxiv-p4"></span>*Delivered in the basilica
Restituta*. <span id="fr_3471"></span>[3472](#fn_3471)

<span id="vii.lxiv-p6"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxiv-p6.1"></span>Holy</span> lessons have been set forth before
us, to which we should both give ear, and upon which by the Lord’s help
I would deliver some <span id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span
id="vii.lxiv-Page_447"></span>observations. In the Apostolic lesson
thanks are rendered unto the Lord for the faith of the Gentiles, of
course, because it was His work. In the Psalm we have said, “O God of
hosts, turn us, and show us Thy Face, and we shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_3472"></span>[3473](#fn_3472) In the Gospel we have been called
to a supper; yea, rather others have been called, we not called, but
led; not only led, but even forced. For so have we heard, that “a
certain Man made a great supper.” <span
id="fr_3473"></span>[3474](#fn_3473) Who is this Man, but “the Mediator
between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus”? <span
id="fr_3474"></span>[3475](#fn_3474) He sent that those who had been
invited might come, for the hour was now come, that they should come.
Who are they who had been invited, but those who had been called by the
Prophets who were sent before? When? Of old, ever since the Prophets
were sent, they invited to Christ’s supper. They were sent then to the
people of Israel. Often were they sent, often did they call men, to come
at the hour of supper. But they received those who invited them, refused
the supper. What means “they received those who invited them, refused
the supper”? They read the Prophets and killed Christ. But when they
killed Him, then though they knew it not, they prepared a Supper for us.
When the Supper was now prepared, when Christ had been offered up, when
the Supper of the Lord, which the faithful know, had been set forth
after the resurrection of Christ, and established by His Hands and
Mouth, were the Apostles sent to them, to whom the Prophets had been
sent before. “Come ye to the supper.”

<span id="vii.lxiv-p10"></span>2. They who would not come made excuses.
And how did they excuse themselves? There were three excuses: “One said,
I have bought a farm, <span id="fr_3475"></span>[3476](#fn_3475) and I
go to see it; have me excused. Another said, I have bought five pairs of
oxen, and I go to prove them; I pray thee have me excused. A third said,
I have married a wife, have me excused; I cannot come.” <span
id="fr_3476"></span>[3477](#fn_3476) Do we suppose that these are not
the excuses, which hinder all men, who decline to come to this supper?
Let us look into them, discuss, find them out; but only that we may
beware. In the purchase of the farm, the spirit of domination is marked
out; therefore pride is rebuked. For men are delighted to have a farm,
to hold, to possess it, to have men in it under them, to have dominion.
An evil vice, the first vice. For the first man wished to have dominion,
in that he would not that any should have dominion over him. What is to
have dominion, but to take pleasure in one’s own power? There is a
greater power, let us submit ourselves to it, that we may be able to be
safe. “I have bought a farm, have me excused.” Having discovered pride,
he would not come.

<span id="vii.lxiv-p13"></span>3. “Another said, I have bought five
pairs of oxen.” Would it not have been enough, “I have bought oxen”?
Something beyond doubt there is, which by its very obscurity challenges
us to seek out, and understand; and in that it is shut, He exhorteth us
to knock. The five pairs of oxen are the senses of this body. There are
numbered five senses of this body, as is known to all; and they who, it
may be, do not consider it, will doubtless perceive it on being reminded
of it. There are then found to be five senses of this body. In the eyes
is the sight, the hearing in the ears, the smell in the nose, the taste
in the mouth, the touch in all the members. We have perception of white
and black, and things coloured in whatever way, light and dark, by the
sight. Harsh and musical sounds, we have perception of by the hearing.
Of sweet and offensive smells, we have perception by the smell. Of
things sweet and bitter by the taste. Of things hard and soft, smooth
and rough, warm and cold, heavy and light, by the touch. They are five,
and they are pairs. Now that they are pairs, is seen most easily in the
case of the three first senses. There are two eyes, two ears, two
nostrils; see three pairs. In the mouth, that is in the sense of taste,
a certain doubling is found, because nothing affects the taste, unless
it is touched by the tongue and the palate. The pleasure of the flesh
which pertains to the touch, has this doubling in a less obvious way.
For there is both an outer and an inner touch. And so it too is double.
Why are they called pairs of oxen? Because by these senses of the body,
earthly things are sought for. For oxen turn up the earth. So there are
men far off from faith, given up to earthly things, occupied in the
things of the flesh; who will not believe anything but what they attain
to by the five senses of their body. In those five senses do they lay
down for themselves the rules of their whole will. “I will not believe,”
says one, “anything but what I see. See, here is what I know, and am
sure of. Such a thing is white, or black, or round, or square, or
coloured so and so; this I know, am sensible of, have a hold of; nature
itself teaches it me. I am not forced to believe what you cannot show
me. Or it is a voice: I perceive that it is a voice; it sings well, it
sings ill, it is sweet, it is harsh. I know, I know this, it has come to
me. There is a good or a bad smell: I know, I perceive it. This is
sweet, this is bitter; this is salt, this insipid. I know not what you
would tell me more. By the touch I know what is hard, what is soft; what
is smooth, what is rough; what is warm, and what cold. What more would
you show me?”

<span id="vii.lxiv-p14"></span>4. By such an impediment was our Apostle
Thomas held back, who as to the Lord Christ, the resurrection that is of
Christ, would not <span id="page_448">p. 448</span> <span
id="vii.lxiv-Page_448"></span>believe even his own eyes only. “Unless,”
says he, “I put my fingers into the places of the nails and wounds, and
unless I put my hand into His side, I will not believe.” <span
id="fr_3477"></span>[3478](#fn_3477) And the Lord who could have risen
again without any vestige of a wound, kept the scars, that they might be
touched by the doubting Apostle, and the wounds of his heart be healed.
And yet as designing to call to His supper others, against the excuse of
“the five pairs of oxen,” He said, “Blessed they who do not see, and
believe.” <span id="fr_3478"></span>[3479](#fn_3478) We, my Brethren,
who have been called to this supper, have not been kept back by “these
five pairs.” For we have not in this age desired to see the Face of the
Lord’s Body, nor have we longed to hear the Voice proceeding out of the
mouth of that Body; we have not sought in Him for any passing <span
id="fr_3479"></span>[3480](#fn_3479) odour. A certain “woman anointed
Him with most costly ointment,” that “house was filled with the
odour;” <span id="fr_3480"></span>[3481](#fn_3480) but we were not
there; lo, we did not smell, yet we believe. He gave to the disciples
the Supper consecrated by His Own Hands; but we did not sit down at that
Feast, and yet we daily eat this same Supper by faith. And do not think
it strange that in that supper which He gave with His Own Hand, one was
present without faith: the faith that appeared, afterwards was more than
a compensation for that faithlessness then. Paul was not there who
believed, Judas was there who betrayed. How many now too in this same
Supper, though they saw not then that table, nor beheld with their eyes,
nor tasted with their mouths, the bread which the Lord took in His
Hands, yet because it is the same as is now prepared, how many now also
in this same Supper, “eat and drink judgment to themselves”? <span
id="fr_3481"></span>[3482](#fn_3481)

<span id="vii.lxiv-p20"></span>5. But whence arose an occasion, so to
say, to the Lord, to speak of this supper? One of them that sat at meat
with Him (for He was at a feast, whither He had been invited), had said,
“Blessed are they who eat bread in the kingdom of God.” <span
id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482) He sighed as though after distant
things, and the Bread Himself was sitting down before him. Who is the
Bread of the kingdom of God, but He who saith, “I am the Living Bread
which came down from heaven”? <span id="fr_3483"></span>[3484](#fn_3483)
Do not get thy mouth ready, but thine heart. On this occasion it was
that the parable of this supper was set forth. Lo, we believe in Christ,
we receive Him with faith. In receiving Him we know what to think of. We
receive but little, and we are nourished in heart. It is not then what
is seen, but what is believed, that feeds us. Therefore we too have not
sought for that outward sense; nor have we said, “Let them believe who
have seen with their eyes, and handled with their hands the Lord Himself
after His resurrection, if what is said be true; we do not touch Him,
why should we believe?” If we were to entertain such thoughts, we should
be kept back from the supper by those “five pairs of oxen.” That ye may
know, Brethren, that not the gratification of these five senses, which
softens and ministers pleasure, but a kind of curiosity was denoted, He
did not say, “‘I have bought five pairs of oxen,’ and I go to feed
them;” but, “I go to prove them.” He who wishes to “prove” by “the pairs
of oxen,” does not wish to be in doubt, just as St. Thomas by these
“pairs” did not wish to be in doubt. “Let me see, let me touch, let me
put in my fingers.” “‘Behold,’ saith the Lord, ‘put in thy fingers along
My Side, and be not unbelieving.’ <span
id="fr_3484"></span>[3485](#fn_3484) For thy sake have I been slain; at
the place which thou wishest to touch, have I shed My Blood, that I
might redeem thee; and dost thou still doubt of Me, unless thou touch
Me? Behold, this too I grant; behold, this too I show thee; touch, and
believe; find out the place of My wound, heal the wound of thy
doubting.”

<span id="vii.lxiv-p24"></span>6. “The third said, I have married a
wife.” This is the pleasure of the flesh, which is a hindrance to many:
and I would that it were so only without, and not within! There are men
who say, “There is no happiness for a man, if he have not the pleasures
of the flesh.” These are they whom the Apostle censures, saying, “‘Let
us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die.’ <span
id="fr_3485"></span>[3486](#fn_3485) Who hath risen to this life from
the other? Who hath ever told us what goes on there? We take away with
us, what in the time present makes our happiness.” He that speaks thus,
“has married a wife,” attaches himself to the flesh, places his delight
in the pleasures of the flesh, excuses himself from the supper; let him
look well to it that he die not by an inward famine. Attend to John, the
holy Apostle and Evangelist; “Love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world.” <span id="fr_3486"></span>[3487](#fn_3486) O ye
who come to the Supper of the Lord, “Love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world.” He did not say, “Have not;” but, “Love
not.” Thou hast had, possessed, loved. The love of earthly things, is
the bird-lime of the spirit’s wings. Lo, thou hast desired, thou hast
stuck fast. “Who will give thee wings as of a dove?” <span
id="fr_3487"></span>[3488](#fn_3487) When wilt thou fly, whither thou
mayest in deed, seeing thou hast perversely wished to rest here, where
thou hast to thy hurt stuck fast? “Love not the world,” is the divine
trumpet. By the voice of this trumpet unceasingly is it proclaimed to
the compass of the earth, and to the whole world, “Love not the world,
neither the things that are in the world. <span id="page_449">p.
449</span> <span id="vii.lxiv-Page_449"></span>Whosoever loveth the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the
world, is the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the
ambition of life.” <span id="fr_3488"></span>[3489](#fn_3488) He begins
at the last with which the Gospel ends. He begins at that, at which the
Gospel made an end. “The lust of the flesh, I have married a wife. The
lust of the eyes, I have bought five pairs of oxen. The ambition of
life, I have bought a farm.”

<span id="vii.lxiv-p29"></span>7. Now these senses are denoted by the
mention of the eyes only, the whole by a part, because the pre-eminence
in the five senses belongs to the eyes. Wherefore though sight belongs
peculiarly to the eyes, we are accustomed to use the word “seeing”
through all the five senses. How? In the first place, in relation to the
eyes themselves we say; “See how white it is, look and see how white it
is:” this has relation to the eyes. Hear and see how musical it is!
Could we say conversely, “Hear and see how white it is”? This
expression, “see,” runs through all the senses; whereas the
distinguishing expression <span id="fr_3489"></span>[3490](#fn_3489) of
the other senses does not in its turn run through it. “Mark and see how
musical; smell and see how agreeable it is; taste and see how sweet it
is; touch and see how soft it is.” And yet surely since they are senses,
we should rather say thus; “Hear and be sensible how musical it is;
smell and be sensible how agreeable it is; taste and be sensible how
sweet it is; touch and be sensible how hot it is; handle and be sensible
how smooth it is; handle and be sensible how soft it is.” But we say
none of these. For thus the Lord Himself after His resurrection when He
appeared to His disciples, and when though they saw Him they still
wavered in faith supposing that they saw a spirit, said, “Why do ye
doubt, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? See My Hands and My
Feet.” It is not enough to say, “See;” He saith, “Touch, and handle, and
see.” <span id="fr_3490"></span>[3491](#fn_3490) “Look and see, handle
and see; with the eyes alone see, and see by all the senses.” Because He
was looking for the inner sense of faith, He offered Himself to the
outward senses of the body. We have made no attainment <span
id="fr_3491"></span>[3492](#fn_3491) in the Lord by these outward
senses, we have heard with our ears, have believed with our heart; and
this hearing not from His mouth, but from the mouth of His preachers,
from their mouths who were already at the supper, and who by the pouring
forth of what they there drunk in invited us.

<span id="vii.lxiv-p33"></span>8. Let us away then with vain and evil
excuses, and come we to the supper by which we may be made fat within.
Let not the puffing up of pride keep us back, let it not lift us up, nor
unlawful curiosity scare us, and turn us away from God; let not the
pleasure of the flesh hinder us from the pleasure of the heart. Let us
come, and be filled. And who came but the beggars, the “maimed,” the
“halt,” the “blind”? But there came not thither the rich, and the whole,
who walked, as they thought, well, and saw acutely; who had great
confidence in themselves, and were therefore in the more desperate case,
in proportion as they were more proud. Let the beggars come, for He
inviteth them, “who, though He was rich, for our sakes became poor, that
we beggars through His poverty might be enriched.” <span
id="fr_3492"></span>[3493](#fn_3492) Let the maimed come, “for they that
are whole need not a physician, but they that are in evil case.” <span
id="fr_3493"></span>[3494](#fn_3493) Let the halt come who may say to
Him, “Set in order my steps in Thy paths.” <span
id="fr_3494"></span>[3495](#fn_3494) Let the blind come who may say,
“Enlighten mine eyes, that I may never sleep in death.” <span
id="fr_3495"></span>[3496](#fn_3495) Such as these came at the hour,
when those who had been first invited, had been rejected for their own
excuses: they came at the hour, they entered in from the streets and
lanes of the city. And the servant “who had been sent,” brought answer,
“Lord, it is done as Thou hast commanded, and yet there is room.” “Go
out,” saith He, “into the highways and hedges, and compel those whom
thou shalt find to come in.” <span id="fr_3496"></span>[3497](#fn_3496)
Whom thou shalt find wait not till they choose to come, compel them to
come in. I have prepared a great supper, a great house, I cannot suffer
any place to be vacant in it. The Gentiles came from the streets and
lanes: let the heretics come from the hedges, here they shall find
peace. For those who make hedges, their object is to make divisions. Let
them be drawn away from the hedges, let them be plucked up from among
the thorns. They have stuck fast in the hedges, they are unwilling to be
compelled. <span id="fr_3497"></span>[3498](#fn_3497) Let us come in,
they say, of our own good will. This is not the Lord’s order, “Compel
them,” saith he, “to come in.” Let compulsion be found outside, the will
arise within.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3471"></span>[446:3472](1060281.htm#fr_3471) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p5"></span> See Serm. xl. (xc. Ben.).

<span id="fn_3472"></span>[447:3473](1060281.htm#fr_3472) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p7"></span> [Ps. lxxx.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007)<span id="vii.lxiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3473"></span>[447:3474](1060281.htm#fr_3473) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p8"></span> [Luke xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3474"></span>[447:3475](1060281.htm#fr_3474) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p9"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3475"></span>[447:3476](1060281.htm#fr_3475) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p11"></span> *Villam*, Vulgate.

<span id="fn_3476"></span>[447:3477](1060281.htm#fr_3476) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p12"></span> [Luke xiv.
18-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#018)<span
id="vii.lxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3477"></span>[448:3478](1060281.htm#fr_3477) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p15"></span> [John xx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025)<span id="vii.lxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3478"></span>[448:3479](1060281.htm#fr_3478) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p16"></span> [John xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)<span id="vii.lxiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3479"></span>[448:3480](1060281.htm#fr_3479) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p17"></span> *Temporalem*.

<span id="fn_3480"></span>[448:3481](1060281.htm#fr_3480) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p18"></span> [John xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003)<span id="vii.lxiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3481"></span>[448:3482](1060281.htm#fr_3481) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span id="vii.lxiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[448:3483](1060281.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p21"></span> [Luke xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#015)<span id="vii.lxiv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3483"></span>[448:3484](1060281.htm#fr_3483) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p22"></span> [John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span id="vii.lxiv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3484"></span>[448:3485](1060281.htm#fr_3484) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p23"></span> [John xx.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027)<span id="vii.lxiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3485"></span>[448:3486](1060281.htm#fr_3485) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p25"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032)<span id="vii.lxiv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3486"></span>[448:3487](1060281.htm#fr_3486) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p26"></span> [1 John ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)<span id="vii.lxiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3487"></span>[448:3488](1060281.htm#fr_3487) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p27"></span> [Ps.
55.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)<span id="vii.lxiv-p27.1"></span>,
Sept. (lv. 6, English version).

<span id="fn_3488"></span>[449:3489](1060281.htm#fr_3488) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p28"></span> [1 John
2:15](../../../bib/vul/jo1002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/vul/jo1002.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxiv-p28.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_3489"></span>[449:3490](1060281.htm#fr_3489) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p30"></span> *Proprietas*.

<span id="fn_3490"></span>[449:3491](1060281.htm#fr_3490) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p31"></span> [Luke
24:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span id="vii.lxiv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3491"></span>[449:3492](1060281.htm#fr_3491) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p32"></span> *Carpsimus*.

<span id="fn_3492"></span>[449:3493](1060281.htm#fr_3492) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p34"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="vii.lxiv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3493"></span>[449:3494](1060281.htm#fr_3493) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p35"></span> [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span id="vii.lxiv-p35.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_3494"></span>[449:3495](1060281.htm#fr_3494) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p36"></span> [Ps. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxiv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3495"></span>[449:3496](1060281.htm#fr_3495) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p37"></span> [Ps. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003)<span id="vii.lxiv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3496"></span>[449:3497](1060281.htm#fr_3496) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p38"></span> [Luke
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023)<span id="vii.lxiv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3497"></span>[449:3498](1060281.htm#fr_3497) <span
id="vii.lxiv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxiv-p39"></span> This alludes to the laws made against
the Donatists by the Christian Emperors. See St. Augustin’s Epis. 195,
and especially § 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXIII](1060282)
