[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060261)  [Next](1060263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xlv"></span> <span id="vii.xlv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xlv-p1.1"></span>Sermon XLIII.</span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xlv-p2.1"></span>\[XCIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xlv-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)<span id="vii.xlv-p3.2"></span>,
“then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins.”*

<span id="vii.xlv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xlv-p4.1"></span>Ye</span> who were present yesterday remember
my promise; which with the Lord’s assistance is to be made good to-day,
not to you only, but to the many others also who have come together. It
is no easy question, who the ten virgins are, of whom five are wise, and
five foolish. Nevertheless, according to the context of this passage
which I have wished should be read again to you to-day, Beloved, I do
not think, as far as the Lord vouchsafes to give me understanding, that
this parable or similitude relates to those women only who by a peculiar
and more excellent sanctity are called Virgins in the Church, whom by a
more usual term we are wont also to call, “The Religious;” <span
id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085) but if I mistake not this parable
relates to the whole Church. <span id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086)
But though we should understand it of those only who are called “the
Religious,” are they but ten? God forbid that so great a company of
virgins should be reduced to so small a number! But perhaps one may say,
“But what if though they be so many in outward profession, yet in truth
they are so few, that scarce ten can be found!” It is not so. For if he
had meant that the good virgins only should be understood by the ten, He
would not have represented five foolish ones among them. For if this is
the number of the virgins which are called, why are the doors of the
great house shut against five?

<span id="vii.xlv-p7"></span>2. So then let us understand, dearly
Beloved, that this parable relates to us all, that is, to <span
id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span id="vii.xlv-Page_402"></span>the whole
Church together, not to the Clergy <span
id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087) only of whom we spoke yesterday;
nor to the laity only; but generally to all. Why then are the Virgins
five and five? These five and five virgins are all Christian souls
together. But that I may tell you what by the Lord’s inspiration I
think, it is not souls of every sort, but such souls as have the
Catholic faith, and seem to have good works in the Church of God; and
yet even of them, “five are wise, and five are foolish.” First then let
us see why they are called “five,” and why “virgins,” and then let us
consider the rest. Every soul in the body is therefore denoted <span
id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088) by the number five, because it
makes use of five senses. For there is nothing of which we have
perception by the body, but by the five folded gate, either by the
sight, or the hearing, or the smelling, or the tasting, or the touching.
Whoso then abstaineth from unlawful seeing, unlawful hearing, unlawful
smelling, unlawful tasting, and unlawful touching, by reason of his
uncorruptness <span id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089) hath gotten the
name of virgin.

<span id="vii.xlv-p11"></span>3. But if it be good to abstain from the
unlawful excitements of the senses, and on that account every Christian
soul has gotten the name of virgin; why are five admitted and five
rejected? They are both virgins, and yet are rejected. It is not enough
that they are virgins; and that they have lamps. They are virgins, by
reason of abstinence from unlawful indulgence of the senses; they have
lamps, by reason of good works. Of which good works the Lord saith, “Let
your works shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_3090"></span>[3091](#fn_3090) Again He saith to His disciples,
“Let your loins be girded and your lamps burning.” <span
id="fr_3091"></span>[3092](#fn_3091) In the “girded loins” is virginity;
in the “burning lamps” good works.

<span id="vii.xlv-p14"></span>4. The title of virginity is not usually
applied to married persons: yet even in them there is a virginity of
faith, which produces wedded chastity. For that you may know, Holy
Brethren, that every one, every soul, as touching the soul, and that
uncorruptness of faith by which abstinence from things unlawful is
practised, and by which good works are done, is not unsuitably called “a
virgin;” the whole Church which consists of virgins, and boys, and
married men and married women, is by one name called a Virgin. Whence
prove we this? Hear the Apostle saying, not to the religious women only
but to the whole Church together; “I have espoused you to One Husband,
that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.” <span
id="fr_3092"></span>[3093](#fn_3092) And because the devil, the
corrupter of this virginity, is to be guarded against, after the Apostle
had said, “I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as
a chaste virgin to Christ;” he subjoined, “But I fear, lest as the
serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.” <span
id="fr_3093"></span>[3094](#fn_3093) Few have virginity in the body; in
the heart all ought to have it. If then abstinence from what is unlawful
be good, whereby it has received the name of virginity, and good works
are praiseworthy, which are signified by the lamps; why are five
admitted and five rejected? If there be a virgin, and one who carries
lamps, who yet is not admitted; where shall he see himself, who neither
preserveth a virginity from things unlawful, and who not wishing to have
good works walketh in darkness?

<span id="vii.xlv-p17"></span>5. Of these then, my Brethren, yea, of
these let us the rather treat. He who will not see what is evil, he who
will not hear what is evil, he that turneth away his smell from the
unlawful fumes, and his taste from the unlawful food of the sacrifices,
he who refuseth the embrace of another man’s wife, breaketh his bread to
the hungry, bringeth the stranger into his house, clotheth the naked,
reconcileth the litigious, visiteth the sick, burieth the dead; he
surely is a virgin, surely he hath lamps. What seek we more? Something
yet I seek. What seekest thou yet, one will say? Something yet I seek;
the Holy Gospel hath set me on the search. It hath said that even of
these, virgins, and carrying lamps, some are wise and some foolish. By
what do we see this? By what make the distinction? By the oil. Some
great, some exceedingly great thing doth this oil signify. Thinkest thou
that it is not charity? This we say as searching out what it is; we
hazard no precipitate judgment. I will tell you why charity seems to be
signified by the oil. The Apostle says, “I show unto you a way above the
rest.” <span id="fr_3094"></span>[3095](#fn_3094) Though I speak with
the tongues of men and of Angels, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.” <span
id="fr_3095"></span>[3096](#fn_3095) This, that is “charity,” is “that
way above the rest,” which is with good reason signified by the oil. For
oil swims above all liquids. Pour in water, and pour in oil upon it, the
oil will swim above. Pour in oil, pour in water upon it, the oil will
swim above. If you keep the usual order, it will be uppermost; <span
id="fr_3096"></span>[3097](#fn_3096) if you change the order, it will be
uppermost. “Charity never falleth.” <span
id="fr_3097"></span>[3098](#fn_3097)

<span id="vii.xlv-p22"></span>6. What is it then, Brethren? Let us treat
now of the five wise and the five foolish virgins. They wished to go to
meet the Bridegroom. What is the meaning of “to go and meet the
Bridegroom”? To go with the heart, to be waiting for his coming. But he
tarried. “While he tarries, they all slept.” What is “all”? Both the
foolish and the wise, “all slumbered and slept.” Think we is this sleep
good? What <span id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span
id="vii.xlv-Page_403"></span>is this sleep? Is it that at the tarrying
of the Bridegroom, “because iniquity aboundeth, the love of many waxeth
cold”? Are we to understand this sleep so? I like it not. I will tell
you why. Because among them are the wise virgins; and certainly when the
Lord said, “Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax
cold;” He went on to say, “But he that shall endure unto the end, the
same shall be saved.” <span id="fr_3098"></span>[3099](#fn_3098) Where
would ye have those wise virgins be? Are they not among those that
“shall endure unto the end”? They would not be admitted within at all,
Brethren, for any other reason, than because they have “endured unto the
end.” No coldness of love then crept over them, in them love did not wax
cold; but preserves its glow even unto the end. And because it glows
even unto the end, therefore are the gates of the Bridegroom opened to
them; therefore are they told to enter in, as that excellent servant,
“Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” <span
id="fr_3099"></span>[3100](#fn_3099) What then is the meaning of they
“all slept”? <span id="fr_3100"></span>[3101](#fn_3100) There is another
sleep which no one escapes. Remember ye not the Apostle saying, “But I
would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are
asleep,” <span id="fr_3101"></span>[3102](#fn_3101) that is, concerning
them which are dead? For why are they called “they which are asleep,”
but because they are in their own day? Therefore “they all slept.”
Thinkest thou that because one is wise, he has not therefore to die? Be
the virgin foolish, or be she wise, all suffer equally the sleep of
death.

<span id="vii.xlv-p27"></span>7. But men continually say to themselves,
“Lo, the day of judgment is coming now, so many evils are happening, so
many tribulations thicken; behold all things which the Prophets have
spoken, are well-nigh fulfilled; the day of judgment is already at
hand.” They who speak thus, and speak in faith, go out as it were with
such thoughts to “meet the Bridegroom.” But, lo! war upon war,
tribulation upon tribulation, earthquake upon earthquake, famine upon
famine, nation against nation, and still the Bridegroom comes not yet.
Whilst then He is expected to come, all they who are saying, “Lo, He is
coming, and the Day of Judgment will find us here,” fall asleep. Whilst
they are saying this, they fall asleep. Let each one then have an eye to
this his sleep, and persevere even unto his sleep in love; let sleep
find him so waiting. For suppose that he has fallen asleep. “Will not He
who falls asleep afterwards rise again?”  <span
id="fr_3102"></span>[3103](#fn_3102) Therefore “they all slept;” both of
the wise and the foolish virgins in the parable, it is said, “they all
slept.”

<span id="vii.xlv-p29"></span>8. “Lo, at midnight there was a cry
made.” <span id="fr_3103"></span>[3104](#fn_3103) What is, “at
midnight”? When there is no expectation, no belief at all of it. Night
is put for ignorance. A man makes as it were a calculation with himself:
“Lo, so many years have passed since Adam, and the six thousand years
are being completed, and then immediately according to the computation
of certain expositors, the Day of Judgment will come;” yet these
calculations come and pass away, and still the coming of the Bridegroom
is delayed, and the virgins who had gone to meet him sleep. And, lo,
when He is not looked for, when men are saying, “The six thousand years
were waited for, and, lo, they are gone by, how then shall we know when
He will come?” He will come at midnight. What is, “will come at
midnight”? Will come when thou art not aware. Why will He come when thou
art not aware of it? Hear the Lord Himself, “It is not for you to know
the times or the seasons which the Lord hath put in His own
power.” <span id="fr_3104"></span>[3105](#fn_3104) “The day of the
Lord,” says the Apostle, “will come as a thief in the night.” <span
id="fr_3105"></span>[3106](#fn_3105) Therefore watch thou by night that
thou be not surprised by the thief. For the sleep of death—will ye, or
nill ye—it will come.

<span id="vii.xlv-p33"></span>9. “But when that cry was made at
midnight.” What cry was this, but that of which the Apostle says, “In
the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump”? “For the trumpet shall
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed”? <span id="fr_3106"></span>[3107](#fn_3106) And so when the cry
was made at midnight, “Behold, the Bridegroom cometh;” what follows?
“Then all those virgins arose.” What is, “they” all arose? “The hour
will come,” said the Lord Himself, “when all that are in the graves
shall hear His voice, and shall come forth.” <span
id="fr_3107"></span>[3108](#fn_3107) Therefore at the last trumpet they
all arose. “Now those wise virgins had brought oil with them in their
vessels; but the foolish brought no oil with them.” <span
id="fr_3108"></span>[3109](#fn_3108) What is the meaning of “brought no
oil with them in their vessels”? What is “in their vessels”? In their
hearts. Whence the Apostle says, “Our glorying is this, the testimony of
our conscience.” <span id="fr_3109"></span>[3110](#fn_3109) There is the
oil, the precious oil; this oil is of the gift of God. Men can put oil
into their vessels, but they cannot create the olive. See, I have oil;
but didst thou create the oil? It is of the gift of God. Thou hast oil.
Carry it with thee. What is “carry it with thee”? Have it within, there
please thou God.

<span id="vii.xlv-p38"></span>10. For, lo, those “foolish virgins, who
brought no oil with them,” wish to please men by that abstinence of
theirs whereby they are called virgins, and by their good works, when
they seem to carry lamps. And if they wish to please men, and on that
account do all these praiseworthy <span id="page_404">p. 404</span>
<span id="vii.xlv-Page_404"></span>works, they do not carry oil with
them. Do you then carry it with thee, carry it within where God seeth;
there carry the testimony of thy conscience. For he who walks to gain
the testimony of another, does not carry oil with him. If thou abstain
from things unlawful, and doest good works to be praised of men; there
is no oil within. And so when men begin to leave off their praises, the
lamps fail. Observe then, Beloved, before those virgins slept, it is not
said that their lamps were extinguished. The lamps of the wise virgins
burned with an inward oil, with the assurance of a good conscience, with
an inner glory, with an inmost charity. Yet the lamps of the foolish
virgins burned also. Why burnt they then? Because there was yet no want
of the praises of men. But after that they arose, that is in the
resurrection from the dead, they began to trim their lamps, that is,
began to prepare to render unto God an account of their works. And
because there is then no one to praise, every man is wholly employed in
his own cause, there is no one then who is not thinking of himself,
therefore were there none to sell them oil; so their lamps began to
fail, and the foolish betook themselves to the five wise, “give us of
your oil, for our lamps are going out.” <span
id="fr_3110"></span>[3111](#fn_3110) They sought for what they had been
wont to seek for, to shine that is with others’ oil, to walk after
others’ praises. “Give us of your oil, for our lamps are going out.”

<span id="vii.xlv-p40"></span>11. But they say, “Not so, lest there be
not enough for us and you, but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy
for yourselves.” <span id="fr_3111"></span>[3112](#fn_3111) This was not
the answer of those who give advice, but of those who mock. And why mock
they? Because they were wise, because wisdom was in them. For they were
not wise by ought of their own; but that wisdom was in them, of which it
is written in a certain book, she shall say to those that despised her,
when they have fallen upon the evils which she threatened them; “I will
laugh over your destruction.” <span id="fr_3112"></span>[3113](#fn_3112)
What wonder then is it, that the wise mock the foolish virgins? And what
is this mocking?

<span id="vii.xlv-p43"></span>12. “Go ye to them that sell, and buy for
yourselves:” <span id="fr_3113"></span>[3114](#fn_3113) ye who never
were wont to live well, but because men praised you, who sold you oil.
What means this, “sold you oil”? “Sold praises.” Who sell praises, but
flatterers? How much better had it been for you not to have acquiesced
in flatterers, and to have carried oil within, and for a good
conscience-sake to have done all good works; then might ye say, “The
righteous shall correct me in mercy, and reprove me, but the oil of the
sinner shall not fatten  <span id="fr_3114"></span>[3115](#fn_3114) my
head.” <span id="fr_3115"></span>[3116](#fn_3115) Rather, he says, let
the righteous correct me, let the righteous reprove me, let the
righteous buffet me, let the righteous correct me, than the “oil of the
sinner fatten mine head.” What is the oil of the sinner, but the
blandishments of the flatterer?

<span id="vii.xlv-p47"></span>13. “Go ye” then “to them that sell,” this
have ye been accustomed to do. But we will not give to you. Why? “Lest
there be not enough for us and you.” What is, “lest there be not
enough”? This was not spoken in any lack of hope, but in a sober and
godly humility. For though the good man have a good conscience; how
knows he, how He may judge who is deceived by no one? He hath a good
conscience, no sins conceived in the heart solicit  <span
id="fr_3116"></span>[3117](#fn_3116) him, yet, though his conscience be
good, because of the daily sins of human life, he saith to God, “forgive
us our debts;” seeing he hath done what comes next, “as we also forgive
our debtors.” <span id="fr_3117"></span>[3118](#fn_3117) He hath broken
his bread to the hungry from the heart, from the heart hath clothed the
naked; out of that inward oil he hath done good works, and yet in that
judgment even his good conscience trembleth.

<span id="vii.xlv-p50"></span>14. See then what this, “Give us oil,” is.
They were told “Go ye rather to them that sell.” In that ye have been
used to live upon the praises of men, ye do not carry oil with you; but
we can give you none; “lest there be not enough for us and you.” For
scarcely do we judge of ourselves, how much less can we judge of you?
What is “scarcely do we judge of ourselves”? Because, “When the
righteous King sitteth on the throne, who will glory that his heart is
pure?”  <span id="fr_3118"></span>[3119](#fn_3118) It may be thou dost
not discover anything in thine own conscience; but He who seeth better,
whose Divine glance penetrateth into deeper things, discovereth it may
be something, He seeth it may be something, He discovereth something.
How much better mayest thou say to Him, “Enter not into judgment with
Thy servant”? <span id="fr_3119"></span>[3120](#fn_3119) Yea, how much
better, “Forgive us our debts”? Because it shall be also said to thee
because of those torches, because of those lamps; “I was hungry, and ye
gave Me meat.” What then? did not the foolish virgins do so too? Yea,
but they did it not before Him. How then did they do it? As the Lord
forbiddeth, who said, “Take heed that ye do not your righteousness
before men to be seen of them, otherwise ye have no reward of your
Father which is in heaven: and when ye pray, be not as the hypocrites,
for they love to pray, standing in the streets, that they may be seen of
men. Verily I say unto you, they have received their reward.” <span
id="fr_3120"></span>[3121](#fn_3120) They have bought oil, they have
given the price; they have bought <span id="page_405">p. 405</span>
<span id="vii.xlv-Page_405"></span>it, they have not been defrauded of
men’s praises, they have sought men’s praises, and have had them. These
praises of men aid them not in the judgment day. But the other virgins,
how have they done? “Let your works shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_3121"></span>[3122](#fn_3121) He did not say, “may glorify you.”
For thou hast no oil of thine own self. Boast thyself and say, I have
it; but from Him, “for what hast thou that thou hast not
received?” <span id="fr_3122"></span>[3123](#fn_3122) So then in this
way acted the one, and in that the other.

<span id="vii.xlv-p56"></span>15. Now it is no wonder, that “while they
are going to buy,” while they are seeking for persons by whom to be
praised, and find none; while they are seeking for persons by whom to be
comforted, and find none; that the door is opened, that “the Bridegroom
cometh,” <span id="fr_3123"></span>[3124](#fn_3123) and the Bride, the
Church, glorified then with Christ, that the several members may be
gathered together into their whole. “And they went in with Him into the
marriage, and the door was shut.” Then the foolish virgins came
afterwards; but had they bought any oil, or found any from whom they
might buy it? Therefore they found the doors shut; they began to knock,
but too late.

<span id="vii.xlv-p58"></span>16. It is said, and it is true, and no
deceiving saying, “Knock, and it shall be opened unto you;” <span
id="fr_3124"></span>[3125](#fn_3124) but now when it is the time of
mercy, not when it is the time of judgment. For these times cannot be
confounded, since the Church sings to her Lord of “mercy and
judgment.” <span id="fr_3125"></span>[3126](#fn_3125) It is the time of
mercy; repent. Canst thou repent in the time of judgment? Thou wilt be
then as those virgins, against whom the door was shut. “Lord, Lord, open
to us.” What! did they not repent, that they had brought no oil with
them? Yes, but what profiteth them their late repentance, when the true
wisdom mocked them? Therefore “the door was shut.” And what was said to
them? “I know you not.” Did not He know them, who knoweth all things?
What then is, “I know you not?”  <span
id="fr_3126"></span>[3127](#fn_3126) I refuse, I reject you. In my art I
do not acknowledge you, my art knoweth not vice; now this is a
marvellous thing, it doth not know vice, and it judgeth vice. It doth
not know it in the practice of it; it judgeth by reproving it. Thus
then, “I know you not.”

<span id="vii.xlv-p62"></span>17. The five wise virgins came, and “went
in.” How many are ye, my Brethren, in the profession of Christ’s Name!
let there be among you the five wise, but be not five such persons only.
Let there be among you the five wise, belonging to this wisdom of the
number five. For the hour will come, and come when we know not. It will
come at midnight, Watch ye. Thus did the Gospel close; “Watch, for ye
know neither the day nor the hour.”  <span
id="fr_3127"></span>[3128](#fn_3127) But if we are all to sleep, how
shall we watch? Watch with the heart, watch with faith, watch with hope,
watch with charity, watch with good works; and then, when thou shalt
sleep in thy body, the time will come that thou shalt rise. And when
thou shalt have risen, make ready the lamps. Then shall they go out no
more, then shall they be renewed <span
id="fr_3128"></span>[3129](#fn_3128) with the inner oil of conscience;
then shall that Bridegroom fold thee in His spiritual <span
id="fr_3129"></span>[3130](#fn_3129) embrace, then shall He bring thee
into His House where thou shall never sleep, where thy lamp can never be
extinguished. But at present we are in labour, and our lamps
flicker <span id="fr_3130"></span>[3131](#fn_3130) amid the winds and
temptations of this life; but only let our flame burn strongly, that the
wind of temptation may increase the fire, rather than put it out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[401:3086](1060262.htm#fr_3085) <span
id="vii.xlv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p5"></span> *Sancti moniales*.

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[401:3087](1060262.htm#fr_3086) <span
id="vii.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p6"></span> Bing. *Antiq*. B, vii. c. iv. sect. 8.

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[402:3088](1060262.htm#fr_3087) <span
id="vii.xlv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p8"></span> *Præpositos*.

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[402:3089](1060262.htm#fr_3088) <span
id="vii.xlv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p9"></span> *Censetur*.

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[402:3090](1060262.htm#fr_3089) <span
id="vii.xlv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p10"></span> *Integritatem*.

<span id="fn_3090"></span>[402:3091](1060262.htm#fr_3090) <span
id="vii.xlv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p12"></span> [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="vii.xlv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3091"></span>[402:3092](1060262.htm#fr_3091) <span
id="vii.xlv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p13"></span> [Luke xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span id="vii.xlv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3092"></span>[402:3093](1060262.htm#fr_3092) <span
id="vii.xlv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p15"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span id="vii.xlv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3093"></span>[402:3094](1060262.htm#fr_3093) <span
id="vii.xlv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p16"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span id="vii.xlv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3094"></span>[402:3095](1060262.htm#fr_3094) <span
id="vii.xlv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p18"></span> *Supereminentiorem*. [1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span id="vii.xlv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3095"></span>[402:3096](1060262.htm#fr_3095) <span
id="vii.xlv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="vii.xlv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3096"></span>[402:3097](1060262.htm#fr_3096) <span
id="vii.xlv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p20"></span> *Vincit*.

<span id="fn_3097"></span>[402:3098](1060262.htm#fr_3097) <span
id="vii.xlv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p21"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008)<span id="vii.xlv-p21.1"></span>.
*Cadit*.

<span id="fn_3098"></span>[403:3099](1060262.htm#fr_3098) <span
id="vii.xlv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p23"></span> [Matt.
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span id="vii.xlv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3099"></span>[403:3100](1060262.htm#fr_3099) <span
id="vii.xlv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p24"></span> [Matt. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span id="vii.xlv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3100"></span>[403:3101](1060262.htm#fr_3100) <span
id="vii.xlv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p25"></span> [Matt. xxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#005)<span id="vii.xlv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3101"></span>[403:3102](1060262.htm#fr_3101) <span
id="vii.xlv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p26"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013)<span id="vii.xlv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3102"></span>[403:3103](1060262.htm#fr_3102) <span
id="vii.xlv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p28"></span> [Ps.
41.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#008)<span id="vii.xlv-p28.1"></span>,
Sept. (xli. 8, English version).

<span id="fn_3103"></span>[403:3104](1060262.htm#fr_3103) <span
id="vii.xlv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p30"></span> [Matt. xxv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#006)<span id="vii.xlv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3104"></span>[403:3105](1060262.htm#fr_3104) <span
id="vii.xlv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p31"></span> [Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span id="vii.xlv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3105"></span>[403:3106](1060262.htm#fr_3105) <span
id="vii.xlv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p32"></span> [1 Thess. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002)<span id="vii.xlv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3106"></span>[403:3107](1060262.htm#fr_3106) <span
id="vii.xlv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p34"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052)<span id="vii.xlv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3107"></span>[403:3108](1060262.htm#fr_3107) <span
id="vii.xlv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p35"></span> [John
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="vii.xlv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3108"></span>[403:3109](1060262.htm#fr_3108) <span
id="vii.xlv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p36"></span> [Matt.
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#004),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#003)<span id="vii.xlv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3109"></span>[403:3110](1060262.htm#fr_3109) <span
id="vii.xlv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p37"></span> [2 Cor. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span id="vii.xlv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3110"></span>[404:3111](1060262.htm#fr_3110) <span
id="vii.xlv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p39"></span> [Matt. xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#008)<span id="vii.xlv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3111"></span>[404:3112](1060262.htm#fr_3111) <span
id="vii.xlv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p41"></span> [Matt. xxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#009)<span id="vii.xlv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3112"></span>[404:3113](1060262.htm#fr_3112) <span
id="vii.xlv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p42"></span> [Prov. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026)<span id="vii.xlv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3113"></span>[404:3114](1060262.htm#fr_3113) <span
id="vii.xlv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p44"></span> [Matt. xxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#009)<span id="vii.xlv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3114"></span>[404:3115](1060262.htm#fr_3114) <span
id="vii.xlv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p45"></span> *Impinguabit*.

<span id="fn_3115"></span>[404:3116](1060262.htm#fr_3115) <span
id="vii.xlv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p46"></span> [Ps.
141.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005)<span id="vii.xlv-p46.1"></span>,
Sept. (cxli. English version).

<span id="fn_3116"></span>[404:3117](1060262.htm#fr_3116) <span
id="vii.xlv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p48"></span> *Titillant*.

<span id="fn_3117"></span>[404:3118](1060262.htm#fr_3117) <span
id="vii.xlv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p49"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="vii.xlv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3118"></span>[404:3119](1060262.htm#fr_3118) <span
id="vii.xlv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p51"></span> [Prov.
20:8](../../../bib/sep/pro020.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/sep/pro020.htm#009)<span id="vii.xlv-p51.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_3119"></span>[404:3120](1060262.htm#fr_3119) <span
id="vii.xlv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p52"></span> [Ps. cxliii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span id="vii.xlv-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3120"></span>[404:3121](1060262.htm#fr_3120) <span
id="vii.xlv-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p53"></span> [Matt. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span id="vii.xlv-p53.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3121"></span>[405:3122](1060262.htm#fr_3121) <span
id="vii.xlv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p54"></span> [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="vii.xlv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3122"></span>[405:3123](1060262.htm#fr_3122) <span
id="vii.xlv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p55"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="vii.xlv-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3123"></span>[405:3124](1060262.htm#fr_3123) <span
id="vii.xlv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p57"></span> [Matt. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#010)<span id="vii.xlv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3124"></span>[405:3125](1060262.htm#fr_3124) <span
id="vii.xlv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p59"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="vii.xlv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3125"></span>[405:3126](1060262.htm#fr_3125) <span
id="vii.xlv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p60"></span> [Ps. ci.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="vii.xlv-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3126"></span>[405:3127](1060262.htm#fr_3126) <span
id="vii.xlv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p61"></span> [Matt. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)<span id="vii.xlv-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3127"></span>[405:3128](1060262.htm#fr_3127) <span
id="vii.xlv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p63"></span> [Matt. xxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013)<span id="vii.xlv-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3128"></span>[405:3129](1060262.htm#fr_3128) <span
id="vii.xlv-p63.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p64"></span> *Vegetentur*.

<span id="fn_3129"></span>[405:3130](1060262.htm#fr_3129) <span
id="vii.xlv-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p65"></span> *Incorporeis*.

<span id="fn_3130"></span>[405:3131](1060262.htm#fr_3130) <span
id="vii.xlv-p65.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlv-p66"></span> *Fluctuant*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XLIV](1060263)
