[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060269)  [Next](1060271) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.liii"></span> <span id="vii.liii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.liii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LI.</span>

<span id="vii.liii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.liii-p2.1"></span>\[CI. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.liii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.liii-p3.1"></span>*[Luke x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#002)<span id="vii.liii-p3.2"></span>,
“The harvest truly is plenteous,” etc.*

<span id="vii.liii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.liii-p4.1"></span>By</span> the lesson of the Gospel which has
just been read, we are reminded to search what that harvest is of which
the Lord says, “The harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few.
Pray ye the Lord of the harvest, that He would send forth labourers into
His harvest.” <span id="fr_3261"></span>[3262](#fn_3261) Then to His
twelve disciples, whom He also named Apostles, He added other
seventy-two, and sent them all, as appears from His words, to the
harvest then ready. What then was that harvest? For that harvest was not
among these Gentiles, among whom there had been nothing sown. It remains
therefore that we understand that this harvest was among the people of
the Jews. It was to that harvest that the Lord of the harvest came, to
that harvest He sent reapers; but to the Gentiles He sent not reapers,
but sowers. Understand we then that it was harvest among the people of
the Jews, sowing time among the peoples of the Gentiles. For out of that
harvest were the Apostles chosen, where now that the harvest was, the
corn was already ripe; for there had the Prophets sown. Delightful it is
to take a view of God’s husbandry, and to feel delight in His gifts, and
the labourers in His field. For in this husbandry did he labour, who
said, “I laboured more than they all.”  <span
id="fr_3262"></span>[3263](#fn_3262) But the strength to labour was
given him by the Lord of the harvest. Therefore he added, “Yet it is not
I, but the grace of God which is with me.” For that he was employed in
this husbandry he clearly enough shows, where he says, “I have planted,
Apollos watered.” <span id="fr_3263"></span>[3264](#fn_3263) But this
Apostle, from Saul, becoming Paul, that is, from being proud, the least
of all (for the name of Saul is derived from Saul; but Paul is little;
whence in a way interpreting his own name, he says, “I am the least of
the Apostles” <span id="fr_3264"></span>[3265](#fn_3264) : this Paul I
say, the little, and the least, sent unto the Gentiles, says that he was
sent particularly to the Gentiles. He himself so writes, we read,
believe, preach it. He then in his Epistle to the Galatians says, that
having been now called by the Lord Jesus, he came to Jerusalem, and
“communicated the Gospel” <span id="fr_3265"></span>[3266](#fn_3265)
unto the Apostles, that their right hands were given to him, the sign of
harmony, the sign of agreement, that what they had learnt from him
differed in no respect from them. Afterwards he says that it was agreed
between him and them, that he should go to the Gentiles, and they unto
the circumcision, he as a sower, they as reapers. So also with good
reason, though they knew it not, did the Athenians give him his name.
For as they heard the word from him, they said, “Who is this sower of
words?” <span id="fr_3266"></span>[3267](#fn_3266)

<span id="vii.liii-p11"></span>2. Attend then and be it your delight
with me to take a view of the husbandry of God and the two harvests in
it, the one already past, the other yet to come; the one already past
among the people of the Jews, the one yet to come among the peoples of
the Gentiles. Let us prove this; and whereby, but by the Scripture of
God, the Lord of the harvest? See we have it said there in this present
lesson, “The harvest is great, but the labourers are few. Pray ye the
Lord of the harvest, that He would send forth labourers into His
harvest.” <span id="fr_3267"></span>[3268](#fn_3267) But because in that
harvest there were to be gainsaying and persecuting Jews, He says,
“Behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves.” <span
id="fr_3268"></span>[3269](#fn_3268) Let us show something clearer still
touching this harvest in the Gospel according to John, where the Lord
sat as He was wearied at the well, great mysteries <span
id="fr_3269"></span>[3270](#fn_3269) indeed were transacted, but the
time is too short to treat of them all. But give ye ear to that which
relates to the present subject. For we have undertaken to show a harvest
among the people, among whom the Prophets preached; for therefore were
they sowers, that the Apostles might be reapers. A woman of Samaria
talks with the Lord Jesus, and when the Lord among other things had told
her how God ought to be worshipped, she says, “We know that Messias
cometh who is called Christ, and He will teach us all things. And the
Lord saith to her, I that speak with thee am He.” <span
id="fr_3270"></span>[3271](#fn_3270) Believe what thou hearest; why dost
thou make search for what thou seest? “I that speak with thee am He.”
But as to what she had said, “We know that the Messias will come,” whom
Moses and the Prophets have announced, “who is called Christ.” The
harvest was already in the ear. When it had yet to grow it had <span
id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span id="vii.liii-Page_423"></span>received
the Prophets as sowers, now that it was come to ripeness it waited for
the Apostles as reapers. Presently as she heard this she believed and
left her water-pot, and ran in haste, and began to announce the Lord.
The disciples at that time had gone to buy bread; who on their return
found the Lord talking with the woman, and they marvelled. Yet did they
not dare to say to Him, “What or why talkest Thou with her?” <span
id="fr_3271"></span>[3272](#fn_3271) They had astonishment in
themselves, they repressed their boldness in their heart. To this
Samaritan woman then the Name of Christ was nothing new, she was already
waiting for His coming, already did she believe that He would come.
Whence had she believed it, if Moses had not sown? But hear this more
expressly noted. The Lord then said to His disciples, “Ye say that the
summer is yet far distant, lift up your eyes, and see the fields white
already to harvest”  <span id="fr_3272"></span>[3273](#fn_3272) And then
He adds, “Others have laboured, and ye are entered into their
labours.” <span id="fr_3273"></span>[3274](#fn_3273) Abraham laboured,
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, the Prophets laboured in sowing; at the Lord’s
coming the harvest was found ripe. The reapers sent with the scythe of
the Gospel, carried the sheaves into the Lord’s floor, where Stephen was
to be threshed.

<span id="vii.liii-p19"></span>3. But here comes in that Paul, and he is
sent to the Gentiles. And this he does not conceal in setting forth the
grace, which he had specially and peculiarly received. For he says in
his Scriptures, that he was sent to preach the Gospel where Christ had
not been named. <span id="fr_3274"></span>[3275](#fn_3274) But because
that first harvest was past already, and all the Jews who remained are
no harvest, let us consider that harvest which we ourselves are. For it
has been sown by Apostles and Prophets. The Lord Himself sowed it. For
He was in the Apostles, seeing that Christ also Himself reaped it. For
they are nothing without Him; He is perfect without them. For He saith
Himself to them, “For without Me, ye can do nothing.” <span
id="fr_3275"></span>[3276](#fn_3275) What then doth Christ from
henceforth sowing among the Gentiles say? “A sower went out to
sow.” <span id="fr_3276"></span>[3277](#fn_3276) “There” are reapers
“sent out” to reap, “here” an unwearied sower “went out” to sow. For
what fear did it cause him, that “some seed fell on the way side, and
some on rocky places, and some among thorns”? If he had been afraid of
these unmanageable <span id="fr_3277"></span>[3278](#fn_3277) grounds,
he would never have got to the good ground. What is it to us, what
affair of ours is it to be disputing now of the Jews, and talking of the
chaff? this only concerns us, that we be not “the way side,” nor “the
rock,” nor “the thorns,” but “the good ground.” Be our heart
well-prepared, that from it may come the “thirty,” or the “sixty fold,”
or the thousand, and the “hundred fold;” some more, some less; but all
is wheat. Let it not be “the way side,” where the enemy as a bird may
take away the seed trodden down by the passers by. Let it not be “the
rock,” where the shallow soil makes it spring up immediately, so that it
cannot bear the sun. Let it not be the “thorns,” the lusts of this
world, the anxieties of an ill-ordered <span
id="fr_3278"></span>[3279](#fn_3278) life. For what is worse than that
anxiety of life, which doth not suffer one to attain unto Life? What
more miserable, than by caring for life, to lose Life? What more
unhappy, than by fearing death, to fall into death? Let the thorns be
rooted up, the field prepared, the seeds put in, let them grow unto the
harvest, let the barn be longed for, not the fire feared.

<span id="vii.liii-p25"></span>4. My place accordingly it is, whom with
all my unworthiness the Lord hath appointed to be a labourer in His
field, to say these things to you, to sow, to plant, to water, yea to
dig round about some trees, and to apply the basket of <span
id="fr_3279"></span>[3280](#fn_3279) dung; belongeth it to me to do
these things faithfully; to you to receive them faithfully; to the Lord
to aid me in my labour, and you in your belief, all of us labouring, but
in Him overcoming the world. What then belongs to your place I have
already said; now I wish to say what belongs to ours. But peradventure
it seems to some of you, that it is something superfluous which I have
declared that I wish to say, and speaking within themselves they are
saying in thought, “O that he would now let us go! He has said already
what belongs to our place, as to that which belongs to his, what is that
to us?” I think it is better that in a reciprocal and mutual love, we
should belong to you. Ye are now indeed of one family, we of the same
family are dispensers, it is true, but we all belong to one Lord. Nor
what I give, do I give of mine own; but of His from whom I also receive.
For if I should give of mine own, I shall give a lie. “For he that
speaketh a lie, speaketh of his own.” <span
id="fr_3280"></span>[3281](#fn_3280) So then ye ought to give ear to
that which belongs to the duty of the dispenser, whether it be that ye
may have joy in yourselves, if ye find yourselves to be such, or whether
it be that ye may be even in this very thing instructed. For how many
are there among this people who shall some day be dispensers! I too was
once where ye now are; and I who am seen now to be measuring out to my
fellowservants their food from this higher place, a few years since in a
lower place was receiving food with my fellow-servants. I am speaking
now a Bishop to lay-men; but I know that in speaking to them I <span
id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span id="vii.liii-Page_424"></span>am
speaking to many who will some day be bishops also.

<span id="vii.liii-p28"></span>5. Let us see then how we must understand
what the Lord enjoined on them whom He sent to preach the Gospel, and
let us consider in our mind this prepared harvest. “Carry,” He saith,
“neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes; and salute no man by the way. And
into whatsoever house ye enter, say, Peace be to this house. If the Son
of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; if not, it shall
return to you again.” <span id="fr_3281"></span>[3282](#fn_3281) If it
hath “rested,” hath the other lost it? This be far from the mind of
Saints! So then this is not to be taken in a carnal sense; and hence it
may be neither are the “purse,” nor “shoes,” nor “scrip;” nor above all
that, where if we take it simply without examination, pride seems to be
enjoined us, that we “salute no man by the way.”

<span id="vii.liii-p30"></span>6. Let us give heed to our Lord, our True
Example and Succour. Let us prove that He is our Succour; “Without Me ye
can do nothing.” <span id="fr_3282"></span>[3283](#fn_3282) Let us prove
that He is our Example; “Christ,” says Peter, “suffered for us, leaving
us an example that we should follow His steps.” <span
id="fr_3283"></span>[3284](#fn_3283) Our Lord Himself had bags in the
way, and these bags He entrusted to Judas. It is true He suffered from
the thief; but I as desiring to learn of my Lord say, “O Lord, Thou
didst suffer from the thief, whence hadst Thou that of which he could
take away? Me, a wretched and infirm man Thou hast admonished not even
to carry a purse; Thou didst carry bags, and hadst that in which Thou
couldest suffer from the thief. If Thou hadst not carried them, neither
could he have found anything to take away.” What remains, but that he
here saith to me, “Understand what that thou hearest, ‘Carry no purse,’
means? What is a purse? Money shut up, that is, concealed wisdom. What
is, ‘Carry no purse? Be not wise within your own selves only. <span
id="fr_3284"></span>[3285](#fn_3284) Receive ye the Holy Ghost.’ It
should be a fountain in thee, not a purse; from whence distribution is
made to others, not where it is itself shut in.” And the scrip is the
same as the purse.

<span id="vii.liii-p34"></span>7. What are “the shoes”? The shoes which
we use, are the skins of dead beasts, the coverings of our feet. By this
then are we bidden to renounce dead works. This Moses was admonished of
in a figure, when the Lord speaking to him said, “Loose thy shoes from
off thy feet; for the place wherein thou standest is holy ground.” <span
id="fr_3285"></span>[3286](#fn_3285) What ground is so holy as the
Church of God? In it therefore let us stand, let us loose our shoes, let
us, that is, renounce dead works. For as touching these shoes, wherewith
we walk, the same my Lord again assures me. For if He had not been shod
Himself, John would not have said of Him, “I am not worthy to unloose
the latchet of His shoes.” <span id="fr_3286"></span>[3287](#fn_3286) Be
there obedience then, let not a haughty severity steal over us. “I,”
says one, “fulfil the Gospel, because I walk with naked feet.” Well,
thou canst do it, I cannot. But let us both keep that which we both
receive together. How? Let us glow with charity, let us love one
another; and so it shall be, that I will love your strength, and thou
shall bear my weakness.

<span id="vii.liii-p37"></span>8. But what thinkest thou, who dost not
choose to understand in what sense these words are used, and who art
forced by thy <span id="fr_3287"></span>[3288](#fn_3287) perverse
interpretation to slander even the Lord Himself as to the “bags” and
“shoes;” what thinkest thou? Does it please thee then, that as we meet
our friends in the way, we should neither pay them our salutations if
they are our betters, nor return the salutations of our inferiors? What,
dost thou fulfil the Gospel, because thou art saluted, and art silent?
But thus thou wilt not be like to the traveller going on the way, but to
the milestone pointing out the way. Let us then lay aside this
coarse <span id="fr_3288"></span>[3289](#fn_3288) interpretation, and
understand aright the words of the Lord, “and salute no man by the way.”
For it is not without a cause that we are enjoined this, nor would He
mislike us to do what He enjoined. What then is, “Salute no man by the
way”? It might indeed be even simply taken thus, that He has commanded
us to do what He enjoins with all speed; and that His words “Salute no
man by the way,” are as though He had said, “Put all other things by,
till ye accomplish what has been enjoined you;” according to that style
of speaking by which expressions are wont to be exaggerated in the
custom of conversation. Nor need we go far; in the same discourse a
little while afterwards He says, “And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted
to heaven, shall be thrust down to hell.” <span
id="fr_3289"></span>[3290](#fn_3289) What is, “exalted to heaven”? Did
the walls of that city touch the clouds, or reach to the stars? But what
is “exalted to heaven”? Thou seemest thyself to be surpassing happy,
surpassing powerful, thou art exceeding proud. As then for the sake of
exaggeration this was said, “Thou art exalted unto heaven” to that city,
which was not exalted, nor rose up unto heaven; so to express haste
hyperbolically was it said, “So run, so do what I have enjoined you,
that travellers by the way may not in the least retard you; but
disregarding all things else, hasten to the end set before you.”

<span id="vii.liii-p41"></span>9. But there is another more recondite
meaning in these words which it is not difficult to understand, which
respects more particularly myself and all dispensers, and you too who
are hearers. He that salutes, wishes salvation. <span
id="fr_3290"></span>[3291](#fn_3290) For <span id="page_425">p.
425</span> <span id="vii.liii-Page_425"></span>so the ancients in their
letters wrote thus, “Such a one sends salvation to another.” Salutation
derives its name from this salvation. What then is, “Salute no man by
the way”? They who “salute by the way,” do so “by occasion.” I see that
ye have quickly understood me, yet for all that I must not finish yet.
For ye have not all understood so quickly. I have seen that some
understand by their voice, I see more asking for something further by
their silence. But seeing that we are talking of the way, let us walk as
it were in the way: ye quick ones, wait for the slow, and walk evenly.
What then did I say, He “who salutes by the way,” salutes only by
occasion? He was not going to him whom he salutes. He was about one
thing, another came in his way; he was seeking one thing, he found
across his path some other thing to do. What then is it to “salute by
occasion”? “By occasion” to announce salvation. Now what else is it to
announce salvation, but to preach the Gospel? If then thou dost preach,
do it by love, and not “by occasion.” There are men then, who though
“they seek their own things,” yet preach no other Gospel; of whom the
Apostle says with sighing, “For all seek their own, not the things which
are Jesus Christ’s.” <span id="fr_3291"></span>[3292](#fn_3291) And
these “saluted,” that is announced salvation, they preached the Gospel;
but they sought some other thing, and therefore they saluted only “by
occasion.” And what is this? If thou art such an one, whosoever thou
art, thou doest it; nay not all of you who do it are such, but it may be
that some of you who do it are. But if thou art such, it is not that
thou doest it, but it is done by thee.

<span id="vii.liii-p44"></span>10. For such as these did the Apostle
suffer; yet did he not enjoin them so to be. And these do something, or
something is done by them; they seek something else, yet they preach the
word. Care not what the preacher seeks after; be it thy will to hold
fast what he preaches; but let his intention be no concern of thine.
Hear the word of salvation from his mouth, from his mouth hold fast this
salvation. Be not thou the judge of his heart. If thou seest that he is
seeking after other things, what is that to thee? Hear Him who is
Salvation; <span id="fr_3292"></span>[3293](#fn_3292) “What they say,
do.” <span id="fr_3293"></span>[3294](#fn_3293) He has given thee
assurance who hath said, “What they say, do.” Do they evil? “Do not what
they do.” Do they good. They do not “salute by the way,” they do not
preach the Gospel by occasion; “be ye followers of them, even as they
also are of Christ.” <span id="fr_3294"></span>[3295](#fn_3294) A good
man preaches to thee; pluck the grape from the vine. A bad man preaches
to thee, pluck the grape as it hangs in the hedge. The cluster has grown
on the vine-branch entangled among the thorns, but it has not grown from
the thorns. By all means when thou seest any such thing as this and art
hungry, be careful as thou pluckest it, lest when thou puttest forth thy
hand to the grape, thou be torn by the thorns. This is what I say; in
such wise hear what is good, as that thou imitate not the evil of the
character. Let him preach “by occasion,” salute by the way; it will
injure him because he has not given ear to the precept of Christ,
“Salute no man by the way;” it will not injure thee, who, whether thou
dost hear of salvation <span id="fr_3295"></span>[3296](#fn_3295) from a
passer by, or from one who comes direct to thee, dost hold fast that
salvation. Hear the Apostle, who as I have said already gives us to
understand this. “What then?” “So that in every way, whether by occasion
or in truth, Christ is preached; and herein I do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice. For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your
prayer.” <span id="fr_3296"></span>[3297](#fn_3296)

<span id="vii.liii-p50"></span>11. Let then such as these, the Apostles
of Christ, the preachers of the Gospel, who “salute not by the way,”
that is, who do not seek or do any other thing, but who in genuine
charity preach the Gospel, let them come into the house, and say, “Peace
to this house.” They speak not with the mouth only; they pour out that
of which they are full; they preach peace, and they have peace. They are
not as those of whom it was said, “Peace, Peace, and there is no peace.”
 <span id="fr_3297"></span>[3298](#fn_3297) What is, “Peace, Peace, and
there is no peace”? They preach it, but they have it not; they praise it
and they love it not; they say, and do not. But yet do thou receive the
peace, “whether by occasion or in truth Christ be preached.” Whoso then
is full of peace, and salutes, saying, “Peace to this house, if the son
of peace be there, his peace shall rest upon him; if not,” for
peradventure there is no one of peace there, yet he who saluted has lost
nothing, “it shall return,” says he, “to you again.” It shall return to
thee, though it never departed from thee. For this He would mean to say,
It profiteth thee that thou hast declared it, it hath not profited him
at all who hath not received it; thou hast not lost thy reward, because
he hath remained empty; it is rendered thee for thy good will, it is
rendered thee for the charity which thou hast bestowed, He will render
it to thee who hath given thee assurance of it by that Angelic voice,
“Peace on earth to men of good will.” <span
id="fr_3298"></span>[3299](#fn_3298)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3261"></span>[422:3262](1060270.htm#fr_3261) <span
id="vii.liii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p5"></span> [Luke x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#002)<span id="vii.liii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3262"></span>[422:3263](1060270.htm#fr_3262) <span
id="vii.liii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="vii.liii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3263"></span>[422:3264](1060270.htm#fr_3263) <span
id="vii.liii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p7"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="vii.liii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3264"></span>[422:3265](1060270.htm#fr_3264) <span
id="vii.liii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009)<span id="vii.liii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3265"></span>[422:3266](1060270.htm#fr_3265) <span
id="vii.liii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p9"></span> [Gal. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)<span id="vii.liii-p9.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3266"></span>[422:3267](1060270.htm#fr_3266) <span
id="vii.liii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p10"></span> [Acts xvii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018)<span id="vii.liii-p10.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.liii-p10.2"></span>σπερμολόγος</span>.

<span id="fn_3267"></span>[422:3268](1060270.htm#fr_3267) <span
id="vii.liii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p12"></span> [Luke x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#002)<span id="vii.liii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3268"></span>[422:3269](1060270.htm#fr_3268) <span
id="vii.liii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p13"></span> [Luke x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#003)<span id="vii.liii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3269"></span>[422:3270](1060270.htm#fr_3269) <span
id="vii.liii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p14"></span> *Sacramenta*.

<span id="fn_3270"></span>[422:3271](1060270.htm#fr_3270) <span
id="vii.liii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p15"></span> [John
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#026)<span id="vii.liii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3271"></span>[423:3272](1060270.htm#fr_3271) <span
id="vii.liii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p16"></span> [John iv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#027)<span id="vii.liii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3272"></span>[423:3273](1060270.htm#fr_3272) <span
id="vii.liii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p17"></span> [John iv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035)<span id="vii.liii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3273"></span>[423:3274](1060270.htm#fr_3273) <span
id="vii.liii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p18"></span> [John iv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038)<span id="vii.liii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3274"></span>[423:3275](1060270.htm#fr_3274) <span
id="vii.liii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p20"></span> [Rom. xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#020)<span id="vii.liii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3275"></span>[423:3276](1060270.htm#fr_3275) <span
id="vii.liii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p21"></span> [John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="vii.liii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3276"></span>[423:3277](1060270.htm#fr_3276) <span
id="vii.liii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p22"></span> [Luke viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#005)<span id="vii.liii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3277"></span>[423:3278](1060270.htm#fr_3277) <span
id="vii.liii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p23"></span> *Difficiles*.

<span id="fn_3278"></span>[423:3279](1060270.htm#fr_3278) <span
id="vii.liii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p24"></span> *Vitiosæ*.

<span id="fn_3279"></span>[423:3280](1060270.htm#fr_3279) <span
id="vii.liii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p26"></span> *i.e*. to appoint the exercises of
penance; see Sermon lx. (cx. Ben) (i.).

<span id="fn_3280"></span>[423:3281](1060270.htm#fr_3280) <span
id="vii.liii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p27"></span> [John viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="vii.liii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3281"></span>[424:3282](1060270.htm#fr_3281) <span
id="vii.liii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p29"></span> [Luke x.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#004)<span id="vii.liii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3282"></span>[424:3283](1060270.htm#fr_3282) <span
id="vii.liii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p31"></span> [John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="vii.liii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3283"></span>[424:3284](1060270.htm#fr_3283) <span
id="vii.liii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p32"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span id="vii.liii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3284"></span>[424:3285](1060270.htm#fr_3284) <span
id="vii.liii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p33"></span> [Rom. xii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016)<span id="vii.liii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3285"></span>[424:3286](1060270.htm#fr_3285) <span
id="vii.liii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p35"></span> [Exod. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005)<span id="vii.liii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3286"></span>[424:3287](1060270.htm#fr_3286) <span
id="vii.liii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p36"></span> [Luke iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016)<span id="vii.liii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3287"></span>[424:3288](1060270.htm#fr_3287) <span
id="vii.liii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p38"></span> *Praviter*.

<span id="fn_3288"></span>[424:3289](1060270.htm#fr_3288) <span
id="vii.liii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p39"></span> *Stoliditatem*.

<span id="fn_3289"></span>[424:3290](1060270.htm#fr_3289) <span
id="vii.liii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p40"></span> [Luke x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#015)<span id="vii.liii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3290"></span>[424:3291](1060270.htm#fr_3290) <span
id="vii.liii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p42"></span> *Salutem*.

<span id="fn_3291"></span>[425:3292](1060270.htm#fr_3291) <span
id="vii.liii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p43"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="vii.liii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3292"></span>[425:3293](1060270.htm#fr_3292) <span
id="vii.liii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p45"></span> *Salutem*.

<span id="fn_3293"></span>[425:3294](1060270.htm#fr_3293) <span
id="vii.liii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p46"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="vii.liii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3294"></span>[425:3295](1060270.htm#fr_3294) <span
id="vii.liii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p47"></span> [1 Cor.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#016), [1 Cor.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)<span id="vii.liii-p47.1"></span>;
Sermon xxiv. (lxxiv. Ben.) 4.

<span id="fn_3295"></span>[425:3296](1060270.htm#fr_3295) <span
id="vii.liii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p48"></span> *Salutem*.

<span id="fn_3296"></span>[425:3297](1060270.htm#fr_3296) <span
id="vii.liii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p49"></span> [Phil.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#019)<span id="vii.liii-p49.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.liii-p49.2"></span>προφάσει</span>;
*per occasionem*, Vulgate.

<span id="fn_3297"></span>[425:3298](1060270.htm#fr_3297) <span
id="vii.liii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p51"></span> [Jer. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#011)<span id="vii.liii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3298"></span>[425:3299](1060270.htm#fr_3298) <span
id="vii.liii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.liii-p52"></span> [Luke ii.
14](../../../bib/vul/luk002.htm#014)<span id="vii.liii-p52.1"></span>,
Vulg.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LII](1060271)
