[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060278)  [Next](1060280) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxii"></span> <span id="vii.lxii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LX.</span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxii-p2.1"></span>\[CX. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxii-p3.1"></span>*[Luke xiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#006)<span id="vii.lxii-p3.2"></span>,
where we are told of the fig-tree, which bare no fruit for three years;
and of the woman which was in an infirmity eighteen years; and on the
words of the* [Psa. 9.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019)<span
id="vii.lxii-p3.3"></span>*, “Arise, O Lord; let not man prevail: let
the nations be judged in thy sight.”*

<span id="vii.lxii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxii-p4.1"></span>Touching</span> “the fig-tree” which had its
three years’ trial, and bare no fruit, and “the woman which was in an
infirmity eighteen years,” hearken to what the Lord may grant me to say.
The fig-tree is the human race. And the three years are the three times;
one before the Law, the second under the Law, the third under grace. Now
there is nothing unsuitable in understanding <span id="page_444">p.
444</span> <span id="vii.lxii-Page_444"></span>by “the fig-tree” the
human race. For when the first man sinned, he covered his nakedness with
fig-leaves; <span id="fr_3441"></span>[3442](#fn_3441) covered those
members, from which we derive our birth. For what before his sin should
have been his glory, after sin became his shame. So before that, “they
were naked, and were not ashamed.” <span
id="fr_3442"></span>[3443](#fn_3442) For they had no reason to blush,
when no sin had gone before; nor could they blush for their Creator’s
works, because they had not yet mingled any evil work of their own with
the good works of their Creator. For they had not yet eaten of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, of which they had been forbidden to eat.
After then that they had eaten and sinned, the human race sprang from
them; that is, man from man, debtor from debtor, mortal from mortal,
sinner from sinner. In this “tree” then he entitles those, who through
the whole range of time would not bear fruit; and for this cause the axe
was hanging over the unfruitful tree. The gardener intercedes for it,
punishment is deferred, that help may be administered. Now the gardener
who intercedes, is every saint who within the Church prays for those who
are without the Church. And what does he pray? “Lord, let it alone this
year also;” that is, in this time of grace, spare the sinners, spare the
unbelievers, spare the barren, spare the unfruitful. “I will dig about
it, and put a basket of dung about it; if it bear fruit, well; but if
not, thou shalt come and cut it down.” <span
id="fr_3443"></span>[3444](#fn_3443) “Thou shalt come:” When? Thou shalt
come in judgment, when Thou shalt come to judge the quick and dead.
Meanwhile they are spared. But what is the “digging”? What is the
“digging about it,” but the teaching lowliness and repentance? For a
ditch is low ground. The basket of dung understand in its good effects.
It is filthy, but it produces fruit. The gardener’s filth is the
sinner’s sorrows. They who repent, repent in filthy robes; if, that is,
they understand aright, and repent in truth. To this tree then is it
said, “Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.” <span
id="fr_3444"></span>[3445](#fn_3444)

<span id="vii.lxii-p9"></span>2. What is that “woman who was in an
infirmity eighteen years”? In six days God finished His works. Three
times six are eighteen. What the “three years” then in “the tree”
signified, that do the “eighteen years” in this woman. She was bent
down, she could not look up; because in vain did she hear, “Up with your
hearts.” But the Lord made her straight. There is hope then, for the
children, that is, even until the day of judgment come. Man ascribes
much to himself. Yet what is man? A righteous man is something great.
But yet a righteous man is righteous only by the grace of God. “For what
is man, save that thou art mindful of him?” <span
id="fr_3445"></span>[3446](#fn_3445) Wouldest thou see what man is? “All
men are liars.” <span id="fr_3446"></span>[3447](#fn_3446) We have
chanted, “Arise, Lord; let not man prevail.” <span
id="fr_3447"></span>[3448](#fn_3447) What is, “let not man prevail”?
Were not the Apostles men? Were not Martyrs men? The Lord Jesus Himself,
without ceasing to be God, vouchsafed to be Man. What then is, “Arise,
Lord; let not man prevail”? If “all men are liars; arise,” Truth, “let
not” falsehood “prevail.” If man then would be anything good, it must
not be of anything of his own. For if he should wish to be anything of
his own he will be “a liar.” If he would wish to be true, he must be so
of that which is from God, not of anything of his own.

<span id="vii.lxii-p13"></span>3. Therefore, “Arise, Lord; let not man
prevail.” So much did lying prevail before the flood, that after the
flood only eight men remained. <span
id="fr_3448"></span>[3449](#fn_3448) By them the earth was again
replenished with lying men, and out of them was elected the people of
God. Many miracles were wrought, divine benefits imparted. They were
brought right through to the land of promise, delivered from Egyptian
bondage: Prophets were raised up among them, they received the temple,
they received the priesthood, they received the anointing, they received
the Law. Yet of this very people was it said afterwards, “The strange
children have lied unto me.”  <span id="fr_3449"></span>[3450](#fn_3449)
At last He was sent who had been promised afore by the Prophets. “Let
not man prevail,” even the more, because that God was made Man. But even
He, though He did divine works, was despised, though He showed forth so
many acts of mercy, He was apprehended, He was scourged, He was hanged.
Thus far “did man prevail,” to apprehend the Son of God, to scourge the
Son of God, to crown the Son of God with thorns, to hang the Son of God
upon the tree. So far “did man prevail:” how far, but up to the time
that having been taken down from the tree, He was laid in the sepulchre?
If He had remained there, man would have “prevailed” indeed. But this
prophecy addresses the very Lord Jesus Himself, saying, “Arise, Lord,
let not man prevail.” O Lord, Thou hast vouchsafed to come in the flesh,
the Word made Flesh. The Word above us, the Flesh among us, the
Word-flesh <span id="fr_3450"></span>[3451](#fn_3450) between God and
Man: Thou didst choose a virgin to be born from according to the flesh,
when Thou wast to be conceived, Thou didst find a Virgin; when Thou wast
born, Thou didst leave a Virgin. But Thou wast not acknowledged; Thou
wast Seen, and yet wast hidden. Infirmity was seen, Power was hidden.
All this was done, that Thou mightest shed that Blood, which is our
Price. <span id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span
id="vii.lxii-Page_445"></span>Thou didst so great miracles, didst give
health to the weaknesses of the sick, didst show forth many acts of
mercy, and receivedst evil for good. They mocked Thee, Thou didst hang
upon the tree; the ungodly wagged their heads before Thee, and said, “If
Thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.” <span
id="fr_3451"></span>[3452](#fn_3451) Hadst Thou then lost Thy power, or
rather wast Thou showing forth Thy Patience? and yet they mocked Thee,
and yet they derided Thee, yet, when Thou wast slain, they went away as
if victorious. Lo, Thou art laid in the sepulchre: “Arise, Lord, let not
man prevail.” “Let not” the ungodly enemy “prevail, let not” the blind
Jew “prevail.” For when Thou wert crucified, the Jew in his blindness
seemed to himself to have “prevailed.” “Arise, Lord, let not man
prevail.” It is done, yea, it is done. And now what remains, but that
“the nations be judged in thy sight”? For He hath risen again, as ye
know, and ascended into heaven; and from thence He shall come to judge
the quick and the dead.

<span id="vii.lxii-p18"></span>4. Ah! unfruitful tree, mock not, because
thou art yet spared; the axe is delayed, be not <span
id="fr_3452"></span>[3453](#fn_3452) thou secure; He will come and thou
shalt be cut down. Believe that He will come. All these things which now
ye see, once were not. Once the Christian people were not over the whole
world. It was read of in prophecy, not seen in the earth; now it is both
read and seen. Thus was the Church herself completed. It was not said to
her, “See, O daughter, and hear;” but, “Hear and see.” <span
id="fr_3453"></span>[3454](#fn_3453) Hear the predictions, see the
completions. As then, my beloved Brethren, Christ had once not been born
of a Virgin, but His birth was promised, and He was born; He had once
not done His miracles, they were promised, and He did them: He had not
yet suffered, it was promised, and so it came to pass: He had not risen
again, it was foretold, and so fulfilled: His Name was not throughout
the world, it was foretold, and so fulfilled: the idols were not
destroyed and broken down, it was foretold, and so fulfilled: heretics
had not assailed the Church, it was foretold, and so fulfilled. So also
the Day of Judgment is not yet, but seeing it hath been foretold, it
shall be fulfilled. Can it be that He who in so many things hath shown
Himself true, should be false touching the Day of Judgment? He hath
given us a bond <span id="fr_3454"></span>[3455](#fn_3454) of His
promises. For God hath made Himself a debtor, not by owing ought, that
is, not by borrowing; but by promising. We cannot therefore say to Him,
“Give back what Thou hast received.” Since “who hath first given to Him,
and it shall be recompensed unto him again?” <span
id="fr_3455"></span>[3456](#fn_3455) We cannot say to Him, “Give what
Thou hast received;” but we say without <span
id="fr_3456"></span>[3457](#fn_3456) scruple, “Give what Thou hast
promised.”

<span id="vii.lxii-p24"></span>5. For hence it is that we are bold to
say, day by day, “Thy kingdom come;” <span
id="fr_3457"></span>[3458](#fn_3457) that when His kingdom comes, we too
may reign with Him. Which hath been promised to us in these words; “Then
will I say unto them, Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world.” <span
id="fr_3458"></span>[3459](#fn_3458) But assuredly only if we shall have
done what follows in that place. “For I was an hungred, and ye gave Me
meat,” etc. He made these promises to our fathers; but He hath given us
a security, <span id="fr_3459"></span>[3460](#fn_3459) for us too to
read. If He who hath vouchsafed to give us this security, were to make a
reckoning with us and say, “Read my debts, the debts, that is, of my
promises, and reckon up what I have already paid, and reckon also what I
still owe; see how many I have paid already; and what I owe is but
little; will ye for that little that remains, think Me an untrustworthy
promiser?” What should we have to answer against this most evident
truth? Let him then who is barren repent, and bear “fruit worthy of
repentance.” He that is bent down, who looks only on the earth, rejoices
in earthly happiness, who thinks this the only happy life, where he may
be happy, and who believes no other can be; whosoever he be that is so
bent down, let him be made straight; if he cannot by himself, let him
call upon God. For was that woman made straight by herself? Woe had it
been for her, if He had not stretched out His Hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3441"></span>[444:3442](1060279.htm#fr_3441) <span
id="vii.lxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p5"></span> [Gen. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007)<span id="vii.lxii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3442"></span>[444:3443](1060279.htm#fr_3442) <span
id="vii.lxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p6"></span> [Gen. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025)<span id="vii.lxii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3443"></span>[444:3444](1060279.htm#fr_3443) <span
id="vii.lxii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p7"></span> [Luke
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#009)<span id="vii.lxii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3444"></span>[444:3445](1060279.htm#fr_3444) <span
id="vii.lxii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p8"></span> [Matt. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002)<span id="vii.lxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3445"></span>[444:3446](1060279.htm#fr_3445) <span
id="vii.lxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p10"></span> [Ps. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)<span id="vii.lxii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3446"></span>[444:3447](1060279.htm#fr_3446) <span
id="vii.lxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p11"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span id="vii.lxii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3447"></span>[444:3448](1060279.htm#fr_3447) <span
id="vii.lxii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p12"></span> [Ps. ix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019)<span id="vii.lxii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3448"></span>[444:3449](1060279.htm#fr_3448) <span
id="vii.lxii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p14"></span> [1 Pet. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020)<span id="vii.lxii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3449"></span>[444:3450](1060279.htm#fr_3449) <span
id="vii.lxii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p15"></span> [Ps.
144.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#011)<span
id="vii.lxii-p15.1"></span>, Sept. (cxliv. 11).

<span id="fn_3450"></span>[444:3451](1060279.htm#fr_3450) <span
id="vii.lxii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p16"></span> *Conf*. B. x. 67–70 (42, 43).

<span id="fn_3451"></span>[445:3452](1060279.htm#fr_3451) <span
id="vii.lxii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p17"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040)<span id="vii.lxii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3452"></span>[445:3453](1060279.htm#fr_3452) <span
id="vii.lxii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p19"></span> A paranomasia not to be preserved in the
original, *dilata est* securis, *noli esse* secura.

<span id="fn_3453"></span>[445:3454](1060279.htm#fr_3453) <span
id="vii.lxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p20"></span> [Ps.
45.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010)<span
id="vii.lxii-p20.1"></span>, Sept. (xlv. 10, English version).

<span id="fn_3454"></span>[445:3455](1060279.htm#fr_3454) <span
id="vii.lxii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p21"></span> *Chirographum*.

<span id="fn_3455"></span>[445:3456](1060279.htm#fr_3455) <span
id="vii.lxii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p22"></span> [Rom. xi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#035)<span id="vii.lxii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3456"></span>[445:3457](1060279.htm#fr_3456) <span
id="vii.lxii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p23"></span> *Planè*.

<span id="fn_3457"></span>[445:3458](1060279.htm#fr_3457) <span
id="vii.lxii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p25"></span> [Matt. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="vii.lxii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3458"></span>[445:3459](1060279.htm#fr_3458) <span
id="vii.lxii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p26"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="vii.lxii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3459"></span>[445:3460](1060279.htm#fr_3459) <span
id="vii.lxii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxii-p27"></span> *Cautionem*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXI](1060280)
