[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060191)  [Next](1060193.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—Of the Hour of the Lord’s
Passion, and of the Question Concerning the Absence of Any Discrepancy
Between Mark and John in the Article of the “Third” Hour and the
“Sixth.”</span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p2"></span>40. Matthew continues thus: “And they set
up over His head His accusation written, ‘This is Jesus the King of the
Jews.’” <span id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384.md) Mark, on the other
hand, before making any such statement, inserts these words: “And it was
the third hour, and they crucified Him.” <span
id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385.md) For he subjoins these terms
immediately after he has told us about the parting of the garments.
This, then, is a matter which we must consider with special care, lest
any serious error emerge. For there are some who entertain the idea that
the Lord was certainly crucified at the third hour; and that thereafter,
from the sixth hour on to the ninth, the darkness covered the land.
According to this theory, we should have to understand three hours to
have passed between the time when He was crucified and the time when the
darkness occurred. And this view might certainly be held with all due
warrant, were it not that John has stated that it was about the sixth
hour when Pilate sat down on the judgment-seat, in a place that is
called the Pavement, but in Hebrew, Gabbatha. For his version goes on in
this manner: “And as it was the preparation of the passover, and about
the sixth hour: and he saith unto the Jews, Behold your King! But they
cried out, Away with him, away with him! crucify him! Pilate said unto
them, Shall I crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have no
king but Cæsar. Then delivered he Him therefore unto them to be
crucified.” <span id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386.md) If Jesus,
therefore, was delivered up to the Jews to be crucified when it was
about the sixth hour, and when Pilate was then sitting upon the
judgment-seat, how could He have been crucified at the third hour, as
some have been led to suppose, in consequence of a misinterpretation of
the words of Mark?

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p6"></span>41. First, then, let us consider what the
hour really is at which He can have been crucified; and then we shall
see how it happens that Mark has reported Him to have been crucified at
the third hour. Now it was about the sixth hour when Pilate, who was
sitting, as has been stated, at the time upon the judgment-seat,
delivered Him up to be crucified. The expression is not that it was the
sixth hour fully, but only that it was about the sixth hour; that is to
say, the fifth hour was entirely gone, and so much of the sixth hour had
also been entered upon. These writers, however, could not naturally use
such phraseologies as the fifth hour and a quarter, or the fifth hour
and a third, or the fifth hour and a half or anything of that kind. For
the Scriptures have the well-known habit of dealing simply with the
round numbers, without mention of fractions, especially in matters of
time. We have an example of this in the case of the “eight days,” after
which, as they tell us, He went up into a mountain, <span
id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387.md) —a space which is given by Matthew
and Mark as “six days after,” <span id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388.md)
because they look simply at the days between the one from which the
reckoning commences and the one with which it closes. This is
particularly to be kept in view when we notice how measured the terms
are which John employs here. For he says not “the sixth hour,” but
“about the sixth hour.” And yet, even had he not expressed himself in
that way, but had stated merely that it was the sixth hour, it would
still be competent for us to interpret the phrase in accordance with the
method of speech with which we are, as I said, familiar in Scripture,
namely, the use of the round numbers. And thus we could still take the
sense quite fairly to be that, on the comple<span id="page_198">p.
198</span> <span id="vi.vi.xiv-Page_198"></span>tion of the fifth hour
and the commencement of the sixth, those matters were going on which are
recorded in connection with the Lord’s crucifixion, until, on the close
of the sixth hour, and when He was hanging on the cross, the darkness
occurred which is attested by three of the evangelists, namely, Matthew,
Mark, and Luke. <span id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389.md)

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p10"></span>42. In due order, let us now inquire how
it is that Mark, after telling us that they parted His garments when
they were crucifying Him, casting lots upon them what every man should
take, has appended this statement, “And it was the third hour, and they
crucified Him.” <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390.md) Now here he
had already made the declaration, “And crucifying Him, they parted His
garments;” and the other evangelists also certify that, when He was
crucified, they parted His garments. If, therefore, it was Mark’s design
to specify the time at which the incident took place, it would have been
enough for him to say simply, “And it was the third hour.” What reason,
then, can be assigned for his having added these words, “And they
crucified Him,” but that, under the summary statement thus inserted, he
intended significantly to suggest something which might be found a
subject for consideration, when the Scripture in question was read in
times in which the whole Church knew perfectly well what hour it was at
which the Lord was hanged upon the tree, and the means were possessed
for either correcting the writer’s error or confuting his want of truth?
But, inasmuch as he was quite aware of the fact that the Lord was
suspended \[on the cross\] by the soldiers, and not by the Jews, as John
most plainly affirms, <span id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391.md) his
hidden object \[in bringing in the said clause\] was to convey the idea
that those parties who cried out that He should be crucified were the
Lord’s real crucifiers, rather than the men who simply discharged their
service to their chief in accordance with their duty. We understand,
accordingly, that it was the third hour when the Jews cried out that the
Lord should be crucified. And thus it is intimated most truly that these
persons did really crucify Christ at the time when they cried out. All
the more, too, did this merit notice, because they were unwilling to
have the appearance of having done the deed themselves, and with that
view delivered Him up unto Pilate, as their words indicate clearly
enough in the report given by John. For, after stating how Pilate said
to them, “What accusation bring ye against this man?” his version
proceeds thus: “They answered and said unto him, If he were not a
malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee. Then said
Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your law. The
Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to
death.” <span id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392.md) Consequently, what
they were especially unwilling to have the appearance of doing, that
Mark here shows that they actually did do at the third hour. For he
judged most truly that the Lord’s murderer was rather the tongue of the
Jews than the hand of the soldiers.

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p14"></span>43. Moreover, if any one alleges that it
was not the third hour when the Jews cried out for the first time in the
terms referred to, he simply displays himself most insanely to be an
enemy to the Gospel; unless perchance he can prove himself able to
produce some new solution of the problem. For he cannot possibly
establish the position that it was not the third hour at the period
alluded to. And, consequently, we surely ought rather to credit a
veracious evangelist than the contentious suspicions of men. But you may
ask, How can you prove that it was the third hour? I answer, Because I
believe the evangelists; and if you also believe them, show me how the
Lord can have been crucified both at the sixth hour and at the third.
For, to make a frank acknowledgment, we cannot get over the statement of
the sixth hour in John’s narrative; and Mark records the third hour:
and, therefore, if both of us accept the testimony of these writers,
show me any other way in which both these notes of time can be taken as
literally correct. If you can do so, I shall most cheerfully acquiesce.
For what I prize is not my own opinion, but the truth of the Gospel. And
I could wish, indeed, that more methods of clearing up this problem
might be discovered by others. Until that be done, however, join me, if
it please you, in taking advantage of the solution which I have
propounded. For if no explanation can be found, this one will suffice of
itself. But if another can be devised, when it is unfolded, we shall
make our choice. Only don’t consider it an inevitable conclusion that
any one of all the four evangelists has stated what is false, or has
fallen into error in a position of authority at once so elevated and so
holy.

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p15"></span>44. Again, if any one affirms his
ability to prove it not to have been the third hour when the Jews cried
out in the terms in question, because, after Mark’s statement to this
effect, “And Pilate answered, and said again unto them, What will ye
then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews? And
they cried out again, Crucify him,” we find no further details
introduced into the narrative of the same evangelist, but are led on at
once to the statement, that the Lord was delivered up by Pilate to be
crucified—an act which John mentions <span id="page_199">p. 199</span>
<span id="vi.vi.xiv-Page_199"></span>to have taken place about the sixth
hour;—I repeat, if any one adduces such an argument, let him understand
that many things have been passed by without record here, which occurred
in the interval when Pilate was engaged in looking out for some means by
which he could rescue Jesus from the Jews, and was exerting himself most
strenuously by every means in his power to withstand their maddened
desires. For Matthew says, “Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do,
then, with Jesus, which is called Christ? They all say, Let him be
crucified.” Then we affirm it to have been the third hour. And when the
same Matthew goes on to add the sentence, “But when Pilate saw that he
could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made,” we understand
that a period of two hours had passed, during the attempts made by
Pilate to effect the release of Jesus, and the tumults raised by the
Jews in their efforts to defeat him, and that the sixth hour had then
commenced, previous to the close of which those things took place which
are related as happening between the time when Pilate delivered up the
Lord and the oncoming of the darkness. Once more, as regards what
Matthew records above,—namely, “And when he was set down on the
judgment-seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do
with that just man; for I have suffered many things this day in a dream
because of him,”  <span id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393.md) —we remark,
that Pilate really took his seat upon the tribunal at a later point, but
that, among the earlier incidents which Matthew was recounting, the
account given of Pilate’s wife came into his mind, and he decided on
inserting it in this particular connection, with the view of preparing
us for understanding how Pilate had an especially urgent reason for
wishing, even on to the last, not to deliver Him up to the Jews.

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p17"></span>45. Luke, again, after mentioning how
Pilate said, “I will therefore chastise him and let him go,” tells us
that the whole multitude then cried out, “Away with this man, and
release unto us Barabbas.” <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394.md)
But perhaps they had not yet exclaimed, “Crucify him!” For Luke next
proceeds thus: “Pilate therefore, willing to release Jesus, spake again
to them. But they cried, saying, Crucify him, crucify him!” <span
id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395.md) This is understood to have been at
the third hour. Luke then continues in these terms: “And he said unto
them the third time, Why, what evil hath he done? I have found no cause
of death in him: I will therefore chastise him and let him go. And they
were instant with loud voices requiring that He might be crucified. And
the voices of them prevailed.” <span
id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396.md) Here, then, this evangelist also
makes it quite evident that there was a great tumult. With sufficient
accuracy for the purposes of my inquiry into the truth, we can further
gather how long the interval was after which he spoke to them in these
terms, “Why, what evil hath he done?” And when he adds thereafter, “They
were instant with loud voices, requiring that He might be crucified, and
the voices of them prevailed,” who can fail to perceive that this
clamour was made just because they saw that Pilate was unwilling to
deliver the Lord up to them? And, inasmuch as he was exceedingly
reluctant to give Him up, he did not certainly yield at present in a
moment, but in reality two hours and something more were passed by him
in that state of hesitancy.

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p21"></span>46. Interrogate John in like manner, and
see how strong this hesitancy was on Pilate’s part, and how he shrank
from so shameful a service. For this evangelist records these incidents
much more fully, although even he certainly does not mention all the
occurrences which took up these two hours and part of the sixth hour.
After telling us how Pilate scourged Jesus, and allowed the robe to be
put on Him in derision by the soldiers, and suffered Him to be subjected
to ill-treatment and many acts of mockery (all of which was permitted by
Pilate, as I believe, really with the view of mitigating their fury and
keeping them from persevering in their maddened desire for His death),
John continues his account in the following manner: “Pilate went forth
again, and saith unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye
may know that I find no fault in him. Then came Jesus forth, wearing the
crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them, Behold
the man!” <span id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397.md) The object of this
was, that they might gaze upon that spectacle of ignominy and be
appeased. But the evangelist proceeds again: “When the chief priests
therefore and officers saw Him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him,
crucify him!” <span id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398.md) It was then the
third hour, as we maintain. Mark also what follows: “Pilate saith unto
them, Take ye him, and crucify him; for I find no fault in him. The Jews
answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he
made himself the Son of God. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he
was the more afraid; and went again into the judgment-hall, and saith
unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. Then saith
Pilate unto Him, Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have
power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? Jesus answered,
Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee
from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater
sin. From thenceforth Pilate sought to release Him.” <span
id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399.md) Now, when it is said here <span
id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span id="vi.vi.xiv-Page_200"></span>that
“Pilate sought to release Him,” how long a space of time may we suppose
to have been spent in that effort, and how many things may have been
omitted here among the sayings which were uttered by Pilate, or the
contradictions which were raised by the Jews, until these Jews gave
expression to the words which moved him, and made him yield? For the
writer goes on thus: “But the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this
man go, thou art not Cæsar’s friend: whosoever maketh himself a king
speaketh against Cæsar. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he
brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment-seat, in a place that
is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha. And it was the
preparation of the passover, about the sixth hour.” <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400.md) Thus, then, between that
exclamation of the Jews when they first cried out, “Crucify him,” at
which period it was the third hour, and this moment when he sat down on
the judgment-seat, two hours had passed, which had been taken up with
Pilate’s attempts to delay matters and the tumults raised by the Jews;
and by this time the fifth hour was quite spent, and so much of the
sixth hour had been entered. Then the narrative goes on thus: “He saith
unto the Jews, Behold your King! But they cried out, Away with him, away
with him! crucify him!” <span id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401.md) But
not even now was Pilate so overcome by the apprehension of their
bringing a charge against himself as to be very ready to yield. For his
wife had sent to him when he was sitting at this time upon the
judgment-seat,—an incident which Matthew, who is the only one that
records it, has given by anticipation, introducing it before he comes to
its proper place (according to the order of time) in his narrative, and
bringing it in at another point which he judged opportune. In this way,
Pilate, still continuing his efforts to prevent further advances, said
then to them, “Shall I crucify your king?” Thereupon “the chief priests
answered, We have no king but Cæsar. Then delivered he Him therefore
unto them to be crucified.” <span id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402.md)
And in the time that passed when He was on the way, and when He was
crucified along with the two robbers, and when His garments were parted
and the possession of His coat was decided by lot, and the various deeds
of contumely were done to Him (for, while these different things were
going on, gibes were also cast at Him), the sixth hour was fully spent,
and the darkness came on, which is mentioned by Matthew, Mark, and
Luke. <span id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403.md)

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p29"></span>47. Let such impious pertinacity
therefore perish, and let it be believed that the Lord Jesus Christ was
crucified at once at the third hour by the voice of the Jews, and at the
sixth by the hands of the soldiers. For during these tumults on the part
of the Jews, and these agitations on the side of Pilate, upwards of two
hours elapsed from the time when they burst out with the cry, “Crucify
Him.” But again, even Mark, who studies brevity above all the other
evangelists, has been pleased to give a concise indication of Pilate’s
desire and of his efforts to save the Lord’s life. For, after giving us
this statement, “And they cried again, Crucify him” (in which he gives
us to understand that they had cried out before this, when they asked
that Barabbas might be released to them), he has appended these words:
“Then Pilate continued to say unto them, Why, what evil hath he
done?” <span id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404.md) Thus by one short
sentence he has given us an idea of matters which took a long time for
their transaction. At the same time, however, keeping in view the
correct apprehension of his meaning, he does not say, “Then Pilate
*said* unto them,” but expresses himself thus: “Then Pilate *continued
to say* unto them, Why, what evil hath he done?” For, if his phrase had
been “*said*,” <span id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405.md) we might have
understood him to mean that such words were uttered only once. But, by
adopting the terms, “*continued to say*,” <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406.md) he has made it clear enough to the
intelligent that Pilate spoke repeatedly, and in a number of ways. Let
us therefore consider how briefly Mark has expressed this as compared
with Matthew, how briefly Matthew as compared with Luke, how briefly
Luke as compared with John, while at the same time each of these writers
has introduced now one thing and now another peculiar to himself. In
fine, let us also consider how brief is even the narrative given by John
himself, as compared with the number of things which took place, and the
space of time occupied by their occurrence. And let us give up the
madness of opposition, and believe that two hours, and something more,
may quite well have passed in the interval referred to.

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p33"></span>48. If any one, however, asserts that if
this was the real state of the case, Mark might have mentioned the third
hour explicitly at the point at which it really was the third hour,
namely, when the voices of the Jews were lifted up demanding that the
Lord should be crucified; and, further, that he might have told us
plainly there that those vociferators did really crucify Him at that
time,—such a reasoner is simply imposing laws upon the historians of
truth in his own overweening pride. For he might as well <span
id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-Page_201"></span>maintain that if he were himself to be a
narrator of these occurrences, they ought all to be recorded just in the
same way and the same order by all other writers as they have been
recorded by himself. Let him therefore be content to reckon his own
notion inferior to that of Mark the evangelist, who has judged it right
to insert the statement just at the point at which it was suggested to
him by divine inspiration. For the recollections of those historians
have been ruled by the hand of Him who rules the waters, as it is
written, according to His own good pleasure. For the human memory
moves <span id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407.md) through a variety of
thoughts, and it is not in any man’s power to regulate either the
subject which comes into his mind or the time of its suggestion. Seeing,
then, that those holy and truthful men, in this matter of the order of
their narrations, committed the casualties of their recollections (if
such a phrase may be used) to the direction of the hidden power of God,
to whom nothing is casual, it does not become any mere man, in his low
estate, removed far from the vision of God, and sojourning distantly
from Him, to say, “This ought to have been introduced here;” for he is
utterly ignorant of the reason which led God to will its being inserted
in the place it occupies. The word of an apostle is to this effect: “But
if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.” <span
id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408.md) And again he says: “To the one
indeed we are the savour of life unto life; to the other, the savour of
death unto death;” and adds immediately, “And who is sufficient for
these things?” <span id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409.md) —that is to
say, who is sufficient to comprehend how righteously that is done? The
Lord Himself expresses the same when He says, “I am come that they which
see not might see, and that they which see might be made blind.” <span
id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410.md) For it is in the depth of the
riches of the knowledge and wisdom of God that it comes to pass that of
the same lump one vessel is made unto honour, and another unto
dishonour. <span id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411.md) And to flesh and
blood it is said, “O man, who art thou that repliest against God?” <span
id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412.md) Who, then, knows the mind of the
Lord in the matter now under consideration? or who hath been His
counsellor, <span id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413.md) where He has in
such wise ruled the hearts of these evangelists in their recollections,
and has raised them to so commanding a position of authority in the
sublime edifice of His Church, that those very things which are capable
of presenting the appearance of contradictions in them become the means
by which many are made blind, deservedly given over to the lusts of
their own heart, and to a reprobate mind; <span
id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414.md) and by which also many are
exercised in the thorough cultivation of a pious understanding, in
accordance with the hidden righteousness of the Almighty? For the
language of a prophet in speaking to the Lord is this: “Thy thoughts are
exceeding deep. An inconsiderate man will not know, and a foolish man
will not understand these things.” <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415.md)

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p43"></span>49. Moreover, I request and admonish
those who read the statement which, with the help of the Lord, has thus
been elaborated by us, to bear in mind this discourse, which I have
thought it needful to introduce in the present connection, in every
similar difficulty which may be raised in such inquiries, so that there
may be no necessity for repeating the same thing over and over again.
Besides, any one who is willing to clear himself of the hardness of
impiety, and to give his attention to the subject, will easily perceive
how opportune the place is in which Mark has inserted this notice of the
third hour, so that every one may there be led to bethink himself of an
hour at which the Jews really crucified the Lord, although they sought
to transfer the burden of the crime to the Romans, whether to the
leaders among them or to the soldiers, \[as we see\] when we come here
upon the record of what was done by the soldiers in the discharge of
their duty. For this writer says here, “And crucifying Him, they parted
His garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should take.” <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416.md) And to whom can this refer but to
the soldiers, as is made manifest in John’s narrative? Thus, lest any
one should leave the Jews out of account, and make the conception of so
great a crime lie against those soldiers, Mark gives us here the
statement, “And it was the third hour, and they crucified Him,”—his
object being to have those Jews rather discovered to be the real
crucifiers, who will be found by the careful investigator in a position
making it quite possible for them to have cried out for the Lord’s
crucifixion at the third hour, while he observes that what was done by
the soldiers took place at the sixth hour. <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417.md)

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p46"></span>50. At the same time, however, there are
not wanting persons who would have the time of the preparation—which is
referred to by John, when he says, “And it was the preparation of the
passover, about the sixth hour”—understood under this third hour of the
day, which was also the period at which Pilate sat down upon the
judgment-seat. In this way the completion of the said third hour would
appear to be the time when He was crucified, and when He was now hanging
on the tree. Other three hours must then be supposed to have passed, at
the end <span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-Page_202"></span>of which He gave up the ghost. According
to this idea, too, the darkness would have commenced with the hour at
which He died—that is to say, the sixth hour of the day—and have lasted
until the ninth. For these persons affirm that the preparation of the
passover of the Jews was indeed on the day which was followed by the day
of the Sabbath, because the days of unleavened bread began with the said
Sabbath; but that, nevertheless, the true passover, which was being
realized in the Lord’s passion, the passover not of the Jews, but of the
Christians, began to be prepared—that is, to have its *parasceue*—from
the ninth hour of the night onwards, inasmuch as the Lord was then being
prepared for being put to death by the Jews. For the term *parasceue*
means by interpretation “preparation.” Between the said ninth hour of
the night, therefore, and His crucifixion, the period occurs which is
called by John the sixth hour of the *parasceue*, and by Mark the third
hour of the day; so that, according to this view, Mark has not
introduced by way of recapitulation into his record the hour at which
the Jews cried out, “Crucify him, crucify him,” but has expressly
mentioned the third hour as the hour at which the Lord was nailed to the
tree. What believer would not receive this solution of the problem with
favour, were it only possible to find some point \[in the narrative of
incidents\] in connection with the said ninth hour, at which we could
suppose, in due consistency with other circumstances, the *parasceue* of
our passover—that is to say, the preparation of the death of Christ—to
have commenced. For, if we say that it began at the time when the Lord
was apprehended by the Jews, it was still but the first parts of the
night. If we hold that it was at the time when He was conducted to the
house of Caiaphas’ father-in-law, where He was also heard by the chief
priests, the cock had not crowed at all as yet, as we gather from
Peter’s denial, which took place only when the cock was heard. Again, if
we suppose it was at the time when He was delivered up to Pilate, we
have in the plainest terms the statement of Scripture, to the effect
that by this time it was morning. Consequently, it only remains for us
to understand that this *parasceue* of the passover—that is to say, the
preparation for the death of the Lord—commenced at the period when all
the chief priests, in whose presence He was first heard, answered and
said, “He is guilty of death,” an utterance which we find reported both
by Matthew and by Mark; <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418.md) so
that they are taken to have introduced, in the form of a recapitulation,
at a later stage, facts relating to the denial of Peter, which in point
of historical order had taken place at an earlier point. And it is
nothing unreasonable to conjecture, that the time at which, as I have
said, they pronounced Him guilty of death, may very well have been the
ninth hour of the night, between which time and the hour at which Pilate
sat down on the judgment-seat there came in this sixth hour, as it is
called—not, however, the sixth hour of the day, but that of the
*parasceue*—that is to say, the preparation for the sacrifice of the
Lord, which is the true passover. And, on this theory, the Lord was
suspended on the tree when the sixth hour of the same *parasceue* was
completed, which occurred at the completion of the third hour of the
day. <span id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419.md) We may make our choice,
therefore, between this view and the other, which supposes Mark to have
introduced the third hour by way of reminiscence, and to have had it
especially in view, in mentioning the hour there, to suggest the fact of
the condemnation brought upon the Jews in the matter of the Lord’s
crucifixion, in so far as they are understood to have been in a position
to raise the clamour for His crucifixion to such an effect that we may
hold them to have been the persons who actually crucified Him, rather
than the men by whose hands He was suspended on the tree; just as the
centurion, already referred to, approached the Lord in a more genuine
sense than could be said of those friends whom He sent \[on the
matter-of-fact mission\]. <span id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420.md) But
whichever of these two views we adopt, unquestionably a solution is
found for this problem on the subject of the hour of the Lord’s passion,
which is most remarkably apt at once to excite the impudence of the
contentious and to agitate the inexperience of the weak.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[197:1385](1060192.htm#fr_1384.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p3"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p3.1"></span>.
\[No notice is taken of the different forms the “title” on the cross,
recorded by the evangelists.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[197:1386](1060192.htm#fr_1385.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p4"></span> [Mark xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[197:1387](1060192.htm#fr_1386.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p5"></span> [John xix.
13-16](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[197:1388](1060192.htm#fr_1387.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p7"></span> [Luke ix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[197:1389](1060192.htm#fr_1388.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p8"></span> [Matt.
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001.md), [Mark
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[198:1390](1060192.htm#fr_1389.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p9"></span> [Matt.
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045.md), [Mark
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033.md), [Luke
23:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#044.md)<span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[198:1391](1060192.htm#fr_1390.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p11"></span> [Mark xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[198:1392](1060192.htm#fr_1391.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p12"></span> [John xix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[198:1393](1060192.htm#fr_1392.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p13"></span> [John xviii.
29-31](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#029.md)<span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[199:1394](1060192.htm#fr_1393.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p16"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[199:1395](1060192.htm#fr_1394.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p18"></span> [Luke
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#016.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#018.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[199:1396](1060192.htm#fr_1395.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p19"></span> [Luke
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#021.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[199:1397](1060192.htm#fr_1396.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p20"></span> [Luke
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#023.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[199:1398](1060192.htm#fr_1397.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p22"></span> [John
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[199:1399](1060192.htm#fr_1398.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p23"></span> [John xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[199:1400](1060192.htm#fr_1399.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p24"></span> [John xix.
6-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006.md)<span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[200:1401](1060192.htm#fr_1400.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p25"></span> [John xix.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012.md)<span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[200:1402](1060192.htm#fr_1401.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p26"></span> [John xix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[200:1403](1060192.htm#fr_1402.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p27"></span> [John
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[200:1404](1060192.htm#fr_1403.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p28"></span> \[The arrangement of the various
details is open to discussion; but the probability is, that the virtual
surrender of Pilate to the demand of the Jews took place about the third
hour (9 <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p28.1"></span>A.M.</span>), and that it was nearly two
hours before the crucifixion took place.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[200:1405](1060192.htm#fr_1404.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p30"></span> [Mark
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[200:1406](1060192.htm#fr_1405.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p31"></span> *Dixit*.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[200:1407](1060192.htm#fr_1406.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p32"></span> *Dicebat*. (The Greek also has the
imperfect, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p32.1"></span>ἔλεγεν</span>. But in the use of this verb
in the New Testament the continuous force of the imperfect cannot be
insisted upon, as many examples will show. The conclusion of Augustin is
correct, despite the insufficiency of this argument.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[201:1408](1060192.htm#fr_1407.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p34"></span> *Fluitat* = floats.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[201:1409](1060192.htm#fr_1408.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p35"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[201:1410](1060192.htm#fr_1409.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p36"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[201:1411](1060192.htm#fr_1410.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p37"></span> [John ix.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[201:1412](1060192.htm#fr_1411.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p38"></span> [Rom. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[201:1413](1060192.htm#fr_1412.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p39"></span> [Rom. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[201:1414](1060192.htm#fr_1413.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p40"></span> [Rom. xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[201:1415](1060192.htm#fr_1414.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p41"></span> [Rom. i.
24-28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024.md)<span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[201:1416](1060192.htm#fr_1415.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p42"></span> [Ps.
92:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#006.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[201:1417](1060192.htm#fr_1416.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p44"></span> [Mark xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#024.md)<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[201:1418](1060192.htm#fr_1417.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p45"></span> \[There is so much force in the
positions of Augustin in regard to the time of day, that one may
overlook the irrelevant arguments he introduces. He at least candidly
accepts the readings before him. The supposition of an early confusion
of the numbers has no support, and such an alteration is altogether
unlikely.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[202:1419](1060192.htm#fr_1418.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p47"></span> [Matt.
26:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#066.md), [Mark
14:64](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#064.md)<span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[202:1420](1060192.htm#fr_1419.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p48"></span> \[This view is extremely fanciful.
“Preparation” was a Jewish term, with a distinct meaning. In early
Christian times it meant Friday. To modify the sense is impossible.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[202:1421](1060192.htm#fr_1420.md) <span
id="vi.vi.xiv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.xiv-p49"></span> See above, Book ii. ch. 20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](1060193.md)
