[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060025)  [Next](1060027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xx"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX.</span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p2"></span>62. And, indeed, in these three classes of
examples, I see that no class of injury is passed over. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) For all matters in which we suffer any
injustice are divided into two classes: of which the one is, where
restitution cannot be made; the other, where it can. But in that case
where restitution cannot be made, a compensation in revenge is usually
sought. For what does it profit, that on being struck you strike in
return? Is that part of the body which was injured for that reason
restored to its original condition? But an excited mind desires such
alleviations. Things of that sort, however, afford no pleasure to a
healthy and firm one; nay, such an one judges rather that the other’s
infirmity is to be compassionately borne with, than that his own (which
has no existence) should be soothed by the punishment of another.

<span id="v.ii.xx-p4"></span>63. Nor are we thus precluded from
inflicting such punishment \[requital\] <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) as avails for correction, and as
compassion itself dictates; nor does it stand in the way of that course
proposed, where one is prepared to endure more at the hand of him whom
he wishes to set right. But no one is fit for inflicting this punishment
except the man who, by the greatness of his love, has overcome that
hatred wherewith those are wont to be inflamed who wish to avenge
themselves. For it is not to be feared that parents would seem to hate a
little son when, on committing an offence, he is beaten by them that he
may not go on offending. And certainly the perfection of love is set
before us by the imitation of God the Father Himself when it is said in
what follows: “Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) which persecute
you;” and yet it is said of Him by the prophet, “For whom the Lord
loveth He correcteth; yea, He scourgeth every son whom He
receiveth.” <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) The Lord also says,
“The servant that knows not <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) his
Lord’s will, and does things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
stripes; but the servant that knows his Lord’s will, and does things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with many stripes.” <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) No more, therefore, is sought for,
except that he should punish to whom, in the natural order of things,
the power is given; and that he should punish with the same goodwill
which a father has towards his little son, whom by reason of his youth
he cannot yet hate. For from this source the most suitable example is
drawn, in order that it may be sufficiently manifest that sin can be
punished in love rather than be left unpunished; so that one may wish
him on whom he inflicts it not to be miserable by means of punishment,
but to be happy by means of correction, yet be prepared, if need be, to
endure with equanimity more injuries inflicted by him whom he wishes to
be corrected, whether he may have the power of putting restraint upon
him or not.

<span id="v.ii.xx-p10"></span>64. But great and holy men, although they
at the time knew excellently well that that death which separates the
soul from the body is not to be dreaded, yet, in accordance with the
sentiment of those who might fear it, punished some sins with death,
both because the living were struck with a salutary fear, and because it
was not death itself that would injure those who were being punished
with death, but sin, which might be increased if they continued to live.
They did not judge rashly on whom God had bestowed such a power of
judging. Hence it is <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="v.ii.xx-Page_28"></span>that Elijah inflicted death on many, both
with his own hand <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) and by calling
down fire from heaven; <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) as was
done also without rashness by many other great and godlike men, in the
same spirit of concern for the good of humanity. And when the disciples
had quoted an example from this Elias, mentioning to the Lord what had
been done by him, in order that He might give to themselves also the
power of calling down fire from heaven to consume those who would not
show Him hospitality, the Lord reproved in them, not the example of the
holy prophet, but their ignorance in respect to taking vengeance, their
knowledge being as yet elementary; <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) perceiving that they did not in love
desire correction, but in hated desired revenge. Accordingly, after He
had taught them what it was to love one’s neighbour as oneself, and when
the Holy Spirit had been poured out, whom, at the end of ten days after
His ascension, He sent from above, as He had promised, <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) there were not wanting such acts of
vengeance, although much more rarely than in the Old Testament. For
there, for the most part, as servants they were kept down by fear; but
here mostly as free they were nourished by love. For at the words of the
Apostle Peter also, Ananias and his wife, as we read in the Acts of the
Apostles, fell down dead, and were not raised to life again, but buried.

<span id="v.ii.xx-p15"></span>65. But if the heretics who are opposed to
the Old Testament <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) will not
credit this book, let them contemplate the Apostle Paul, whose writings
they read along with us, saying with respect to a certain sinner whom he
delivered over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, “that the
spirit may be saved.” <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) And if
they will not here understand death (for perhaps it is uncertain), let
them acknowledge that punishment \[requital\] of some kind or other was
inflicted by the apostle through the instrumentality of Satan; and that
he did this not in hatred, but in love, is made plain by that addition,
“that the spirit may be saved.” Or let them notice what we say in those
books to which they themselves attribute great authority, where it is
written that the Apostle Thomas imprecated on a certain man, by whom he
had been struck with the palm of the hand, the punishment of death in a
very cruel form, while yet commending his soul to God, that it might be
spared in the world to come,—whose hand, torn from the rest of his body
after he had been killed by a lion, a dog brought to the table at which
the apostle was feasting. It is allowable for us not to credit this
writing, for it is not in the catholic canon; yet they both read it, and
honour it as being thoroughly uncorrupted and thoroughly truthful, who
rage very fiercely (with I know not what blindness) against the
corporeal punishments which are in the Old Testament, being altogether
ignorant in what spirit and at what stage in the orderly distribution of
times they were inflicted.

<span id="v.ii.xx-p18"></span>66. Hence, in this class of injuries which
is atoned for by punishment, such a measure will be preserved by
Christians, that, on an injury being received, the mind will not mount
up into hatred, but will be ready, in compassion for the infirmity, to
endure even more; nor will it neglect the correction, which it can
employ either by advice, or by authority, or by \[the exercise of\]
power. There is another class of injuries, where complete restitution is
possible, of which there are two species: the one referring to money,
the other to labour. And therefore examples are subjoined: of the former
in the case of the coat and cloak, of the latter in the case of the
compulsory service of one and two miles; for a garment may be given
back, and he whom you have assisted by labour may also assist you, if it
should be necessary. Unless, perhaps, the distinction should rather be
drawn in this way: that the first case which is supposed, in reference
to the cheek being struck, means all injuries that are inflicted by the
wicked in such a way that restitution cannot be made except by
punishment; and that the second case which is supposed, in reference to
the garment, means all injuries where restitution can be made without
punishment; and therefore, perhaps, it is added, “if any man will sue
thee at the law,” because what is taken away by means of a judicial
sentence is not supposed to be taken away with such a degree of violence
as that punishment is due; but that the third case is composed of both,
so that restitution may be made both without punishment and with it. For
the man who violently exacts labour to which he has no claim, without
any judicial process, as he does who wickedly compels a man to go with
him, and forces in an unlawful way assistance to be rendered to himself
by one who is unwilling, is able both to pay the penalty of his
wickedness and to repay the labour, if he who endured the wrong should
ask it again. In all these classes of injuries, therefore, the Lord
teaches that the disposition of a Christian ought to be most patient and
compassionate, and thoroughly prepared to endure more.

<span id="v.ii.xx-p19"></span>67. But since it is a small matter merely
to abstain from injuring, unless you also confer a benefit as far as you
can, He therefore goes on to say, “Give to every one that asketh thee,
and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away.” “To every
one that asketh,” says He; not, Everything to him that asketh: so that
you are to give that which you can honestly and <span id="page_29">p.
29</span> <span id="v.ii.xx-Page_29"></span>justly give. For what if he
should ask money, wherewith he may endeavour to oppress an innocent man?
what if, in short, he should ask something unchaste? <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) But not to recount many examples,
which are in fact innumerable, that certainly is to be given which may
hurt neither thyself nor the other party, as far as can be known or
supposed by man; and in the case of him to whom you have justly denied
what he asks, justice itself is to be made known, so that you may not
send him away empty. Thus you will give to every one that asketh you,
although you will not always give what he asks; and you will sometimes
give something better, when you have set him right who was making unjust
requests.

<span id="v.ii.xx-p21"></span>68. Then, as to what He says, “From him
that would borrow of thee turn not thou away,” it is to be referred to
the mind; for God loveth a cheerful giver. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) Moreover, every one who accepts
anything borrows, even if he himself is not going to pay it; for
inasmuch as God pays back more to the merciful, whosoever does a
kindness lends at interest. Or if it does not seem good to understand
the borrower in any other sense than of him who accepts of anything with
the intention of repaying it, we must understand the Lord to have
included those two methods of doing a favour. For we either give in a
present what we give in the exercise of benevolence, or we lend to one
who will repay us. And frequently men who, setting before them the
divine reward, are prepared to give away in a present, become slow to
give what is asked in loan, as if they were destined to get nothing in
return from God, inasmuch as he who receives pays back the thing which
is given him. Rightly, therefore, does the divine authority exhort us to
this mode of bestowing a favour, saying, “And from him that would borrow
of thee turn not thou away:” *i.e.*, do not alienate your goodwill from
him who asks it, both because your money will be useless, and because
God will not pay you back, inasmuch as the man has done so; but when you
do that from a regard to God’s precept, it cannot be unfruitful with Him
who gives these commands. <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[27:186](1060026.htm#fr_185) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p3"></span> *Exemplum citatur injuriæ privatæ,
forensis, curialis* (Bengel).

<span id="fn_186"></span>[27:187](1060026.htm#fr_186) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p5"></span> *Vindicta*.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[27:188](1060026.htm#fr_187) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p6"></span> *Pro eis qui vos persequuntur*; Vulgate,
*pro persequentibus*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[27:189](1060026.htm#fr_188) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p7"></span> [Prov. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012)<span id="v.ii.xx-p7.1"></span>. So
the LXX. English version: “even as a father the son in whom he
delighteth,” following the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[27:190](1060026.htm#fr_189) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p8"></span> *Nescit*; Vulgate, *non cognovit*.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[27:191](1060026.htm#fr_190) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p9"></span> [Luke
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048),
[47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span id="v.ii.xx-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[28:192](1060026.htm#fr_191) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p11"></span> [1 Kings xviii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040)<span id="v.ii.xx-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[28:193](1060026.htm#fr_192) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p12"></span> [2 Kings i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#010)<span id="v.ii.xx-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[28:194](1060026.htm#fr_193) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p13"></span> [Luke ix.
52-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#052)<span id="v.ii.xx-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[28:195](1060026.htm#fr_194) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p14"></span> [Acts ii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.xx-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[28:196](1060026.htm#fr_195) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p16"></span> *i.e.*, The Manicheans.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[28:197](1060026.htm#fr_196) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p17"></span> [1 Cor. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span id="v.ii.xx-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[29:198](1060026.htm#fr_197) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p20"></span> “To give everything to every one—the
sword to the madman, the alms to the impostor, the criminal request to
the temptress—would be to act as the enemy of others and ourselves”
(Alford). Paul’s *willingness* to spend and be spent illustrates a
proper conformity to the precept.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[29:199](1060026.htm#fr_198) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p22"></span> [2 Cor. ix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.xx-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[29:200](1060026.htm#fr_199) <span
id="v.ii.xx-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xx-p23"></span> This section, which concerns the *law of
retaliation*, grew out of a rule of every-day life which the Pharisees
constructed upon a principle of judicature laid down, [Exod. xxi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#024)<span id="v.ii.xx-p23.1"></span>
(Tholuck). The spirit, not the exact letter, of the illustrations is to
be observed, and, when the spirit of the precept would demand it, the
exact letter. Christians are taught to bear witness by enduring,
yielding, and giving. “Sin is to be conquered by being made to feel the
power of goodness.” Christ gave a good example at His trial, without
following the letter of His precept here; and Paul followed Him ([1 Cor.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span id="v.ii.xx-p23.2"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](1060027)
