[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060311)  [Next](1060313) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xcv"></span> <span id="vii.xcv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xcv-p1.1"></span>Sermon XCIII.</span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xcv-p2.1"></span>\[CXLIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xcv-p3.1"></span>*[John xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span id="vii.xcv-p3.2"></span>, “I
tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away,” etc.*

<span id="vii.xcv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xcv-p4.1"></span>The</span> medicine for all the wounds of the
soul, and the one propitiation for the offences of men, is to believe on
Christ; nor can any one be cleansed at all, whether from original sin
which he derived from Adam, <span id="fr_4239"></span>[4240](#fn_4239)
in whom all men have sinned, and become by nature children of wrath; or
from the sins which they have themselves added, by not resisting the
concupiscence of the flesh, but by following and serving it in unclean
and injurious deeds: unless by faith they are united and compacted into
His Body, who was conceived without any enticement of the flesh and
deadly pleasure, and whom His Mother nourished in her womb without sin,
and “Who did no sin, neither was deceit found in His Mouth.” <span
id="fr_4240"></span>[4241](#fn_4240) They verily who believe on Him,
become the children of God; because they are born of God by the grace of
adoption, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ our Lord. Wherefore,
dearly Beloved, it is with good reason that the same Lord and our
Saviour mentions this one sin only, of which the Holy Ghost convinces
the world, that it believeth not on Him. “I tell you the truth,” He
saith, “It is expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away,
the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send Him
unto you. And when He shall come, He will convince the world of sin, and
of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on
Me. Of righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye shall see Me no
more. Of judgment, because the prince of this world is already
judged.” <span id="fr_4241"></span>[4242](#fn_4241)

<span id="vii.xcv-p8"></span>2. Of this one only sin then He would have
the world to be convinced, that they believe not on Him; to wit, because
by believing on Him all sins are loosed, He would have this one imputed
by which the rest are bound. And because by believing they are born of
God, and become children of God; “For,” saith he, “to them gave He power
to become the sons of God, to them that believe on Him.” <span
id="fr_4242"></span>[4243](#fn_4242) Whoso then believeth on the Son of
God, in so far as he adhereth to Him, and becometh himself also by
adoption a son and heir of God, and a joint-heir with Christ, in so far
he sinneth not. Whence John saith, “Whosoever is born of God sinneth
not.” <span id="fr_4243"></span>[4244](#fn_4243) And therefore the sin
of which the world is convinced is this, that they believe not on Him.
This is the sin of which He also saith, “If I had not come, they had not
had sin.” <span id="fr_4244"></span>[4245](#fn_4244) For what! had they
not innumerable other sins? But by His coming this one sin was added to
them that believed not, by which the rest should be retained. Whereas in
them that believe, because this one was wanting, it was brought to pass
that all should be remitted to them that believe. Nor is it with any
other view that the Apostle Paul saith, “All have sinned, and have need
of the glory of God; <span id="fr_4245"></span>[4246](#fn_4245) that
“whosoever believeth on Him, should not be confounded;” <span
id="fr_4246"></span>[4247](#fn_4246) as the Psalm also saith “Come ye
unto Him, and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be
confounded.” <span id="fr_4247"></span>[4248](#fn_4247) Whoso then
glorieth in himself shall be confounded; for he shall not be found
without sins. Accordingly he only shall not be confounded who glorieth
in the Lord. “For all have sinned, and have need of the glory of God.”
And so when he was speaking of the infidelity of the Jews, he did not
say, “For if some of them have sinned, shall their sin make the faith of
God of none effect?” For how should he say, “If some of them have
sinned;” when he said himself, “For all have sinned”? But he said, “If
some of them believed not, shall their unbelief make the faith of God of
none effect?” <span id="fr_4248"></span>[4249](#fn_4248) That he might
<span id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span
id="vii.xcv-Page_537"></span>point out more expressly this sin, by which
alone the door is closed against the rest that they by the grace of God
should not be remitted. Of which one sin by the coming of the Holy
Ghost, that is by the gift of His grace, which is granted to the
faithful, the world is convinced, in the Lord’s words, “Of sin, because
they believed not on Me.”

<span id="vii.xcv-p16"></span>3. Now there would be no great merit and
glorious blessedness in believing, if the Lord had always appeared in
His Risen Body to the eyes of men. The Holy Ghost then hath brought this
great gift to them that should believe, that Him whom they should not
see with the eyes of flesh, they might with a mind sobered from carnal
desires, and inebriated with spiritual longings, sigh after. Whence it
was that when that disciple who had said that he would not believe,
unless he touched with the hands His Scars, after he had handled the
Lord’s Body, cried out as though awaking from sleep, “My Lord and my
God;” the Lord said to him, “Because thou hast seen Me, thou hast
believed; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed.” <span id="fr_4249"></span>[4250](#fn_4249) This blessedness
hath the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, brought to us, that the form of a
servant which He took from the Virgin’s womb, being removed from the
eyes of flesh, the purified eye of the mind might be directed to This
Form of God, in which He continued equal with the Father, even when He
vouchsafed to appear in the Flesh; so as that with the Same Spirit
filled the Apostle might say, “Though we have known Christ after the
flesh; yet now we know Him so no longer.”  <span
id="fr_4250"></span>[4251](#fn_4250) Because even the Flesh of Christ he
knew not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, who, not by touching in
curiosity, but in believing assured, acknowledgeth the power of His
Resurrection; not saying in his heart, “Who hath ascended into heaven?
that is, to bring Christ down; or, Who hath descended into the deep?
that is, to bring back Christ from the dead.” “But,” saith he, “the word
is nigh thee, in thy mouth, that Jesus is the Lord; and if thou shalt
believe in thine heart that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou
shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” <span
id="fr_4251"></span>[4252](#fn_4251) These, Brethren, are the words of
the Apostle, pouring them forth with the holy inebriation of the Holy
Ghost Himself.

<span id="vii.xcv-p20"></span>4. Forasmuch then as we could in no way
have had this blessedness by which we see not and yet believe, unless we
received it of the Holy Ghost; it is with good reason said, “It is
expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send Him unto
you.” <span id="fr_4252"></span>[4253](#fn_4252) By His Divinity indeed
He is with us always; but unless He had in Body gone away from us, we
had always seen His Body after the flesh. and never believed after a
spiritual sort; by the which belief justified and blessed we might
attain <span id="fr_4253"></span>[4254](#fn_4253) with cleansed hearts
to contemplate the Very Word, God with God, “by whom all things were
made,” and “who was made Flesh, that He might dwell among us.” And if
not with the contact of the hand, but “with the heart man believeth unto
righteousness;” with good reason is the world, which will not believe
save what it sees, convinced of our righteousness. Now that we might
have that righteousness of faith of which the unbelieving world should
be convinced, therefore said the Lord, “Of righteousness, because I go
to the Father, and ye shall see Me no more.” As if He had said, “This
shall be your righteousness, that ye believe on Me, the Mediator, of
whom ye shall be most fully assured that He is risen again and gone to
the Father, though ye see Him not after the Flesh; that by Him
reconciled, ye may be able to see God after the Spirit.” Whence He saith
to the woman who represents the Church, when she fell at His Feet after
His Resurrection, “Touch Me not, for I am not yet ascended to the
Father.” <span id="fr_4254"></span>[4255](#fn_4254) Which expression is
understood mystically, thus. “Believe not in Me after a carnal manner by
means of bodily contact; but thou shalt believe after a spiritual
manner; that is, with a spiritual faith shalt touch Me, when I shall
have ascended to the Father.” For, “blessed are they who do not see, and
believe.” And this is the righteousness of faith, of which the world,
which hath it not, is convinced of us who are not without it; for “the
just liveth by faith.”  <span id="fr_4255"></span>[4256](#fn_4255)
Whether it be then that as rising again in Him, and in Him coming to the
Father, we are invisibly and in justification perfected; or that as not
seeing and yet believing we live by faith, for that “the just liveth by
faith;” with these meanings said He, “Of righteousness, because I go to
the Father, and ye shall see Me no more.”

<span id="vii.xcv-p25"></span>5. Nor let the world excuse itself by
this, that it is hindered by the devil from believing on Christ. For to
believers the prince of the world is cast out, <span
id="fr_4256"></span>[4257](#fn_4256) that he work no more in the hearts
of men whom Christ hath begun to possess by faith; as he worketh in the
children of unbelief; <span id="fr_4257"></span>[4258](#fn_4257) whom he
is constantly stirring up to tempt and disturb the righteous. For
because he is cast out, who once had dominion interiorly he wageth war
exteriorly. Although then by means of his persecutions, “the Lord doth
direct the meek in judgment;” <span id="fr_4258"></span>[4259](#fn_4258)
nevertheless in this very fact of <span id="page_538">p. 538</span>
<span id="vii.xcv-Page_538"></span>his being cast out, is he “judged
already.” And of this, “judgment” is the world convinced; for in vain
doth he who will not believe on Christ complain of the devil whom,
judged, that is, cast out, and for the exercising of us allowed to
attack us from without, not only men, but even women, and boys, and
girls, Martyrs have overcome. Now in whom have they overcome, but in Him
on whom they have believed, and whom seeing not, they loved, and by
whose dominion in their hearts they have got rid of a most
oppressive <span id="fr_4259"></span>[4260](#fn_4259) lord. And all this
by grace, by the gift, that is, of the Holy Ghost. Rightly then doth the
Same Spirit convince the world, both of “sin,” because it believeth not
on Christ; “and of righteousness,” because they who have had the will
have believed, though Him on whom they believed they saw not; and by His
Resurrection have hoped that themselves also should be in the
resurrection perfected; “and of judgment,” because if they had had the
will to believe, they could be hindered by none, “for that the prince of
this world hath been judged already.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4239"></span>[536:4240](1060312.htm#fr_4239) <span
id="vii.xcv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p5"></span> [Ps. li.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="vii.xcv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4240"></span>[536:4241](1060312.htm#fr_4240) <span
id="vii.xcv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p6"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="vii.xcv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4241"></span>[536:4242](1060312.htm#fr_4241) <span
id="vii.xcv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p7"></span> [John xvi.
7-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span id="vii.xcv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4242"></span>[536:4243](1060312.htm#fr_4242) <span
id="vii.xcv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p9"></span> [John i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="vii.xcv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4243"></span>[536:4244](1060312.htm#fr_4243) <span
id="vii.xcv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p10"></span> [1 John iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009)<span id="vii.xcv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4244"></span>[536:4245](1060312.htm#fr_4244) <span
id="vii.xcv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p11"></span> [John xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)<span id="vii.xcv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4245"></span>[536:4246](1060312.htm#fr_4245) <span
id="vii.xcv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p12"></span> [Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="vii.xcv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4246"></span>[536:4247](1060312.htm#fr_4246) <span
id="vii.xcv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p13"></span> [Rom. ix.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)<span id="vii.xcv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4247"></span>[536:4248](1060312.htm#fr_4247) <span
id="vii.xcv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p14"></span> [Ps.
34.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)<span id="vii.xcv-p14.1"></span>,
Sept. (xxxiv. 5, English version).

<span id="fn_4248"></span>[536:4249](1060312.htm#fr_4248) <span
id="vii.xcv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p15"></span> [Rom. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003)<span id="vii.xcv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4249"></span>[537:4250](1060312.htm#fr_4249) <span
id="vii.xcv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p17"></span> [John xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)<span id="vii.xcv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4250"></span>[537:4251](1060312.htm#fr_4250) <span
id="vii.xcv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p18"></span> [2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)<span id="vii.xcv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4251"></span>[537:4252](1060312.htm#fr_4251) <span
id="vii.xcv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p19"></span> [Rom. x.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span id="vii.xcv-p19.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4252"></span>[537:4253](1060312.htm#fr_4252) <span
id="vii.xcv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p21"></span> [John xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span id="vii.xcv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4253"></span>[537:4254](1060312.htm#fr_4253) <span
id="vii.xcv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p22"></span> *Mereremur*.

<span id="fn_4254"></span>[537:4255](1060312.htm#fr_4254) <span
id="vii.xcv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p23"></span> [John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="vii.xcv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4255"></span>[537:4256](1060312.htm#fr_4255) <span
id="vii.xcv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p24"></span> [Hab.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004), [Rom.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="vii.xcv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4256"></span>[537:4257](1060312.htm#fr_4256) <span
id="vii.xcv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p26"></span> [John xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)<span id="vii.xcv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4257"></span>[537:4258](1060312.htm#fr_4257) <span
id="vii.xcv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p27"></span> [Eph. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span id="vii.xcv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4258"></span>[537:4259](1060312.htm#fr_4258) <span
id="vii.xcv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p28"></span> [Ps. xxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009)<span id="vii.xcv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4259"></span>[538:4260](1060312.htm#fr_4259) <span
id="vii.xcv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xcv-p29"></span> *Pessimo*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XCIV](1060313)
