[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060053)  [Next](1060055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p2"></span>78. Here, therefore, those who promise a
wisdom and a knowledge of the truth which they do not possess, are
especially to be guarded against; as, for instance, heretics, who
frequently commend themselves on account of their fewness. And hence,
when He had said that there are few who find the strait gate and the
narrow way, lest they \[the heretics\] should falsely substitute
themselves under the pretext of their fewness, He immediately added,
“Beware of false prophets, <span id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) which
come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.”
But such parties do not deceive the single eye, which knows how to
distinguish a tree by its fruits. For He says: “Ye shall know them by
their fruits.” Then He adds the similitudes: “Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so, every good tree bringeth forth
good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth
good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit <span
id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.”

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p5"></span>79. And in \[the interpretation of\]
this passage we must be very much on our guard against the error of
those who judge from these same two trees that there are two original
natures, the one of which belongs to God, but the other neither belongs
to God nor springs from Him. And this error has both been already
discussed in other books \[of ours\] <span
id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) very copiously, and if that is still
too little, will be discussed again; but at present we have merely to
show that the two trees before us do not help them. In the first place,
because it is so clear that He is speaking of men, that whoever reads
what goes before and what follows will wonder at their blindness.
Secondly, they fix their attention on what is said, “A good tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit,” and therefore think that neither can it happen that an evil soul
should be changed into something better, nor a good one into something
worse; as if it were said, A good tree cannot become evil, nor an evil
tree good. But it is said, “A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit,
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.” For the tree is
certainly the soul itself, *i.e.* the man himself, but the fruits are
the works of the man; an evil man, therefore, cannot perform good works,
nor a good man evil works. If an evil man, therefore, wishes to perform
good works, let him first become good. So the Lord Himself says in
another passage more plainly: “Either make the tree good, or make the
tree bad.” But if He were figuratively representing the two natures of
such parties by these two trees, He would not say, “Make:” for who of
the sons of men can make a nature? Then also in that passage, when He
had made mention of these two trees, He added, “Ye hypocrites, how can
ye, being evil, speak good things?” <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) As long, therefore, as any one is
evil, he cannot bring forth good fruits; for if he were to bring forth
good fruits, he would no longer be evil. So it might most truly have
been said, snow cannot be warm; for when it begins to be warm, we no
longer call it snow, but water. It may therefore come about, that what
was snow is no longer so; but it cannot happen that snow should be warm.
So it may come about, that he who was evil is no longer evil; it cannot,
however, happen that an evil man should do good. And although he is
sometimes useful, this is not the man’s own doing; but it is done
through him, in virtue of the arrangements of divine providence: as, for
instance, it is said of the Pharisees, “What they bid you, do; but what
they do, do not consent to do.” This very circumstance, that they spoke
things that were good, and that the things which they spoke were
usefully listened to and done, was not a matter belonging to them: for,
says He, “they sit in Moses’ seat.” <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) It was, therefore, when engaged
through divine providence in preaching the law of God, that they were
able to be useful to their <span id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span
id="v.iii.xxiv-Page_61"></span>hearers, although they were not so to
themselves. Respecting such it is said in another place by the prophet,
“They have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns;” <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) because they teach what is good, and
do what is evil. Those, therefore, who listened to them, and did what
was said by them, did not gather grapes of thorns, but through the
thorns gathered grapes of the vine: just as, were any one to thrust his
hand through a hedge, or were at least to gather a grape from a vine
which was entangled in a hedge, that would not be the fruit of the
thorns, but of the vine.

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p10"></span>80. The question, indeed, is most
rightly put, What are the fruits He would wish us to attend to, whereby
we might know the tree? For many reckon among the fruits certain things
which belong to the sheep’s clothing, and in this way are deceived by
wolves: as, for instance, either fastings, or prayers, or almsgivings;
but unless all of these things could be done even by hypocrites, He
would not say above, “Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before
men, to be seen of them.” And after prefixing this sentence, He goes on
to speak of those very three things, almsgiving, prayer, fasting. For
many give largely to the poor, not from compassion, but from vanity; and
many pray, or rather seem to pray, while not keeping God in view, but
desiring to please men; and many fast, and make a wonderful show of
abstinence before those to whom such things appear difficult, and by
whom they are reckoned worthy of honour: and catch them with artifices
of this sort, while they hold up to view one thing for the purpose of
deceiving, and put forth another for the purpose of preying upon or
killing those who cannot see the wolves under that sheep’s clothing.
These, therefore, are not the fruits by which He admonishes us that the
tree is known. For such things, when they are done with a good intention
in sincerity, are the appropriate clothing of sheep; but when they are
done in wicked deception, they cover nothing else but wolves. But the
sheep ought not on this account to hate their own clothing, because the
wolves often conceal themselves therein.

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p11"></span>81. What the fruits are by the finding
of which we may know an evil tree, the apostle tells us: “Now the works
of the flesh are manifest, which are these; adulteries, fornications,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatreds, variances,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before,
as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things
shall not inherit the kingdom of God.” And what the fruits are by which
we may know a good tree, the very same apostle goes on to tell us: “But
the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance.” <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) It must be known, indeed, that “joy”
stands here in a strict and proper sense; for bad men are, strictly
speaking, not said to rejoice, but to make extravagant demonstrations of
joy: just as we have said above, that “will” which the wicked do not
possess, stands in a strict sense where it is said, “All things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.”
In accordance with that strict sense of the word, in virtue of which joy
is spoken of only in the good, the prophet also speaks, saying:
“Rejoicing is not for the wicked, saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) So also “faith” stands, not certainly
as meaning any kind of it, but true faith: and the other things which
find a place here have certain resemblances of their own in bad men and
deceivers; so that they entirely mislead, unless one has the pure and
single eye by which he may know such things. It is accordingly the best
arrangement, that the cleansing of the eye is first discussed, and then
mention is made of what things were to be guarded against.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_461"></span>[60:462](1060054.htm#fr_461) <span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p3"></span> *Cavete a pseudoprophetis*; Vulgate,
*attendite a falsis prophetis*.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[60:463](1060054.htm#fr_462) <span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p4"></span> Excellency of fruitage is sanctity of
life (*Bonitas fructuum est sanctitas vitæ* (Bengel).

<span id="fn_463"></span>[60:464](1060054.htm#fr_463) <span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p6"></span> More particularly his works against the
Manichæans, *Contra Faustum Manichæum*, etc. Augustin also made much use
of this passage against the Pelagians, to show that the will must be
aided to produce good thoughts and deeds; that the unregenerate man is
incapable of restoring himself.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[60:465](1060054.htm#fr_464) <span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p7"></span> [Matt.
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[60:466](1060054.htm#fr_465) <span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p8"></span> [Matt.
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[61:467](1060054.htm#fr_466) <span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p9"></span> [Jer. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#013)<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[61:468](1060054.htm#fr_467) <span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p12"></span> [Gal. v.
19-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)<span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[61:469](1060054.htm#fr_468) <span
id="v.iii.xxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p13"></span> [Isa. lvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#021)<span id="v.iii.xxiv-p13.1"></span>,
according to the Septuagint.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](1060055)
