[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060264)  [Next](1060266) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xlviii"></span> <span id="vii.xlviii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xlviii-p1.1"></span>Sermon XLVI.</span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xlviii-p2.1"></span>\[XCVI. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xlviii-p3.1"></span>*[Mark viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#034)<span id="vii.xlviii-p3.2"></span>,
“If any man would come after me, let him deny himself,” etc. And on the
words* <span id="vii.xlviii-p3.3"></span>*[1 John ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)<span id="vii.xlviii-p3.4"></span>,
“if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.”*

<span id="vii.xlviii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xlviii-p4.1"></span>Hard</span> and grievous does that appear
which the Lord hath enjoined, that “whosoever will come after Him, must
deny himself.” <span id="fr_3156"></span>[3157](#fn_3156) But what He
enjoineth is not hard or grievous, who aideth us that what He enjoineth
may be done. For both is that true which is said to Him in the Psalm,
“Because of the words of Thy lips I have kept hard ways.” <span
id="fr_3157"></span>[3158](#fn_3157) And that is true which He said
Himself, “My yoke is easy, and My burden is light.” <span
id="fr_3158"></span>[3159](#fn_3158) For whatsoever is hard in what is
enjoined us, charity makes easy. We know what great things love itself
can do. Very often is this love even abominable and impure; but how
great hardships have men suffered, what indignities and intolerable
things have they endured, to attain to the object of their love? whether
it be a lover of money who is called covetous; or a lover of honour, who
is called ambitious; or a lover of beautiful women, who is called
voluptuous. And who could enumerate all sorts of loves? Yet consider
what labour all lovers undergo, and are not conscious of their labours;
and then does any such one most feel labour, when he is hindered from
labour. Since then the majority of men are such as their loves are, and
that there ought to be no other care for the regulation of our lives,
than the choice of that which we ought to love; why dost thou wonder, if
he who loves Christ, and who wishes to follow Christ, for the love of
Him denies himself? For if by loving himself man is lost, surely by
denying himself he is found.

<span id="vii.xlviii-p8"></span>2. The first destruction of man, was the
love of himself. For if he had not loved himself, if he had preferred
God to himself, he would have been willing to be ever subject unto God;
and would not have been turned to the neglect of His will, and the doing
his own will. For this is to love one’s self, to wish to do one’s own
will. Prefer to this God’s will; learn to love thyself by not loving
thyself. For that ye may know that it is a vice to love one’s self, the
Apostle speaks thus, “For men shall be lovers of their own
selves.” <span id="fr_3159"></span>[3160](#fn_3159) And can he who loves
himself have any sure trust in himself? No; for he begins to love
himself by forsaking God, and is driven away from himself to love those
things <span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="vii.xlviii-Page_409"></span>which are beyond himself; to such a
degree that when the aforesaid Apostle had said,” Men shall be lovers of
their own selves,” he subjoined immediately, “lovers of money.” Already
thou seest that thou art without. Thou hast begun to love thyself: stand
in thyself if thou canst. Why goest thou without? Hast thou, as being
rich in money, become a lover of money? Thou hast begun to love what is
without thee, thou hast lost thyself. When a man’s love then goes even
away from himself to those things which are without, he begins to share
the vanity of his vain desires, and prodigal as it were to spend his
strength. He is dissipated, exhausted, without resource or strength, he
feeds swine; and wearied with this office of feeding swine, he at last
remembers what he was, and says, “How many hired servants of my Father’s
are eating bread, and I here perish with hunger!” <span
id="fr_3160"></span>[3161](#fn_3160) But when the son in the parable
says this, what is said of him, who had squandered all he had on
harlots, who wished to have in his own power what was being well kept
for him with his father; he wished to have it at his own disposal, he
squandered all, he was reduced to indigence: what is said of him? “And
when he returned to himself.” If “he returned to himself,” he had gone
away from himself. Because he had fallen from himself, had gone away
from himself, he returns first to himself, that he may return to that
state from which he had fallen away by falling from himself. For as by
falling away from himself, he remained in himself; so by returning to
himself, he ought not to remain in himself, lest he again go away from
himself. Returning then to himself, that he might not remain in himself,
what did he say? “I will arise and go to my Father.” <span
id="fr_3161"></span>[3162](#fn_3161) See, whence he had fallen away from
himself, he had fallen away from his Father; he had fallen away from
himself, he had gone away from himself to those things which are
without. He returns to himself, and goes to his Father, where he may
keep himself in all security. If then he had gone away from himself, let
him also in returning to himself, from whom he had gone away, that he
may “go to his Father,” deny himself. What is “deny himself”? Let him
not trust in himself, let him feel that he is a man, and have respect to
the words of the prophet, “Cursed is every one that putteth his hope in
man.” <span id="fr_3162"></span>[3163](#fn_3162) Let him withdraw
himself from himself, but not towards things below. Let him withdraw
himself from himself, that he may cleave unto God. Whatever of good he
has, let him commit to Him by whom he was made; whatever of evil he has,
he has made it for himself. The evil that is in him God made not; let
him destroy what himself has done, who has been thereby undone. “Let him
deny himself,” He saith, “and take up his cross, and follow Me.”

<span id="vii.xlviii-p13"></span>3. And whither must the Lord be
followed? Whither He is gone, we know; but a very few days since we
celebrated the solemn memorial of it. For He has risen again, and
ascended into heaven; thither must He be followed. Undoubtedly we must
not despair of it, because He hath Himself promised us, not because man
can do anything. Heaven was far away from us, before that our Head had
gone into heaven. But now why should we despair, if we are members of
that Head? Thither then must He be followed. And who would be unwilling
to follow Him to such an abode? Especially seeing that we are in so
great travail on earth with fears and pains. Who would be unwilling to
follow Christ thither, where is supreme felicity, supreme peace,
perpetual security? Good is it to follow Him thither: but we must see by
what way we are to follow. For the Lord Jesus did not say the words we
are engaged in, when He had now risen from the dead. He had not yet
suffered, He had still to come to the Cross, had to come to His
dishonouring, to the outrages, the scourging, the thorns, the wounds,
the mockeries, the insults, Death. Rough as it were is the way; it makes
thee to be slow; thou hast no mind to follow. But follow on. Rough is
the way which man has made for himself, but what Christ hath trodden in
His passage is worn smooth. For who would not wish to go to exaltation?
Elevation is pleasing to all; but humility is the step to it. Why dost
thou put out thy foot beyond thee? Thou hast a mind to fall, not to
ascend. Begin by the step, and so thou hast ascended. This step of
humility those two disciples were loth to have an eye to, who said,
“Lord, bid that one of us may sit at Thy right hand, and the other at
the left in Thy kingdom.” <span id="fr_3163"></span>[3164](#fn_3163)
They sought for exaltation, they did not see the step. But the Lord
showed them the step. For what did He answer them? “Ye who seek the hill
of exaltation, can ye drink the cup of humiliation?” And therefore He
does not say simply, “Let him deny himself, and follow Me” howsoever:
but He said more, “Let him take up his cross, and follow Me.”

<span id="vii.xlviii-p15"></span>4. What is, “Let him take up his
cross”? Let him bear whatever trouble he has; so let him follow Me. For
when he shall begin to follow Me in conformity to My life and precepts,
he will have many to contradict him, he will have many to hinder him, he
will have many to dissuade him, and that from among those who are even
as it were Christ’s companions. They who hindered the blind men from
crying out were walking with Christ. <span
id="fr_3164"></span>[3165](#fn_3164) Whether therefore they be <span
id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span
id="vii.xlviii-Page_410"></span>threats or caresses, or whatsoever
hindrances there be, if thou wish to follow, turn them into thy cross,
bear it, carry it, do not give way beneath it. There seems to be an
exhortation to martyrdom in these words of the Lord. If there be
persecution, ought not all things to be despised in consideration of
Christ? The world is loved; but let Him be preferred by whom the world
was made. Great is the world; but greater is He by whom the world was
made. Fair is the world; but fairer is He by whom the world was made.
Sweet is the world; but sweeter is He by whom the world was made. Evil
is the world; and good is He by whom the world was made. How shall I be
able to explain and unravel what I have said? May God help me? For what
have I said? what have ye applauded? See, it is but a question, and yet
ye have already applauded. How is the world evil, if He by whom the
world was made is good? Did not God make all things, “and behold they
were very good”? Does not Scripture at each several work of creation
testify that God made it good, by saying, “And God saw that it was
good,” and at the end summed them all up together thus how that God had
made them, “And behold they were very good”? <span
id="fr_3165"></span>[3166](#fn_3165)

<span id="vii.xlviii-p18"></span>5. How then is the world evil, and He
good by whom the world was made? How? “Since the world was made by Him,
and the world knew Him not.” <span id="fr_3166"></span>[3167](#fn_3166)
The world was made by Him, the heaven and earth and all things that are
in them: “the world knew Him not,” the lovers of the world; the lovers
of the world and the despisers of God; this “world knew Him not.” So
then the world is evil, because they are evil who prefer the world to
God. And He is good who made the world, the heaven, and earth, and sea,
and themselves who love the world. For this only, that they love the
world and do not love God, He made not in them. But themselves, all that
appertains to their nature He made; what appertains to guiltiness, He
made not. This is that I said a little while ago, “Let man efface what
he has made, and so will he be well-pleasing to Him who made Him.”

<span id="vii.xlviii-p20"></span>6. For there is among men themselves a
good world also; but one that has been made good from being evil. For
the whole world if you take the word “world” for men, putting aside
(what we call the world) the heaven and earth and all things that in
them are; if you take the world for men, the whole world did he who
first sinned make evil. The whole mass was corrupted in the root. God
made man good; so runs the Scripture, “God made man upright; and men
themselves found out many cogitations.” <span
id="fr_3167"></span>[3168](#fn_3167) Run from these “many” to One,
gather up thy scattered things into one: flow on together, fence thyself
in, abide with One; go not to many things. There is blessedness. But we
have flowed away, have gone on to perdition: we were all born with sin,
and to that sin wherein we were born have we too added by our evil
living, and the whole world has become evil. But Christ came, and He
chose that which He made, not what He found; for He found all evil, and
by His grace He made them good. And so was made another “world;” and the
“world” now persecutes the “world.”

<span id="vii.xlviii-p22"></span>7. What is the “world” which
persecutes? That of which it is said to us, “Love not the world, neither
the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, is the lust of
the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, which is not
of the Father, but of the world. And the world passeth away, and the
lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever,”
 <span id="fr_3168"></span>[3169](#fn_3168) even as God abideth for
ever. Lo! I have spoken of two “worlds,” the “world” which persecutes,
and that which it persecutes. What is the “world” which persecutes? “All
that is the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life, which is not of the Father, but of the world;” and
“the world passeth away.” Lo, this is the “world” which persecutes. What
is the “world” which it persecutes? “He that doeth the will of God
abideth for ever,” even as God abideth for ever.

<span id="vii.xlviii-p24"></span>8. But see, that which persecutes is
called the “world;” let us prove whether that also which suffers
persecution is called “the world.” What! Art thou deaf to the voice of
Christ who speaketh, or rather to Holy Scripture which testifieth, “God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself.” <span
id="fr_3169"></span>[3170](#fn_3169) “If the world hate you, know ye
that it first hated Me.” <span id="fr_3170"></span>[3171](#fn_3170) See,
the “world” hates. What does it hate but the “world”? What “world”? “God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself.” The condemned “world”
persecutes; the reconciled “world” suffers persecution. The condemned
“world” is all that is without the Church; the reconciled “world” is the
Church. For He says, “The Son of Man came not to judge the world, but
that the world through Him may be saved.” <span
id="fr_3171"></span>[3172](#fn_3171)

<span id="vii.xlviii-p28"></span>9. Now in this world, holy, good,
reconciled, saved, or rather to be saved, and now saved in hope, “for we
are saved in hope;” <span id="fr_3172"></span>[3173](#fn_3172) in this
world, I say, that is in the Church which wholly follows Christ, He hath
said as of universal application, “Whosoever will follow Me, let him
deny himself.” For it is not that the virgins ought to give ear to this,
and the married women <span id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span
id="vii.xlviii-Page_411"></span>ought not; or that the widows ought, and
the women who still have their husbands ought not; or that monks ought,
and the married men ought not; or that the clergy ought, and the laymen
ought not: but let the whole Church, the whole body, all the members,
distinguished and distributed throughout their several offices, follow
Christ. Let the whole Church follow Him, that only Church, let the dove
follow Him, let the spouse follow Him, let her who has been redeemed and
endowed with the Bridegroom’s blood, follow Him. There virgin purity
hath its place; there widowed continence hath its place; married
chastity there hath its place; but adultery hath no place of its own
there; and no place there hath lasciviousness, unlawful and meet for
punishment. But let these several members which have their place there,
in their kind and place and measure, “follow Christ;” let them “deny
themselves;” that is, let them presume nothing of themselves: let them
“take up their cross,” that is, let them in the world endure for
Christ’s sake whatever the world may bring upon them. Let them love Him,
who Alone doth not deceive, who Alone is not deceived, Alone deceiveth
not; let them love Him, for that is true which He doth promise. But
because He doth not give at once, faith wavers. Hold on, persevere,
endure, bear delay and thou hast borne the cross.

<span id="vii.xlviii-p30"></span>10. Let not the virgin say, “I shall
alone be there.” For Mary shall not be there alone but the widow Anna
shall be there also. Let not the woman which hath an husband say, “The
widow will be there, not I;” for it is not that Anna will be there, and
Susanna not be there. But by all means let them who would be there prove
themselves hereby, that they who have here a lower place envy not, but
love in others the better place. For, for instance, my Brethren, that ye
may understand me; one man has chosen a married life, another a life of
continence; if he who has chosen the married life, has adulterous lusts,
he has “looked back;” he has lusted after that which is unlawful. He too
who would wish afterwards to return from continence to a married life,
has “looked back;” he has chosen what is in itself lawful, yet he has
“looked back.” Is marriage then to be condemned? No. Marriage is not to
be condemned; but see whither he had come who has chosen it. He had
already got before it. When he was living as a young man in
voluptuousness, marriage was before him; he was making his way towards
it; but when he had chosen continence, marriage was behind him.
“Remember,” saith the Lord, “Lot’s wife.” <span
id="fr_3173"></span>[3174](#fn_3173) Lot’s wife, by looking behind,
remained motionless. To whatever point then any one has been able to
reach, let him fear to “look back” from thence; and let him walk in the
way, let him “follow Christ.” “Forgetting those things which are behind,
and stretching forth unto those things which are before, let him by an
earnest inward intention press on toward the prize of the calling of God
in Christ Jesus.” <span id="fr_3174"></span>[3175](#fn_3174) Let those
that are married regard the unmarried as above themselves; let them
acknowledge that they are better; let them in them love what themselves
have not; and let them in them love Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3156"></span>[408:3157](1060265.htm#fr_3156) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p5"></span> [Mark viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#034)<span id="vii.xlviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3157"></span>[408:3158](1060265.htm#fr_3157) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p6"></span> [Ps.
17.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004)<span
id="vii.xlviii-p6.1"></span>, Sept. (xvii. English version).

<span id="fn_3158"></span>[408:3159](1060265.htm#fr_3158) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p7"></span> [Matt. xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span id="vii.xlviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3159"></span>[408:3160](1060265.htm#fr_3159) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p9"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002)<span id="vii.xlviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3160"></span>[409:3161](1060265.htm#fr_3160) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p10"></span> [Luke xv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#017)<span id="vii.xlviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3161"></span>[409:3162](1060265.htm#fr_3161) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p11"></span> [Luke xv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#018)<span id="vii.xlviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3162"></span>[409:3163](1060265.htm#fr_3162) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p12"></span> [Jer. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="vii.xlviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3163"></span>[409:3164](1060265.htm#fr_3163) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p14"></span> [Mark x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#037)<span id="vii.xlviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3164"></span>[409:3165](1060265.htm#fr_3164) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p16"></span> *Vid*. Serm. xxxviii. (lxxxviii. Ben.)
13 (xiv). [Matt. xx. 31](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#031)<span
id="vii.xlviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3165"></span>[410:3166](1060265.htm#fr_3165) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p17"></span> [Gen.
i](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#000)<span id="vii.xlviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3166"></span>[410:3167](1060265.htm#fr_3166) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p19"></span> [John i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010)<span id="vii.xlviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3167"></span>[410:3168](1060265.htm#fr_3167) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p21"></span> [Eccles.
7.29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xlviii-p21.1"></span>, Sept. (vii. 29, English version).

<span id="fn_3168"></span>[410:3169](1060265.htm#fr_3168) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p23"></span> [1 John ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)<span id="vii.xlviii-p23.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3169"></span>[410:3170](1060265.htm#fr_3169) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p25"></span> [2 Cor. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)<span id="vii.xlviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3170"></span>[410:3171](1060265.htm#fr_3170) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p26"></span> [John xv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018)<span id="vii.xlviii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3171"></span>[410:3172](1060265.htm#fr_3171) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p27"></span> [John iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)<span id="vii.xlviii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3172"></span>[410:3173](1060265.htm#fr_3172) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p29"></span> [Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="vii.xlviii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3173"></span>[411:3174](1060265.htm#fr_3173) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p31"></span> [Luke xvii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#032)<span id="vii.xlviii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3174"></span>[411:3175](1060265.htm#fr_3174) <span
id="vii.xlviii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xlviii-p32"></span> [Phil.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xlviii-p32.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XLVII](1060266)
