[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060093)  [Next](1060095.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.—Epilogue to the
Preceding.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span>52. Much more might I say on this
subject, were it not that the requirements of the task which I have
undertaken compel me to conclude this book, and revert to the object
originally proposed. When, indeed, I took it in hand to solve <span
id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="vi.iv.xxxiv-Page_100"></span>those
problems of the Gospels which meet us where the four evangelists, as it
seems to certain critics, fail to harmonize with each other, by setting
forth to the best of my ability the particular designs which they
severally have in view, I was met first by the necessity of discussing a
question which some are accustomed to bring before us,—the question,
namely, as to the reason why we cannot produce any writings composed by
Christ Himself. For their aim is to get Him credited with the writing of
some other composition, I know not of what sort, which may be suitable
to their inclinations, and with having indulged in no sentiments of
antagonism to their gods, but rather with having paid respect to them in
a kind of magical worship; and their wish is also to get it believed
that His disciples not only gave a false account of Him when they
declared Him to be the God by whom all things were made, while He was
really nothing more than a man, although certainly a man of the most
exalted wisdom, but also that they taught with regard to these gods of
theirs something different from what they had themselves learned from
Him. This is how it happens that we have been engaged preferentially in
pressing them with arguments concerning the God of Israel, who is now
worshipped by all nations through the medium of the Church of the
Christians, who is also subverting their sacrilegious vanities the whole
world over, exactly as He announced by the mouth of the prophets so long
ago, and who has now fulfilled those predictions by the name of Christ,
in whom He had promised that all nations should be blessed. And from all
this they ought to understand that Christ could neither have known nor
taught anything else with regard to their gods than what was enjoined
and foretold by the God of Israel through the agency of these prophets
of His by whom He promised, and ultimately sent, this very Christ, in
whose name, according to the promise given to the fathers, when all
nations were pronounced blessed, it has come to pass that this same God
of Israel should be called the God of the whole earth. By this, too,
they ought to see that His disciples did not depart from the doctrine of
their Master when they forbade the worship of the gods of the Gentiles,
with the view of preventing us from addressing our supplications to
insensate images, or from having fellowship with demons, or from serving
the creature rather than the Creator with the homage of religious
worship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV](1060095.md)
