[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060235)  [Next](1060237) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xix"></span> <span id="vii.xix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xix-p1.1"></span>Sermon XVII.</span>

<span id="vii.xix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xix-p2.1"></span>\[LXVII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xix-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xix-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span id="vii.xix-p3.2"></span>, “I
thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou didst hide
these things from the wise and understanding,” etc.*

<span id="vii.xix-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xix-p4.1"></span>When</span> the Holy Gospel was being read, we
heard that the Lord Jesus exulted in Spirit, and said, “I confess to
Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, for that Thou hast hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto
babes.” <span id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251) Thus much to
begin <span id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252) with, we find before we
pass on further, if we consider the words of the Lord with due
attention, with diligence, and above all with piety, that we ought not
invariably to understand when we read of “confession” in the Scriptures,
the confession <span id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253) of a sinner.
Now especial need there was of saying this, and of reminding you,
Beloved, of this, because as soon as this word was uttered by the
reader’s voice, there followed upon it the sound of the beating of your
breasts, when ye had heard, I mean, what the Lord said, “I confess to
Thee, O Father.” At the uttering of these words, “I confess,” ye beat
your breasts. Now what means this beating of the breast, but to show
that which lies hid within the breast, and to chastise by the visible
beating the secret sin? And why did ye this, but because ye heard, “I
confess to Thee, O Father.” Ye heard the words “I confess,” but ye did
not consider, who it is that confesses. But consider now. If Christ,
from whom all sin is far removed, said, “I confess:” confession does not
belong to the sinner only, but sometimes to him also that praiseth God.
We confess then, whether <span id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span
id="vii.xix-Page_311"></span>in praising God, or accusing ourselves. In
either case it is a godly confession, either when thou blamest thyself,
who art not without sin, or when thou praisest Him who can have no sin.

<span id="vii.xix-p8"></span>2. But if we consider it well: thine own
blame is His praise. For why is it that thou dost now confess in
accusing thyself for thy sin? in accusing thyself why dost thou confess?
but because thou art become alive from the dead? for the Scripture
saith, “Confession perisheth from the dead, as from one that is
not.” <span id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254) If confession perisheth
from the dead, he who confesseth must be alive; and if he confesseth sin
he hath undoubtedly risen again from death. Now if he that confesseth
sin hath risen again from the dead, who hath raised him? No dead man can
raise himself. He only was able to raise Himself, who though His Body
was dead, was not dead. For He raised up that which was dead. He raised
up Himself, who in Himself was alive, but in His Body that was to be
raised was dead. For not the Father only, of whom it was said by the
Apostle, “Wherefore God also hath exalted Him,” <span
id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255) raised the Son, but the Lord also
raised Himself, that is, His Body. Whence He said, “Destroy this temple,
and in three days I will raise it again.” <span
id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256) But the sinner is dead, especially
he whom the load of sinful habit presseth down, who is buried as it were
like Lazarus. For he was not merely dead, he was buried also. <span
id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257) Whosoever then is oppressed by the
load of evil habit, of a wicked life, of earthly lusts, I mean, so that
that in his case is true which is piteously described in a certain
Psalm, “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God,” <span
id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258) he is such an one, of whom it is
said, “Confession perisheth from the dead, as from one that is not.” And
who shall raise him up, but He who when the stone was removed, cried
out, and said, “Lazarus, Come forth?” <span
id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259) Now what is to “come forth,” but to
bring forth what was hidden? He then who confesseth “cometh forth.”
“Come forth” he could not were he not alive; he could not be alive, had
he not been raised again. And therefore in confession the accusing of
one’s self, is the praise of God.

<span id="vii.xix-p15"></span>3. Now one may say, what profit then is
the Church, if he that confesseth comes forth, at once raised to life
again by the voice of the Lord? What profit to Him that confesseth, is
the Church, to which the Lord said, “Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven.” <span id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260)
Consider this very case of Lazarus: he comes forth, but with his bands.
He was alive already through confession, but he did not yet walk free,
entangled as he was in his bands. What then doth the Church to which it
was said, “Whatsoever ye shall loose, shall be loosed;” but what <span
id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) the Lord said forthwith to His
disciples, “Loose him, and let him go”? <span
id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262)

<span id="vii.xix-p19"></span>4. Whether then we accuse ourselves, or
directly praise God, in both ways do we praise God. If with a pious
intention we accuse ourselves, by so doing we praise God. When we praise
God directly, we do as it were celebrate His Holiness, who is without
sin: but when we accuse ourselves, we give Him glory, by whom we have
risen again. This if thou shalt do, the enemy will find none occasion
whereby to <span id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263) overreach thee
before the judge. For when thou shall be thine own accuser, and the Lord
thy Deliverer, what shall he be but a mere calumniator? With good reason
hath the Christian hereby provided protection for himself against his
enemies, not those that may be seen, flesh and blood, to be pitied,
rather than to be feared, but against those against whom the Apostle
exhorts us to arm ourselves: “We wrestle not against flesh and
blood;” <span id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264) that is, against men
whom ye see raging against you. They are but vessels, which another
uses, they are but instruments which another handles. “The devil,” saith
the Scripture, “entered into the heart of Judas, that he should betray
the Lord.” <span id="fr_2265"></span>[2266](#fn_2265) One may say then,
what have I done? Hear the Apostle, “Give not place to the devil.” <span
id="fr_2266"></span>[2267](#fn_2266) Thou hast given him place by an
evil will: he entered, and possessed, and now uses thee. He had not
possessed thee, hadst thou not given him place.

<span id="vii.xix-p24"></span>5. Therefore doth he warn and say, “We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and
powers.” Any one might suppose this meant against the kings of the
earth, against the powers of this world. How so? are they not flesh and
blood? And once for all it is said, “not against flesh and blood.” Turn
thy attention from all men. What enemies then remain? “Against
principalities and powers of spiritual wickedness, the rulers of the
world.”  <span id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267) It might seem as
though he gave the devil and his angels more than they have. It is so,
he has called them the “rulers of the world.” But to prevent
misunderstanding, he explains what this world is, of which they are the
rulers. “The rulers of the world, of this darkness.” What is, “of the
world, of this darkness?” The world is full of those who love it, and of
unbelievers, over whom he is ruler. This the Apostle calls darkness.
This darkness the devil and his angels are the rulers of. This is not
the natural, and unchangeable darkness: this darkness changes, and
becomes light; it believes, and by believing is enlightened. When this
takes place in it, it will hear the words, “For ye were sometimes <span
id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span id="vii.xix-Page_312"></span>darkness,
but now are ye light in the Lord.” <span
id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268) For when ye were darkness, ye were
not in the Lord: again, when ye are light, ye are light not in
yourselves, but in the Lord. “For what hast thou which thou hast not
received?” <span id="fr_2269"></span>[2270](#fn_2269) Inasmuch then as
they are invisible enemies, by invisible means must they be subdued. A
visible enemy indeed thou mayest overcome by blows; thy invisible enemy
thou conquerest by belief. A man is a visible enemy; to strike a blow is
visible also. The devil is an invisible enemy; to believe is invisible
also. Against invisible enemies then there is an invisible fight.

<span id="vii.xix-p28"></span>6. From these enemies how can any man say
that he is safe? For this I had begun to speak of, but I thought it
necessary to treat of these enemies at some little length. But now that
we know our enemies, let us see to our defence against them. “In
praising I will call upon the Lord, so shall I be safe from mine
enemies.” <span id="fr_2270"></span>[2271](#fn_2270) Thou seest what
thou hast to do. “In praising call;” that is, “in praising the Lord,
call.” For thou wilt not be safe from thine enemies, if thou praise
thyself. “In praising call upon the Lord, and thou shalt be safe from
thine enemies.” For what doth the Lord Himself say? “The sacrifice of
praise shall glorify Me, and there is the way, in which I will show him
My salvation.” <span id="fr_2271"></span>[2272](#fn_2271) Where is the
way? In the sacrifice of praise. Let not your foot then wander out of
this way. Keep in the way; depart not from it; from the praise of the
Lord depart not a foot, nay, not a nail’s breadth. For if thou wilt
deviate from this way, and praise thyself instead of the Lord, thou wilt
not be safe from thine enemies; for it is said of them, “They have laid
stumbling-blocks for me by the way.” <span
id="fr_2272"></span>[2273](#fn_2272) Therefore in whatever measure thou
thinkest that thou hast good of thine own self, thou hast deviated from
the praise of God. Why dost thou marvel then, if thine enemy seduce
thee, when thou art thine own seducer? Hear the Apostle, “For if a man
think himself to be something when he is nothing, he seduceth
himself.” <span id="fr_2273"></span>[2274](#fn_2273)

<span id="vii.xix-p33"></span>7. Give heed then to the Lord confessing;
“I confess to Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth.” I confess to
Thee, that is, I praise Thee. I praise Thee, not I accuse myself. Now as
far as the taking of very <span id="fr_2274"></span>[2275](#fn_2274) man
is concerned, all is grace, singular and perfect grace. What merit had
that man <span id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275) who is Christ, if
thou take away the grace, even that so pre-eminent grace, whereby it
behoved that there should be One Christ, and that He whom we acknowledge
should be He? Take away this grace, and what is Christ but a mere man?
what but the same as thou art thyself? He took a Soul, He took a Body,
He took a perfect Man; He uniteth him to Himself, the Lord maketh one
Person with the servant. What pre-eminent grace is this! Christ in
heaven, Christ on earth; Christ at once both in heaven and earth; not
two Christs, but the same Christ, both in heaven and earth. Christ with
the Father, Christ in the Virgin’s womb; Christ on the Cross, Christ
succouring some souls in hell; and on the self-same day Christ in
paradise with the robber who confessed. And how did the robber
attain <span id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276) to this blessedness,
but because he held on that way, in which “He showeth His salvation”?
That way, from which let not thy foot wander. For in that he accused
himself, he praised God, and made his own life blessed. He looked in
hope <span id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277) for this from the Lord,
and said to Him, “Lord, remember me when Thou comest into Thy
kingdom.” <span id="fr_2278"></span>[2279](#fn_2278) For he considered
his own wicked deeds, and thought it much, if mercy should be shown him
even at the last. But the Lord immediately after He had said, “Remember
me”—when? “when Thou comest into Thy kingdom,” saith, “Verily I say unto
thee, Today shall thou be with Me in paradise.” Mercy offered at once,
what misery deferred.

<span id="vii.xix-p39"></span>8. Hear then the Lord confessing; “I
confess to Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth.” <span
id="fr_2279"></span>[2280](#fn_2279) What do I confess? Wherein do I
praise thee? For this confession, as I have said before, signifieth
praise. “Because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and hast revealed them unto babes.” What is this, Brethren? Understand
by that which is opposed to them. “Thou hast hid these things,” saith
he, “from the wise and prudent;” and he did not say, thou hast revealed
them to the foolish and imprudent, but “Thou hast hid these things”
indeed “from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.”
To these wise and <span id="page_313">p. 313</span> <span
id="vii.xix-Page_313"></span>prudent, who are really objects of
derision, to the arrogant who in false pretence are great, yet in truth
are only swollen up, he opposed not the foolish, nor the imprudent, but
babes. Who are babes? The humble. Therefore “Thou hast hidden these
things from the wise and prudent.” Under the name of the wise and
prudent, He hath Himself explained that the proud are understood, when
He said, “Thou hast revealed them unto babes.” Therefore from those who
are not babes Thou hast hidden them. What is from those who are not
babes? From those who are not humble. And who are they but the proud? O
way of the Lord! Either there was none, or it lay hid, that it might be
revealed to us. Why did the Lord exult? “Because it was revealed unto
babes.” We must be little babes; for if we would wish to be great, “wise
and prudent” as it were, it is not revealed unto us. Who are these great
ones? The wise and prudent. “Professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools.” <span id="fr_2280"></span>[2281](#fn_2280) Here then thou
hast a remedy suggested from its opposite. For if by “professing thyself
wise, thou art become a fool; profess thyself a fool, and thou wilt be
wise.” But profess it in truth, profess it from the heart, for it is
really so as thou professest. If thou profess it, do not profess it
before men, and forbear to profess it before God. As to thyself, and all
that is thine, thou art altogether dark. For what else is it to be a
fool, but to be dark in heart? He saith of them at last, “Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools.” Before they professed this,
what do we find? “And their foolish heart was darkened.” <span
id="fr_2281"></span>[2282](#fn_2281) Acknowledge then that thou art not
to thyself a light. At best thou art but an eye, thou art not the light.
And what good is even an open and a sound eye, if the light be wanting?
Acknowledge therefore that of thine own self thou art no light to
thyself; and cry out as it is written, “Thou, Lord, wilt light my
candle: Thou wilt enlighten, O Lord, my darkness with Thy Light.” <span
id="fr_2282"></span>[2283](#fn_2282) For myself I was all darkness; but
Thou art the Light that scattereth the darkness, and enlighteneth me; of
myself I am no light to myself, yea I have no portion of light but in
Thee.

<span id="vii.xix-p44"></span>9. So John also, the friend of the
Bridegroom, was thought to be the Christ, was thought to be the Light.
“He was not that Light, but that he might bear witness of the
Light.” <span id="fr_2283"></span>[2284](#fn_2283) But what was the
Light? It was the true Light. What is the true Light? “That which
lighteneth every man.” If that be the true Light which lighteneth every
man, then it lightened John also, who professed and confessed rightly,
“Of His fulness have all we received.” <span
id="fr_2284"></span>[2285](#fn_2284) See if he said ought else, but
“Thou, O Lord, shalt lighten my candle.” Finally, being now enlightened,
He gave His testimony. For the benefit of the blind the lamp gave
witness to the Day. See how that He is a lamp; “Ye sent,” He said, “unto
John, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light; he was a
burning and a shining lamp.” <span id="fr_2285"></span>[2286](#fn_2285)
He, the lamp, that is, a thing enlightened, was lighted that it might
shine. That which can be lighted can be extinguished also. Now that it
may not be extinguished, let it not expose itself to the wind of pride.
Therefore, “I confess to Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent,” from
those who thought themselves to be light, and were darkness; and who
because they were darkness, and thought themselves to be light, could
not even be enlightened. But they who were darkness, and confessed that
they were darkness, were little babes, not great; were humble, not
proud. Rightly therefore did they say, “O Lord, Thou wilt lighten my
candle.” They knew themselves, they praised the Lord. They did not stray
from the way of salvation; “They in praise called upon the Lord, and
they were saved from their enemies.” <span
id="fr_2286"></span>[2287](#fn_2286)

<span id="vii.xix-p49"></span>10. Turning then to the Lord our God, the
Father Almighty, in purity of heart, let us render unto Him, as our
frailty best can, our highest and abundant thanks, with our whole mind
praying His singular goodness, that in His good pleasure He would
vouchsafe to hear our prayers, that by His Power He would drive out the
enemy from our deeds and thoughts, would enlarge our faith, direct our
minds, grant us spiritual thoughts, and bring us safe to His endless
blessedness, through His Son Jesus Christ. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[310:2252](1060236.htm#fr_2251) <span
id="vii.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p5"></span> [Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span id="vii.xix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[310:2253](1060236.htm#fr_2252) <span
id="vii.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p6"></span> *Interim*.

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[310:2254](1060236.htm#fr_2253) <span
id="vii.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p7"></span> *Vocem*.

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[311:2255](1060236.htm#fr_2254) <span
id="vii.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p9"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
17.28](../../../bib/sep/sir017.htm#028)<span id="vii.xix-p9.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[311:2256](1060236.htm#fr_2255) <span
id="vii.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p10"></span> [Phil. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="vii.xix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[311:2257](1060236.htm#fr_2256) <span
id="vii.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p11"></span> [John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="vii.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[311:2258](1060236.htm#fr_2257) <span
id="vii.xix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p12"></span> [John xi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#017)<span id="vii.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[311:2259](1060236.htm#fr_2258) <span
id="vii.xix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p13"></span> [Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span id="vii.xix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[311:2260](1060236.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="vii.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p14"></span> [John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)<span id="vii.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[311:2261](1060236.htm#fr_2260) <span
id="vii.xix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p16"></span> [Matt.
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019), [Matt.
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span id="vii.xix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[311:2262](1060236.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="vii.xix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p17"></span> *Vid*. Serm. 48 (98, Bened.) 6.

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[311:2263](1060236.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="vii.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p18"></span> [John xi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)<span id="vii.xix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[311:2264](1060236.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="vii.xix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p20"></span> *Circumveniat*.

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[311:2265](1060236.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="vii.xix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p21"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="vii.xix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2265"></span>[311:2266](1060236.htm#fr_2265) <span
id="vii.xix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p22"></span> [John xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002)<span id="vii.xix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2266"></span>[311:2267](1060236.htm#fr_2266) <span
id="vii.xix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p23"></span> [Eph. iv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#027)<span id="vii.xix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[311:2268](1060236.htm#fr_2267) <span
id="vii.xix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p25"></span> Vulgate.

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[312:2269](1060236.htm#fr_2268) <span
id="vii.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p26"></span> [Eph. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="vii.xix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2269"></span>[312:2270](1060236.htm#fr_2269) <span
id="vii.xix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p27"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="vii.xix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2270"></span>[312:2271](1060236.htm#fr_2270) <span
id="vii.xix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p29"></span> [Ps.
18.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003)<span id="vii.xix-p29.1"></span>,
Sept. (xviii. 3, English version).

<span id="fn_2271"></span>[312:2272](1060236.htm#fr_2271) <span
id="vii.xix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p30"></span> [Ps.
50.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)<span id="vii.xix-p30.1"></span>,
Sept. (l. English version).

<span id="fn_2272"></span>[312:2273](1060236.htm#fr_2272) <span
id="vii.xix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p31"></span> [Ps.
140.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#005)<span id="vii.xix-p31.1"></span>,
Sept. (cxl. 5, English version).

<span id="fn_2273"></span>[312:2274](1060236.htm#fr_2273) <span
id="vii.xix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p32"></span> [Gal. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003)<span id="vii.xix-p32.1"></span>,
Vulg.

<span id="fn_2274"></span>[312:2275](1060236.htm#fr_2274) <span
id="vii.xix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p34"></span> *Ipsius*.

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[312:2276](1060236.htm#fr_2275) <span
id="vii.xix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p35"></span> It was the doctrine of Paul of Samosata,
that the man Christ was exalted to be the Son of God (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xix-p35.1"></span>προκοπῄ</span>, from [Luke
ii. 52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span
id="vii.xix-p35.2"></span>), as if by merit. Origen seems to hold the
same, at least as regards the (supposed) pre-existent soul of Christ
(*vid*. Huet. *Origen*, ii. 3, § 6; *vid*. however De la Rue’s note);
and the Arians, at least implicitly (Socr. *Hist*. i. 6, Athan. *Orat.
contr. Arian*, i. 35, iii. 51; and Leporius, *Cassian. Incarn*. i. 3,
4). The same heresy was imputed to the Nestorians (but falsely according
to Garner, in *Mar. Merc*. pt. i. p. 431), and thereby connected them
with the Pelagians, as if unassisted human nature could merit grace. The
Church on the other hand, proceeding from [Rom. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span id="vii.xix-p35.3"></span>,
taught that the human nature which became the manhood of the Word was
predestined to be such by grace before its creation, and became such in
the moment of creation. St. Athanasius touches on this subject against
the Arians (*Orat*. i. 46); St. Augustin enlarges on it against the
Pelagians (*De Prædest. Sanct*. 23, 30; *De Corrept. et Grat*. 30); St.
Cyril, against the Nestorians (*Contra Nest*. iii. p. 83); Vigilius,
against the Monophysites (*Contra Eutych*. v. B. P. t. 4, p. 528, ed.
1624). When St. Augustin says “that man,” he is speaking of our Lord’s
human nature as abstracted from that Divine Person in whom it actually
existed, and not as if it ever existed as a separate hypostasis. This
use of “homo” and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xix-p35.4"></span>ἄνθρωπος</span> is very frequent with the
Fathers; what is more startling is the expression “homo *ille*,” yet
*vid.* also Augustin, *De Præd. Sanct*. 30; Alcuin, *De Trin*. iii. 1;
Agobard, *Cont. Felic*. B. P. t. 9, p. 1194. However, this point is a
subject of debate among theologians (*vid*. Petav. *De Incarn*. xi.
fin.).

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[312:2277](1060236.htm#fr_2276) <span
id="vii.xix-p35.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p36"></span> *Meruit*.

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[312:2278](1060236.htm#fr_2277) <span
id="vii.xix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p37"></span> *Præsumpsit*.

<span id="fn_2278"></span>[312:2279](1060236.htm#fr_2278) <span
id="vii.xix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p38"></span> [Luke xxiii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#042)<span id="vii.xix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2279"></span>[312:2280](1060236.htm#fr_2279) <span
id="vii.xix-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p40"></span> [Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span id="vii.xix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2280"></span>[313:2281](1060236.htm#fr_2280) <span
id="vii.xix-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p41"></span> [Rom. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)<span id="vii.xix-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2281"></span>[313:2282](1060236.htm#fr_2281) <span
id="vii.xix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p42"></span> [Rom. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span id="vii.xix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2282"></span>[313:2283](1060236.htm#fr_2282) <span
id="vii.xix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p43"></span> [Ps. xviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028)<span id="vii.xix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2283"></span>[313:2284](1060236.htm#fr_2283) <span
id="vii.xix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p45"></span> [John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#008)<span id="vii.xix-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2284"></span>[313:2285](1060236.htm#fr_2284) <span
id="vii.xix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p46"></span> [John i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span id="vii.xix-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2285"></span>[313:2286](1060236.htm#fr_2285) <span
id="vii.xix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p47"></span> [John v.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#033)<span id="vii.xix-p47.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2286"></span>[313:2287](1060236.htm#fr_2286) <span
id="vii.xix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p48"></span> [Ps. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003)<span id="vii.xix-p48.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XVIII](1060237)
