[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060257)  [Next](1060259) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xli"></span> <span id="vii.xli-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xli-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXXIX.</span>

<span id="vii.xli-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xli-p2.1"></span>\[LXXXIX. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xli-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xli-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019)<span id="vii.xli-p3.2"></span>,
where Jesus dried up the fig-tree; and on the words,* <span
id="vii.xli-p3.3"></span>*[Luke xxiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#028)<span id="vii.xli-p3.4"></span>,
where He made a pretence as though He would go further.*

<span id="vii.xli-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xli-p4.1"></span>The</span> lesson of the Holy Gospel which has
just been read, has given us an alarming warning, lest we have leaves
only, and have no fruit. That is, in few words, lest words be present
and deeds be wanting. Very terrible! Who does not fear when in this
lesson he sees with the eyes of the heart the withered tree, withered at
that word being spoken to it, “Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward
for ever”? <span id="fr_2948"></span>[2949](#fn_2948) Let the fear work
amendment, and the amendment bring forth fruit. For without doubt, the
Lord Christ foresaw that a certain tree would deservedly become
withered, because it would have leaves, and would have no fruit. That
tree is the synagogue, not that which was called, but that which was
reprobate. For out of it also was called the people of God, who in
sincerity and truth waited in the Prophets for the salvation of God,
Jesus Christ. And forasmuch as it waited in faith, it was thought
worthy <span id="fr_2949"></span>[2950](#fn_2949) to know Him when He
was present. For out of it came the Apostles, out of it came the whole
multitude of those who went before the ass of the Lord, and said,
“Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is He that cometh in the Name of
the Lord.” <span id="fr_2950"></span>[2951](#fn_2950) There was a great
company then of believing Jews, a great company of those who believed in
Christ before He shed His Blood for them. For it was not in vain that
the Lord Himself had come to none “but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.” <span id="fr_2951"></span>[2952](#fn_2951) But in others, after
He was crucified, and was now exalted into heaven, He found the fruit of
repentance; and these He did not make to wither, but cultivated them in
His field, and watered them with His word. Of this number were those
four thousand Jews who believed, after that the disciples and those who
were with them, filled with the Holy Ghost, spake with the tongues of
all nations, <span id="fr_2952"></span>[2953](#fn_2952) and in that
diversity of tongues announced in a way beforehand, that the Church
should be throughout all nations. They believed at that time, and “they
were the lost sheep of the house of Israel;” but because “the Son of Man
had come to seek and to save that which was lost,” <span
id="fr_2953"></span>[2954](#fn_2953) He found these also. But they lay
hid here and there among thorns, as though wasted and dispersed by the
wolves; and because they lay hid among thorns, He did not come to find
them, save when torn by the <span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="vii.xli-Page_389"></span>thorns of His Passion; yet come He did, He
found, He redeemed them. They had slain, not Him so much, as themselves.
They were saved by Him who was slain for them. For, as the Apostles
spake, they were pricked; <span id="fr_2954"></span>[2955](#fn_2954)
they were pricked in conscience, who had pricked Him with the spear; and
being pricked they sought for counsel, received it when it was given,
repented, found grace, and believing drunk that Blood which in their
fury they had shed. But they who have remained in this bad and barren
race, even unto this day, and shall remain unto the end, were figured in
that tree. You come to them at this day, and find with them all the
writings of the Prophets. But these are but leaves; Christ is an
hungred, and He seeketh for fruit; but findeth no fruit among them,
because He doth not find Himself among them. For He hath no fruit, who
hath not Christ. And he hath not Christ, who holdeth not to Christ’s
unity, who hath not charity. And so by this chain he hath no fruit who
hath not charity. Hear the Apostle, “Now the fruit of the Spirit is
charity;” so setting forth the praise of this cluster, that is, of this
fruit; “The fruit of the Spirit,” he says, “is charity,  <span
id="fr_2955"></span>[2956](#fn_2955) joy, peace, long-suffering.” Do not
wonder at what follows, when charity leads the way.

<span id="vii.xli-p13"></span>2. Accordingly, when the disciples
marvelled at the withering of the tree, He set forth to them the value
of faith, and said to them, “If ye have faith, and doubt not;” <span
id="fr_2956"></span>[2957](#fn_2956) that is, if in all things ye have
trust in God; and do not say, “God can do this, this He cannot do;” but
rely on the omnipotence of the Almighty; “ye shall not only do this, but
also if ye shall say to this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast
into the sea, it shall be done. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask
in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.” <span
id="fr_2957"></span>[2958](#fn_2957) Now we read that miracles were
wrought by the disciples, yea rather by the Lord through the disciples;
for, “without Me,” He says, “ye can do nothing.” <span
id="fr_2958"></span>[2959](#fn_2958) The Lord could do many things
without the disciples, but the disciples nothing without the Lord. He
who could make <span id="fr_2959"></span>[2960](#fn_2959) even the
disciples themselves, was not certainly assisted by them to make them.
We read then of the Apostles’ miracles, but we nowhere read of a tree
being withered by them, nor of a mountain removed into the sea. Let us
enquire therefore where this was done. For the words of the Lord could
not be without effect. If ye are thinking of “trees” and “mountains” in
their ordinary and familiar sense, it has not been done. But if ye think
of that tree of which He spake, and of that mountain of the Lord of
which the Prophet said, “In the last days the mountain of the Lord’s
house shall be manifest;” <span id="fr_2960"></span>[2961](#fn_2960) if
ye think of it, and understand it thus, it has been done, and done by
the Apostles. The tree is the Jewish nation, but I say again, that part
of it which was reprobate, not that which was called; that tree which we
have spoken of is the Jewish nation. The mountain, as the prophetic
testimony hath taught us, is the Lord Himself. The withered tree is the
Jewish nation reft of the honour of Christ; the sea is this world with
all the nations. Now see the Apostles speaking to this tree which was
about to be withered away, and casting the mountain into the sea. In the
Acts of the Apostles they speak to the Jews who gainsay and resist the
word of truth, that is, who have leaves and have no fruit, and they say
to them, “It was necessary that the word of God should first have been
spoken to you: but seeing ye have put it from you” (for ye use the words
of the Prophets, yet do not acknowledge Him whom the Prophets foretold,
that is, ye have leaves only), “lo, we turn to the Gentiles.” For this
also was foretold by the Prophets; “Behold, I have given Thee for a
light of the Gentiles, that Thou mayest be My salvation unto the end of
the earth.” <span id="fr_2961"></span>[2962](#fn_2961) See then, the
tree hath withered away; and Christ hath been removed unto the Gentiles,
the mountain into the sea. For how should not the tree wither away which
is planted in that vineyard, of which it was said, “I will command my
clouds that they rain no rain upon it”? <span
id="fr_2962"></span>[2963](#fn_2962)

<span id="vii.xli-p21"></span>3. Now that in order to convey this truth
the Lord acted prophetically, I mean that, as concerning this tree, it
was not His will merely to exhibit a miracle, but that by the miracle He
conveyed the intimation of something to come, there are many things
which teach and persuade us, yea even against our wills force us to
believe. In the first place, what fault in the tree was it that it had
no fruit, when even if it had no fruit at the proper season, that is,
the season of its fruit, it would not assuredly be any fault in the
tree; for the tree as being without sense and reason could not be to
blame. But to this is added, that as we read it in the narrative of the
other Evangelist who expressly mentions this, “it was not the time for
that fruit.” <span id="fr_2963"></span>[2964](#fn_2963) For that was the
time when the fig-tree shoots forth its tender leaves, which come, we
know, before the fruit; and this we prove, because the day of the Lord’s
Passion was at hand, and we know at what time He suffered; and if we did
not know it, we ought of course to give credit to the Evangelist who
says, “The time of figs was not yet.” So then if it was only a miracle
<span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="vii.xli-Page_390"></span>that was to have been set forth, and not
something to be prophetically figured, it would have been much more
worthy of the clemency and mercy of the Lord, to have made green again
any tree He might find withered; as He healed the sick, as He cleansed
the lepers, as He raised the dead. But then contrariwise, as though
against the ordinary rule of His clemency, He found a green tree, not
yet bearing fruit out of its proper season, but still not refusing the
hope of fruit to its dresser, and He withered it away; as though He
would say to us, “I have no delight in the withering away of this tree,
but thus I would convey to you, that I have not designed to do this
without any cause for it, but only because I desired thereby to convey
to you a lesson you might the more regard. It is not this tree that I
have cursed, it is not on a tree without sense that I have inflicted
punishment, but I have made thee fear, whosoever thou art that dost
consider the matter, that thou mightest not despise Christ when He is an
hungered, that thou mightest love rather to be enriched with fruit, than
to be overshadowed by leaves.”

<span id="vii.xli-p23"></span>4. This one thing is that which the Lord
intimates that He designed to signify by what He did. What else is
there? He cometh to the tree being hungry, and seeketh fruit. Did He not
know that it was not the time for it? What the cultivator of the tree
knew, did not its Creator know? He seeketh on the tree then for fruit
which it had not yet. Doth He really seek for it, or rather make a
pretence of seeking it? For if He really sought it, He was mistaken. But
this be far from Him, to be mistaken! He made then a pretence of seeking
it. Fearing to allow this, that he maketh a pretence, thou dost confess
that He was mistaken. Again, thou dost turn away from the idea of His
being mistaken, and so run into that of His making a pretence. We are
parched up between the two. If we are parched, let us beg for rain, that
we may grow green, lest in saying anything unworthy of the Lord, we
rather wither away. The Evangelist indeed says, “He came to the tree,
and found no fruit on it.” <span id="fr_2964"></span>[2965](#fn_2964)
“He found none,” would not be said of Him, unless He had either really
sought for it, or made a pretence of seeking, though He knew that there
was none there. Wherefore we do not hesitate, let us by no means say
that Christ was mistaken. What then? shall we say He made a pretence?
Shall we say this? How shall we get out of this difficulty? Let us say
what, if the Evangelist had not said of the Lord in another place, we
should not of ourselves dare to say. Let us say what the Evangelist has
written, and when we have said, let us understand it. But in order that
we may understand it, let us first believe. For, “unless ye believe,”
says the Prophet, “ye shall not understand.” <span
id="fr_2965"></span>[2966](#fn_2965) The Lord Christ after His
Resurrection, was walking in the way with two of His disciples, by whom
He was not yet recognised, and with whom He joined company as a third
traveller. They came to the place whither they were going, and the
Evangelist says, “But He made a pretence as though He would have gone
further.” <span id="fr_2966"></span>[2967](#fn_2966) But they kept Him,
saying, in the spirit of a courteous kindness, <span
id="fr_2967"></span>[2968](#fn_2967) that it was already drawing toward
evening, and praying Him to tarry there with them; being received and
entertained by them, He breaketh Bread, and is known of them in blessing
and breaking of the Bread. So then, let us not now fear to say, that He
made a pretence of seeking, if He made a pretence of going further. But
here there arises another question. Yesterday <span
id="fr_2968"></span>[2969](#fn_2968) I insisted <span
id="fr_2969"></span>[2970](#fn_2969) at some length on the truth which
is in the Apostles; how then do we find any “pretence” in the Lord
Himself? Therefore, Brethren, I must tell you, and teach you according
to my poor abilities, which the Lord giveth me for your benefit, and
must convey to you what ye may hold as a rule <span
id="fr_2970"></span>[2971](#fn_2970) in the interpretation of all
Scripture. Everything that is said or done is to be understood either in
its literal signification, or else it signifies something figuratively;
or at least contains both of these at once, both its own literal
interpretation, <span id="fr_2971"></span>[2972](#fn_2971) and a
figurative signification also. Thus I have set forth three things,
examples of them must now be given; and from whence, but from the Holy
Scriptures? It is said in its literal acceptation, that the Lord
suffered, that He rose again, and ascended into heaven; that we shall
rise again at the end of the world, that we shall reign with Him for
ever, if we do not despise Him. Take all this as spoken literally, and
look not out for figures; as it is expressed, so it really is. And so
also with divers actions. The Apostle went up to Jerusalem to see Peter,
the Apostle actually did this, it actually took place, it was an action
peculiar to himself. It is a fact which he tells you; a simple fact
according to its literal meaning. “The stone which the builders refused,
is become the Head of the corner,” <span
id="fr_2972"></span>[2973](#fn_2972) is spoken in a figure. If we take
“the stone” literally, what “stone did the builders refuse, which became
the Head of the corner”? If we take “the stone” literally, of what
corner is this “stone” become the Head? If we admit that it was
figuratively expressed, and take it figuratively, <span id="page_391">p.
391</span> <span id="vii.xli-Page_391"></span>the Corner-stone is
Christ: the head of the corner, is the Head of the Church. Why is the
Church the Corner? Because she has called the Jews from one side, and
the Gentiles from another, and these two walls as it were coming from
different quarters, and meeting together in one, she has bound together
by the grace of her peace. For, “He is our peace, who hath made both
one.” <span id="fr_2973"></span>[2974](#fn_2973)

<span id="vii.xli-p34"></span>5. Ye have heard instances of a literal
expression, and a literal action, and of a figurative expression; ye are
waiting for an instance of a figurative action. There are many such, but
meanwhile, as is suggested by this mention of the corner-stone, when
Jacob anointed the stone which he had placed at his head as he slept,
and in his sleep saw a mysterious <span
id="fr_2974"></span>[2975](#fn_2974) dream, ladders rising from the
earth to heaven, and Angels ascending and descending, and the Lord
standing upon the ladder, <span id="fr_2975"></span>[2976](#fn_2975) he
understood what it was designed to figure, and took the stone for a
figure of Christ, to prove to us thereby that he was no stranger to the
understanding of that vision and revelation. Do not wonder then that he
anointed it, for Christ received His Name from “the anointing.” Now this
Jacob was said in the Scripture to be “a man without guile.” <span
id="fr_2976"></span>[2977](#fn_2976) And this Jacob ye know was called
Israel. Accordingly in the Gospel, when the Lord saw Nathanael, He said,
“Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.” And that Israelite
not yet knowing who it was that talked with him, answered, “Whence
knewest Thou me?” And the Lord said to him, “When thou wast under the
fig-tree I saw thee;” <span id="fr_2977"></span>[2978](#fn_2977) as
though he would say, When thou wast in the shadow of sin, I
predestinated thee. And Nathanael, because he remembered that he had
been under the fig-tree, where the Lord was not, acknowledged His
Divinity, and answered, “Thou art the Son of God, Thou art the King of
Israel.” He who had been under the fig-tree was not made a withered
fig-tree; he acknowledged Christ. And the Lord said unto him, “Because I
said, When thou wast under the fig-tree I saw thee, believest thou? thou
shall see greater things than these.” What are these “greater things”?
“Verily I say unto you” (for he “is an Israelite in whom is no guile;”
remember Jacob in whom was no guile; and recollect of what he is
speaking, the stone at his head, the vision in his sleep, the ladder
from earth to heaven, the Angels ascending and descending; and so see
what it is that the Lord would say to “the Israelite without guile”);
“Verily I say unto you, Ye shall see heaven opened” (hear, thou
guileless Nathanael, what guileless Jacob saw); “ye shall see heaven
opened, and Angels ascending and descending” (unto whom?) “unto the Son
of Man.” Therefore was He, as the Son of Man, anointed on the head; for
“the head of the woman is the man, and the Head of the man is
Christ.” <span id="fr_2978"></span>[2979](#fn_2978) Now observe, He did
not say, “ascending from the Son of Man, and descending to the Son of
Man,” as if He were only above; but “ascending and descending unto the
Son of Man.” Hear the Son of Man crying out from above, “Saul, Saul.”
Hear the Son of Man from below, “Why persecutest thou Me?” <span
id="fr_2979"></span>[2980](#fn_2979)

<span id="vii.xli-p41"></span>6. Ye have heard an instance of a literal
expression, as “that we shall rise again;” of a literal action, as that,
according as it is said, “Paul went up to Jerusalem to see Peter.” <span
id="fr_2980"></span>[2981](#fn_2980) “The stone which the builders
refused,” is a figurative expression; “the anointed stone” which was at
Jacob’s head, is a figurative action. There is now due to your
expectation an example made out of both together, something which is at
once a literal fact, and which also signifies something else figured by
it. “We know that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other
by a free-woman;” <span id="fr_2981"></span>[2982](#fn_2981) this was
literally a fact, not only a story, but a fact; are ye looking for that
which was figured in it? “These are the two Testaments.” That then which
is spoken figuratively, is a sort of fiction. But since it has some real
event represented by it, and the very figure itself has its ground of
truth, it escapes all imputation of falsehood. “The sower went out to
sow his seed; and as he sowed, some fell by the way side, some fell upon
stony places, some fell among thorns, and some fell upon good
ground.” <span id="fr_2982"></span>[2983](#fn_2982) Who went out “to
sow,” or when went he out, or upon what “thorns,” or “stones” or “way
side” or in what field did he sow? If we receive this as a fictitious
story, we understand it in a figurative sense; it is fictitious. For if
any sower really went out, and did cast the seed in these different
places, as we have heard, it were no fiction, and so no falsehood. But
now though it be a fiction, yet it is no falsehood. Why? Because the
fiction has some further signification, it deceives thee not. It
requires only one to understand it, and does not lead any one into
error. And thus Christ wishing to convey this lesson to us, sought for
fruit, and hereby set forth to us a figurative, and no deceiving
fiction; a fiction therefore worthy of praise, not of blame; not one by
the examination of which we might run into what was false; but by the
diligent investigation of which we might discover what is true.

<span id="vii.xli-p45"></span>7. I see that one may say, Explain to me;
what did that signify, that “He made a pretence of going further”? For
if it had no further <span id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span
id="vii.xli-Page_392"></span>meaning, it is a deceit, a lie. We must
then according to our rules of exposition, and distinctions, tell you
what this “pretence of going further,” signified; “He made a pretence of
going further,” and is kept back from going further. In so far then as
the Lord Christ being as they supposed absent in respect of His Bodily
presence, was thought to be really absent, He will as it were “go
further.” But hold Him fast by faith, hold Him fast at the breaking of
Bread. What shall I say more? Have ye recognised Him? If so, then have
ye found Christ. I must not speak <span
id="fr_2983"></span>[2984](#fn_2983) any longer on this Sacrament. They
who put off the knowledge of this Sacrament, Christ goeth further from
them. Let them then hold It fast, let them not let Him go; let them
invite Him to their home, and so they are invited to heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2948"></span>[388:2949](1060258.htm#fr_2948) <span
id="vii.xli-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p5"></span> [Matt. xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019)<span id="vii.xli-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2949"></span>[388:2950](1060258.htm#fr_2949) <span
id="vii.xli-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p6"></span> *Meruit*.

<span id="fn_2950"></span>[388:2951](1060258.htm#fr_2950) <span
id="vii.xli-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p7"></span> [Matt. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009)<span id="vii.xli-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2951"></span>[388:2952](1060258.htm#fr_2951) <span
id="vii.xli-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p8"></span> [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span id="vii.xli-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2952"></span>[388:2953](1060258.htm#fr_2952) <span
id="vii.xli-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p9"></span> [Acts ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span id="vii.xli-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2953"></span>[388:2954](1060258.htm#fr_2953) <span
id="vii.xli-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p10"></span> [Luke xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)<span id="vii.xli-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2954"></span>[389:2955](1060258.htm#fr_2954) <span
id="vii.xli-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p11"></span> [Acts ii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037)<span id="vii.xli-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2955"></span>[389:2956](1060258.htm#fr_2955) <span
id="vii.xli-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p12"></span> [Gal. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span id="vii.xli-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2956"></span>[389:2957](1060258.htm#fr_2956) <span
id="vii.xli-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p14"></span> [Matt. xxi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#021)<span id="vii.xli-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2957"></span>[389:2958](1060258.htm#fr_2957) <span
id="vii.xli-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p15"></span> [Matt. xxi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#022)<span id="vii.xli-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2958"></span>[389:2959](1060258.htm#fr_2958) <span
id="vii.xli-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p16"></span> [John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="vii.xli-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2959"></span>[389:2960](1060258.htm#fr_2959) <span
id="vii.xli-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p17"></span> The meaning of “*facio*” as “to *do*,”
and “to make,” cannot be expressed in our language.

<span id="fn_2960"></span>[389:2961](1060258.htm#fr_2960) <span
id="vii.xli-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p18"></span> [Isa. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="vii.xli-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2961"></span>[389:2962](1060258.htm#fr_2961) <span
id="vii.xli-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p19"></span> [Acts
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046), [Isa.
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)<span id="vii.xli-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2962"></span>[389:2963](1060258.htm#fr_2962) <span
id="vii.xli-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p20"></span> [Isa. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006)<span id="vii.xli-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2963"></span>[389:2964](1060258.htm#fr_2963) <span
id="vii.xli-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p22"></span> [Mark xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#013)<span id="vii.xli-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2964"></span>[390:2965](1060258.htm#fr_2964) <span
id="vii.xli-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p24"></span> [Matt. xxi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019)<span id="vii.xli-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2965"></span>[390:2966](1060258.htm#fr_2965) <span
id="vii.xli-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p25"></span> [Isa. vii.
9](../../../bib/sep/isa007.htm#009)<span id="vii.xli-p25.1"></span>,
Sept.

<span id="fn_2966"></span>[390:2967](1060258.htm#fr_2966) <span
id="vii.xli-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p26"></span> [Luke xxiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#028)<span id="vii.xli-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2967"></span>[390:2968](1060258.htm#fr_2967) <span
id="vii.xli-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p27"></span> *More humanitatis*.

<span id="fn_2968"></span>[390:2969](1060258.htm#fr_2968) <span
id="vii.xli-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p28"></span> Probably in that Sermon which is marked
as next before this in Posidonius’ Catalogue, ch. 9, namely, “From the
Epistle to the Galatians, where Paul reproved Peter.” Ben ed. note.

<span id="fn_2969"></span>[390:2970](1060258.htm#fr_2969) <span
id="vii.xli-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p29"></span> *Commendavimus*.

<span id="fn_2970"></span>[390:2971](1060258.htm#fr_2970) <span
id="vii.xli-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p30"></span> *Regulariter*.

<span id="fn_2971"></span>[390:2972](1060258.htm#fr_2971) <span
id="vii.xli-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p31"></span> *Cognitionem*.

<span id="fn_2972"></span>[390:2973](1060258.htm#fr_2972) <span
id="vii.xli-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p32"></span> [Matt.
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042), [Ps.
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span id="vii.xli-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2973"></span>[391:2974](1060258.htm#fr_2973) <span
id="vii.xli-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p33"></span> [Eph. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="vii.xli-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2974"></span>[391:2975](1060258.htm#fr_2974) <span
id="vii.xli-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p35"></span> *Magnum*.

<span id="fn_2975"></span>[391:2976](1060258.htm#fr_2975) <span
id="vii.xli-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p36"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#011)<span id="vii.xli-p36.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2976"></span>[391:2977](1060258.htm#fr_2976) <span
id="vii.xli-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p37"></span> [Gen. xxv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)<span id="vii.xli-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2977"></span>[391:2978](1060258.htm#fr_2977) <span
id="vii.xli-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p38"></span> [John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)<span id="vii.xli-p38.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2978"></span>[391:2979](1060258.htm#fr_2978) <span
id="vii.xli-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p39"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="vii.xli-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2979"></span>[391:2980](1060258.htm#fr_2979) <span
id="vii.xli-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p40"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="vii.xli-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2980"></span>[391:2981](1060258.htm#fr_2980) <span
id="vii.xli-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p42"></span> [Gal. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)<span id="vii.xli-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2981"></span>[391:2982](1060258.htm#fr_2981) <span
id="vii.xli-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p43"></span> [Gal. iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022)<span id="vii.xli-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2982"></span>[391:2983](1060258.htm#fr_2982) <span
id="vii.xli-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p44"></span> [Matt. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003)<span id="vii.xli-p44.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2983"></span>[392:2984](1060258.htm#fr_2983) <span
id="vii.xli-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xli-p46"></span> See Serm. vi. (lvi. Ben.) 10 (vi.) note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XL](1060259)
