[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060171)  [Next](1060173) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXXV.—Of the Pharisees Who Sit in
the Seat of Moses, and Enjoin Things Which They Do Not, and of the Other
Words Spoken by the Lord Against These Same Pharisees; Of the Question
Whether Matthew’s Narrative Agrees Here with Those Which are Given by
the Other Two Evangelists, and in Particular with that of Luke, Who
Introduces a Passage Resembling This One, Although It is Brought in Not
in This Order, But in Another Connection.</span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p2"></span>144. Matthew proceeds with his account,
observing the following order of narration: “Then spake Jesus to the
multitude, and to His disciples, saying, The scribes and the Pharisees
sit in Moses’ seat: all, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and
do not;” and so on, down to the words, “Ye shall not see me henceforth,
till ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.”
 <span id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175) Luke also mentions a similar
discourse which was spoken by the Lord in opposition to the Pharisees
and the scribes and the doctors of the law, but reports it as delivered
in the house of a certain Pharisee, who had invited Him to a feast. In
order to relate that passage, he has made a digression from the order
which is followed by Matthew, about the point at which they have both
put on record the Lord’s sayings respecting the sign of the three days
and nights in the history of Jonas, and the queen of the south, and the
unclean spirit that returns and finds the house swept. <span
id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176) And that paragraph is followed up
by Matthew with these words: “While He yet talked to the people, behold,
His mother and His brethren stood without, desiring to speak with Him.”
But in the version which the third Gospel presents of the discourse then
spoken by the Lord, after the recital of certain <span id="page_167">p.
167</span> <span id="vi.v.lxxvi-Page_167"></span>sayings of the Lord
which Matthew has omitted to notice, Luke turns off from the order which
he had been observing in concert with Matthew, so that his immediately
subsequent narrative runs thus: “And as He spake, a certain Pharisee
besought Him to dine with him: and He went in, and sat down to meat. And
when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that He had not first washed
before dinner. And the Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees make
clean the outside of the cup and platter.” <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177) And after this, Luke reports other
utterances which were directed against the said Pharisees and scribes
and teachers of the law, which are of a similar tenor to those which
Matthew also recounts in this passage which we have taken in hand at
present to consider. <span id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178)
Wherefore, although Matthew records these things in a manner which,
while it is true indeed that the house of that Pharisee is not mentioned
by name, yet does not specify as the scene where the words were spoken
any place entirely inconsistent with the idea of His having been in the
house referred to; still the facts that the Lord by this time \[*i.e.*
according to Matthew’s Gospel\] had left Galilee and come into
Jerusalem, and that the incidents alluded to above, on to the discourse
which is now under review, <span id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179)
are so arranged in the context after His arrival as to make it only
reasonable to understand them to have taken place in Jerusalem, whereas
Luke’s narrative deals with what occurred at the time when the Lord as
yet was only journeying towards Jerusalem, are considerations which lead
me to the conclusion that these are not the same, but only two similar
discourses, of which the former evangelist has reported the one, and the
latter the other.

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p8"></span>145. This is also a matter which
requires some consideration,—namely, the question how it is said here,
“Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is He that
cometh in the name of the Lord,” <span
id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180) when, according to this same
Matthew, they had already expressed themselves to this effect. <span
id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181) Besides, Luke likewise tells us
that a reply containing these very words had previously been returned by
the Lord to the persons who had counselled Him to leave their locality,
because Herod sought to kill Him. That evangelist represents these
self-same terms, which Matthew records here, to have been employed by
Him in the declaration which He directed on that occasion against
Jerusalem itself. For Luke’s narrative proceeds in the following manner:
“The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto Him, Get
thee out, and depart hence: for Herod will kill thee. And He said unto
them, Go ye and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures
to-day and to-morrow, and the third day I am perfected. Nevertheless, I
must walk to-day, and to-morrow, and the day following; for it cannot be
that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how
often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather
her brood under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house shall be
left unto you desolate: and I say unto you, that ye shall not see me
until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the
name of the Lord.” <span id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182) There does
not seem, however, to be anything contradictory to the narration thus
given by Luke in the circumstance that the multitudes said, when the
Lord was approaching Jerusalem, “Blessed is He that cometh in the name
of the Lord.” For, according to the order which is followed by Luke, He
had not yet come to the scene in question, and the words had not been
uttered. But since he does not tell us that He did actually leave the
place at that time, not to return to it until the period came when such
words would be spoken by them (for He continues on His journey until he
arrives at Jerusalem; and the saying, “Behold, I cast out devils, and I
do cures to-day and to-morrow, and the third day I am perfected,” is to
be taken to have been uttered by Him in a mystical and figurative sense:
for certainly He did not suffer at a time answering literally to the
third day after the present occasion; nay, He immediately goes on to
say, “Nevertheless, I must walk to-day, and to-morrow, and the day
following”), we are indeed constrained also to put a mystical
interpretation upon the sentence, “Ye shall not see me henceforth, until
the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name
of the Lord,” and to understand it to refer to that advent of His in
which He is to come in His effulgent brightness; <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183) it being thereby also implied, that
what He expressed in the declaration, “I cast out devils, and I do cures
to-day and to-morrow, and the third day I am perfected,” bears upon His
body, which is the Church. For devils are cast out when the nations
abandon their ancestral superstitions and believe on Him; and cures are
wrought when men renounce the devil and this world, and live in
accordance with His commandments, even unto the consummation of the
resurrection, in which there shall, as it were, be realized that
perfecting on the third day; that is to say, the Church shall be
perfected up to the measure of the angelic fulness through the realized
immortality of the body as well as the soul. Therefore the order
followed by Matthew is by no means <span id="page_168">p. 168</span>
<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-Page_168"></span>to be understood to involve a
digression to another connection. But we are rather to suppose, either
that Luke has antedated the events which took place in Jerusalem, and
has introduced them at this point simply as they were here suggested to
his recollection, before his narrative really brings the Lord to
Jerusalem; or that the Lord, when drawing near the same city on that
occasion, did actually reply to the persons who counselled Him to be on
His guard against Herod, in terms resembling those in which Matthew
represents Him to have spoken also to the multitudes at a period when He
had already arrived in Jerusalem, and when all these events had taken
place which have been detailed above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[166:1176](1060172.htm#fr_1175) <span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p3"></span> [Matt.
xxiii](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#000)<span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[166:1177](1060172.htm#fr_1176) <span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p4"></span> [Matt. xii.
39-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039)<span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[167:1178](1060172.htm#fr_1177) <span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p5"></span> [Luke xi.
29-39](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#029)<span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[167:1179](1060172.htm#fr_1178) <span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p6"></span> [Luke xi.
40-52](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#040)<span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[167:1180](1060172.htm#fr_1179) <span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p7"></span> In [Matt.
xxiii](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#000)<span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[167:1181](1060172.htm#fr_1180) <span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p9"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#039)<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[167:1182](1060172.htm#fr_1181) <span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p10"></span> [Matt. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009)<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[167:1183](1060172.htm#fr_1182) <span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p11"></span> [Luke xiii.
31-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#031)<span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[167:1184](1060172.htm#fr_1183) <span
id="vi.v.lxxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxvi-p12"></span> *In claritate*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVI](1060173)
