[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060115)  [Next](1060117.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.xx"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—Of the Lengthened Sermon Which,
According to Matthew, He Delivered on the Mount.</span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p2"></span>43. Now, regarding that lengthened sermon
which, according to Matthew, the Lord delivered on the mount, let us at
present see whether it appears that the rest of the evangelists stand in
no manner of antagonism to it. Mark, it is true, has not recorded it at
all, neither has he preserved any utterances of Christ’s in any way
resembling it, with the exception of certain sentences which are not
given connectedly, but occur here and there, and which the Lord repeated
in other places. Nevertheless, he has left a space in the text of his
narrative indicating the point at which we may understand this sermon to
have been spoken, although it has been left unrecited. That is the place
where he says: “And He was preaching in their synagogues, and in all
Galilee, and was casting out devils.” <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847.md) Under the head of this preaching, in
which he says Jesus engaged in all Galilee, we may also understand that
discourse to be comprehended which was delivered on the mount, and which
is detailed by Matthew. For the same Mark continues his account thus:
“And there came a leper to Him, beseeching Him; and kneeling down to
Him, said, If Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean.” <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848.md) And he goes on with the rest of the
story of the cleansing of this leper, in such a manner as to make it
intelligible to us that the person in question is the very man who is
mentioned by Matthew as having been healed at the time when the Lord
came down from the mount after the delivery of His discourse. For this
is how Matthew gives the history there: “Now, when He was come down from
the mountain, great multitudes followed Him; and, behold, there came a
leper, and worshipped Him, saying, Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make
me clean;” <span id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849.md) and so on.

<span id="vi.v.xx-p6"></span>44. This leper is also referred to by
Luke, <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850.md) not indeed in this order,
but after the manner in which the writers are accustomed to act,
recording at a subsequent point things which have been omitted at a
previous stage, or bringing in at an earlier point occurrences which
took place at a later period, according as they had incidents suggested
to their minds by the heavenly influence, with which indeed they had
become acquainted before, but which they were afterwards prompted to
commit to writing as they came up to their recollection. This same Luke,
however, has also left us a version of his own of that copious discourse
of the Lord, in a passage which he commences just as the section in
Matthew begins. For in the latter the words run thus: “Blessed are the
poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven;” <span
id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851.md) while in the former they are put thus:
“Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God.” <span
id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852.md) Then, too, much of what follows in
Luke’s narrative is similar to what we have in the other. And finally,
the conclusion given to the sermon is repeated in both Gospels in its
entire identity,—namely, the story of the wise man who builds upon the
rock, and the foolish man who builds upon the sand; the only difference
being, that Luke speaks only of the stream beating against the house,
and does not mention also the rain and the wind, as they occur in
Matthew. Accordingly, it might very readily be believed that he has
there introduced the self-same discourse of the Lord, but that at the
same time he has omitted certain sentences which Matthew has inserted;
that he has also brought in other sayings which Matthew has not
mentioned; and that, in a similar manner, he has expressed certain of
these utterances in somewhat different terms, but without detriment to
the integrity of the truth.

<span id="vi.v.xx-p10"></span>45. This we might very well suppose to
have been the case, as I have said, were it not that a difficulty is
felt to attach to the circumstance that Matthew tells us how this
discourse was delivered on a mount by the Lord in a sitting posture;
while Luke says that it was spoken on a plain by the Lord in a standing
posture. This difference, accordingly, makes it seem as if the former
referred to one discourse, and the latter to another. And what should
there be, indeed, to hinder \[us from supposing\] Christ to have
repeated elsewhere some words which He had already spoken, or from doing
a second time certain things which He had already done on some previous
occasion? However, that these two discourses, of which the one is
inserted by Matthew and the other by Luke, are not separated by a long
space of time, is with much probability inferred from the fact that, at
once in what precedes and in what follows <span id="page_125">p.
125</span> <span id="vi.v.xx-Page_125"></span>them, both the evangelists
have related certain incidents either similar or perfectly identical, so
that it is not unreasonably felt that the narrations of the writers who
introduce these things are occupied with the same localities and days.
For Matthew’s recital proceeds in the following terms: “And there
followed Him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from
Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judæa, and from beyond Jordan.
And seeing the multitudes, He went up into a mountain; and when He was
set, His disciples came unto Him: and He opened His mouth, and taught
them, saying, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven;” <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853.md) and so forth. Here
it may appear that His desire was to free Himself from the great crowds
of people, and that for this reason He went up into the mountain, as if
He meant to withdraw Himself from the multitudes, and seek an
opportunity of speaking with His disciples alone. And this seems to be
certified also by Luke, whose account is to the following effect: “And
it came to pass in those days, that He went out into a mountain to pray,
and continued all night in prayer to God. And when it was day, He called
unto Him His disciples: and of them He chose twelve, whom also He named
apostles; Simon, whom He also named Peter, and Andrew his brother, James
and John, Philip and Bartholomew, Matthew and Thomas, James the son of
Alpheus, and Simon, who is called Zelotes, Judas the brother of James,
and Judas Scarioth, which was the traitor. And He came down with them,
and stood in the plain, and the company of His disciples, and a great
multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the
sea-coast of Tyre <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854.md) and Sidon,
which had come to hear Him, and to be healed of their diseases; and they
that were vexed with unclean spirits were healed. <span
id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855.md) And the whole multitude sought to
touch Him; for there went virtue out of Him, and healed them all. And He
lifted up His eyes on His disciples, and said, Blessed be ye poor: for
yours is the kingdom of heaven;” <span id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856.md)
and so on. Here the relation permits us to understand that, after
selecting on the mountain twelve disciples out of the larger body, whom
He also named apostles (which incident Matthew has omitted), He then
delivered that discourse which Matthew has introduced, and which Luke
has left unnoticed,—that is to say, the one on the mount; and that
thereafter, when He had now come down, He spoke in the plain a second
discourse similar to the first, on which Matthew is silent, but which is
detailed by Luke; and further, that both these sermons were concluded in
the same manner. <span id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857.md)

<span id="vi.v.xx-p16"></span>46. But, again, as regards what Matthew
proceeds to state after the termination of that discourse—namely this,
“And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the
people <span id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858.md) were astonished at His
doctrine,” <span id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859.md) —it may appear that
the speakers there were those multitudes of disciples out of whom He had
chosen the twelve. Moreover, when the evangelist goes on immediately in
these terms, “And when He was come down from the mountain, great
multitudes followed Him; and, behold, there came a leper and worshipped
Him,” <span id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860.md) we are at libertyto
suppose that that incident took place subsequently to both
discourses,—not only after the one which Matthew records, but also after
the one which Luke inserts. For it is not made apparent what length of
time elapsed after the descent from the mountain. But Matthew’s
intention was simply to indicate the fact itself, that after that
descent there were great multitudes of people with the Lord on the
occasion when He cleansed the leper, and not to specify what period of
time had intervened. And this supposition may all the more readily be
entertained, since \[we find that\] Luke tells us how the same leper was
cleansed at a time when the Lord was now in a certain city,—a
circumstance which Matthew has not cared to mention.

<span id="vi.v.xx-p20"></span>47. After all, however, this explanation
may also be suggested,—namely, that in the first instance the Lord,
along with His disciples and no others, was on some more elevated
portion of the mountain, and that during the period of His stay there He
chose out of the number of His followers those twelve; that then He came
down in company with them, not indeed from the mountain itself, but from
that said altitude on the mountain, into the plain—that is to say, into
some level spot which was found on the slope of the mountain, and which
was capable of accommodating great multitudes; and that thereafter, when
He had seated Himself, His disciples took up their position next Him,
and in these circumstances He delivered both to them and to the other
multitudes who were present one discourse, which Matthew and Luke have
both recorded, their modes of narrating it being indeed different, but
the truth being given with equal fidelity by the two writers in all that
concerns the facts and sayings which both of them have recounted. For we
have already prefaced our inquiry with the position, which indeed ought
of itself to have been obvious to all without the need of any one to
give them counsel to that effect beforehand, <span id="page_126">p.
126</span> <span id="vi.v.xx-Page_126"></span>that there is not
\[necessarily\] any antagonism between writers, although one may omit
something which another mentions; nor, again, although one states a fact
in one way, and another in a different method, provided that the same
truth is set forth in regard to the objects and sayings themselves. In
this way, therefore, Matthew’s sentence, “Now when He was come down from
the mountain,” may at the same time be understood to refer also to the
plain, which there might very well have been on the slope of the
mountain. And thereafter Matthew tells the story of the cleansing of the
leper, which is also given in a similar manner by Mark and Luke.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_847"></span>[124:848](1060116.htm#fr_847.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p3"></span> [Mark i.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#039.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[124:849](1060116.htm#fr_848.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p4"></span> [Mark i.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#040.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[124:850](1060116.htm#fr_849.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p5"></span> [Matt.
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[124:851](1060116.htm#fr_850.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p7"></span> [Luke
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#013.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p7.1"></span>.
\[It seems altogether more probable that the healing of the leper
occurred, before the Sermon on the Mount, at the time indicated by
Luke.—R.\]

<span id="fn_851"></span>[124:852](1060116.htm#fr_851.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p8"></span> [Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[124:853](1060116.htm#fr_852.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p9"></span> [Luke vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[125:854](1060116.htm#fr_853.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p11"></span> [Matt. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#025.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p11.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[125:855](1060116.htm#fr_854.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p12"></span> Various <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.xx-p12.1"></span>mss.</span> and editions insert *et* before
the *Tyri* = both of Tyre, although it is wanting in the Greek.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[125:856](1060116.htm#fr_855.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p13"></span> *Qui vexabantur a spiritibus immundis
curabantur*.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[125:857](1060116.htm#fr_856.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p14"></span> [Luke vi.
12-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[125:858](1060116.htm#fr_857.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p15"></span> \[The explanation suggested in § 47 is
altogether more probable.—R.\]

<span id="fn_858"></span>[125:859](1060116.htm#fr_858.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p17"></span> *Turbæ*, multitudes.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[125:860](1060116.htm#fr_859.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p18"></span> [Matt. vii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[125:861](1060116.htm#fr_860.md) <span
id="vi.v.xx-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xx-p19"></span> [Matt.
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002.md)<span id="vi.v.xx-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](1060117.md)
