[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060282)  [Next](1060284.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxvi"></span> <span id="vii.lxvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxvi-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXIV.</span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxvi-p2.1"></span>\[CXIV. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxvi-p3.1"></span>*[Luke xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p3.2"></span>, “If
thy brother sin, rebuke him,” etc., touching the remission of sins.*

<span id="vii.lxvi-p4"></span>Delivered at the Table of St. Cyprian, in
the presence of Count Boniface.

<span id="vii.lxvi-p5"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxvi-p5.1"></span>The</span> Holy Gospel which we heard just now
as it was being read, has admonished touching the remission of sins. And
on this subject must ye be admonished now by my discourse. For we are
ministers of the word, not our own word, but the word of our God and
Lord, whom no one serves without glory, whom no one despises without
punishment. He then the Lord our God, who abiding with the Father made
us, and having been made for us, re-made us, He the Lord our God Jesus
Christ Himself says to us what we have heard just now in the Gospel.
“If,” He saith, “thy brother shall sin against thee, rebuke him, and if
he shall repent, forgive him; and if he shall sin against time seven
times in a day, and shall come and say, I repent, forgive him.” <span
id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519.md) He would not have “seven times in a
day” otherwise understood than “as often as may be,” lest haply he sin
eight times, and thou be unwilling to forgive. What then is “seven
times”? Always, as often as he shall sin and repent. For this, “Seven
times in a day will I praise thee,” <span
id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520.md) is the same as in another Psalm,
“His praise shall always be in my mouth.” <span
id="fr_3521"></span>[3522](#fn_3521.md) And there is the strongest reason
why seven times should be put for that which is always: for the whole
course of time revolves in a circle of seven coming and returning days.

<span id="vii.lxvi-p9"></span>2. Whosoever then thou art that hast thy
thoughts on Christ, and desirest to receive what He hath promised, be
not slow to do that which He hath enjoined. Now what hath He promised?
“Eternal life.” And what hath He enjoined? That pardon be given to thy
brother. As if He had said to thee, “Do thou, O man, give pardon to a
man, that I, who am God, may <span id="page_453">p. 453</span> <span
id="vii.lxvi-Page_453"></span>come unto thee.” But that I may pass over,
or rather pass by for a while, those more exalted divine promises in
which our Creator engages to make us equal with His Angels, that we may
with Him, and in Him, and by Him, live without end; not to speak of this
just now, dost thou not wish to receive of thy God this very thing,
which thou art commanded to give thy brother? This very thing, I say,
which thou art commanded to give thy brother, dost thou not wish to
receive from thy Lord? Tell me if thou wishest it not; and so give it
not. What is this, but that thou shouldest forgive him that asks thee,
if thou require to be forgiven? But if thou have nothing to be forgiven
thee, I dare to say, be unwilling to forgive. Though I ought not even to
say this. Though thou have nothing to be forgiven thee, forgive.

<span id="vii.lxvi-p10"></span>3. Thou art just on the point of saying
to me, “But I am not God, I am a man, a sinner.” God be thanked that
thou dost confess thou hast sins. Forgive then, that they may be
forgiven thee. Yet the Lord Himself our God exhorteth us to imitate Him.
In the first place God Himself, Christ, exhorteth us, of whom the
Apostle Peter said, “Christ hath suffered for us, leaving you an example
that ye should follow His steps, who did no sin, neither was guile,
found in His mouth.” <span id="fr_3522"></span>[3523](#fn_3522.md) He then
verily had no sin, yet did He die for our sins, and shed His Blood for
the remission of sins. He took upon Him for our sakes what was not His
due, that He might deliver us from what was due to us. Death was not due
to Him, nor life to us. Why? Because we were sinners. Death was not due
to Him, nor life to us; He received what was not due to Him, He gave
what was not due to us. But since we are speaking of the remission of
sins, lest ye should think it too high a thing to imitate Christ, hear
the Apostle saying, “Forgiving one another, even as God in Christ hath
forgiven you.” <span id="fr_3523"></span>[3524](#fn_3523.md) “Be ye
therefore imitators of God.” They are the Apostle’s words, not mine. Is
it indeed a proud thing to imitate God? Hear the Apostle, “Be ye
imitators of God as dearly beloved children.” <span
id="fr_3524"></span>[3525](#fn_3524.md) Thou art called a child: if thou
refuse to imitate Him, why seekest thou His inheritance?

<span id="vii.lxvi-p14"></span>4. This would I say even if thou hadst no
sin which thou mightest desire to be forgiven thee. But as it is,
whosoever thou art, thou art a man; though thou be righteous, thou art a
man; be thou layman, or monk, or clerk, or Bishop, or Apostle, thou art
a man. Hear the Apostle’s voice, “If we shall say that we have no sin,
we deceive ourselves.” <span id="fr_3525"></span>[3526](#fn_3525.md) He,
that famous John and an Evangelist, he whom the Lord Christ loved beyond
all the rest, who lay on His breast, he says, “If we shall say.” He did
not say, “If ye shall say that ye have no sin,” but “if we shall say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.”
He joined himself in the guilt, that he might be joined in the pardon
also. “If we shall say.” Consider who it is that says, “If we shall say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
But if we shall confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquity.” <span
id="fr_3526"></span>[3527](#fn_3526.md) How does He cleanse? By forgiving,
not as though He found nothing to punish, but as finding something to
forgive. So then, Brethren, if we have sins, let us forgive them that
ask us. Let us not retain enmities in our heart against another. For the
retaining of enmities more than anything corrupts this heart of ours.

<span id="vii.lxvi-p17"></span>5. I would then that thou shouldest
forgive, seeing that I find thee asking forgiveness. Thou art asked,
forgive: thou art asked, and thou wilt ask thyself; thou art asked,
forgive; thou wilt ask to be forgiven; for, lo, the time of prayer will
come: I have thee fast in the words thou wilt have to speak. Thou wilt
say, “Our Father, which art in heaven.” For thou wilt not be in the
number of children, if thou shalt not say, “Our Father.” So then thou
wilt say, “Our Father, which art in heaven.” Follow on; “Hallowed be Thy
Name.” Say on, “Thy kingdom come.” Follow still on, “Thy will be done,
as in heaven, so in earth.” See what thou addest next, “Give us this day
our daily bread.” <span id="fr_3527"></span>[3528](#fn_3527.md) Where are
thy riches? So thou art a beggar. Nevertheless in the mean while (it is
the point I am speaking of), say what is next after, “Give us this day
our daily bread.” Say what follows this: “Forgive us our debts.” Now
thou hast come to my words, “Forgive us our debts.” By what right? by
what covenant? on what condition? on what express stipulation? “As we
also forgive our debtors.” It is but a small thing that thou dost not
forgive; yea thou dost more, thou liest unto God. The condition is laid
down, the law fixed. “Forgive as I forgive.” Therefore He does not
forgive, unless thou forgivest. “Forgive as I forgive.” Thou wishest to
be forgiven when thou askest, forgive him that asks of thee. He that is
skilled in heaven’s laws <span id="fr_3528"></span>[3529](#fn_3528.md) has
dictated these prayers: He does not deceive thee; ask according to the
tenor of His heavenly voice: say, “Forgive us, as we also forgive,” and
do what thou sayest. He that lies in his prayers, loses the benefit he
seeks: he that lies in his prayers, both loses his cause, and finds his
punishment. And if any one lies to the emperor, he is convicted of his
lie at his coming: but when thou liest in prayer, thou by thy <span
id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span id="vii.lxvi-Page_454"></span>very
prayer art convicted. For God does not seek for witness as regards thee
to convict thee. He who dictated the prayers to thee, is thine Advocate:
if thou liest, He is a witness against thee: if thou dost not amend
thyself, He will be thy Judge. So then both say it, and do. For if thou
say it not, thou wilt not obtain making thy requests contrary to the
law; but if thou say it and do it not, thou wilt be further guilty of
lying. There is no means of evading that verse, save by fulfilling what
we say. Can we blot this verse out of our prayer? Would ye that clause,
“Forgive us our debts,” should be there, and that we should blot out
what follows, “As we also forgive our debtors”? Thou shalt not blot it
out, lest thou be first blotted out thyself. So then in this prayer thou
sayest, “Give,” and thou sayest, “Forgive:” that thou mayest receive
what thou hast not, and may be forgiven what thou hast done amiss. So
then thou wishest to receive, give; thou wishest to be forgiven,
forgive. It is a brief summary. Hear Christ Himself in another place,
“Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.” What will ye forgive? What others
have sinned against you. What shall ye be forgiven? What ye have sinned
yourselves. “Forgive.” “Give, and there shall be given you what ye
desire,” <span id="fr_3529"></span>[3530](#fn_3529.md) eternal life.
Support the temporal life of the poor man, sustain the poor man’s
present life, and for this so small and earthly seed ye shall receive
for harvest life eternal. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[452:3520](1060283.htm#fr_3519.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p6"></span> [Luke xvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[452:3521](1060283.htm#fr_3520.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p7"></span> [Ps. cxix.
164](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#164.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3521"></span>[452:3522](1060283.htm#fr_3521.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p8"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3522"></span>[453:3523](1060283.htm#fr_3522.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p11"></span> [1 Pet.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3523"></span>[453:3524](1060283.htm#fr_3523.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p12"></span> [Col.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#013.md), [Eph.
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3524"></span>[453:3525](1060283.htm#fr_3524.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p13"></span> [Eph. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3525"></span>[453:3526](1060283.htm#fr_3525.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p15"></span> [1 John i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3526"></span>[453:3527](1060283.htm#fr_3526.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p16"></span> [1 John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3527"></span>[453:3528](1060283.htm#fr_3527.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p18"></span> [Matt. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p18.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3528"></span>[453:3529](1060283.htm#fr_3528.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p19"></span> *Jurisperitus*.

<span id="fn_3529"></span>[454:3530](1060283.htm#fr_3529.md) <span
id="vii.lxvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxvi-p20"></span> [Luke
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038.md)<span id="vii.lxvi-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXV](1060284.md)
