[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060057)  [Next](1060059.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii"></span> <span id="page_67">p. 67</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_67"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>Introductory Essay.</span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="vi.ii-p2.1"></span>By Professor M. B. Riddle, D.D.</span>

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p4.1"></span>The</span> treatise of Augustin <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p4.2"></span>On the Harmony of the
Evangelists</span> (*De Consensu Evangelistarum*) is regarded as the
most laborious task undertaken by the great African Father. But its
influence has been much less obvious than that of his strictly
exegetical and doctrinal works. Dr. Salmond, in his Introductory Notice,
gives a discriminating and just estimate of it. Jerome was, in some
respects, far better equipped for such a task than Augustin; yet one
cannot study this work, bearing in mind the hermeneutical tendencies of
the fourth century, without having an increased respect for the ability,
candour, and insight of the great theologian when engaged in labours
requiring linguistic knowledge, which he did not possess. Despite his
ignorance of the correct text in many difficult passages, his lack of
familiarity with the Greek original, many of his explanations have stood
the test of time, finding acceptance even among the exegetes of this
age.

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span>Most modern Harmonies give indications of the
abiding influence of the work. Yet the treatise itself has not called
forth extended comments. From its character it directs attention to the
problems it discusses rather than to its own solutions of them. Hence
the difficulty of presenting an adequate Bibliographical List in
connection with this work. All Gospel Harmonies, all Lives of Christ,
all discussions of the apparent discrepancies of the Gospels, stand
related to it. As a complete list was out of the question, it seemed
fitting to preface this edition of the work with a few general
statements in regard to Harmonies of the Gospels.

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>The early date of the oldest work of this
character, before <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p6.1"></span>A.D.</span> 170 (see below), attests the
genuineness of our four canonical Gospels, by proving that they, and
they only, were generally accepted at that time. But it also shows that
the existence of four Gospels, recognised as genuine and authoritative,
naturally calls forth harmonistic efforts. Two questions confront every
intelligent reader of these four Gospels: (1) In view of the variation
in the *order* of events as narrated by the different evangelists, what
is the more probable chronological order? (2) In view of the variation
in *details*, what is, in each case, the correct explanation of such
variations? These problems are largely exegetical; but those of the
former class soon lead to the historical method of treatment, while
those of the latter class lead to apologetic discussions, when apparent
discrepancies are discovered. The work of Augustin deals more largely
with the latter; more recent Harmonies lay greater stress upon the
historical and chronological questions. The methods represent the
tendencies of the age to which they respectively belong. The historical
method is doubtless the more correct one; but, when it assumes the
extreme form of destructive criticism, it denies the possibility of
harmony. On the other hand, the apologetic method, when linked with a
mechanical view of inspiration, too often adopts interpretations that
are ungrammatical, in order to ignore the necessity of harmonizing
differences. The true position lies between these extremes: the
grammatico-historical sense must be accepted; the correct text of each
Gospel must be determined, independently of verbal variations; the
truthfulness of each evangelist must be assumed, until positive error is
proven; the more definite statements are to be used in explaining the
less definite; the characteristics of each evangelist must be given
their proper weight in determining the probabilities of greater or less
accuracy of detail.

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span><span id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_68"></span>But the necessary limitations of harmonistic
methods should be fully recognised. Absolute certainty is often
impossible: there will always be room for difference of judgment. For
example, there is to-day as little agreement as ever in regard to the
length of our Lord’s ministry; *i.e.*, whether the Evangelist John
refers to three or four passovers. The Tripaschal and Quadripaschal
theories still divide scholars, as in past ages of the Church.

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>Still, the progress made in textual criticism
has, by indicating more positively the exact words of all four accounts,
laid the foundation for better results in harmonistic labours.

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>One great advantage of a Harmony, as now
constructed, with the text of the evangelists in parallel columns, or in
independent sections when the matter is peculiar to one of them, is the
emphasis it gives to the historical sequence. The movement of the
evangelical narrative is made more apparent; the relations of the events
shed light upon the entire story; the purpose of discourses and journeys
appears; the training of the Twelve can be better studied; the emphasis
placed upon the closing events of our Lord’s life on earth is made more
obvious. A comparison of the several accounts gives to the events new
significance, often reveals minute and undesigned coincidences which
attest the truthfulness of all the narrators. Now that the attempt to
secure mechanical uniformity in the narratives has been universally
rejected by scholars, another advantage of a Harmony is seen to be this:
that it sets forth most strikingly the verbal differences and
correspondences of the parallel passages. Only by a minute comparison of
these can we discover the data for a settlement of the problem
respecting the origin and relation of the Synoptic Gospels. <span
id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492.md)

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>The dangers attending harmonistic methods
are obvious enough, and appeared very early. The tendency has been to
create a rigid verbal uniformity. Hence the peculiarities of the several
evangelists are obscured; the text of one is, consciously or
unconsciously, conformed to that of another. The Gospel of Mark, the
most individual and striking of the Synoptics, probably the oldest, has
been repeatedly altered to correspond with that of Matthew. When
uniformity could not be secured by this process, false exegesis was
often resorted to, and hermeneutical principles avowed which injured the
cause of truth. Evangelical truth cannot be defended with the weapons of
error. This vicious method was usually the result of mechanical views of
inspiration. That view of inspiration which rightly recognises language
as vital, and which therefore seeks to know the meaning of every word,
has no worse foe than the hermeneutical principle which ignores the
historical sense of any word of Scripture.

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span>The tendency just referred to brought
harmonistic labours into disrepute. The immense activity of the present
century in exegetical theology has not taken this direction. Moreover,
the historical method received its greatest impulse from the
tendency-theory of the Tübingen school, which presupposes the
impossibility of constructing a Harmony of the four Gospels. Hence the
reaction, in Germany especially, has been excessive.

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span>Yet Harmonies are still prepared, and are
still useful. Harmonistic labours have their rightful, though limited,
place in the field of Exegetical Theology.

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>A very brief sketch of the leading works of
this character will serve to illustrate the above statements.

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span>The earliest attempt at constructing a
Harmony was that of <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p15.1"></span>Tatian <span id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493.md)
</span> (died <span class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p16.3"></span>
A.D.</span> 172). The date of its appearance was between <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p16.4"></span>A.D.</span> 153 and 170; and
its title, *Diatessaron*, furnishes abundant evidence of the early
acceptance of our four canonical Gospels. Our knowledge of this work
was, until recently, very slight. But the discovery of an Armenian
translation of a commentary upon it, <span id="page_69">p. 69</span>
<span id="vi.ii-Page_69"></span>by Ephraem the Syrian, has enabled <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p16.5"></span>Zahn</span> to reconstruct a
large part of the text. The commentary was translated into Latin in
1841, but little attention was paid to it until an edition by <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p16.6"></span>Moesinger</span> appeared in
1876. <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494.md) The influence of Tatian’s
*Diatessaron* upon the Greek text seems to have been unfortunate. Many
of the corruptions in the received text of the Gospel of Mark are
probably due to the confusion of the separate narratives occasioned by
this work. Tregelles (in the new edition of <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p17.2"></span>Horne’s</span> *Introduction*, vol. iv. p. 40)
says that it “had more effect apparently in the text of the Gospels in
use throughout the Church than all the designed falsifications of
Marcion and every scion of the Gnostic blood.” It seems to have
contained nothing indicating heretical bias or intentional alteration.

<span id="vi.ii-p18"></span>The next Harmony was that of <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p18.1"></span>Ammonius</span> of Alexandria,
the teacher of Origen, the first work bearing this title (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii-p18.2"></span>ἉΑρμονία</span>). It
appeared about <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p18.3"></span>A.D.</span> 220, but has been lost. Until
recently it was supposed that the sections into which some early <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p18.4"></span>mss</span>. divide the Gospels
were those of Ammonius himself; but, while he did make such divisions,
those bearing his name are to be attributed to Eusebius (see below).
Ammonius made Matthew the basis of his work, and by his arrangement
destroyed the continuity of the separate narratives. Every Harmony based
upon the order of Matthew must be a failure.

<span id="vi.ii-p19"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p19.1"></span>Eusebius</span> of Cæsarea (died <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p19.2"></span>A.D.</span> 340) adopted a
similar set of divisions, adding to them numbers from 1 to 10, called
“Canons,” which indicate the parallelisms of the sections. These
sections and canons are printed in Tischendorf’s critical editions of
the Greek Testament, and in some other editions. <span
id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495.md) The influence of this system seems to
have been great, but Eusebius often accepts a parallelism where there is
really none whatever. Some of the sections are very brief, containing
only part of a verse. Hence the tables of sections furnish no basis for
estimating the matter common to two or more evangelists.

<span id="vi.ii-p31"></span>The work of Augustin comes next in order; it
deals little with chronological questions, and shows no trace of such
complete textual labour as that of Eusebius.

<span id="vi.ii-p32"></span>The Reformation gave a new impulse to this
department of Biblical study. In the sixteenth century many Harmonies
appeared. Among the authors are the well-known names of Osiander,
Jansen, Robert Stephens, John Calvin, Du Moulin, Chemnitz. These works
were written in Latin, as a rule; and they are worthy of the age which
produced them. Lack of sufficient critical material prevented complete
accuracy, but the exegetical methods of the sixteenth century obtain in
the Harmonies also.

<span id="vi.ii-p33"></span>The seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
present little in this field of labour that deserves favourable notice.
The undisputed reign of the *Textus Receptus* impeded investigation; the
supernaturalism of the dominant theology was not favourable to
historical investigation; the mechanical theory of inspiration led to
arbitrary and forced interpretations. Even the older rationalism, which
explained away the supernatural, was scarcely more faulty in its
exegesis than many an orthodox commentator. The labours of J. <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p33.1"></span>Lightfoot</span> deserve
grateful recognition. This great Hebrew scholar did not finish his
Harmony of the Gospels, but shed great light upon many of the problems
involved, by his knowledge of Jewish customs. J. A. <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p33.2"></span>Bengel</span>, the pioneer of
modern textual criticism of the New Testament, published a valuable
Harmony in German. W. <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p33.3"></span>Newcome</span> published a Harmony of the
Gospels in Greek (Dublin, 1778). He follows <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p33.4"></span> Le Clerc</span> (Amsterdam, 1779), and his
Harmony is the basis of the more modern work by <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p33.5"></span>Edward Robinson</span> (see below).

<span id="vi.ii-p34"></span><span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_70"></span>While the Tübingen school, by its
tendency-theory, virtually denied the possibility of constructing a
Harmony, it compelled the conservative theologians to adopt the
historical method. Thus there has been gathered much material for
harmonistic labours. But in Germany, as in England and America, Lives of
Christ have been more numerous than Harmonies.

<span id="vi.ii-p35"></span>K. <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p35.1"></span>Wieseler</span> and C. <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p35.2"></span>Tischendorf</span>, among recent German
scholars, have published valuable Harmonies. In England the work most in
use is that of E. <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p35.3"></span>Greswell</span>. The Archbishop of York, <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p35.4"></span>William Thomson</span>,
presents in Smith’s Bible Dictionary a valuable table of the Harmony of
the Four Gospels (article “Gospels,” Am. ed. vol. ii. p. 751).

<span id="vi.ii-p36"></span>An interesting edition of the Synoptic
Gospels is that of W. G. <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p36.1"></span>Rushbrooke</span> *(Synopticon*, Cambridge,
1880–81). It is designed to show, by different type and colour, the
divergences and correspondences of the three Gospels. The Greek text is
that of Tischendorf, corrected from that of Westcott and Hort. It
presents in the readiest form the material for harmonistic comparisons;
but the editor has prepared it with a purpose diametrically opposed to
that of the Harmonist, namely, to construct from the matter common to
the Synoptists a “triple tradition,” which will, in the author’s
judgment, approximately present the “source” from which all have drawn.
The work has great value apart from its theory of the origin of the
Synoptic Gospels.

<span id="vi.ii-p37"></span>In America <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p37.1"></span>Edward Robinson</span> published, in repeated
editions, a Harmony of the Gospels in Greek and also in English. He had
previously reprinted that of Newcome.

<span id="vi.ii-p38"></span>S. J. <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p38.1"></span>Andrews</span> (*Life of our Lord*; New York,
1863), has sought “to arrange the events of the Lord’s life, as given us
by the evangelists, so far as possible, in a chronological order, and to
state the grounds of this order.” It is virtually a Harmony, with the
full text of the Gospels omitted. Few works of the kind equal it in
value, though it needs revision in the light of the more recent results
of textual criticism.

<span id="vi.ii-p39"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p39.1"></span>Frederic Gardiner</span>has published a *Harmony
of the Four Gospels in Greek* (Andover, 1871, 1876). It gives the text
of Tischendorf (eighth edition), with a collation of the *Textus
Receptus*, and of the texts of Griesbach, Lachmann, and Tregelles. The
authorities are cited in the case of important variations. Another
valuable feature is a comparative table, presenting in parallel columns
the arrangement adopted by Greswell, Stroud, Robinson, Thomson,
Tischendorf, and Gardiner.

<span id="vi.ii-p40"></span>A number of works, aiming to consolidate
into one narrative the four accounts, have been passed over.

<span id="vi.ii-p41"></span>The Harmony of Dr. Robinson, which has held
its ground for more than forty years, has been recently revised by the
present writer. The text of Tischendorf has been substituted for that of
Hahn; all the various readings materially affecting the sense which are
found in Tregelles, Westcott and Hort, and in the Revised English
version of 1881, have been given in footnotes, with a selection of the
leading authorities (<span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p41.1"></span>mss.</span> and versions) for or against each
reading cited. The Appendix has been enlarged to meet the new phases of
discussion; but the whole volume is what it purports to be,—a revision
of the standard work of Dr. Robinson. In the matter of the Greek text,
the author would probably have done what has now been done by the
editor. A similar but less extensive revision of the English Harmony of
Dr. Robinson has been published. <span id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496.md)

<span id="vi.ii-p43"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p43.1"></span>Allegheny, Pa</span>., Nov. 14, 1887.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_492"></span>[68:493](1060058.htm#fr_492.md) <span
id="vi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span> The writer may be pardoned for alluding to
his own experience in connection with this point. In the exegetical
labours of some years, he found himself accepting the theory that the
three Synoptists wrote independently of each other. Afterwards, when the
task of editing Dr. Robinson’s Greek Harmony compelled him to compare
again and again every word of each account, the evidences of
independence seemed to him to be overwhelming.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[68:494](1060058.htm#fr_493.md) <span
id="vi.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span> See <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p16.1"></span>Schaff</span>, *History of the Christian
Church*, vol. ii. rev. ed., pp. 493 sqq., 726 sqq.; also <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p16.2"></span>Schaff-Herzog</span>,
*Encyclopedia*, article “Diatessaron.” For the literature, see as above,
and the supplementary volume of the *Ante-Nicene Fathers*, pp. 33–35.
Tatian’s *Address to the Greeks* may be found in vol. ii. *Ante-Nicene
Fathers*, pp. 65–83.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[69:495](1060058.htm#fr_494.md) <span
id="vi.ii-p16.7"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span> For full titles of these volumes, see <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p17.1"></span>Schaff</span>, as above.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[69:496](1060058.htm#fr_495.md) <span
id="vi.ii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p20"></span> The letter of Eusebius to Caprianus is
given by C. R. <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p20.1"></span>Gregory</span> *(Prolegomena* to Tischendorf’s
eighth edition, part i. pp. 143–153), together with a full list of the
sections arranged under the separate canons. The numbers signify as
follows:—

<span id="vi.ii-p21"></span>1. In all four Gospels, 71.

<span id="vi.ii-p22"></span>2. In Matthew, Mark, Luke, 111.

<span id="vi.ii-p23"></span>3. In Matthew, Luke, John, 22.

<span id="vi.ii-p24"></span>4. In Matthew, Mark, John, 26.

<span id="vi.ii-p25"></span>5. In Matthew, Luke, 82.

<span id="vi.ii-p26"></span>6. In Matthew, Mark, 47.

<span id="vi.ii-p27"></span>7. In Matthew, John, 7.

<span id="vi.ii-p28"></span>8. In Luke, Mark, 14.

<span id="vi.ii-p29"></span>9. In Luke, John, 21.

<span id="vi.ii-p30"></span>10. In one Gospel: Matthew, 62; Mark, 21;
Luke, 71; John, 97.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[70:497](1060058.htm#fr_496.md) <span
id="vi.ii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p42"></span> For lists of Harmonies, see <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p42.1"></span>Schaff</span>, *History of the
Christian Church*, rev. ed. vol. i. pp. 575, 576; <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p42.2"></span>Gardiner</span>, *Harmony*,
pp. xxxiv.-xxxvii.; <span class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p42.3"></span>
Robinson</span>, *Harmony*, revised by <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p42.4"></span> Riddle</span>, pp. ix, x. Each of these lists
contains references to older authors and their lists. See also <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.ii-p42.5"></span> Smith</span>, *Bible
Dictionary*, Am. ed. (<span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p42.6"></span>Hackett</span> and <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.ii-p42.7"></span>Abbot</span>) ii. pp. 950, 960.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translator’s Introductory Notice.](1060059.md)
