[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060108)  [Next](1060110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Concerning the Words Ascribed to
John by All the Four Evangelists Respectively.</span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p2"></span>25. Moreover, Matthew makes up his
account of John in the following manner:—Now in those days came John the
Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judæa, and saying, Repent ye,
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. For this is He that is spoken of
by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths
straight. <span id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783.md) Mark also and Luke
agree in presenting this testimony of Isaiah as one referring to
John. <span id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784.md) Luke, indeed, has likewise
recorded some other words from the same prophet, which follow those
already cited, when he gives his narrative of John the Baptist. The
evangelist John, again, mentions that John the Baptist did also
personally advance this same testimony of Isaiah regarding
himself. <span id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785.md) And, to a similar
effect, Matthew here has given us certain words of John which are
unrecorded by the other evangelists. For he speaks of him as “preaching
in the wilderness of Judæa, and saying, Repent ye, for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand;” which words of John have been omitted by the others.
In what follows, however, in immediate connection with that passage in
Matthew’s Gospel,—namely, the sentence, “The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths
straight,”—the position is ambiguous; and it does not clearly appear
whether this is something recited by Matthew in his own person, or
rather a continuance of the words spoken by John himself, so as to lead
us to understand the whole passage to be the reproduction of John’s own
utterance, in this way: “Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand; for this is He that was spoken of by the prophet Isaiah,” and so
on. For it ought to create no difficulty against this latter view, that
he does not say, “For I am He that was spoken of by the prophet Isaiah,”
but employs the phraseology, “For this is He that was spoken of.” For
that, indeed, is a mode of speech <span
id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786.md) which the evangelists Matthew and John
are in the habit of using in reference to themselves. Thus Matthew has
adopted the phrase, “He found <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787.md) a
man sitting at the receipt of custom,” <span
id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788.md) instead of “He found me.” John, too,
says, “This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote
these things, and we know that his testimony is true,” <span
id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789.md) instead of “I am,” etc., or, “My
testimony is true.” Yea, our Lord Himself very frequently uses the
words, “The Son of man,” <span id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790.md) or,
“The Son of God,” <span id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791.md) instead of
saying, “I.” So, again, He tells us that “it behoved Christ to suffer,
and to rise from the dead the third day,” <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792.md) instead of saying, “It behoved me to
suffer.” Consequently it is perfectly possible that the clause, “For
this is He that was spoken of by the prophet Isaiah,” which immediately
follows the saying, “Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand,”
may be but a continuation of what John the Baptist said of himself; so
that only after these words cited from the speaker himself will
Matthew’s own narrative proceed, being thus resumed: “And the same John
had his raiment of camel’s hair,” and so forth. But if this is the case,
then it need not seem wonderful that, when asked what he had to say
regarding himself, he should reply, according to the narrative of the
evangelist John, “I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness,” <span
id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793.md) as he had already spoken in the same
terms when enjoining on them the duty of repentance. Accordingly,
Matthew goes on to tell us about his attire and his mode of living, and
continues his account thus: And the same John had his raiment of camel’s
hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and his meat was <span
id="page_117">p. 117</span> <span id="vi.v.xiii-Page_117"></span>locusts
and wild honey. Mark also gives us this same statement almost in so many
words. But the other two evangelists omit it.

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p14"></span>26. Matthew then proceeds with his
narrative, and says: Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judæa, and
all the region round about Jordan, and were baptized by him in Jordan,
confessing their sins. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of
vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth
therefore fruits meet for repentance; and think not to say within
yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God
is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. For now the
axe is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree which
bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the
fire. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but He that is to
come after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear:
He shall baptize you in the Holy Spirit and fire: whose fan is in His
hand, and He will thoroughly purge His floor, and gather His wheat into
the garner; but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. <span
id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794.md) This whole passage is also given by
Luke, who ascribes almost the same words to John. And where there is any
variation in the words, there is nevertheless no real departure from the
sense. Thus, for example, Matthew tells us that John said, “And think
not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father,” where Luke
puts it thus: “And begin not to say, We have Abraham to our father.”
Again, in the former we have the words, “I indeed baptize you with water
unto repentance;” whereas the latter brings in the questions put by the
multitudes as to what they should do, and represents John to have
replied to them with a statement of good works as the fruits of
repentance,—all which is omitted by Matthew. So, when Luke tells us what
reply the Baptist made to the people when they were musing in their
hearts concerning Him, and thinking whether He were the Christ, he gives
us simply the words, “I indeed baptize you with water,” and does not add
the phrase, “unto repentance.” Further, in Matthew the Baptist says,
“But he that is to come after me is mightier than I;” while in Luke he
is exhibited as saying, “But one mightier than I cometh.” In like
manner, according to Matthew, he says, “whose shoes I am not worthy to
bear;” but according to the other, his words are, “the latchet of whose
shoes I am not worthy to unloose.” The latter sayings are recorded also
by Mark, although he makes no mention of those other matters. For, after
noticing his attire and his mode of living, he goes on thus: “And
preached, saying, There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet
of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose: I have
baptized you with water, but He shall baptize you in the Holy Spirit.”
In the notice of the shoes, therefore, he differs from Luke in so far as
he has added the words, “to stoop down;” and in the account of the
baptism he differs from both these others in so far as he does not say,
“and in fire,” but only, “in the Holy Spirit.” For as in Matthew, so
also in Luke, the words are the same, and they are given in the same
order, “He shall baptize you in the Spirit and in fire,”—with this
single exception, that Luke has not added the adjective “Holy,” <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795.md) while Matthew has given it thus: “in
the Holy Spirit and in fire.” <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796.md)
The statements made by these three are attested by the evangelist John,
when he says: “John bears witness <span
id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797.md) of Him, and cries, saying, This was He
of whom I spake, He that cometh after me is preferred before me; for He
was before me.” <span id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798.md) For thus he
indicates that the thing was spoken by John at the time at which those
other evangelists record him to have uttered the words. Thus, too, he
gives us to understand that John was repeating and calling into notice
again something which he had already spoken, when he said, “This was He
of whom I spake, He that cometh after me.”

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p20"></span>27. If now the question is asked, as to
which of the words we are to suppose the most likely to have been the
precise words used by John the Baptist, whether those recorded as spoken
by him in Matthew’s Gospel, or those in Luke’s, or those which Mark has
introduced, among the few sentences which he mentions to have been
uttered by him, while he omits notice of all the rest, it will not be
deemed worth while creating any difficulty for oneself in a matter of
that kind, by any one who wisely understands that the real requisite in
order to get at the knowledge of the truth is just to make sure of the
things really meant, whatever may be the precise words in which they
happen to be expressed. For although one writer may retain a certain
order in the words, and another present a different one, there is surely
no real contradiction in that. Nor, again, need there be any antagonism
between the two, although one may state what another omits. For it is
evident that the evangelists have set forth these matters just in
accordance with the recollection each retained of them, and just
according as their several predilections prompted them to employ greater
brevity or richer detail <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span
id="vi.v.xiii-Page_118"></span>on certain points, while giving,
nevertheless, the same account of the subjects themselves.

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p21"></span>28. Thus, too, in what more pertinently
concerns the matter in hand, it is sufficiently obvious that, since the
truth of the Gospel, conveyed in that word of God which abides eternal
and unchangeable above all that is created, but which at the same time
has been disseminated <span id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799.md) throughout
the world by the instrumentality of temporal symbols, and by the tongues
of men, has possessed itself of the most exalted height of authority, we
ought not to suppose that any one of the writers is giving an unreliable
account, if, when several persons are recalling some matter either heard
or seen by them, they fail to follow the very same plan, or to use the
very same words, while describing, nevertheless, the self-same fact.
Neither should we indulge such a supposition, although the order of the
words may be varied; or although some words may be substituted in place
of others, which nevertheless have the same meaning; or although
something may be left unsaid, either because it has not occurred to the
mind of the recorder, or because it becomes readily intelligible from
other statements which are given; or although, among other matters which
(may not bear directly on his immediate purpose, but which) he decides
on mentioning rather for the sake of the narrative, and in order to
preserve the proper order of time, one of them may introduce something
which he does not feel called upon to expound as a whole at length, but
only to touch upon in part; or although, with the view of illustrating
his meaning, and making it thoroughly clear, the person to whom
authority is given to compose the narrative makes some additions of his
own, not indeed in the subject-matter itself, but in the words by which
it is expressed; or although, while retaining a perfectly reliable
comprehension of the fact itself, he may not be entirely successful,
however he may make that his aim, in calling to mind and reciting anew
with the most literal accuracy the very words which he heard on the
occasion. Moreover, if any one affirms that the evangelists ought
certainly to have had that kind of capacity imparted to them by the
power of the Holy Spirit, which would secure them against all variation
the one from the other, either in the kind of words, or in their order,
or in their number, that person fails to perceive, that just in
proportion as the authority of the evangelists \[under their existing
conditions\] is made pre-eminent, the credit of all other men who offer
true statements of events ought to have been established on a stronger
basis by their instrumentality: so that when several parties happen to
narrate the same circumstance, none of them can by any means be rightly
charged with untruthfulness if he differs from the other only in such a
way as can be defended on the ground of the antecedent example of the
evangelists themselves. For as we are not at liberty either to suppose
or to say that any one of the evangelists has stated what is false, so
it will be apparent that any other writer is as little chargeable with
untruth, with whom, in the process of recalling anything for narration,
it has fared only in a way similar to that in which it is shown to have
fared with those evangelists. And just as it belongs to the highest
morality to guard against all that is false, so ought we all the more to
be ruled by an authority so eminent, to the effect that we should not
suppose ourselves to come upon what must be false, when we find the
narratives of any writers differ from each other in the manner in which
the records of the evangelists are proved to contain variations. At the
same time, in what most seriously concerns the faithfulness of doctrinal
teaching, we should also understand that it is not so much in mere
words, as rather truth in the facts themselves, that is to be sought and
embraced; for as to writers who do not employ precisely the same modes
of statement, if they only do not present discrepancies with respect to
the facts and the sentiments themselves, we accept them as holding the
same position in veracity. <span id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800.md)

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p24"></span>29. With respect, then, to those
comparisons which I have instituted between the several narratives of
the evangelists, what do these present that must be considered to be of
a contradictory order? Are we to regard in this light the circumstance
that one of them has given us the words, “whose shoes I am not worthy to
bear,” whereas the others speak of the “unloosing of the latchet of the
shoe”? For here, indeed, the difference seems to be neither in the mere
words, nor in the order of the words, nor in any matter of simple
phraseology, but in the actual matter of fact, when in the one case the
“bearing of the shoe” is mentioned, and in the other the “unloosing of
the shoe’s latchet.” Quite fairly, therefore, may the question be put,
as to what it was that John declared himself unworthy to do—whether to
bear the shoes, or to unloose the shoe’s latchet. For if only the one of
these two sentences was uttered by him, then that evangelist will appear
to have given the correct narrative who was in a position to record what
was said; while the writer who has given the saying in another form,
although he may not indeed have offered an \[intentionally\] false
account of it, may at any rate be taken to have made a slip of memory,
and will be reckoned thus to have stated one thing instead of another.
It is only seemly, however, that no charge of absolute unveracity should
be laid <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="vi.v.xiii-Page_119"></span>against the evangelists, and that, too,
not only with regard to that kind of unveracity which comes by the
positive telling of what is false, but also with regard to that which
arises through forgetfulness. Therefore, if it is pertinent to the
matter to deduce one sense from the words “to bear the shoes,” and
another sense from the words “to unloose the shoe’s latchet,” what
should one suppose the correct interpretation to be put on the facts,
but that John did give utterance to both these sentences, either on two
different occasions or in one and the same connection? For he might very
well have expressed himself thus, “whose shoe’s latchet I am not worthy
to unloose, and whose shoes I am not worthy to bear:” and then one of
the evangelists may have reproduced the one portion of the saying, and
the rest of them the other; while, notwithstanding this, all of them
have really given a veracious narrative. But further, if, when he spoke
of the shoes of the Lord, John meant nothing more than to convey the
idea of His supremacy and his own lowliness, then, whichever of the two
sayings may have actually been uttered by him, whether that regarding
the unloosing of the latchet of the shoes, or that respecting the
bearing of the shoes, the self-same sense is still correctly preserved
by any writer who, while making mention of the shoes in words of his
own, has expressed at the same time the same idea of lowliness, and thus
has not made any departure from the real mind \[of the person of whom he
writes\]. It is therefore a useful principle, and one particularly
worthy of being borne in mind, when we are speaking of the concord of
the evangelists, that there is no divergence \[to be supposed\] from
truth, even when they introduce some saying different from what was
actually uttered by the person concerning whom the narrative is given,
provided that, notwithstanding this, they set forth as his mind
precisely what is also so conveyed by that one among them who reproduces
the words as they were literally spoken. For thus we learn the salutary
lesson, that our aim should be nothing else than to ascertain what is
the mind and intention of the person who speaks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_783"></span>[116:784](1060109.htm#fr_783.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p3"></span> [Matt. iii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[116:785](1060109.htm#fr_784.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p4"></span> [Mark
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#003.md), [Luke
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[116:786](1060109.htm#fr_785.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p5"></span> [John i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#023.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[116:787](1060109.htm#fr_786.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p6"></span> Reading *solet quippe esse talis
locutio*, etc. Some codices give *solet quippe esse quasi de aliis
locutio* = a mode of speech as if other persons were meant.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[116:788](1060109.htm#fr_787.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p7"></span> *Invenit*.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[116:789](1060109.htm#fr_788.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p8"></span> [Matt. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[116:790](1060109.htm#fr_789.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p9"></span> [John xxi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[116:791](1060109.htm#fr_790.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p10"></span> [Matt.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006.md), [Matt.
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027.md)<span
id="vi.v.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[116:792](1060109.htm#fr_791.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p11"></span> [John v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[116:793](1060109.htm#fr_792.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p12"></span> [Luke xxiv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[116:794](1060109.htm#fr_793.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p13"></span> [John i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#023.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[117:795](1060109.htm#fr_794.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p15"></span> [Matt. iii.
4-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004.md)<span
id="vi.v.xiii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[117:796](1060109.htm#fr_795.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p16"></span> Greek and Latin Bibles now, however,
add the word *Holy* in Luke. \[The variation does not occur in early
Greek <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.xiii-p16.1"></span>mss.</span>—R.\]

<span id="fn_796"></span>[117:797](1060109.htm#fr_796.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p17"></span> [Matt.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003.md), [Mark
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#006.md), [Luke
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[117:798](1060109.htm#fr_797.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p18"></span> *Perhibet*.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[117:799](1060109.htm#fr_798.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p19"></span> [John i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md)<span id="vi.v.xiii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[118:800](1060109.htm#fr_799.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p22"></span> *Dispensato*.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[118:801](1060109.htm#fr_800.md) <span
id="vi.v.xiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xiii-p23"></span> Or, as abiding by the same truth—*in
eadem veritate constitisse approbamus*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](1060110.md)
