[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060152)  [Next](1060154.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.lvii"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LVI.—Of the Manifestation Which the
Lord Made of Himself, in Company with Moses and Elias, to His Disciples
on the Mountain; And of the Question Concerning the Harmony Between the
First Three Evangelists with Regard to the Order and the Circumstances
of that Event; And in Especial, the Number of the Days, in So Far as
Matthew and Mark State that It Took Place After Six Days, While Luke
Says that It Was After Eight Days.</span>

<span id="vi.v.lvii-p2"></span>112. Matthew proceeds thus: “Verily I say
unto you, There be some standing here which shall not taste of death
till they see the Son of man coming in His kingdom. And after six days,
Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and brought them up
into an high mountain;” and so on, down to where we read, “Tell the
vision to no man until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.”
This vision of the Lord upon the mount in the presence of the three
disciples, Peter, James, and John, on which occasion also the testimony
of the Father’s voice was borne Him from heaven, is related by the three
evangelists in the same order, and in a manner expressing the same sense
completely. <span id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097.md) And as regards
other matters, they may be seen by the readers to be in accordance with
those modes of narration of which we have given examples in many
passages already, and in which there are diversities in expression
without any consequent diversity in meaning.

<span id="vi.v.lvii-p4"></span>113. But with respect to the circumstance
that Mark, along with Matthew, tells us how the event took place after
six days, while Luke states that it was after eight days, those who find
a difficulty here do not deserve to be set aside with contempt, but
should be enlightened by the offering of explanations. For when we
announce a space of days in these terms, “after so many days,” sometimes
we do not include in the number the day on which we speak, or the day on
which the thing itself which we intimate beforehand or promise is
declared to take place, but reckon only the intervening days, on the
real and full and final expiry of which the incident in question is to
occur. This is what Matthew and Mark have done. Leaving out of their
calculation the day on which Jesus spoke these words, and the day on
which He exhibited that memorable spectacle on the mount, they have
regarded simply the intermediate days, and thus have used the
expression, “after six days.” But Luke, reckoning in the extreme day at
either end, that is to say, the first day and the last day, has made it
“after eight days,” in accordance with that mode of speech in which the
part is put for the whole.

<span id="vi.v.lvii-p5"></span>114. Moreover, the statement which Luke
makes with regard to Moses and Elias in these terms, “And it came to
pass, as they departed <span id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098.md) from
Him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here,” and
so forth, ought not to be considered antagonistic to what Matthew and
Mark have subjoined to the same effect, as if they made Peter offer this
suggestion while Moses and Elias were still talking with the Lord. For
they have not expressly said that it was at that time, but rather they
have simply left unnoticed the fact which Luke has added,—namely, that
it was as they went away that Peter made the suggestion to the Lord with
respect to the making of three tabernacles. At the same time, Luke has
appended the intimation that it was as they were entering the cloud that
the voice came from heaven,—a circumstance which is not affirmed, but
which is as little contradicted, by the others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[154:1098](1060153.htm#fr_1097.md) <span
id="vi.v.lvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lvii-p3"></span> [Matt.
16:28-17:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028.md)<span
id="vi.v.lvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[154:1099](1060153.htm#fr_1098.md) <span
id="vi.v.lvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lvii-p6"></span> \[*Dum discederent*. The Revised Version
correctly renders the Greek: “as they were parting.”—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVII](1060154.md)
