[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060182)  [Next](1060184.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.vi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.—Of What Took Place in the Piece of
Ground or Garden to Which They Came on Leaving the House After the
Supper; And of the Method in Which, in John’s Silence on the Subject, a
Real Harmony Can Be Demonstrated Between the Other Three
Evangelists—Namely, Matthew, Mark, and Luke.</span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p2"></span>10. Matthew then proceeds with his
narrative in the same connection as follows: “Then cometh Jesus with
them unto a place called Gethsemane.” <span
id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265.md) This is mentioned also by
Mark. <span id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266.md) Luke, too, refers to
it, although he does not notice the piece of ground by name. For he
says: “And He came out, and went, as was His wont, to the Mount of
Olives; and His disciples also followed Him. And when He was at the
place, He said unto them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation.” <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267.md) That is the place which the other
two have instanced under the name of Gethsemane. There, we understand,
was the garden which John brings into notice when he gives the following
narration: “When Jesus had spoken these words, He went forth with His
disciples over the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which He
entered, and His disciples.” <span id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268.md)
Then taking Matthew’s record, we get this statement next in order: “He
said unto His disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269.md) And He took with Him Peter and the
two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy. Then
saith He unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death:
tarry ye here, and watch with me. And He went a little farther, and fell
on His face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as Thou wilt. And
He cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto
Peter, What! could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray, that
ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the
flesh is weak. He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O
my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me except I drink it, Thy
will be done. And He came and found them asleep again: for their eyes
were heavy. And He left them, and went away again, and prayed the third
time, saying the same words. Then cometh He to His disciples, and saith
unto them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at
hand, and the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that shall betray
me.” <span id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270.md)

<span id="vi.vi.v-p9"></span>11. Mark also records these passages,
introducing them quite in the same method and succession. Some of the
sentences, however, are given with greater brevity by him, and others
are somewhat more fully explained. These sayings <span id="page_182">p.
182</span> <span id="vi.vi.v-Page_182"></span>of our Lord, indeed, may
seem in one portion to stand in some manner of contradiction to each
other as they are presented in Matthew’s version. I refer to the fact
that \[it is stated there that\] He came to His disciples after His
third prayer, and said to them, “Sleep on now, and take your rest:
behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man shall be betrayed into
the hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that
shall betray me.” For what are we to make of the direction thus given
above, “Sleep on now, and take your rest,” when there is immediately
subjoined this other declaration, “Behold, the hour is at hand,” and
thereafter also the instruction, “Arise, let us be going”? Those readers
who perceive something like a contradiction here, seek to pronounce
these words, “Sleep on now, and take your rest,” in a way betokening
that they were spoken in reproach, and not in permission. And this is an
expedient which might quite fairly be adopted were there any necessity
for it. Mark, however, has reproduced these sayings in a manner which
implies that after He had expressed himself in the terms, “Sleep on now,
and take your rest,” He added the words, “It is enough,” and then
appended to these the further statement, “The hour is come; behold, the
Son of man shall be betrayed.” <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271.md) Hence we may conclude that the case
really stood thus: namely, that after addressing these words to them,
“Sleep on now, and take your rest,” the Lord was silent for a space, so
that what He had thus given them permission to do might be \[seen to
be\] really acted upon; and that thereafter He made the other
declaration, “Behold the hour is come.” Thus it is that in Mark’s Gospel
we find those words \[regarding the sleeping\] followed immediately by
the phrase, “It is enough;” that is to say, “the rest which you have had
is enough now.” But as no distinct notice is introduced of this silence
on the Lord’s part which intervened then, the passage comes to be
understood in a forced manner, and it is supposed that a peculiar
pronunciation must be given to these words.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p11"></span>12. Luke, on the other hand, has omitted
to mention the number of times that He prayed. He has told us, however,
a fact which is not recorded by the others—namely, that when He prayed
He was strengthened by an angel, and that, as He prayed more earnestly,
He had a bloody sweat, with drops falling down to the ground. Thus it
appears that when he makes the statement, “And when He rose up from
prayer, and was come to His disciples,” he does not indicate how often
He had prayed by that time. But still, in so doing, he does not stand in
any kind of antagonism to the other two. Moreover, John does indeed
mention how He entered into the garden along with His disciples. But he
does not relate how He was occupied there up to the period when His
betrayer came in along with the Jews to apprehend Him.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p12"></span>13. These three evangelists, therefore,
have in this manner narrated the same incident, just as, on the other
hand, one man might give three several accounts of a single occurrence,
with a certain measure of diversity in his statements, and yet without
any real contradiction. Luke, for example, has specified the distance to
which He went forward from the disciples—that is to say, when He
withdrew from them in order to pray—more definitely than the others. For
he tells us that it was “about a stone’s cast.” Mark, again, states
first of all in his own words how the Lord prayed that, “If it were
possible, the hour might pass from Him,” referring to the hour of His
Passion, which he also expresses presently by the term “cup.” He then
reproduces the Lord’s own words, in the following manner: “Abba, Father,
all things are possible to Thee: take away this cup from me.” And if we
connect with these terms the clause which is given by the other two
evangelists, and for which Mark himself has also already introduced a
clear parallel, presented as a statement made in his own person instead
of the Lord’s, the whole sentence will be exhibited in this form:
“Father, if it be possible, (for) all things are possible unto Thee,
take away this cup from me.” And it will be so put just to prevent any
one from supposing that He made the Father’s power less than it is when
He said, “If it be possible.” For thus His words were not, “If Thou
canst do it;” but “If it be possible.” And anything is possible which He
wills. Therefore, the expression, “If it be possible,” has here just the
same force as, “If Thou wilt.” For Mark has made the sense in which the
phrase, “If it be possible,” is to be taken quite plain, when he says,
“All things are possible unto Thee.” And further, the fact that these
writers have recorded how He said, “Nevertheless, not what I will, but
what Thou wilt” (an expression which means precisely the same as this
other form, “Nevertheless, not my will but Thine be done”), shows us
clearly enough that it was with reference not to any absolute
impossibility on the Father’s side, but only to His will, that these
words, “If it be possible,” were spoken. This is made the more apparent
by the plainer statement which Luke has presented to the same effect.
For his version is not, “If it be possible,” but, “If Thou be willing.”
And to this clearer declaration of what was really meant we may add,
with the effect of still greater clearness, the clause which Mark has
inserted, so that the whole will proceed thus: “If Thou be willing,
(for) all things are <span id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span
id="vi.vi.v-Page_183"></span>possible unto Thee, take away this cup from
me.”

<span id="vi.vi.v-p13"></span>14. Again, as to Mark’s mentioning that
the Lord said not only “Father,” but “Abba, Father,” the explanation
simply is, that “Abba” is in Hebrew exactly what “Pater” is in Latin.
And perhaps the Lord may have used both words with some kind of
symbolical significance, intending to indicate thereby, that in
sustaining this sorrow He bore the part of His body, which is the
Church, of which He has been made the corner-stone, and which comes to
Him \[in the person of disciples gathered\] partly out of the Hebrews,
to whom He refers when He says “Abba,” and partly out of the Gentiles,
to whom He refers when He says “Pater” \[Father\]. <span
id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272.md) The Apostle Paul also makes use of
the same significant expression. For he says, “In whom we cry, Abba,
Father;” <span id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273.md) and, in another
passage, “God sent His Spirit into your hearts, crying, Abba,
Father.” <span id="fr_1274"></span>[1275](#fn_1274.md) For it was meet that
the good Master and true Saviour, by sharing in the sufferings of the
more infirm, <span id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275.md) should in His
own person illustrate the truth that His witnesses ought not to despair,
although it might perchance happen that, through human frailty, sorrow
might steal in upon their hearts at the time of suffering; seeing that
they would overcome it if, mindful that God knows what is best for those
whose well-being He regards, they gave His will the preference over
their own. On this subject, however, as a whole, the present is not the
time for entering on any more detailed discussion. For we have to deal
simply with the question concerning the harmony of the evangelists, from
whose varied modes of narration we gather the wholesome lesson that, in
order to get at the truth, the one essential thing to aim at in dealing
with the terms is simply the intention which the speaker had in view in
using them. For the word “Father” means just the same as the phrase
“Abba, Father.” But with a view to bring out the mystic significance,
the expression, “Abba, Father,” is the clearer form; while, for
indicating the unity, the word “Father” is sufficient. And that the Lord
did indeed employ this method of address, “Abba, Father,” must be
accepted as matter of fact. But still His intention would not appear
very obvious were there not the means (since others use simply the term
“Father”) to show that under such a form of expression those two
Churches, which are constituted, the one out of the Jews, and the other
out of the Gentiles, are presented as also really one. In this way,
then, \[we may suppose that\] the phrase, “Abba, Father,” was adopted in
order to convey the same idea as was indicated by the Lord on another
occasion, when He said, “Other sheep I have which are not of this
fold.” <span id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276.md) In these words He
certainly referred to the Gentiles, since He had sheep also among the
people of Israel. But in that passage He goes on immediately to add the
declaration, “Them also I must bring, that there may be one fold and one
Shepherd.” And so we may say that, just as the phrase, “Abba, Father,”
contains the idea of \[the two races,\] the Israelites and the Gentiles,
the word “Father,” used alone, points to the one flock which these two
constitute.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[181:1266](1060183.htm#fr_1265.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p3"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
36-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#036.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[181:1267](1060183.htm#fr_1266.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p4"></span> [Mark xiv.
32-42](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[181:1268](1060183.htm#fr_1267.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p5"></span> [Luke xxii.
39-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#039.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[181:1269](1060183.htm#fr_1268.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p6"></span> [John xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[181:1270](1060183.htm#fr_1269.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p7"></span> \[“Go yonder and pray;” so the Latin, as
well as the Greek text. Comp. Revised Version, which in some other
instances, in the passage here cited, agrees more closely with
Augustin’s text than does the Authorized Version.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[181:1271](1060183.htm#fr_1270.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p8"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
36-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#036.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[182:1272](1060183.htm#fr_1271.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p10"></span> [Mark xiv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#041.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p10.1"></span>.
\[On the various explanations of this difficult passage, see
commentaries.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[183:1273](1060183.htm#fr_1272.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p14"></span> See [Eph. ii.
11-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[183:1274](1060183.htm#fr_1273.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p15"></span> [Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[183:1275](1060183.htm#fr_1274.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p16"></span> [Gal. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[183:1276](1060183.htm#fr_1275.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p17"></span> Or = having compassion on the more
infirm; *infirmioribus compatiens*.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[183:1277](1060183.htm#fr_1276.md) <span
id="vi.vi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p18"></span> [John x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.vi.v-p18.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](1060184.md)
