[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060290)  [Next](1060292) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxxiv"></span> <span id="vii.lxxiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxxiv-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXII.</span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxxiv-p2.1"></span>\[CXXII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p3.1"></span>*[John i.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048)<span
id="vii.lxxiv-p3.2"></span>,“When thou wast under the fig tree, I saw
thee,” etc.*

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxxiv-p4.1"></span>What</span> we have heard said by the Lord
Jesus Christ to Nathanael, if we understand it aright, does not concern
him only. For our Lord Jesus saw the whole human race under the
fig-tree. For in this place it is understood that by the fig-tree He
signified sin. Not that it always signifies this, but as I have said in
this place, in that fitness of significancy, in which ye know that the
first man, when he sinned, covered himself with fig leaves. For with
these leaves they covered their nakedness when they blushed for their
sin; <span id="fr_3636"></span>[3637](#fn_3636) and what God had made
them for members, they made for themselves occasions of shame. For they
had no need to blush for the work of God; but the cause of sin preceded
shame. If iniquity had not gone before, nakedness would never have been
put to the blush. For “they were naked, and were not ashamed.” <span
id="fr_3637"></span>[3638](#fn_3637) For they had committed nothing to
be ashamed for. But why have I said all this? That we may understand
that by the fig-tree sin is signified. What then is, “when thou wast
under the fig-tree, I saw thee”? <span
id="fr_3638"></span>[3639](#fn_3638) When thou wast under sin, I saw
thee. And Nathanael looking back upon what had occurred, remembered that
he had been under a fig-tree, where Christ was not. He was not there,
that is, by His Bodily Presence; but by His knowledge in the Spirit
where is He not? And because he knew that he was under the fig-tree
alone, where the Lord Christ was not; when He said to him, “When thou
wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee;” he both acknowledged the Divinity
in Him, and cried out, “Thou art the King of Israel.” <span
id="fr_3639"></span>[3640](#fn_3639)

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p9"></span>2. The Lord said, “Because I said unto
thee, I saw thee when thou wast under the fig-tree, marvellest thou?
thou shalt see greater things than these.” <span
id="fr_3640"></span>[3641](#fn_3640) What are these greater things? And
He said, “Ye shall see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of Man.” <span
id="fr_3641"></span>[3642](#fn_3641) Let us call to mind the old story
written in the sacred Book. I mean in Genesis. <span
id="fr_3642"></span>[3643](#fn_3642) When Jacob slept at a certain
place, he put a stone at his head; and in his sleep he saw a ladder
reaching from earth even unto heaven; and the Lord was resting upon it;
and Angels were ascending and descending by it. This did Jacob see. A
man’s dream would not have been recorded, had not some great mystery
been figured in it, had not some great prophecy been to be understood in
that vision. Accord<span id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span
id="vii.lxxiv-Page_471"></span>ingly, Jacob himself, because he
understood what he had seen, placed a stone there, and anointed it with
oil. Now ye recognise the anointing; recognise The Anointed also. For He
is “the Stone which the builders rejected; He was made the Head of the
corner.” <span id="fr_3643"></span>[3644](#fn_3643) He is the Stone of
which Himself said, “Whosoever shall stumble against This Stone shall be
shaken; but on whomsoever That Stone shall fall, It will crush
him.” <span id="fr_3644"></span>[3645](#fn_3644) It is stumbled against
as It lies on the earth; but It will fall on him, when He shall come
from on high to judge the quick and dead. Woe to the Jews, for that when
Christ lay low in His humility, they stumbled against Him. “This Man,”
say they, “is not of God, because He breaketh the sabbath day.” <span
id="fr_3645"></span>[3646](#fn_3645) “If He be the Son of God, let Him
come down from the cross.” <span id="fr_3646"></span>[3647](#fn_3646)
Madman, the Stone lies on the ground, and so thou deridest It. But since
thou dost deride It, thou art blind; since thou art blind, thou
stumblest; since thou stumblest, thou art shaken; since thou hast been
shaken by It as It now lies on the ground, hereafter shall thou be
crushed by It as It fails from above. Therefore Jacob anointed the
stone. Did he make an idol of it? He showed <span
id="fr_3647"></span>[3648](#fn_3647) a meaning in it, but did not adore
it. Now then give ear, attend to this Nathanael, by the occasion of whom
the Lord Jesus hath been pleased to explain to us Jacob’s vision.

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p18"></span>3. Ye that are well instructed in the
school of Christ, know that this Jacob is Israel too. They are two
names; for they are one man. His first name Jacob, which is by
interpretation supplanter, he received when he was born. For when those
twins were born, his brother Esau was born first; and the hand of the
younger was found on the elder’s foot. <span
id="fr_3648"></span>[3649](#fn_3648) He held his brother’s foot who
preceded him in his birth, and himself came after. And because of this
occurrence, because he held his brother’s heel, <span
id="fr_3649"></span>[3650](#fn_3649) he was called Jacob, that is,
Supplanter. And afterwards, when he was returning from Mesopotamia, the
Angel wrestled with him in the way. <span
id="fr_3650"></span>[3651](#fn_3650) What comparison can there be
between an Angel’s and a man’s strength? Therefore it is a mystery, a
sacrament, a prophecy, a figure; let us therefore understand it. For
consider the manner of the struggle too. While he wrestleth, Jacob
prevailed against the Angel. Some high meaning is here. And when the man
had prevailed against the Angel, he kept hold of Him; yes, the man kept
hold of Him whom he had conquered. And said to Him, “I will not let Thee
go, except Thou bless me.”  <span id="fr_3651"></span>[3652](#fn_3651)
When the conqueror was blessed by the Conquered, Christ was figured. So
then that Angel, who is understood to be the Lord Jesus, saith to Jacob,
“Thou shalt not be any more called Jacob, but Israel shall thy name
be,” <span id="fr_3652"></span>[3653](#fn_3652) which is by
interpretation, “Seeing God.” After this He touched the sinew of his
thigh, the broad part, that is, of the thigh, and it dried up; and Jacob
became lame. Such was He who was conquered. So great power had this
Conquered One, as to touch the thigh, and make lame. It was then with
His Own will that He was conquered. For He “had power to lay down” His
strength, “and He had power to take It up.” <span
id="fr_3653"></span>[3654](#fn_3653) He is not angry at being conquered,
for He is not angry at being crucified. For He even blessed him, saying,
“Thou shalt not be called Jacob, but Israel.” Then the “supplanter” was
made “the seer of God.” And He touched, as I have said, his thigh, and
made him lame. Observe in Jacob the people of the Jews, those thousands
who followed and went before the Lord’s beast, who in concert with the
Apostles worshipped the Lord, and cried out, “Hosanna to the Son of
David, Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3654"></span>[3655](#fn_3654) Behold Jacob blessed. He has
continued lame until now in them who are at this day Jews. For the broad
part of the thigh signifies the multitude of increase. Of whom the
Psalm, when it prophesied that the Nations should believe, speaketh,
saying, “A people whom I have not known, hath served Me; by the hearing
of the ear it hath obeyed Me.” <span
id="fr_3655"></span>[3656](#fn_3655) I was not there, and I was heard;
here I was, and I was killed. “A people whom I have not known, hath
served Me; by the hearing of the ear it hath obeyed Me.” Therefore,
“faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ.” <span
id="fr_3656"></span>[3657](#fn_3656) And it goes on, “The strange
children have lied unto Me;” concerning the Jews. “The strange children
have lied unto Me, the strange children have faded away and have halted
from their paths.” I have pointed out Jacob to you, Jacob blessed and
Jacob lame.

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p28"></span>4. But as arising out of this occasion,
this must not be passed over, which may haply of itself perplex some of
you; with what design is it, that when this Jacob’s grandfather
Abraham’s name was changed (for he too was first called Abram, and God
changed his name, and said, “Thou shall not be called Abram, but
Abraham” <span id="fr_3657"></span>[3658](#fn_3657) ); from that time he
was not called Abram. Search in the Scriptures, and you will see that
before he received another name, he was called only Abram; after he
received it, he was called only Abraham. But this Jacob, when he
received another name, heard the same words, “Thou shalt not be called
Jacob, but Israel shalt thou be called.” <span
id="fr_3658"></span>[3659](#fn_3658) Search the Scriptures, and see how
that he was always called both, both <span id="page_472">p. 472</span>
<span id="vii.lxxiv-Page_472"></span>Jacob and Israel. Abram after he
had received another name, was called only Abraham. Jacob after he had
received another name, was called both Jacob and Israel. The name of
Abraham was to be developed in this world; for here he was made the
father of many nations, whence he received his name. But the name of
Israel relates to another world, where we shall see God. Therefore the
people of God, the Christian people in this present time, is both Jacob
and Israel, Jacob in fact, Israel in hope. For the younger people is
called the Supplanter of its brother the elder people. What! have we
supplanted the Jews? No, but we are said to be their supplanters, for
that for our sakes they were supplanted. If they had not been blinded,
Christ would not have been crucified; His precious Blood would not have
been shed; if that Blood had not been shed, the world would not have
been redeemed. Because then their blindness hath profited us, therefore
hath the elder brother been supplanted by the younger, and the younger
is called the Supplanter. But how long shall this be?

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p31"></span>5. The time will come, the end of the
world will come, and all Israel shall believe; not they who now are, but
their children who shall then be. For these present walking in their own
ways, will go to their own place, will pass on to everlasting damnation.
But when they shall have been made all one people, that shall come to
pass which we sing, “I shall be satisfied when Thy glory shall be
manifested.” <span id="fr_3659"></span>[3660](#fn_3659) When the promise
which is made to us, that we “see face to face,” shall come. “Now we see
through a glass darkly,” and “in part;” <span
id="fr_3660"></span>[3661](#fn_3660) but when both people, now purified,
now raised again, now crowned, now changed into an immortal form, and
into everlasting incorruption, shall see God face to face, and Jacob
shall be no more, but there shall be Israel only; then shall the Lord
see him in the person of this holy Nathanael, and shall say, “Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.” <span
id="fr_3661"></span>[3662](#fn_3661) When thou dost hear, “Behold an
Israelite indeed;” let Israel come into thy mind; when Israel shall come
into thy mind, let his dream come into thy mind, in which he saw a
ladder from earth even to heaven, the Lord standing upon it, the Angels
of God ascending and descending. This dream did Jacob see. But after
this he was called Israel; that is, some little time after as he came
from Mesopotamia, and on his journey. If then Jacob saw the ladder, and
he is also called Israel; and this Nathanael is an “Israelite indeed in
whom is no guile;” therefore when he wondered because the Lord. said to
him, “I saw thee under the fig-tree;” <span
id="fr_3662"></span>[3663](#fn_3662) did He say to him, “Thou shalt see
greater things than these.” <span id="fr_3663"></span>[3664](#fn_3663)
And so He announced to him Jacob’s dream. To whom did He announce it? To
him whom He called “an Israelite, in whom was no guile.” As if He had
said, “His dream, by whose name I have called thee, shall be manifested
in thee; make no haste to wonder, “thou shalt see greater things than
these. Ye shall see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending unto the Son of Man.” <span
id="fr_3664"></span>[3665](#fn_3664) See what Jacob saw; see why Jacob
anointed the stone with oil; see why Jacob prophetically signified and
prefigured the Anointed One. For that action was a prophecy.

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p38"></span>6. Now I know what you are waiting for;
I understand what you would hear from me. This too will I briefly
declare, as the Lord enableth me; “ascending and descending unto the Son
of Man.” How—if they descend to Him, He is here; if they ascend to Him,
He is above. But if they ascend to Him, and descend toHim, He is at once
above and here. It cannot any way possibly be, that they should ascend
to Him, and descend to Him, unless He be both there whither they ascend,
and here whither they descend—How do we prove that He is both there, and
that He is here? Let Paul, who was first Saul, answer us. He found it by
experience, when he was first a persecutor, and afterwards became a
preacher; first Jacob, afterwards Israel; who was himself too “of the
stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin.” <span
id="fr_3665"></span>[3666](#fn_3665) In him let us see Christ above,
Christ below. First, the very Voice of the Lord from heaven shows this;
“Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” <span
id="fr_3666"></span>[3667](#fn_3666) What! had Paul ascended into
heaven? Had Paul so much as cast a stone into heaven? He was persecuting
the Christians, binding them, haling them to be put to death, searching
them out in every place where they lay hid, when they were found on no
consideration sparing them. To whom the Lord Christ saith, “Saul, Saul.”
Whence crieth He? From heaven. Therefore He is above. “Why persecutest
thou Me?” Therefore He is below. Thus have I explained all, though
briefly, yet as well as I could to you, Beloved. I have ministered to
you according to my duty, and now for your duty, do ye think upon the
poor. Let us turn to the Lord, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3636"></span>[470:3637](1060291.htm#fr_3636) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p5"></span> [Gen. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3637"></span>[470:3638](1060291.htm#fr_3637) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p6"></span> [Gen. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3638"></span>[470:3639](1060291.htm#fr_3638) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p7"></span> [John i.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3639"></span>[470:3640](1060291.htm#fr_3639) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p8"></span> [John i.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#049)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3640"></span>[470:3641](1060291.htm#fr_3640) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p10"></span> [John i.
50](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#050)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3641"></span>[470:3642](1060291.htm#fr_3641) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p11"></span> [John i.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3642"></span>[470:3643](1060291.htm#fr_3642) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p12"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#011)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3643"></span>[471:3644](1060291.htm#fr_3643) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p13"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3644"></span>[471:3645](1060291.htm#fr_3644) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p14"></span> [Matt. xxi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3645"></span>[471:3646](1060291.htm#fr_3645) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p15"></span> [John ix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3646"></span>[471:3647](1060291.htm#fr_3646) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p16"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3647"></span>[471:3648](1060291.htm#fr_3647) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p17"></span> *Significavit*.

<span id="fn_3648"></span>[471:3649](1060291.htm#fr_3648) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p19"></span> [Gen.
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3649"></span>[471:3650](1060291.htm#fr_3649) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p20"></span> *Plantam*.

<span id="fn_3650"></span>[471:3651](1060291.htm#fr_3650) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p21"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3651"></span>[471:3652](1060291.htm#fr_3651) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p22"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#026)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3652"></span>[471:3653](1060291.htm#fr_3652) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p23"></span> [Gen. xxxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#010)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3653"></span>[471:3654](1060291.htm#fr_3653) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p24"></span> [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3654"></span>[471:3655](1060291.htm#fr_3654) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p25"></span> [Matt. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3655"></span>[471:3656](1060291.htm#fr_3655) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p26"></span> [Ps.
18:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p26.1"></span>,
Sept. (xviii. 43, 44, English version).

<span id="fn_3656"></span>[471:3657](1060291.htm#fr_3656) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p27"></span> [Rom. x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3657"></span>[471:3658](1060291.htm#fr_3657) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p29"></span> [Gen. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3658"></span>[471:3659](1060291.htm#fr_3658) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p30"></span> [Gen.
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028), [Gen.
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#010)<span
id="vii.lxxiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3659"></span>[472:3660](1060291.htm#fr_3659) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p32"></span> [Ps.
17.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015)<span
id="vii.lxxiv-p32.1"></span>, Sept. (xvii. 15, English version).

<span id="fn_3660"></span>[472:3661](1060291.htm#fr_3660) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p33"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3661"></span>[472:3662](1060291.htm#fr_3661) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p34"></span> [John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3662"></span>[472:3663](1060291.htm#fr_3662) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p35"></span> [John i.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3663"></span>[472:3664](1060291.htm#fr_3663) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p36"></span> [John i.
50](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#050)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3664"></span>[472:3665](1060291.htm#fr_3664) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p37"></span> [John i.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3665"></span>[472:3666](1060291.htm#fr_3665) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p39"></span> [Phil. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3666"></span>[472:3667](1060291.htm#fr_3666) <span
id="vii.lxxiv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxiv-p40"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="vii.lxxiv-p40.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXIII](1060292)
