[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060016)  [Next](1060018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.</span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p2"></span>29. “Be kindly disposed,” <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) says he, “toward thine adversary quickly,
whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary
deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer,
and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, thou shalt by no
means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.” I
understand who the judge is: “For the Father judgeth no man, but hath
committed all judgment unto the Son.” <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) I understand who the officer is: “And
angels,” it is said, “ministered unto Him:” <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) and we believe that He will come with His
angels to judge the quick and the dead. I understand what is meant by
the prison: evidently the punishments of darkness, which He calls in
another passage the outer darkness: <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)
for this reason, I believe, that the joy of the divine rewards is
something internal in the mind itself, or even if anything more hidden
can be thought of, that joy of which it is said to the servant who
deserved well, “Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord;” <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) just as also, under this republican
government, one who is thrust into prison is sent out from the council
chamber, or from the palace of the judge.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p8"></span>30. But now, with respect to paying the
uttermost farthing, <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) it may be
understood without absurdity either as standing for this, that nothing
is left unpunished; just as in common speech we also say “to the very
dregs,” when we wish to express that something is so drained out that
nothing is left: or by the expression “the uttermost farthing” earthly
sins may be meant. For as a fourth part of the separate component parts
of this world, and in fact as the last, the earth is found; so that you
begin with the heavens, you reckon the air the second, water the third,
the earth the fourth. It may therefore seem to be suitably said, “till
thou hast paid the last fourth,” in the sense of “till thou hast
expiated thy earthly sins:” for this the sinner also heard, “Earth thou
art, and unto earth shall thou return.” <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) Then, as to the expression “till thou
hast paid,” I wonder if it does not mean that punishment which is called
eternal. <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) For whence is that debt
paid where there is now no opportunity given of repenting and of leading
a more <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="v.ii.xi-Page_14"></span>correct life? For perhaps the expression
“till thou hast paid” stands here in the same sense as in that passage
where it is said, “Sit Thou at my right hand, until I make Thine enemies
Thy footstool;” <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) for not even when
the enemies have been put under His feet, will He cease to sit at the
right hand: or that statement of the apostle, “For He must reign, till
He hath put all enemies under His feet;” <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) for not even when they have been put
under His feet, will He cease to reign. Hence, as it is there understood
of Him respecting whom it is said, “He must reign, till He hath put His
enemies under His feet,” that He will reign for ever, inasmuch as they
will be for ever under His feet: so here it may be understood of him
respecting whom it is said, “Thou shalt by no means come out thence,
till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing,” that he will never come
out; for he is always paying the uttermost farthing, so long as he is
suffering the everlasting punishment of his earthly sins. Nor would I
say this in such a way as that I should seem to prevent a more careful
discussion respecting the punishment of sins, as to how in the
Scriptures it is called eternal; although in all possible ways it is to
be avoided rather than known.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p14"></span>31. But let us now see who the adversary
himself is, with whom we are enjoined to agree quickly, whiles we are in
the way with him. For he is either the devil, or a man, or the flesh, or
God, or His commandment. <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) But I
do not see how we should be enjoined to be on terms of goodwill, *i.e.*
to be of one heart or of one mind, with the devil. For some have
rendered the Greek word which is found here “of one heart,” others “of
one mind:” but neither are we enjoined to show goodwill to the devil
(for where there is goodwill there is friendship: and no one would say
that we are to make friends with the devil); nor is it expedient to come
to an agreement with him, against whom we have declared war by once for
all renouncing him, and on conquering whom we shall be crowned; nor
ought we now to yield to him, for if we had never yielded to him, we
should never have fallen into such miseries. Again, as to the adversary
being a man, although we are enjoined to live peaceably with all men, as
far as lieth in us, where certainly goodwill, and concord, and consent
may be understood; yet I do not see how I can accept the view, that we
are delivered to the judge by a man, in a case where I understand Christ
to be the judge, “before” whose “judgment-seat we must all
appear,” <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) as the apostle says:
how then is he to deliver me to the judge, who will appear equally with
me before the judge? Or if any one is delivered to the judge because he
has injured a man, although the party who has been injured does not
deliver him, it is a much more suitable view, that the guilty party is
delivered to the judge by that law against which he acted when he
injured the man. And this for the additional reason, that if any one has
injured a man by killing him, there will be no time now in which to
agree with him; for he is not now in the way with him, *i.e.* in this
life: and yet a remedy will not on that account be excluded, if one
repents and flees for refuge with the sacrifice of a broken heart to the
mercy of Him who forgives the sins of those who turn to Him, and who
rejoices more over one penitent than over ninety-nine just
persons. <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) But much less do I see
how we are enjoined to bear goodwill towards, or to agree with, or to
yield to, the flesh. For it is sinners rather who love their flesh, and
agree with it, and yield to it; but those who bring it into subjection
are not the parties who yield to it, but rather they compel it to yield
to them.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p18"></span>32. Perhaps, therefore, we are enjoined to
yield to God, and to be well-disposed towards Him, in order that we may
be reconciled to Him, from whom by sinning we have turned away, so that
He can be called our adversary. For He is rightly called the adversary
of those whom He resists, for “God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace
to the humble;” <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) and “pride is
the beginning of all sin, but the beginning of man’s pride is to become
apostate from God;” <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) and the
apostle says, “For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God
by the death of His Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved
by His life.” <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) And from this it
may be perceived that no nature \[as being\] bad is an enemy to God,
inasmuch as the very parties who were enemies are being reconciled.
Whoever, therefore, while in this way, *i.e.* in this life, shall not
have been reconciled to God by the death of His Son, will be delivered
to the judge by Him, for “the Father judgeth no man, but hath delivered
all judgment to the Son;” and so the other things which are described in
this section follow, which we have already discussed. There is only one
thing which creates a difficulty as regards this interpretation, viz.
how it can be rightly said that we are in the way with God, if in this
passage He Himself is to be understood as the adversary of the wicked,
with whom we are enjoined to be reconciled quickly; unless, perchance,
because He is everywhere, we also, while we are in this way, are
certainly with Him. For as it is said, “If I ascend up into heaven, Thou
art <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span
id="v.ii.xi-Page_15"></span>there; if I make my bed in hell, behold,
Thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall Thy hand lead me, and Thy
right hand shall hold me.” <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) Or if
the view is not accepted, that the wicked are said to be with God,
although there is nowhere where God is not present,—just as we do not
say that the blind are with the light, although the light surrounds
their eyes,—there is one resource remaining: that we should understand
the adversary here as being the commandment of God. For what is so much
an adversary to those who wish to sin as the commandment of God, *i.e.*
His law and divine Scripture, which has been given us for this life,
that it may be with us in the way, which we must not contradict, lest it
deliver us to the judge, but which we ought to submit to quickly? For no
one knows when he may depart out of this life. Now, who is it that
submits to divine Scripture, save he who reads or hears it piously,
deferring to it as of supreme authority; so that what he understands he
does not hate on this account, that he feels it to be opposed to his
sins, but rather loves being reproved by it, and rejoices that his
maladies are not spared until they are healed; and so that even in
respect to what seems to him obscure or absurd, he does not therefore
raise contentious contradictions, but prays that he may understand, yet
remembering that goodwill and reverence are to be manifested towards so
great an authority? But who does this, unless just the man who has come,
not harshly threatening, but in the meekness of piety, for the purpose
of opening and ascertaining the contents of his father’s will?
“Blessed,” therefore, “are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.”
Let us see what follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[13:92](1060017.htm#fr_91) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p3"></span> *Benevolus*; Vulgate, *consentiens*. What
is matter of prudence in a civil case, becomes matter of life and death
in spiritual things. The Lord does not intend to inculcate simply a law
of worldly prudence as asserted by a few modern commentators.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[13:93](1060017.htm#fr_92) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p4"></span> [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="v.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[13:94](1060017.htm#fr_93) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p5"></span> [Matt. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011)<span id="v.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[13:95](1060017.htm#fr_94) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p6"></span> [Matt. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)<span id="v.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[13:96](1060017.htm#fr_95) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p7"></span> [Matt. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#023)<span id="v.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[13:97](1060017.htm#fr_96) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p9"></span> The word translated “farthing” means
literally “a fourth part” and on this original sense Augustin’s second
interpretation is based.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[13:98](1060017.htm#fr_97) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p10"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="v.ii.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[13:99](1060017.htm#fr_98) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p11"></span> Universalists have quoted the passage to
prove the doctrine that punishment will not be endless, others in favor
of purgatory. The main idea is the inexorable rigor of the divine
justice against the impenitent. “The whole tone of the passage is that
of one who seeks to deepen the sense of danger, not to make light of it;
to make men feel that they cannot pay their debt, though God may forgive
it freely” (Plumptre).

<span id="fn_99"></span>[14:100](1060017.htm#fr_99) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p12"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.xi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[14:101](1060017.htm#fr_100) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p13"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)<span id="v.ii.xi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[14:102](1060017.htm#fr_101) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p15"></span> “The devil” (Clemens Alex.); “conscience”
(Euthymius, Zig.); “the man who has done the injury” (Meyer, Tholuck,
Lange, Trench, etc.)

<span id="fn_102"></span>[14:103](1060017.htm#fr_102) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p16"></span> [2 Cor. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="v.ii.xi-p16.1"></span>.
*Exhiberi*; Vulgate, *manifestari*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[14:104](1060017.htm#fr_103) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p17"></span> [Luke xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.xi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[14:105](1060017.htm#fr_104) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p19"></span> [Jas. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="v.ii.xi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[14:106](1060017.htm#fr_105) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p20"></span> [Sir.
10:13](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#013),
[12](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#012)<span id="v.ii.xi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[14:107](1060017.htm#fr_106) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p21"></span> [Rom. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="v.ii.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[15:108](1060017.htm#fr_107) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p22"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)<span id="v.ii.xi-p22.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](1060018)
