[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060237)  [Next](1060239) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxi"></span> <span id="vii.xxi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Sermon XIX.</span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xxi-p2.1"></span>\[LXIX. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xxi-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="vii.xxi-p3.2"></span>,
“Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden,” etc.*

<span id="vii.xxi-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xxi-p4.1"></span>We</span> heard in the Gospel that the Lord,
rejoicing greatly in Spirit, said unto God the Father, “I confess to
Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because Thou hast hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.
Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in Thy sight. All things are
delivered unto Me of My Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the
Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal Him.” <span
id="fr_2305"></span>[2306](#fn_2305) I have labour in talking, you in
hearing: let us then both give ear to Him who goes on to say, “Come unto
Me, all ye that labour.” <span id="fr_2306"></span>[2307](#fn_2306) For
why do we labour all, except that we are mortal men, frail creatures and
infirm, bearing about vessels of clay which crowd and straiten one
another. But if these vessels of flesh are straitened, let the
open <span id="fr_2307"></span>[2308](#fn_2307) expanse of charity be
enlarged. What then does He mean by, “Come unto Me, all ye that labour,”
but that ye may labour no more? In a word, His promise is clear enough;
forasmuch as He called those who were in labour, they might perchance
enquire, for what profit they were called: “and,” saith He, “I will
refresh you.”

<span id="vii.xxi-p8"></span>2. “Take My yoke upon you, and learn of
Me;” <span id="fr_2308"></span>[2309](#fn_2308) not to raise the fabric
of the world, not to create all things visible and invisible, not in the
world so created to work miracles and raise the dead; but, “that I am
meek and lowly in heart.” Thou wishest to be great, begin from the
least. Thou art thinking to construct some mighty fabric in height;
first think of the foundation of humility. And how great soever a mass
of building one may wish and design to place above it, the greater the
building is to be, the deeper does he dig his foundation. The building
in the course of its erection, rises up on high, but he who digs its
foundation, must first go down very low. So then you see even a building
is low before it is high, and the top is raised only after humiliation.

<span id="vii.xxi-p10"></span>3. What is the top in the erection of that
building which we are constructing? Whither will the highest point of
this building reach? I say at once, even to the Vision of God. Ye see
how high, how great a thing it is to see God. Whoso longeth after it,
understands both what I say and what he hears. The Vision of God is
promised to us, of the very God, the Supreme God. For this is good, to
see Him who seeth. <span id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span
id="vii.xxi-Page_316"></span>For they who worship false gods, see them
easily; but they see them “who have eyes and see not.” But to us is
promised the Vision of the Living and the Seeing God, that we may desire
eagerly to see that God of whom Scripture saith, “He that planted the
ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, doth he not
consider?” <span id="fr_2309"></span>[2310](#fn_2309) Doth He then not
hear, who hath made for thee that whereby thou hearest? and doth not He
see, who hath created that whereby thou seest? Well therefore in the
foregoing words of this very Psalm doth He say, “Understand therefore ye
unwise among the people, and ye fools at length be wise.” <span
id="fr_2310"></span>[2311](#fn_2310) For many men commit evil deeds
whilst they think they are not seen by God. And it is difficult indeed
for them to believe that He *cannot* see them; but they think that He
*will* not. Few are found of such great impiety, that that should be
fulfilled in them which is written, “The fool hath said in his heart,
There is no God.” <span id="fr_2311"></span>[2312](#fn_2311) This is but
the madness of a few. For as great piety belongs but to the few, no less
also does great impiety. But the multitude of men speak thus: What! is
God thinking now upon this, that He should know what I am doing in my
house, and does God care for what I may choose to do upon my bed? Who
says this? “Understand, ye unwise among the people, and ye fools at
length be wise.” Because as being a man, it is a labour for thee to know
all that takes place in thy house, and for all the doings and words of
thy servants to reach thee; thinkest thou that it is a like labour for
God to observe thee, who did not labour to create thee? Doth not He fix
His eye upon thee, who made thine eye? Thou wast not, and He created
thee and gave thee being; and doth not He care for thee now that thou
art, who “calleth those things which be not as though they were”? <span
id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312) Do not then promise thyself this.
Whether thou wilt or no, He seeth thee, and there is no place whither
thou canst hide thyself from His eyes. “For if thou goest up into
heaven, He is there; if thou goest down into hell, He is there
also.” <span id="fr_2313"></span>[2314](#fn_2313) Great is thy labour,
whilst unwilling to depart from evil deeds: yet wishest not to be seen
by God. Hard labour truly! Daily art thou wishing to do evil, and dost
thou suspect that thou art not seen? Hear the Scripture which saith, “He
that planted the ear, shall He not hear? He that formed the eye, doth
not He consider?” Where canst thou hide thy evil deeds from the eyes of
God? If thou wilt not depart from them, thy labour is great indeed.

<span id="vii.xxi-p16"></span>4. Hear Him then who saith, “Come unto Me,
all ye that labour.” Thou canst not end thy labour by flying. Dost thou
choose to fly from Him, and not rather to Him? Find out then whither
thou canst escape, and so fly. But if thou canst not fly from Him, for
that He is everywhere present; fly (it is quite nigh <span
id="fr_2314"></span>[2315](#fn_2314) ) to God, who is present where thou
art standing. Fly. Lo in thy flight thou hast passed the heavens, He is
there; thou hast descended into hell, He is there; whatever deserts of
the earth thou shalt choose, there is He, who hath said, “I fill heaven
and earth.” <span id="fr_2315"></span>[2316](#fn_2315) If then He fills
heaven and earth, and there is no place whither thou canst fly from Him;
cease this thy labour, and fly to His presence, lest thou feel His
coming. Take courage from the <span id="fr_2316"></span>[2317](#fn_2316)
hope that thou shalt by well-living see Him, by whom even in thy evil
living thou art seen. For in evil living thou canst be seen, thou canst
not see; but by well-living thou art both seen and seest. For with how
much more tender nearness <span id="fr_2317"></span>[2318](#fn_2317)
will He who crowneth the worthy look on thee, who in His pity saw thee
that He might call thee when unworthy? Nathanael said to the Lord whom
as yet he did not know, “Whence knewest thou me?” The Lord said unto
him, “When thou wast under the fig-tree I saw thee.” <span
id="fr_2318"></span>[2319](#fn_2318) Christ saw thee in thine own shade;
and will He not see thee in His Light? For what is, “When thou wast
under the fig-tree I saw thee”? What does it mean? Call to mind the
original sin of Adam, in whom we all die. When he first sinned, he made
himself aprons of fig-leaves, <span id="fr_2319"></span>[2320](#fn_2319)
signifying by these leaves the irritations of lust to which he had been
reduced by sinning. Hence are we born; in this condition are we born;
born in sinful flesh, which “the likeness of sinful flesh” alone can
cure. Therefore “God sent His own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh.” <span id="fr_2320"></span>[2321](#fn_2320) He came of this
flesh, but He came not as other men. For the Virgin conceived Him not by
lust, but by faith. He came into the Virgin, who was before the Virgin.
He made choice of her whom He created, He created her whom He designed
to choose. He brought to the Virgin fruitfulness: He took not away her
unimpaired purity. He then who came to thee without the irritation of
the leaves of the fig-tree, “when thou wast under the fig-tree,” saw
thee. Make ready then to see Him in His height of glory, <span
id="fr_2321"></span>[2322](#fn_2321) by whom in His pity thou wast seen.
But because the top is high, think of the foundation. What foundation?
dost thou say? “Learn of Him, for He is meek and lowly in heart.” Dig
this foundation of lowliness deep in thee, and so wilt thou attain to
the crowning top of charity. “Turning to the Lord,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2305"></span>[315:2306](1060238.htm#fr_2305) <span
id="vii.xxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p5"></span> [Matt. xi.
25-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span id="vii.xxi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2306"></span>[315:2307](1060238.htm#fr_2306) <span
id="vii.xxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p6"></span> [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="vii.xxi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2307"></span>[315:2308](1060238.htm#fr_2307) <span
id="vii.xxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p7"></span> *Spatia*.

<span id="fn_2308"></span>[315:2309](1060238.htm#fr_2308) <span
id="vii.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p9"></span> [Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="vii.xxi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2309"></span>[316:2310](1060238.htm#fr_2309) <span
id="vii.xxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p11"></span> [Ps.
94.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#009)<span id="vii.xxi-p11.1"></span>,
Sept. (xciv. English version).

<span id="fn_2310"></span>[316:2311](1060238.htm#fr_2310) <span
id="vii.xxi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p12"></span> [Ps.
94.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxi-p12.1"></span>,
Sept. (xciv. English version).

<span id="fn_2311"></span>[316:2312](1060238.htm#fr_2311) <span
id="vii.xxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p13"></span> [Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[316:2313](1060238.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="vii.xxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p14"></span> [Rom. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[316:2314](1060238.htm#fr_2313) <span
id="vii.xxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p15"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[316:2315](1060238.htm#fr_2314) <span
id="vii.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p17"></span> *De proximo*.

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[316:2316](1060238.htm#fr_2315) <span
id="vii.xxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p18"></span> [Jer. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024)<span id="vii.xxi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[316:2317](1060238.htm#fr_2316) <span
id="vii.xxi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p19"></span> *Præsume*.

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[316:2318](1060238.htm#fr_2317) <span
id="vii.xxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p20"></span> *Familiarius*.

<span id="fn_2318"></span>[316:2319](1060238.htm#fr_2318) <span
id="vii.xxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p21"></span> [John i.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048)<span id="vii.xxi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2319"></span>[316:2320](1060238.htm#fr_2319) <span
id="vii.xxi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p22"></span> [Gen. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007)<span id="vii.xxi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2320"></span>[316:2321](1060238.htm#fr_2320) <span
id="vii.xxi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p23"></span> [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2321"></span>[316:2322](1060238.htm#fr_2321) <span
id="vii.xxi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p24"></span> *Sublimiter*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XX](1060239)
