[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060073)  [Next](1060075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—Of the Fact that the God of the
Hebrews, Although the People Were Conquered, Proved Himself to Be
Unconquered, by Overthrowing the Idols, and by Turning All the Gentiles
to His Own Service.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p2"></span>21. Here indeed we have a wonderful fact,
which is not remarked by those few pagans who have remained
such,—namely, that this God of the Hebrews who was offended by the
conquered, and who was also denied acceptance by the conquerors, is now
preached and worshipped among all nations. This is that God of Israel of
whom the prophet spake so long time since, when he thus addressed the
people of God: “And He who brought thee out, the God of Israel, shall be
called (the God) of the whole earth.” <span
id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557.md) What was thus prophesied has been
brought to pass through the name of the Christ, who comes to men in the
form of a descendant of that very Israel who was the grandson of
Abraham, with whom the race of the Hebrews began. <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558.md) For it was to this Israel also that it
was said, “In thy seed shall all the tribes of the earth be
blessed.” <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559.md) Thus it is shown that
the God of Israel, the true God who made heaven and earth, and who
administers human affairs justly and mercifully in such wise that
neither does justice exclude mercy with Him, nor does mercy hinder
justice, was not overcome Himself when His Hebrew people suffered their
overthrow, in virtue of His permitting the kingdom and priesthood of
that nation to be seized and subverted by the Romans. For now, indeed,
by the might of this gospel of Christ, the true King and Priest, the
advent of which was prefigured by that kingdom and priesthood, the God
of Israel Himself is everywhere destroying the idols of the nations.
And, in truth, it was to prevent that destruction that the Romans
refused to admit the sacred rites of this God in the way that they
admitted those of the gods of the other nations whom they conquered.
Thus did He remove both kingdom and priesthood from the prophetic
nation, because He who was promised to men through the agency of that
people had already come. And by Christ the King He has brought into
<span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span
id="vi.iv.xiv-Page_86"></span>subjection to His own name that Roman
empire by which the said nation was overcome; and by the strength and
devotion of Christian faith, He has converted it so as to effect a
subversion of those idols, the honour ascribed to which precluded His
worship from obtaining entrance.

<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p6"></span>22. I am of opinion that it was not by
means of magical arts that Christ, previous to His birth among men,
brought it about that those things which were destined to come to pass
in the course of His history, were pre-announced by so many prophets,
and prefigured also by the kingdom and priesthood established in a
certain nation. For the people who are connected with that now abolished
kingdom, and who in the wonderful providence of God are scattered
throughout all lands, have indeed remained without any unction from the
true King and Priest; in which anointing <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560.md) the import of the name of Christ is
plainly discovered. But notwithstanding this, they still retain remnants
of some of their observances; while, on the other hand, not even in
their state of overthrow and subjugation have they accepted those Roman
rites which are connected with the worship of idols. Thus they still
keep the prophetic books as the witness of Christ; and in this way in
the documents of His enemies we find proof presented <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561.md) of the truth of this Christ who is the
subject of prophecy. What, then, do these unhappy men disclose
themselves to be, by the unworthy method in which they laud <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562.md) the name of Christ? If anything
relating to the practice of magic has been written under His name, while
the doctrine of Christ is so vehemently antagonistic to such arts, these
men ought rather in the light of this fact to gather some idea of the
greatness of that name, by the addition of which even persons who live
in opposition to His precepts endeavour to dignify their nefarious
practices. For just as, in the course of the diverse errors of men, many
persons have set up their varied heresies against the truth under the
cover of His name, so the very enemies of Christ think that, for the
purposes of gaining acceptance for opinions which they propound in
opposition to the doctrine of Christ, they have no weight of authority
at their service unless they have the name of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_557"></span>[85:558](1060074.htm#fr_557.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p3"></span> *Et qui eruit te, Deus Israel, universæ
terræ vocabitur*. [Isa. liv. 5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>. \[Compare the Hebrew, from which the Latin
citation varies.—R.\]

<span id="fn_558"></span>[85:559](1060074.htm#fr_558.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p4"></span> In his *Retractations* (ii. 16) Augustin
alludes to this sentence, and says that the word *Hebrews* (*Hebræi*)
may be derived from *Abraham*, as if the original form had been
*Abrahæi*, but that it is more correct to take it from *Heber*, so that
*Hebræi* is for Heberæi. He refers us also to his discussion in the
*City of God*, xvi. 11.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[85:560](1060074.htm#fr_559.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p5"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[86:561](1060074.htm#fr_560.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p7"></span> *Chrism*.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[86:562](1060074.htm#fr_561.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p8"></span> The text gives *probetur veritas
Christi*, etc.; six <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.iv.xiv-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> give *profertur veritas*,
etc.—<span class="c13"><span id="vi.iv.xiv-p8.2"></span>Migne</span>.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[86:563](1060074.htm#fr_562.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xiv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xiv-p9"></span> Or *adduce—male laudando*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](1060075.md)
