[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060094)  [Next](1060096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.—Of the Fact that the Mystery
of a Mediator Was Made Known to Those Who Lived in Ancient Times by the
Agency of Prophecy, as It is Now Declared to Us in the Gospel.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p2"></span>53. Wherefore, seeing that Christ
Himself is that Wisdom of God by whom all things were created, and
considering that no rational intelligences, whether of angels or of men,
receive wisdom except by participation in this Wisdom wherewith we are
united by that Holy Spirit through whom charity is shed abroad in our
hearts <span id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653.md) (which Trinity at the
same time constitutes one God), Divine Providence, having respect to the
interests of mortal men whose time-bound life was held engaged in things
which rise into being and die, <span id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654.md)
decreed that this same Wisdom of God, assuming into the unity of His
person the (nature of) man, in which He might be born according to the
conditions of time, and live and die and rise again, should utter and
perform and bear and sustain things congruous to our salvation; and
thus, in exemplary fashion, show at once to men on earth the way for a
return to heaven, and to those angels who are above us, the way to
retain their position in heaven. <span id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655.md)
For unless, also, in the nature of the reasonable soul, and under the
conditions of an existence in time, something came newly into
being,—that is to say, unless that began to be which previously was
not,—there could never be any passing from a life of utter corruption
and folly into one of wisdom and true goodness. And thus, as truth in
the contemplative lives in the enjoyment of things eternal, while faith
in the believing is what is due to things which are made, man is
purified through that faith which is conversant with temporal things, in
order to his being made capable of receiving the truth of things
eternal. For one of their noblest intellects, the philosopher Plato, in
the treatise which is named the *Timæus*, speaks also to this effect:
“As eternity is to that which is made, so truth to faith.” Those two
belong to the things above,—namely, eternity and truth; these two belong
to the things below,—namely, that which is made and faith. In order,
therefore, that we may be called off from the lowest objects, and led up
again to the highest, and in order also that what is made may attain to
the eternal, we must come through faith to truth. And because all
contraries are reduced to unity by some middle factor, and because also
the iniquity of time alienated us from the righteousness of eternity,
there was need of some mediatorial righteousness of a temporal nature;
which mediatizing factor might be temporal on the side of those lowest
objects, but also righteous on the side of these highest, <span
id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656.md) and thus, by <span id="page_101">p.
101</span> <span id="vi.iv.xxxv-Page_101"></span>adapting itself to the
former without cutting itself off from the latter, might bring back
those lowest objects to the highest. Accordingly, Christ was named the
Mediator between God and men, who stood between the immortal God and
mortal man, as being Himself both God and man, <span
id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657.md) who reconciled man to God, who
continued to be what He (formerly) was, but was made also what He
(formerly) was not. And the same Person is for us at once the (centre of
the) said faith in things that are made, and the truth in things
eternal.

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p8"></span>54. This great and unutterable mystery,
this kingdom and priesthood, was revealed by prophecy to the men of
ancient time, and is now preached by the gospel to their descendants.
For it behoved that, at some period or other, that should be made good
among all nations which for a long time had been promised through the
medium of a single nation. Accordingly, He who sent the prophets before
His own descent also despatched the apostles after His ascension.
Moreover, in virtue of the man <span id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658.md)
assumed by Him, He stands to all His disciples in the relation of the
head to the members of His body. Therefore, when those disciples have
written matters which He declared and spake to them, it ought not by any
means to be said that He has written nothing Himself; since the truth
is, that His members have accomplished only what they became acquainted
with by the repeated statements of the Head. For all that He was minded
to give for our perusal on the subject of His own doings and sayings, He
commanded to be written by those disciples, whom He thus used as if they
were His own hands. Whoever apprehends this correspondence of unity and
this concordant service of the members, all in harmony in the discharge
of diverse offices under the Head, will receive the account which he
gets in the Gospel through the narratives constructed by the disciples,
in the same kind of spirit in which he might look upon the actual hand
of the Lord Himself, which He bore in that body which was made His own,
were he to see it engaged in the act of writing. For this reason let us
now rather proceed to examine into the real character of those passages
in which these critics suppose the evangelists to have given
contradictory accounts (a thing which only those who fail to understand
the matter aright can fancy to be the case); so that, when these
problems are solved, it may also be made apparent that the members in
that body have preserved a befitting harmony in the unity of the body
itself, not only by identity in sentiment, but also by constructing
records consonant with that identity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_653"></span>[100:654](1060095.htm#fr_653.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p3"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[100:655](1060095.htm#fr_654.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p4"></span> *In rebus orientibus et occidentibus
occupata tenebatur*.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[100:656](1060095.htm#fr_655.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p5"></span> *Fieret et deorsum hominibus exemplum
redeundi et eis qui sursum sunt angelis exemplum manendi*.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[100:657](1060095.htm#fr_656.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p6"></span> Reading *quæ medietas temporalis esset
de imis, justa de summis*. Another version gives *quæ medietas
temporalis esset de imis mixta et summis* = which temporal mediatizing
factor might be made up of the lowest and the highest objects together,
or = which might be a temporal mediatizing factor made up, etc.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[101:658](1060095.htm#fr_657.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p7"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md)<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[101:659](1060095.htm#fr_658.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxv-p9"></span> *Hominem*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](1060096.md)
