[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060173)  [Next](1060175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXXVII.—Of the Harmony Subsisting
Between the Three Evangelists in Their Narratives of the Discourse Which
He Delivered on the Mount of Olives, When the Disciples Asked When the
Consummation Should Happen.</span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p2"></span>147. Matthew continues in the
following strain: “And as He sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples
came unto Him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be?
and what shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of the end of the world?
And Jesus answered, and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive
you: for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall
deceive many;” and so on, down to where we read, “And these shall go
away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.”
We have now, therefore, to examine this lengthened discourse as it meets
us in the three evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke. For they all
introduce it in their narratives, and that, too, in the same
order. <span id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188) Here, as elsewhere,
each of these writers gives some matters which are peculiar to himself,
in which, nevertheless, we have not to apprehend any suspicion of
inconsistency. But what we have to make sure of is the proof that, in
those passages which are exact parallels, they are nowhere to be
regarded as in antagonism with each other. For if anything bearing the
appearance of a contradiction meets us here, the simple affirmation that
it is something wholly distinct, and uttered by the Lord in similar
terms indeed, but on a totally different occasion, cannot be deemed a
legitimate mode of explanation in a case like this, where the narrative,
as given by all the three evangelists, moves in the same connection at
once of subjects and of dates. Moreover, the mere fact that the writers
do not all observe the same order in the reports which they give of the
same sentiments expressed by the Lord, certainly does not in any way
affect either the understanding or the communication <span
id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span id="vi.v.lxxviii-Page_169"></span>of
the subject itself, provided the matters which are represented by them
to have been spoken by Him are not inconsistent the one with the other.

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p4"></span>148. Again, what Matthew states in
this form, “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end
come,” <span id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189) is given also in the
same connection by Mark in the following manner: “And the gospel must
first be published among all nations.” <span
id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190) Mark has not added the words, “and
then shall the end come;” but he indicates what they express, when he
uses the phrase “first “in the sentence, “And the gospel must first be
published among all nations.” For they had asked Him about the end. And
therefore, when He addresses them thus, “The gospel must first be
published among all nations,” the term “first” clearly suggests the idea
of something to be done before the consummation should come.

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p7"></span>149. In like manner, what Matthew
states thus, “When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation,
spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, whoso readeth
let him understand,” <span id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191) is put
in the following form by Mark: “But when ye shall see the abomination of
desolation standing where it ought not, let him that readeth
understand.” <span id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192) But though the
phrase is thus altered, the sense conveyed is the same. For the point of
the clause “where it ought not,” is that the abomination of desolation
ought not to be in the holy place. Luke’s method of putting it, again,
is neither, “And when ye shall see the abomination of desolation stand
in the holy place,” nor “where it ought not,” but, “And when ye shall
see Jerusalem compassed with an army, then know that the desolation
thereof is nigh.”  <span id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193) At that
time, therefore, will the abomination of desolation be in the holy
place.

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p11"></span>150. Again, what is given by Matthew
in the following terms: “Then let them which be in Judæa flee into the
mountains; and let him which is on the house-top not come down to take
anything out of his house; neither let him which is in the field return
back to take his clothes,” <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194) is
reported also by Mark almost in so many words. On the other hand, Luke’s
version proceeds thus: “Then let them which are in Judæa flee to the
mountains.” <span id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195) Thus far he
agrees with the other two. But he presents what is subsequent to that in
a different form. For he goes on to say, “And let them which are in the
midst of it depart out; and let not them that are in the countries enter
thereinto: for these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are
written may be fulfilled.” Now these statements seem to present
differences enough between each other. For the one, as it occurs in the
first two evangelists, runs thus: “Let him which is on the house-top not
come down to take anything out of his house;” whereas what is given by
the third evangelist is to this effect: “And let them which are in the
midst of it depart out.” The import, however, may be, that in the great
agitation which will arise in the face of so mighty an impending peril,
those shut up in the state of siege (which is expressed by the phrase,
“they which are in the midst of it”) will appear upon the housetop \[or
“wall”\], amazed and anxious to see what terror hangs over them, or what
method of escape may open. Still the question rises, How does this third
evangelist say here, “let them depart out,” when he has already used
these terms: “And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with an army”?
For what is brought in after this—namely, the sentence, “And let not
them that are in the countries enter thereinto”—appears to form part of
one consistent admonition; and we can perceive how those who are outside
the city are not to enter into it; but the difficulty is to see how
those who are in the midst of it are to depart out, when the city is
already compassed with an army. Well, may not this expression, “in the
midst of it,” indicate a time when the danger will be so urgent as to
leave no opportunity open, so far as temporal means are concerned, for
the preservation of this present life in the body, and that the fact
that this will be a time when the soul ought to be ready and free, and
neither taken up with, nor burdened by, carnal desires, is imported by
the phrase employed by the first two writers—namely, “on the house-top,”
or, “on the wall”? In this way the third evangelist’s phraseology, “let
them depart out” (which really means, let them no more be engrossed with
the desire of this life, but let them be prepared to pass into another
life), is equivalent in sense to the terms used by the other two,” let
him not come down to take anything out of his house” (which really
means, “let not his affections turn towards the flesh, as if it could
yield him anything to his advantage then”). And in like manner the
phrase adopted by the one, “And let not them that are in the countries
enter thereunto” (which is to say, “Let not those who, with good purpose
of heart, have already placed themselves outside it, indulge again in
any carnal lust or longing after it”), denotes precisely what the other
two evangelists embody in the sentence, “Neither let him which is in the
field return <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-Page_170"></span>back to take his clothes,” which is
much the same as to state that he should not again involve himself in
cares of which he had been unburdened.

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p14"></span>151. Moreover, Matthew proceeds thus:
“But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the
Sabbath-day.” Part of this is given and part omitted by Mark, when he
says, “And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter.” Luke, on the
other hand, leaves this out entirely, and instead of it introduces
something which is peculiar to himself, and by which he appears to me to
have cast light upon this very clause which has been set before us
somewhat obscurely by these others. For his version runs thus: “And take
heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day
come upon you unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watch ye therefore, and pray
always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass.” <span id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196) This is
to be understood to be the same flight as is mentioned by Matthew, which
should not be taken in the winter or on the Sabbath-day. That “winter,”
moreover, refers to these “cares of this life” which Luke has specified
directly; and the “Sabbath-day” refers in like manner to the “surfeiting
and drunkenness.” For sad cares are like a winter; and surfeiting and
drunkenness drown and bury the heart in carnal delights and luxury—an
evil which is expressed under the term “Sabbath-day,” because of old, as
is the case with them still, the Jews had the very pernicious custom of
revelling in pleasure on that day, when they were ignorant of the
spiritual Sabbath. Or, if something else is intended by the words which
thus appear in Matthew and Mark, Luke’s terms may also be taken to bear
on something else, while no question implying any antagonism between
them need be raised for all that. At present, however, we have not
undertaken the task of expounding the Gospels, but only that of
defending them against groundless charges of falsehood and deceit.
Furthermore, other matters which Matthew has inserted in this discourse,
and which are common to him and Mark, present no difficulty. On the
other hand, with respect to those sections which are common to him and
Luke, \[it is to be remarked that\] these are not introduced into the
present discourse by Luke, although in regard to the order of narration
here they are at one. But he records sentences of like tenor in other
connections, either reproducing them as they suggested themselves to his
memory, and thus bringing them in by anticipation so as to relate at an
earlier point words which, as spoken by the Lord, belong really to a
later; or else, giving us to understand that they were uttered twice
over by the Lord, once on the occasion referred to by Matthew, and on a
second occasion, with which Luke himself deals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[168:1189](1060174.htm#fr_1188) <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p3"></span> [Matt.
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003), [Mark
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#004), [Luke
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#007)<span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[169:1190](1060174.htm#fr_1189) <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p5"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[169:1191](1060174.htm#fr_1190) <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p6"></span> [Mark xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#010)<span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[169:1192](1060174.htm#fr_1191) <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p8"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)<span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[169:1193](1060174.htm#fr_1192) <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p9"></span> [Mark xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#014)<span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p9.1"></span>. \[The Greek text of Mark, according to
the best authorities, does not contain the phrase “spoken of by Daniel
the prophet.” Augustin also omits the clause, but the Edinburgh edition
inserts it, following the Authorized Version. It has therefore been
stricken out in this edition.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[169:1194](1060174.htm#fr_1193) <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p10"></span> [Luke xxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020)<span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[169:1195](1060174.htm#fr_1194) <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p12"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016)<span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[169:1196](1060174.htm#fr_1195) <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p13"></span> [Luke xxi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#021)<span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[170:1197](1060174.htm#fr_1196) <span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxviii-p15"></span> [Luke xxi.
34-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034)<span
id="vi.v.lxxviii-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVIII](1060175)
