[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060142)  [Next](1060144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.xlvii"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLVI.—Of the Question as to How the
Four Evangelists Harmonize with Each Other on This Same Subject of the
Miracle of the Five Loaves.</span>

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p2"></span>95. Matthew then proceeds and carries on
his narrative in due consecution to the said incident connected with the
five loaves in the following manner: “And when it was evening, His
disciples came to Him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time is
now past; send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages,
and buy themselves victuals. But Jesus said unto them, They need not
depart; give ye them to eat;” and so forth, down to where we read, “And
the number of those who ate was five thousand men, besides women and
children.” <span id="fr_1057"></span>[1058](#fn_1057) This miracle,
therefore, which all the four evangelists record, <span
id="fr_1058"></span>[1059](#fn_1058) and in which they are supposed to
betray certain discrepancies with each other, must be examined and
subjected to discussion, in order that we may also learn from this
instance some rules which will be applicable to all other similar cases
in the form of principles regulating modes of statement in which,
however diverse they may be, the same sense is nevertheless retained,
and the same veracity in the expression of matters of fact is preserved.
And, indeed, this investigation ought to begin not with Matthew,
although that would be in accordance with the order in which the
evangelists stand, but rather with John, by whom the narrative in
question is told with such particularity as to record even the names of
the disciples with whom the Lord conversed on this subject. For he gives
the history in the following terms: “When Jesus than lifted up His eyes,
and saw a very great company come unto Him, He saith unto Philip, Whence
shall we buy bread, that these may eat? And this He said to prove him;
for He Himself knew what He would do. Philip answered Him, Two hundred
pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them
may take a little. One of His disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother,
saith unto Him, There is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and
two fishes; but what are they among so many? Jesus said therefore, Make
the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat
down, in number about five thousand. Jesus then took the loaves; and
when He had given thanks, He distributed to the disciples, and the
disciples to them that were set down; and likewise of the fishes as much
as they would. And when they were filled, He said unto His disciples,
Gather up the fragments that remain, that they be not lost. Therefore
they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the
fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and above unto
them that had eaten.”  <span id="fr_1059"></span>[1060](#fn_1059)

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p6"></span>96. The inquiry which we have here to
handle does not concern itself with a statement given by this
evangelist, in which he specifies the kind of loaves; for he has not
omitted to mention, what has been omitted by the others, that they were
barley loaves. Neither does the question deal with what he has left
unnoticed,—namely, the fact that, in addition to the five thousand men,
there were also women and children, as Matthew tells us. And it ought
now by all means to be a settled matter, and one kept regularly in view
in all such investigations, that no one should find any difficulty in
the mere circumstance that something which is unrecorded by one writer
is related by another. But the question here is as to how the several
matters narrated by these writers may be \[shown to be\] <span
id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span id="vi.v.xlvii-Page_149"></span>all
true, so that the one of them, in giving his own peculiar version, does
not put out of court the account offered by the other. For if the Lord,
according to the narrative of John, on seeing the multitudes before Him,
asked Philip,with the view of proving him, whence bread might be got to
be given to them, a difficulty may be raised as to the truth of the
statement which is made by the others,—namely, that the disciples first
said to the Lord that He should send the multitudes away, in order that
they might go and purchase food for themselves in the neighbouring
localities, and that He made this reply to them, according to Matthew:
“They need not depart; give ye them to eat.” <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[1061](#fn_1060) With this last Mark and Luke also
agree, only that they leave out the words, “They need not depart.” We
are to suppose, therefore, that after these words the Lord looked at the
multitude, and spoke to Philip in the terms which John records, but
which those others have omitted. Then the reply which, according to
John, was made by Philip, is mentioned by Mark as having been given by
the disciples,—the intention being, that we should understand Philip to
have returned this answer as the mouthpiece of the rest; although they
may also have put the plural number in place of the singular, according
to very frequent usage. The words here actually ascribed to
Philip—namely, “Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for
them, that every one of them may take a little” <span
id="fr_1061"></span>[1062](#fn_1061) —have their counterpart in this
version by Mark, “Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread,
and give them to eat?” <span id="fr_1062"></span>[1063](#fn_1062) The
expression, again, which the same Mark relates to have been used by the
Lord, namely, “How many loaves have ye?” has been passed by without
notice by the rest. On the other hand, the statement occurring in John,
to the effect that Andrew made the suggestion about the five loaves and
the two fishes, appears in the others, who use here the plural number
instead of the singular, as a notice referring the suggestion to the
disciples generally. And, indeed, Luke has coupled Philip’s reply
together with Andrew’s answer in one sentence. For when he says, “We
have no more but five loaves and two fishes,” he reports Andrew’s
response; but when he adds, “except we should go and buy meat for all
this people,” he seems to carry us back to Philip’s reply, only that he
has left unnoticed the “two hundred pennyworth.” At the same time, that
\[sentence about the going and buying meat\] may also be understood to
be implied in Andrew’s own words. For after saying, “There is a lad here
which hath five barley loaves and two fishes,” he likewise subjoined,
“But what are they among so many?” And this last clause really means the
same as the expression in question, namely, “except we should go and buy
meat for all this people.”

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p10"></span>97. From all this variety of statement
which is found in connection with a genuine harmony in regard to the
matters of fact and the ideas conveyed, it becomes sufficiently clear
that we have the wholesome lesson inculcated upon us, that what we have
to look to in studying a person’s words is nothing else than the
intention of the speakers; in setting forth which intention all truthful
narrators ought to take the utmost pains when they record anything,
whether it may relate to man, or to angels, or to God. For the subjects’
mind and intention admit of being expressed in words which should leave
no appearance of any discrepancies as regards the matter of fact.

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p11"></span>98. In this connection, it is true, we
ought not to omit to direct the reader’s attention to certain other
matters which may turn out to be of a kindred nature with those already
considered. One of these is found in the circumstance that Luke has
stated that they were ordered to sit down by fifties, whereas Mark’s
version is that it was by hundreds and by fifties. This difference,
however, creates no real difficulty. The truth is, that the one has
reported simply a part, and the other has given the whole. For the
evangelist who has introduced the notice of the hundreds as well as the
fifties has just mentioned something which the other has left
unmentioned. But there is no contradiction between them on that account.
If, indeed, the one had noticed only the fifties, and the other only the
hundreds, they might certainly have seemed to be in some antagonism with
each other, and it might not have been easy to make it plain that both
instructions were actually uttered, although only the one has been
specified by the former writer, and the other by the latter. And yet,
even in such a case, who will not acknowledge that when the matter was
subjected to more careful consideration, the solution should have been
discovered? This I have instanced now for this reason, that matters of
that kind do often present themselves, which, while they really contain
no discrepancies, appear to do so to persons who pay insufficient
attention to them, and pronounce upon them inconsiderately.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[148:1058](1060143.htm#fr_1057) <span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p3"></span> [Matt. xiv.
15-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015)<span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[148:1059](1060143.htm#fr_1058) <span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p4"></span> [Mark
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#034), [Luke
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#012)<span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[148:1060](1060143.htm#fr_1059) <span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p5"></span> [John vi.
5-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#005)<span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[149:1061](1060143.htm#fr_1060) <span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p7"></span> [Matt. xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#016)<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[149:1062](1060143.htm#fr_1061) <span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p8"></span> [John vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#007)<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[149:1063](1060143.htm#fr_1062) <span
id="vi.v.xlvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p9"></span> [Mark vi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#037)<span id="vi.v.xlvii-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVII](1060144)
