[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060077)  [Next](1060079.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—Of the Fact that the God of
the Hebrews is Not Received by the Romans, Because His Will is that He
Alone Should Be Worshipped.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xviii-p2"></span>26. In fine, they may think of Him as
they please. Still, we may ask whether it is the case that the Romans
refuse to consider evil deities as also proper objects of worship,—those
Romans who have erected fanes to Pallor and Fever, and who enjoin both
that the good demons are to been treated, <span
id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568.md) and that the evil demons are to be
propitiated. Whatever their opinion, then, of Him may be, the question
still is, Why is He the only Deity whom they have judged worthy neither
of being called upon for help, nor of being propitiated? What God is
this, who is either one so unknown, that He is the only one not
discovered as yet among so many gods, or who is one so well known that
He is now the only one worshipped by so many men? There remains, then,
nothing which they can possibly allege in explanation of their refusal
to admit the worship of this God, except that His will was that He alone
should be worshipped; and His command was, that those gods of the
Gentiles that they were worshipping at the time should cease to be
worshipped. But an answer to this other question is rather to be
required of them, namely, what or what manner of deity they consider
this God to be, who has forbidden the worship of those other gods for
whom they erected temples and images,—this God, who has also been
possessed of might so vast that His will has prevailed more in effecting
the destruction of their images than theirs has availed to secure the
non-admittance of His worship. And, indeed, the opinion of that
philosopher of theirs is given in plain terms, whom, even on the
authority of their own oracle, they have maintained to have been the
wisest of all men. For the opinion of Socrates is, that every deity
whatsoever ought to be worshipped just in the manner in which he may
have ordained that he should be worshipped. Consequently it became a
matter of the supremest necessity with them to refuse to worship the God
of the Hebrews. For if they were minded to worship Him in a method
different from the way in which He had declared that He ought to be
worshipped, then assuredly they would have been worshipping not this God
as He is, but some figment of their own. And, on the other hand, if they
were willing to worship Him in the manner which He had indicated, then
they could not but perceive that they were not at liberty to worship
those other deities whom He interdicted them from worshipping. Thus was
it, therefore, that they rejected the service of the one true God,
because they were afraid that they might offend the many false gods. For
they thought that the anger of those deities would be more to their
injury, than the goodwill of this God would be to their profit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_568"></span>[87:569](1060078.htm#fr_568.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xviii-p3"></span> The text gives *invitandos*; others
read *imitandos*, to be imitated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](1060079.md)
