[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060275)  [Next](1060277.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lix"></span> <span id="vii.lix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lix-p1.1"></span>Sermon LVII.</span>

<span id="vii.lix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lix-p2.1"></span>\[CVII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lix-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lix-p3.1"></span>*[Luke xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#015.md)<span id="vii.lix-p3.2"></span>,
“And he said unto them, take heed, and keep yourselves from all
covetousness.”* <span id="fr_3390"></span>[3391](#fn_3390.md)

<span id="vii.lix-p5"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lix-p5.1"></span>I doubt</span> not but that ye who fear God, do
hear His word with awe, and execute it with cheerfulness; that what He
hath promised, ye may at present hope for, hereafter receive. We have
just now heard the Lord Christ Jesus, the Son of God, giving us a
precept. The Truth, who neither deceiveth, nor is deceived, hath given
us a precept; let us hear, fear, beware. What is this precept then: “I
say unto you, Beware of all covetousness”?  <span
id="fr_3391"></span>[3392](#fn_3391.md) What is, “of all covetousness”?
What is, “of all”? Why did He add, “of all”? For He might have spoken
thus, “Beware of covetousness.” It suited Him to add, “of all;” and to
say, “Beware of all covetousness.”

<span id="vii.lix-p7"></span>2. Why He said this, the occasion as it
were out of which these words arose, is shown to us in the holy Gospel.
A certain man appealed to Him against his brother, who had taken away
all his patrimony, and gave not back his proper portion to his brother.
Ye see then how good a case this appellant had. For he was not seeking
to take by violence another’s, but was seeking only for his own which
had been left him by his parents; these was he demanding back by his
appeal to the judgment of the Lord. He had an unrighteous brother; but
against an unrighteous brother had he found a righteous Judge. Ought he
then in so good a cause to lose that opportunity? Or who would say to
his brother, “Restore to thy brother his portion,” if Christ would not
say it? Would that judge be likely to say it, whom perhaps his richer
and extortionate brother might corrupt by a bribe? Forlorn then as he
was, and despoiled of his father’s <span id="page_437">p. 437</span>
<span id="vii.lix-Page_437"></span>goods, when he had found such and so
great a Judge he goes up to Him, he appeals to, he beseeches Him, he
lays his cause before Him in few words. For what occasion was there to
set forth his cause at length, when he was speaking to Him who could
even see the heart? “Master,” he says, “speak to my brother, that he
divide the inheritance with me.” <span
id="fr_3392"></span>[3393](#fn_3392.md) The Lord did not say to him, “Let
thy brother come.” No, He neither sent for him to be present, nor in his
presence did He say to him who had appealed to Him, “Prove what thou
wast saying.” He asked for half an inheritance, he asked for half an
inheritance on earth; the Lord offered him a whole inheritance in
heaven. The Lord gave more than asked for.

<span id="vii.lix-p9"></span>3. “Speak to my brother, that he divide the
inheritance with me.” Just case, short case. But let us hear Him who at
once gives judgment and instruction. “Man,” He saith. “O man;” for
seeing thou valuest this inheritance so highly, what art thou but a man?
He wished to make him something more than man. What more did He wish to
make him, from whom He wished to take covetousness away? What more did
He wish to make him? I will tell you, “I have said, Ye are gods, and all
of you are children of the Most High.” <span
id="fr_3393"></span>[3394](#fn_3393.md) Lo, what He wished to make him, to
reckon him that hath no covetousness among the “gods.” “Man, who made Me
a divider among you?” <span id="fr_3394"></span>[3395](#fn_3394.md) So the
Apostle Paul His servant, when he said, “I beseech you, brethren, that
ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no schisms among
you,” <span id="fr_3395"></span>[3396](#fn_3395.md) was unwilling to be a
divider. And afterwards he thus admonished them who were running after
his name, and dividing Christ: “Every one of you saith, I am of Paul,
and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Is Christ divided?
Was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of
Paul?” <span id="fr_3396"></span>[3397](#fn_3396.md) Judge then, how wicked
are those men, who would have Him to be divided, who would not be a
divider. “Who,” saith He, “hath made Me a divider among you?”

<span id="vii.lix-p14"></span>4. Thou hast petitioned for a kindness;
hear counsel. “I say unto you, Beware of all covetousness.” <span
id="fr_3397"></span>[3398](#fn_3397.md) “Perhaps,” he would say, “thou
wouldest call him covetous and greedy, if he were seeking another’s
goods; but I say, seek not even thine own greedily or covetously.” This
is “Of all, beware of all covetousness.” A heavy burden this! If by any
chance this burden be imposed on them that are weak; let Him be sought
unto, that He who imposes it, may vouchsafe to give us strength. For it
is not a thing to be lightly regarded, my Brethren, when our Lord, our
Redeemer, our Saviour, who died for us, who gave His Own Blood as our
ransom, to redeem us, our Advocate and Judge; it is no light matter when
He saith, “Beware.” He knoweth well how great the evil is; we know it
not, let us believe Him. “Beware,” saith He. Wherefore? of what? “of all
covetousness.” I am but keeping what is mine own, I am not taking away
another’s; “Beware of all covetousness.” Not only is he covetous, who
plunders the goods of others; but he is covetous too, who greedily keeps
his own. But if he is so blamed who greedily keeps his own; how is he
condemned who plunders what is another’s! “Beware,” He saith, “of all
covetousness: For a man’s life consisteth not in the abundance of the
things which he possesseth.” He that stores up great abundance, how much
does he take therefrom to live? When he has taken it, and in a way
separated in thought sufficient to live upon from it, let him consider
for whom the rest remains; lest haply when thou keepest wherewith to
live, thou art gathering only wherewith to die. Behold Christ, behold
truth, behold severity. “Beware,” saith truth: “Beware,” saith severity.
If thou love not the truth, fear severity. “A man’s life consisteth not
in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.” Believe Him, He
doth not deceive thee. On the other hand, thou sayest, “Yea, ‘a man’s
life’ does ‘consist in the abundance of the things which he possesses.’”
He doth not deceive thee; thou deceivest thyself.

<span id="vii.lix-p16"></span>5. Out of this occasion then, when that
appellant was seeking his own portion, not desiring to plunder
another’s, arose that sentence of the Lord, wherein He said not, “Beware
of covetousness;” but added, “of all covetousness.” Nor was this all: He
giveth another example of a certain rich man, “whose ground had turned
out well.” <span id="fr_3398"></span>[3399](#fn_3398.md) “There was,” He
saith, “a certain rich man, whose ground had turned <span
id="fr_3399"></span>[3400](#fn_3399.md) out well.” What is, “had turned out
well”? The ground which he possessed had brought forth a great produce.
How great? So that he could not find where to bestow it: suddenly,
through his abundance he became straitened—this old covetous man. For
how many years had already passed away, and yet those barns had been
enough? So great then was the produce, that the accustomed places were
not sufficient. And the wretched man sought counsel, not as to how he
should lay the additional produce out, but how he should store it up;
and in thinking he discovered an expedient. He seemed as it were wise in
his own eyes, by the discovery of this expedient. Knowingly did he think
of it, wisely hit upon it. What was this he wisely hit upon? “I will
destroy,” he says, <span id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span
id="vii.lix-Page_438"></span>“my” old “barns, and will build new ones
greater, and will fill them; and I will say to my soul.” What wilt thou
say to thy soul? “Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years,
take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry.” <span
id="fr_3400"></span>[3401](#fn_3400.md) This did the wise discoverer of
this expedient say to his soul.

<span id="vii.lix-p20"></span>6. “And God,” who doth not disdain to
speak even with fools, “said unto him.” <span
id="fr_3401"></span>[3402](#fn_3401.md) Some of you may peradventure say,
And how did God speak with a fool? O, my Brethren, with how many fools
does He speak here, when the Gospel is read! When it is read, are not
they who hear and do not, fools? What then did the Lord say? For he, I
repeat, thought himself wise by the discovery of his expedient. “Thou
fool,” He saith; “Thou fool,” who seemest wise unto thyself; “Thou
fool,” who hast said to thy soul, “Thou hast much goods laid up for many
years: to-day is thy soul required of thee!” Thy soul to which thou hast
said, “Thou hast much goods,” to-day is “required,” and hath no good at
all. Let it then despise these goods, and be herself good, that when she
is “required,” she may depart in assured hope. For what is more
perverse <span id="fr_3402"></span>[3403](#fn_3402.md) than a man <span
id="fr_3403"></span>[3404](#fn_3403.md) who wishes to have “much goods,”
and does not wish to be good himself? Unworthy art thou to have them,
who dost not wish to be what thou dost wish to have. For dost thou wish
to have a bad country house? No indeed, but a good one. Or a bad wife?
No, but a good one. Or a bad hood? <span
id="fr_3404"></span>[3405](#fn_3404.md) Or even a bad shoe? And why a bad
soul only? He did not in this place say to this fool who was thinking on
vain things, building barns, and who had no regard to the wants <span
id="fr_3405"></span>[3406](#fn_3405.md) of the poor; He did not say to him,
“To-day shall thy soul be hurried away to hell:” He said no such thing
as this, but “is required of thee.” “I do not tell thee whither thy soul
shall go; yet hence, where thou art laying up for it such store of
things, must it depart, whether thou wilt or no.” Lo, “thou fool,” thou
hast thought to fill thy new and greater barns, as if there was nothing
to be done with what thou hast.

<span id="vii.lix-p26"></span>7. But peradventure he was not yet a
Christian. Let us hear then, Brethren, to whom as believers the Gospel
is read, by whom He who spake these things, is worshipped, whose mark is
borne by us on our forehead, and is held in the heart. For of very great
concernment is it where a man hath the mark of Christ, whether in the
forehead, or both in the forehead and the heart. Ye have heard to-day
the words of the holy prophet Ezekiel, how that before God sent one to
destroy the ungodly people, He first sent one to mark them, and said to
him, “Go and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and moan
for the sins of my people that are done in the midst of them.” <span
id="fr_3406"></span>[3407](#fn_3406.md) He did not say, “which <span
id="fr_3407"></span>[3408](#fn_3407.md) are done without them;” but “in the
midst of them.” Yet they “sigh and moan;” and therefore are they “marked
on the forehead:” in the forehead of the inner man, not the outer. For
there is a forehead in the face, there is a forehead in the conscience.
So it happens that when the inner forehead is stricken, the outer grows
red; either red with shame, or pale with fear. So then there is a
forehead of the inner man. There were they “marked” that they might not
be destroyed; because though they did not correct the sins which were
“done in the midst of them,” yet they sorrowed for them, and by that
very sorrow separated themselves; and though separated in God’s sight,
they were mixed with them in the eyes of men. They are “marked”
secretly, are not hurt openly. Afterwards the Destroyer is sent, and to
him it is said, “Go, lay waste, spare neither young nor old, male nor
female, but come not near those who have the mark on their forehead.”
 <span id="fr_3408"></span>[3409](#fn_3408.md) How great security is
granted to you, my Brethren, who among this people are sighing, and
moaning for the iniquities which are being done in the midst of you, and
who do them not!

<span id="vii.lix-p30"></span>8. But that ye may not commit iniquities,
“beware of all covetousness.” I will tell you in its full extent, what
is “of all covetousness.” In matter of lust he is covetous, whom his own
wife suffices not. And idolatry itself is called covetousness; because
again in matter of divine worship <span
id="fr_3409"></span>[3410](#fn_3409.md) he is covetous, whom the one and
true God suffices not. What but the covetous soul makes for itself many
gods? What but the covetous soul makes to itself false <span
id="fr_3410"></span>[3411](#fn_3410.md) martyrs? “Beware of all
covetousness.” Lo, thou lovest thine own goods, and dost boast thyself
in that thou seekest not the goods of others; see what evil thou doest
in not hearing Christ, who saith, “Beware of all covetousness.” See thou
dost love thine own goods, thou dost not take away the goods of others;
thou hast the fruits of thy labour, they are justly thine; thou hast
been left an heir, some one whose good graces thou hast attained has
given it to thee; thou hast been on the sea, and in its perils, hast
committed no fraud, hast sworn no lie, hast acquired what it hath
pleased God thou shouldest; and thou art keeping it greedily as in a
good conscience, because thou dost not possess it from evil sources, and
dost not seek what is another’s. Yet if thou give not heed to Him who
hath said, “Beware of all <span id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span
id="vii.lix-Page_439"></span>covetousness,” hear how great evils thou
wilt be ready to do for thine own goods’ sake. Lo, for example, it hath
chanced to thee to be made a judge. Thou wilt not be corrupted, because
thou dost not seek the goods of others; no one giveth thee a bribe and
says, “Give judgment against my adversary.” This be far from thee, a
man, who seekest not the things of others, how couldest thou be
persuaded to do this? Yet see what evil thou wilt be ready to do for
thine own goods’ sake. Peradventure he that wishes thee to judge evilly,
and pronounce sentence for him against his adversary is a powerful man,
and able to bring up false accusation against thee, that thou mayest
lose what thou hast. Thou dost reflect, and think upon his power, think
of thine own goods thou art keeping, which thou dost love: not which
thou hast possessed, but in whose power <span
id="fr_3411"></span>[3412](#fn_3411.md) rather thou art thyself unhappily
fixed. This thy bird-lime, by reason of which thou hast not the wings of
virtue free, thou dost look to; and thou sayest within thine own self,
“I am offending this man, he has much influence in the world; he will
suggest evil accusations against me, and I shall be outlawed, <span
id="fr_3412"></span>[3413](#fn_3412.md) and lose all I have.” Thus thou
wilt give unrighteous judgment, not when thou seekest another’s, but
when thou keepest thine own.

<span id="vii.lix-p35"></span>9. Give me a man who has given ear to
Christ, give me a man who has heard with fear “Beware of all
covetousness;” and let him not say to me, “I am a poor man, a plebeian
of mean estate, one of the common people, how can I hope ever to be a
judge? I am in no fear of this temptation, the peril of which thou hast
placed before mine eyes.” Yet lo, even this poor man I will tell what he
ought to fear. Some rich and powerful person calls thee to give false
witness for him. What wilt thou be doing now? Tell me. Thou hast a good
little property of thine own; thou hast laboured for it, hast acquired,
and kept it. That person requires of thee; “Give false witness for me,
and I will give thee so and so much.” Thou who seekest not the things of
others, sayest, “That be far from me: I do not seek for what it has not
pleased God to give me, I will not receive it; depart from me.” “Hast
thou no wish to receive what I give? I will take away what thou hast
already.” See now prove thyself, question now thine own self. Why dost
thou look at me? Look inward on thine own self, look at thine own self
within, examine thine own self within; sit down before thine own self,
and summon thine own self before thee, and stretch thyself upon the rack
of God’s commandment, and torment thyself with His fear, and deal not
softly with thyself; answer thine own self. Lo, if any one were to
threaten thee with this, what wouldest thou do? “I will take away from
thee what with so great labour thou hast acquired, if thou wilt not give
false witness for me.” Give him that; “Beware of all covetousness.” “O
my servant,” He will say to thee, “whom I have redeemed and made free,
whom from a servant I have adopted to be a brother, whom I have set as a
member in My Body, give ear to Me: He may take away what thou hast
acquired, Me he shall not take away from thee. Art thou keeping thine
own goods, that thou mayest not perish? What, have I not said unto thee,
‘Beware of all covetousness’?”

<span id="vii.lix-p36"></span>10. Lo, thou art in confusion, tossed to
and fro; thy heart as a ship is shaken about by tempests. Christ is
asleep: awake Him, that sleepeth, and thou shalt be exposed no more to
the raging of the storm. Awake Him, who was pleased to have nothing
here, and thou hast all, who came even to the Cross for thee, whose
“Bones” as He was naked and hanging “were numbered” by them that mocked
Him; and “beware of all covetousness.” Covetousness of money is not all;
“beware of covetousness” of life. A dreadful covetousness, covetousness
much to be feared. Sometimes a man will despise what he has, and say, “I
will not give false witness; I will not. You tell me, I will take away
what thou hast. Take away what I have; you do not take away what I have
within. For he was not left a poor man, who said, ‘The Lord gave, the
Lord hath taken away; it is done as it pleased the Lord; blessed’
therefore ‘be the Name of the Lord. Naked came I out of my mother’s
womb, naked shall I return to the earth.’ <span
id="fr_3413"></span>[3414](#fn_3413.md) Naked outwardly, well-clothed
within. Naked as regards these rags, these corruptible rags outwardly,
clothed within. With what? ‘Let thy priests be clothed with
righteousness.’” <span id="fr_3414"></span>[3415](#fn_3414.md) But what if
he say to thee, when thou hast despised the things which thou
possessest, what if he say to thee, “I will kill thee”? If thou have
given ear to Christ, answer him, “Wilt Thou kill me? Better that thou
shouldest kill my body, than that I by a false tongue should kill my
soul! What canst thou do to me? Thou wilt kill my body; my soul will
depart at liberty, to receive again at the end of the world even this
very body she hath despised. What canst thou do to me then? Whereas if I
should give false witness for thee, with thy tongue do I kill myself;
and not in my body do I kill myself; ‘For the mouth that lieth killeth
the soul.’” <span id="fr_3415"></span>[3416](#fn_3415.md) But peradventure
thou dost not say so. And why dost thou not say so? Thou wishest to
live; thou wishest to live longer than God hath appointed for thee? Dost
<span id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span
id="vii.lix-Page_440"></span>thou then “beware of all covetousness”? So
long was it God’s will that thou shouldest live, till this person came
to thee. It may be that he will kill thee, to make a martyr of thee.
Entertain then no undue desire of life; and so thou wilt not have an
eternity of death. Ye see how that covetousness everywhere, when we wish
for more than is necessary, causes us to sin. Beware we of all
covetousness, if we would enjoy eternal wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3390"></span>[436:3391](1060276.htm#fr_3390.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.lix-p4.1"></span>πάσης</span>, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.lix-p4.2"></span>τῆς</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.lix-p4.3"></span>πλεονεξίας</span>—A. B. D. K. L. M. Q. X.,
etc., Verss. ap. Scholz. Griesbach regards it as the more probable
reading. \[Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.lix-p4.4"></span>πᾶσης</span> with א and B.\]

<span id="fn_3391"></span>[436:3392](1060276.htm#fr_3391.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p6"></span> [Luke xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#015.md)<span id="vii.lix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3392"></span>[437:3393](1060276.htm#fr_3392.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p8"></span> [Luke xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.lix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3393"></span>[437:3394](1060276.htm#fr_3393.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p10"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.lix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3394"></span>[437:3395](1060276.htm#fr_3394.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p11"></span> [Luke xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.lix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3395"></span>[437:3396](1060276.htm#fr_3395.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p12"></span> [1 Cor. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.lix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3396"></span>[437:3397](1060276.htm#fr_3396.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.lix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3397"></span>[437:3398](1060276.htm#fr_3397.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p15"></span> [Luke xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#015.md)<span id="vii.lix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3398"></span>[437:3399](1060276.htm#fr_3398.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p17"></span> [Luke xii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.lix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3399"></span>[437:3400](1060276.htm#fr_3399.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p18"></span> *Successerat*.

<span id="fn_3400"></span>[438:3401](1060276.htm#fr_3400.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p19"></span> [Luke
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019.md)<span id="vii.lix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3401"></span>[438:3402](1060276.htm#fr_3401.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p21"></span> [Luke xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.lix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3402"></span>[438:3403](1060276.htm#fr_3402.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p22"></span> *Iniquius*.

<span id="fn_3403"></span>[438:3404](1060276.htm#fr_3403.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p23"></span> *Vid*. Serm. xxii. (lxxii. Ben.) 4
(iii.); xxxii. (lxxxii. Ben.) 14 (xi.); xxxv. (lxxxv. Ben).

<span id="fn_3404"></span>[438:3405](1060276.htm#fr_3404.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p24"></span> *Casulam*.

<span id="fn_3405"></span>[438:3406](1060276.htm#fr_3405.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p25"></span> *Ventres*.

<span id="fn_3406"></span>[438:3407](1060276.htm#fr_3406.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p27"></span> [Ezek ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.lix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3407"></span>[438:3408](1060276.htm#fr_3407.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p28"></span> Against the Donatists.

<span id="fn_3408"></span>[438:3409](1060276.htm#fr_3408.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p29"></span> [Ezek. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.lix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3409"></span>[438:3410](1060276.htm#fr_3409.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p31"></span> *Divinitate*.

<span id="fn_3410"></span>[438:3411](1060276.htm#fr_3410.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p32"></span> In allusion to the Circumcelliones
amongst the Donatists. See ab. p. 305, note.

<span id="fn_3411"></span>[439:3412](1060276.htm#fr_3411.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p33"></span> *Quibus male inhæsisti*.

<span id="fn_3412"></span>[439:3413](1060276.htm#fr_3412.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p34"></span> *Proscribor*.

<span id="fn_3413"></span>[439:3414](1060276.htm#fr_3413.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p37"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021.md)<span id="vii.lix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3414"></span>[439:3415](1060276.htm#fr_3414.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p38"></span> [Ps. cxxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.lix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3415"></span>[439:3416](1060276.htm#fr_3415.md) <span
id="vii.lix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lix-p39"></span> [Wisdom
1.11](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.lix-p39.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LVIII](1060277.md)
