[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060113)  [Next](1060115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.xviii"></span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="vi.v.xviii-Page_121"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—Of the Calling of the Apostles
as They Were Fishing.</span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p2"></span>34. Matthew’s narrative is continued
thus: “Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, He
departed into Galilee.” <span id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817) Mark
states the same fact, as also does Luke, <span
id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818) only Luke says nothing in the present
section as to John being cast into prison. The evangelist John, again,
tells us that, before Jesus went into Galilee, Peter and Andrew were
with Him one day, and that on that occasion the former had this name,
Peter, given him, while before that period he was called Simon. Likewise
John tells us, that on the day following, when Jesus was now desirous of
going forth unto Galilee, He found Philip, and said to him that he
should follow Him. Thus, too, the evangelist comes to give the narrative
about Nathanael. <span id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819) Further, he
informs us that on the third day, when He was yet in Galilee, Jesus
wrought the miracle of the turning of the water into wine at Cana. <span
id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820) All these incidents are left
unrecorded by the other evangelists, who continue their narratives at
once with the statement of the return of Jesus into Galilee. Hence we
are to understand that there was an interval here of several days,
during which those incidents took place in the history of the disciples
which are inserted at this point by John. <span
id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821) Neither is there anything
contradictory here to that other passage where Matthew tells us how the
Lord said to Peter, “Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church.” <span id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822) But we are not to
understand that that was the time when he first received this name; but
we are rather to suppose that this took place on the occasion when it
was said to him, as John mentions, “Thou shall be called Cephas, which
is, by interpretation, A stone.” <span id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823)
Thus the Lord could address him at that later period by this very name,
when He said, “Thou art Peter.” For He does not say then, “Thou shalt be
called Peter,” but, “Thou art Peter;” because on a previous occasion he
had already been spoken to in this manner, “Thou shalt be called.”

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p10"></span>35. After this, Matthew goes on with
his narrative in these terms: “And leaving the city of Nazareth, He came
and dwelt in Capharnaum, which is upon the sea-coast, in the borders of
Zabulon and Nephthalim;” and so forth, until we come to the conclusion
of the sermon which He delivered on the mount. In this section of the
narrative, Mark agrees with him in attesting the calling of the
disciples Peter and Andrew, and a little after that, the calling of
James and John. But whereas Matthew introduces in this immediate context
his account of that lengthened sermon which He delivered on the mount,
after He cured a multitude, and when great crowds followed Him, Mark has
inserted other matters at this point, touching His teaching in the
synagogue, and the people’s amazement at His doctrine. Then, too, he has
stated what Matthew also states, although not till after that lengthened
sermon has been given, namely, that “He taught them as one that had
authority, and not as the scribes.” He has likewise given us the account
of the man out of whom the unclean spirit was cast; and after that the
story of Peter’s mother-in-law. In these things, moreover, Luke is in
accord with him. <span id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824) But Matthew has
given us no notice of the evil spirit here. The story of Peter’s
mother-in-law, however, he has not omitted, only he brings it in at a
later stage. <span id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825)

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p13"></span>36. In this paragraph, moreover, which
we are at present considering, the same Matthew follows up his account
of the calling of those disciples to whom, when they were engaged in
fishing, He gave the command to follow Him, by a narrative to the effect
that He went about Galilee, teaching in the synagogues, and preaching
the gospel, and healing all manner of sickness; and that when multitudes
had gathered about Him, He went up into a mountain, and delivered that
lengthened sermon \[already alluded to\]. Thus the evangelist gives us
ground for understanding that those incidents which are recorded by Mark
after the election of those same disciples, took place at the period
when He was going about Galilee, and teaching in their synagogues. We
are at liberty also to suppose that what happened to Peter’s
mother-in-law came in at this point; and that he has mentioned at a
later stage what he has passed over here, although he has not indeed
brought up at that later point, for direct recital, everything else
which is omitted at the earlier. <span id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826)

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p15"></span>37. The question may indeed be raised
as to how John gives us this account of the calling of the disciples,
which is to the effect that, certainly not in Galilee, but in the
vicinity of the Jordan, Andrew first of all became a follower of the
Lord, together with another disciple whose name is not declared; that,
in the second place, Peter got that name from Him; and thirdly, that
Philip was called to follow Him; whereas the other three evangelists, in
a satisfactory concord with each other, Matthew and Mark in particular
being remarkably at one here, tell us that the men were called when they
were engaged in fishing. Luke, it is true, does not mention An<span
id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="vi.v.xviii-Page_122"></span>drew
by name. Nevertheless, we can gather that he was in that same vessel,
from the narrative of Matthew and Mark, who furnish a concise history of
the manner in which the affair was gone about. Luke, however, presents
us with a fuller and clearer exposition of the circumstances, and gives
us also an account of the miracle which was performed there in the haul
of fishes, and of the fact that previous to that the Lord spake to the
multitudes when He was seated in the boat. There may also seem to be a
discrepancy in this respect, that Luke records the saying, “From
henceforth thou shalt catch men,” <span
id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) as if it had been addressed by the
Lord to Peter alone, while the others have exhibited it as spoken to
both the brothers. <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) But it may
very well be the case that these words were spoken first to Peter
himself, when he was seized with amazement at the immense multitude of
fishes which were caught, and this will then be the incident introduced
by Luke; and that they were addressed to the two together somewhat
later, which \[second utterance\] will be the one noticed by the other
two evangelists. Therefore the circumstance which we have mentioned with
regard to John’s narrative deserves to be carefully considered; for it
may indeed be supposed to bring before us a contradiction of no slight
importance. For if it be the case that in the vicinity of the Jordan,
and before Jesus went into Galilee, two men, on hearing the testimony of
John the Baptist, followed Jesus; that of these two disciples the one
was Andrew, who at once went and brought his own brother Simon to Jesus;
and that on this occasion that brother received the name Peter, by which
he was thereafter to be called,—how can it be said by the other
evangelists that He found them engaged in fishing in Galilee, and called
them there to be His disciples? <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829)
How can these diverse accounts be reconciled, unless it be that we are
to understand that those men did not gain such a view of Jesus on the
occasion connected with the vicinity of the Jordan as would lead them to
attach themselves to Him for ever, but that they simply came to know who
He was, and, after their first wonder at His Person, returned to their
former engagements?

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p19"></span>38. For \[it is noticeable that\] again
in Cana of Galilee, after He had turned the water into wine, this same
John tells us how His disciples believed on Him. The narrative of that
miracle proceeds thus: “And the third day there was a marriage in Cana
of Galilee; and the mother of Jesus was there. And both Jesus was called
and His disciples to the marriage.” <span
id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) Now, surely, if it was on this
occasion that they believed on Him, as the evangelist tells us a little
further on, they were not yet His disciples at the time when they were
called to the marriage. This, however, is a mode of speech of the same
kind with what is intended when we say that the Apostle Paul was born in
Tarsus of Cilicia; <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) for certainly
he was not an apostle at that period. In like manner are we told here
that the disciples of Christ were invited to the marriage, by which we
are to understand, not that they were already disciples, but only that
they were to be His disciples. For, at the time when this narrative was
prepared and committed to writing, they were the disciples of Christ in
fact; and that is the reason why the evangelist, as the historian of
past times, has thus spoken of them.

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p22"></span>39. But further, as to John’s
statement, that “after this He went down to Capharnaum, He and His
mother, and His brethren and His disciples; and they continued there not
many days;” <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) it is uncertain
whether by this period these men had already attached themselves to Him,
in particular Peter and Andrew, and the sons of Zebedee. For Matthew
first of all tells us that He came and dwelt in Capharnaum, <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833) and then that He called them from
their boats as they were engaged in fishing. On the other hand, John
says that His disciples came with Him to Capharnaum. Now it may be the
case that Matthew has but gone over here something he had omitted in its
proper order. For he does not say, “After this, walking by the sea of
Galilee, He saw two brethren,” but, without any indication of the strict
consecution of time, simply, “And walking by the sea of Galilee, He saw
two brethren,”  <span id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) and so forth:
consequently it is quite possible that he has recorded at this later
period not something which took place actually at that later time, but
only something which he had omitted to introduce before; so that the men
may be understood in this way to have come along with Him to Capharnaum,
to which place John states that He did come, He and His mother and His
disciples: or should we rather suppose that these were a different body
of disciples, as He \[may already have\] had a follower in Philip, whom
He called in this particular manner, by saying to him, “Follow me”? For
in what order all the twelve apostles were called is not apparent from
the narratives of the evangelists. Indeed, not only is the succession of
the various callings left unrecorded; but even the fact of the calling
is not mentioned in the case of all of them, the only vocations
specified being those of Philip, and Peter and Andrew, and the sons of
Zebedee, and Matthew the publican, who was also called Levi. <span
id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) The first and <span id="page_123">p.
123</span> <span id="vi.v.xviii-Page_123"></span>only person, however,
who received a separate name from Him was Peter. <span
id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) For He did not give the sons of
Zebedee their names individually, but He called them both together the
sons of thunder. <span id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837)

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p29"></span>40. Besides, we ought certainly to note
the fact that the evangelical and apostolical Scriptures do not confine
this designation of His “disciples” to those twelve alone, but give the
same appellation to all those who believed on Him, and were educated
under His instruction for the kingdom of heaven. Out of the whole number
of such He chose twelve, whom He also named apostles, as Luke mentions.
For a little further on he says: And He came down with them, and stood
in the plain, and the concourse <span id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838)
of His disciples and a great multitude of people. <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) And surely he would not speak of a
“concourse” \[or “crowd”\] of disciples if he referred only to twelve
men. In other passages of the Scriptures also the fact is plainly
apparent, that all those were called His disciples who were instructed
by Him in what pertained to eternal life.

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p32"></span>41. But the question may be asked, how
He called the fishermen from their boats two by two, namely, calling
Peter and Andrew first, and then going forward a little and calling
other two, namely the sons of Zebedee, according to the narratives of
Matthew and Mark; whereas Luke’s version of the matter is, that both
their boats were filled with the immense haul of fishes. And his
statement bears further, that Peter’s partners, to wit, James and John,
the sons of Zebedee, were summoned to the men’s help when they were
unable to drag out their crowded nets, and that all who were there were
astonished at the enormous draught of fishes which had been taken; and
that when Jesus said to Peter, “Fear not, from henceforth thou shall
catch men,” although the words had been addressed to Peter alone, they
all nevertheless followed Him when they had brought their ships to
land. <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) Well, we are to understand
by this, that what Luke introduces here was what took place first, and
that these men were not called by the Lord on this occasion, but only
that the prediction was uttered to Peter by himself, that he would be a
fisher of men. That saying, moreover, was not intended to convey that
they would never thereafter be catchers of fish. For we read that even
after the Lord’s resurrection they were engaged again in fishing. <span
id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) The words, therefore, imported simply
that thereafter he would catch men, and they did not bear that
henceforth he would not catch fish. And in this way we are at perfect
liberty to suppose that they returned to the catching of fish, according
to their habit; so that those incidents which are related by Matthew and
Mark might easily take place at a period subsequent to this. I refer to
what occurred at the time when He called the disciples two by two, and
Himself gave them the command to follow Him, at first addressing Peter
and Andrew, and then the others, namely, the two sons of Zebedee. For on
that occasion they did not follow Him only after they had drawn up their
ships on shore, as with the intention of returning to them, but they
went after Him immediately, as after one who summoned and commanded them
to follow Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_817"></span>[121:818](1060114.htm#fr_817) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p3"></span> [Matt. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[121:819](1060114.htm#fr_818) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p4"></span> [Mark
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#014), [Luke
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#014)<span
id="vi.v.xviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[121:820](1060114.htm#fr_819) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p5"></span> [John i.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#039)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p5.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[121:821](1060114.htm#fr_820) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p6"></span> [John ii.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)<span
id="vi.v.xviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[121:822](1060114.htm#fr_821) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p7"></span> \[The interval between the temptation
and the return to Galilee, referred to by the Synoptists, was at least
nine months; possibly more than a year. Augustin implies, in § 42, that
this journey was a different one.—R.\]

<span id="fn_822"></span>[121:823](1060114.htm#fr_822) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p8"></span> [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[121:824](1060114.htm#fr_823) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p9"></span> [John i.
42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[121:825](1060114.htm#fr_824) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p11"></span> [Matt.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013), [Matt.
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#029), [Mark
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#016), [Luke
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031)<span
id="vi.v.xviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[121:826](1060114.htm#fr_825) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p12"></span> [Matt.
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#015)<span
id="vi.v.xviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[121:827](1060114.htm#fr_826) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p14"></span> \[There is here a partial recognition
of the fact, now widely received, that the order of Mark is the most
exact. No harmony can be successfully constructed on the order of
Matthew.—R.\]

<span id="fn_827"></span>[122:828](1060114.htm#fr_827) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p16"></span> [Luke v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#010)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[122:829](1060114.htm#fr_828) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p17"></span> [Matt.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010), [Mark
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#017)<span
id="vi.v.xviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[122:830](1060114.htm#fr_829) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p18"></span> [Matt.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013), [Mark
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#016), [Luke
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001), [John
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#035)<span
id="vi.v.xviii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[122:831](1060114.htm#fr_830) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p20"></span> [John
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#002)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[122:832](1060114.htm#fr_831) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p21"></span> [Acts xxii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[122:833](1060114.htm#fr_832) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p23"></span> [John ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#012)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[122:834](1060114.htm#fr_833) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p24"></span> [Matt. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[122:835](1060114.htm#fr_834) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p25"></span> [Matt. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[122:836](1060114.htm#fr_835) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p26"></span> [Matt.
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018), [Matt.
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009), [Mark
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#016), [Mark
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#014), [Luke
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001), [John
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#035)<span
id="vi.v.xviii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[123:837](1060114.htm#fr_836) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p27"></span> [John i.
42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[123:838](1060114.htm#fr_837) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p28"></span> [Mark iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[123:839](1060114.htm#fr_838) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p30"></span> *Turba*.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[123:840](1060114.htm#fr_839) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p31"></span> [Luke vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#017)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[123:841](1060114.htm#fr_840) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p33"></span> [Luke v.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001)<span
id="vi.v.xviii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[123:842](1060114.htm#fr_841) <span
id="vi.v.xviii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xviii-p34"></span> [John xxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#003)<span id="vi.v.xviii-p34.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](1060115)
