[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060105)  [Next](1060107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.x"></span>

<span id="vi.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—An Explanation of the Circumstance
that Matthew States that Joseph’s Reason for Going into Galilee with the
Child Christ Was His Fear of Archelaus, Who Was Reigning at that Time in
Jerusalem in Place of His Father, While Luke Tells Us that the Reason
for Going into Galilee Was the Fact that Their City Nazareth Was
There.</span>

<span id="vi.v.x-p2"></span>22. Or may a question perchance be raised as
to how Matthew tells us that His parents went with the boy Jesus into
Galilee, because they were unwilling to go into Judæa in consequence of
their fear of Archelaus; whereas it would rather appear that the reason
for their going into Galilee was, as Luke has not failed to indicate,
the consideration that their city was Nazareth of Galilee? Well, but we
must observe, that when the angel said to Joseph in his dreams in Egypt,
“Arise, and take the young child and His mother, and go into the land of
Israel,” <span id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778.md) the words were
understood at first by Joseph in a way that made him consider himself
commanded to journey into Judæa. For that was the first interpretation
that could have been put upon the phrase, “the land of Israel.” But
again, after ascertaining that Archelaus, the son of Herod, was reigning
there, he declined to expose himself to such danger, inasmuch as this
phrase, “the land of Israel,” was capable also of being so understood as
to cover Galilee too, because the people of Israel were occupants of
that territory as well as the other. At the same time, this question
also admits of being solved in another manner. For it might have
appeared to the parents of Christ that they were called to take up their
residence along with the boy, concerning whom such information had been
conveyed to them through the responses of angels, just in Jerusalem
itself, where was the temple of the Lord: and it may thus be, that when
they came back out of Egypt, they would have gone directly thither in
that belief, and have taken up their abode there, had it not been that
they were terrified at the presence of Archelaus. And certainly they did
not receive any such instructions from heaven to take up their residence
there as would have made it their imperative duty to set at nought the
fears they entertained of Archelaus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_778"></span>[114:779](1060106.htm#fr_778.md) <span
id="vi.v.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.x-p3"></span> [Matt.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#020.md)<span id="vi.v.x-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](1060107.md)
