[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060251)  [Next](1060253.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxv"></span> <span id="vii.xxxv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXXIII.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xxxv-p2.1"></span>\[LXXXIII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xxxv-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p3.2"></span>,
“How oft shall my brother sin against me,” etc.*

<span id="vii.xxxv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xxxv-p4.1"></span>Yesterday</span> the holy Gospel warned us not
to neglect the sins of our brethren: “But if thy brother shall sin
against thee, rebuke him between him and thee alone. If he shall hear
thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But if he shall refuse to hear thee,
take with thee two or three more; that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to
hear them too, tell it to the Church. But if he shall neglect to hear
the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a
publican.” <span id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763.md) To-day also the
section which follows, and which we heard when it was read, relates to
the same subject. For when the Lord Jesus had said this to Peter, he
went on to ask his Master, how often he should forgive a brother who had
sinned against him; and he enquired whether seven times would be enough.
“The Lord answered him, Not only seven times, but seventy times
seven.” <span id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764.md) <span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span id="vii.xxxv-Page_363"></span>Then he
added a parable very full of terror: That the “kingdom of heaven is like
unto an householder, which took account with his servants; among whom he
found one that owed ten thousand talents. And when he commanded all that
he had, and all his family, and himself to be sold, and the debt to be
paid, he fell down at his lord’s feet,” <span
id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765.md) and prayed for delay, and
obtained <span id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766.md) entire remission.
For as we have heard, “His lord was moved with compassion, and forgave
him all the debt.” Then that man free from his debt, but a bondslave of
iniquity, after he had gone out from the presence of his lord, found in
his turn a debtor of his own, who owed him, not ten thousand talents,
the sum which had been remitted to him, but a hundred denarii; and “he
began to drag him by the throat, and say, Pay me that thou owest.” <span
id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767.md) Then he besought his fellow-servant
as he had done his lord; but he did not find his fellow-servant such a
man as the other had found his lord. He not only would not forgive him
the debt; but he did not even grant him a delay. He hurried him along
with great violence <span id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768.md) to make
him pay, he who had been but just now set free from his debt to his
lord. His fellow-servants were displeased; and “went and told their lord
what was done;” and the lord summoned his servant to his presence, and
said to him, “O thou wicked servant, when thou didst owe me so great a
debt, in pity to thee I forgave thee all. Shouldest not thou also have
had compassion on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pity on thee?” <span
id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769.md) And he commanded that all which he
had forgiven him should be paid.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p12"></span>2. It is then for our instruction that He
put forth this parable, and by this warning He would save us from
perishing. “So,” said He, “shall My heavenly Father do also unto you, if
ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.” <span id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770.md) Lo, Brethren,
the thing is plain, useful is the admonition, and a wholesome obedience
is by all means due, that what hath been bidden may be fulfilled. For
every man is at once God’s debtor, and hath also some brother a debtor
to himself. For who is there who is not God’s debtor, but he in whom
there can be found no sin? And who is there who hath not a brother his
debtor, but he against whom no one hath sinned? Think you that any one
among mankind can be found, who is not himself bounden to his brother by
some sin? So then every man is a debtor, yet having himself his own
debtors too. The righteous God therefore appointeth a rule for thee
toward thy debtor, which He also will observe with His. For two works of
mercy are there, which deliver us, which the Lord hath Himself briefly
laid down in the Gospel: “Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: give, and
it shall be given unto you.” <span id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771.md)
“Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven,” relates to pardoning. “Give, and it
shall be given unto you,” relates to doing kindnesses. As to what He
saith of pardoning, thou both wishest thy sin to be pardoned thee, and
thou hast another whom thou mayest pardon. Again, as to the doing
kindnesses; a beggar asks of thee, and thou art God’s beggar. For we are
all when we pray God’s beggars; we stand, yea rather we fall prostrate
before the door of the Great Householder, we groan in supplication
wishing to receive something; and this something is God Himself. What
does the beggar ask of thee? Bread. And what dost thou ask of God, but
Christ, who saith, “I am the living Bread which came down from
heaven”? <span id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772.md) Would you be
forgiven? Forgive. “Forgive, and it shall be forgiven you.” Would you
receive? “Give, and it shall be given unto you.”

<span id="vii.xxxv-p16"></span>3. But now hear what in so plain a
precept I may cause a difficulty. In this question of forgiveness when
pardon is asked, and it is due from him who should grant it, it may be a
difficulty to us as it was to Peter. “How often ought I to forgive? Is
up to seven times sufficient?” “It is not sufficient,” saith the Lord,
“I say not unto thee, Until seven times; but, Until seventy times
seven.” <span id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773.md) Now reckon up how
often thy brother hath sinned against thee. If thou canst reach the
seventy-eighth fault, so as to get beyond the seventy times seven, then
set about revenge. Is this then what He really means, and is it really
so, that if he shall sin “seventy times seven,” thou shouldest forgive
him; but if he shall sin seventy times and eight, it should then be
lawful for thee not to forgive? Nay I am bold to say, that if he should
even sin seventy-eight times, thou must forgive. Yea, as I have said, if
he shall sin seventy-eight times, forgive. And if he sin a hundred
times, forgive. And why need I say, so and so often? In one word, <span
id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774.md) as often as he shall sin, forgive
him. Have I then taken upon me to overpass the measure of my Lord? He
fixed the limit of forgiveness in the number seventy-seven; shall I
presume to overleap this limit? It is not so, I have not presumed to go
at all beyond. I have heard the Lord Himself speaking in His Apostle
where there is no measure or number fixed. For He says, “Forgiving one
another, if any man have a quarrel against any, as God in Christ hath
forgiven you.”  <span id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775.md) Here you have
the rule. If Christ have forgiven thee thy sins “seventy times and
seven” only, if He have pardoned up to this point, and refused to pardon
<span id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span
id="vii.xxxv-Page_364"></span>beyond it; then do thou also fix this
limit, and be loth to forgive beyond it. But if Christ hath found
thousands of sins upon sins, and hath yet forgiven all; withdraw not
then thy mercy, but ask the forgiveness of that large number. For it was
not without a meaning that the Lord said “seventy times seven;”
forasmuch as there is no trespass whatever which thou oughtest not to
forgive. See this servant in the parable, who being a debtor was found
to have a debtor, owed ten thousand talents. And I suppose that ten
thousand talents are at least ten thousand sins. For I will not say how
but one talent will include all sins. But how much did the other servant
owe him? He owed a hundred denarii. Now is not this more than “seventy
and seven”? And yet the Lord was wroth, because he did not forgive him.
For not only is a hundred more than “seventy-seven;” but a hundred
denarii, perhaps are a thousand” asses.” But what was this to ten
thousand talents?

<span id="vii.xxxv-p20"></span>4. And so let us be ready to forgive all
the trespasses which are committed against us, if we desire to be
forgiven. For if we consider our sins, and reckon up what we do in deed,
what by the eye, what by the ear, what by thought, what by numberless
movements; I know not whether we so much as sleep without a talent. And
therefore do we daily beg, daily knock at the ears of God by prayer,
daily prostrate ourselves and say, “Forgive us our debts, as we forgive
our debtors.” <span id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776.md) What debts of
thine? All, or a certain part? Thou wilt answer, All. So then do thou
with thy debtor. This then is the rule thou layest down, this the
condition thou speakest of; this the covenant and agreement thou dost
mention when thou prayest, saying, “Forgive us, as we forgive our
debtors.”

<span id="vii.xxxv-p22"></span>5. What then, Brethren, is the meaning of
“seventy times seven”? Hear, for it is a great mystery, a wonderful
sacrament. When the Lord was baptized, the Evangelist St. Luke has in
that place commemorated His generations in the regular order, series,
and line in which they had come down to that generation in which Christ
was born. Matthew begins at Abraham, <span
id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777.md) and comes down to Joseph in a
descending order; but Luke begins to reckon in an ascending order. Why
does the one reckon in a descending, and the other in an ascending
order? Because Matthew set forth the generation of Christ by which He
came down to us; and so he began to reckon when Christ was born in a
descending order. <span id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778.md) Whereas,
because Luke begins to reckon when Christ was baptized; in this is the
beginning of ascension, he begins to reckon in an ascending order, and
in his reckoning he has completed seventy-seven generations. <span
id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779.md) With whom did he begin his
reckoning? Observe with whom? He began to reckon from Christ up to Adam
himself, who was the first sinner, and who begat us with the bond of
sin. He reckoned up to Adam, and so there are reckoned seventy-seven
generations; that is, from Christ up to Adam and from Adam up to Christ
are the aforesaid seventy-seven generations. So then if no generation
was omitted, there is no exemption of any trespass which ought not to be
forgiven. For therefore did he reckon up his seventy-seven generations,
which number the Lord mentioned as to the forgiveness of sins; since he
begins to reckon from the baptism, wherein all sins are remitted.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p26"></span>6. And, Brethren, observe in this a yet
greater mystery. <span id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780.md) In the
number seventy-seven is a mystery of the remission of sins. So many are
the generations found to be from Christ to Adam. Now then, ask with
somewhat more careful diligence for the secret meaning of this number,
and enquire into its hidden meaning; with more careful diligence knock,
that it may be opened unto thee. Righteousness consists in the
observance of the Law of God: true. For the Law is set forth in ten
precepts. Therefore it was that the servant in the parable “owed ten
thousand talents.” This is that memorable Decalogue written by the
finger of God, and delivered to the people by Moses, the servant of God.
He “owed” then “ten thousand talents;” which signifies all sins, with
reference to the number of the Law. And the other “owed a hundred
denarii;” derived equally from the same number. For a hundred times a
hundred make ten thousand; and ten times ten make a hundred. And the one
“owed ten thousand talents,” and the other ten times ten denarii. For
there was no departure from the number <span
id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781.md) of the law, and in both numbers you
will find every kind of sin included. Both are debtors, and both implore
and beg for pardon; but the wicked, ungrateful servant would not repay
what he had received, would not grant the mercy which had been
undeservedly accorded to him.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p29"></span>7. Consider then, Brethren; every man
begins from Baptism; he goes out free, the “ten thousand talents” are
forgiven him; and when he goes out, he will soon find some
fellow-servant his debtor. Let him note then, what sin itself is; <span
id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782.md) for the number eleven is the
transgression of the law. For the law is ten, sin eleven. For the law is
denoted by ten, sin by eleven. Why is sin denoted by eleven? Because to
get to eleven, there is the transgression of the ten. <span
id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783.md) But the due limit is fixed in the
law; and the transgression of it is sin. Now when you have <span
id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span id="vii.xxxv-Page_365"></span>passed
beyond the ten, you come to eleven. This high mystery was figured out
when the tabernacle was commanded to be built. There are many things
mentioned there in number, which are a great mystery. <span
id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784.md) Among the rest, curtains of
haircloth were ordered to be made not ten, but eleven; <span
id="fr_2785"></span>[2786](#fn_2785.md) because by haircloth is signified
the confession of sins. Now what do you require more? Would you know how
that all sins are contained in this number “seventy-seven”? Seven then
is usually put for a whole; because in seven days the revolution of time
is completed, and when the seventh is ended, it returns to the first
again, that the same revolution may be continued. In such revolutions
whole ages pass away: yet there is no departure from the number seven.
For He spoke of all sins, when He said “seventy times seven;” for
multiply that eleven seven times, and it makes seventy-seven. Therefore
would He have all sins forgiven, for He marked them out by the number”
seventy-seven.” Let no one then retain against himself by refusing to
forgive, lest it be retained against him, when he prayeth. For God
saith, “Forgive, and thou shalt be forgiven.” For I have forgiven thee
first; do thou at least forgive after that. For if thou wilt not
forgive, I will call thee back, and put upon thee again all that I had
remitted to thee. For the Truth doth not speak falsely; Christ neither
deceiveth, nor is deceived, and He hath said at the close of the
parable, “So likewise shall your Father which is in heaven do unto
you.” <span id="fr_2786"></span>[2787](#fn_2786.md) Thou findest a Father,
imitate thy Father. For if thou wilt not imitate Him, thou art
devising <span id="fr_2787"></span>[2788](#fn_2787.md) to be disinherited.
“So likewise” then “shall My heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye
from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.”
Say not with the tongue, “I forgive,” and put off to forgive in the
heart; for by His threat of vengeance God showeth thee thy punishment.
God knoweth where thou speakest. Man can hear thy voice; God looketh
into thy conscience. If thou sayest, I forgive; forgive. Better is it
that thou shouldest be violent in words, and forgive in the heart, than
in words be soft, and in the heart relentless.

<span id="vii.xxxv-p36"></span>8. Now then unruly boys will beg, and
take it <span id="fr_2788"></span>[2789](#fn_2788.md) hard to be beat
taking exception against <span id="fr_2789"></span>[2790](#fn_2789.md) us
when we wish to chastise them after this fashion. “I have sinned, but
forgive me.” Well, I have forgiven, and he sins again. “Forgive me,” he
cries, and I have forgiven him. He sins a third time. “Forgive me,” he
cries, and a third time I have forgiven him. Now then the fourth time
let him be beat. And he will say, “What! have I tired you out to
seventy-seven times?” Now if by such exceptions the severity of
discipline sleep, upon the suppression of discipline wickedness will
rage with impunity. What then is to be done? Let us reprove with words,
and if need be with scourges; but let us withal forgive the sin, and
cast away the remembrance of it from the heart. For therefore did the
Lord add, “from your hearts,” that though through affection discipline
be exercised, gentleness might not depart out of the heart. For what is
so kind and gentle as the surgeon with his knife? He that is to be cut
cries, yet cut he is; he that is to be cauterized cries, but cauterized
he is. This is not cruelty; on no account let that surgeon’s treatment
be called cruelty. Cruel he is against the wounded part that the patient
may be cured; for if the wound be softly dealt with, the man is lost.
Thus then would I advise, my Brethren, that we love our brethren,
howsoever they may have sinned against us; that we let not affection
toward them depart out of our hearts, and that when need is, we exercise
discipline toward them; lest by the relaxation of discipline, wickedness
increase, and we begin to be accused on God’s behalf, for it has been
read to us, “Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may
fear.” <span id="fr_2790"></span>[2791](#fn_2790.md) Certainly, if one, as
is the only true way, distinguishes the times, and so solves the
question, all is true. If the sin be in secret, rebuke it in secret. If
the sin be public and open, rebuke it publicly that the sinner may be
reformed; and “that others also may fear.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[362:2764](1060252.htm#fr_2763.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p5"></span> [Matt. xviii.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[362:2765](1060252.htm#fr_2764.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p6"></span> [Matt. xviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[363:2766](1060252.htm#fr_2765.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p7"></span> [Matt. xviii.
23-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[363:2767](1060252.htm#fr_2766.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p8"></span> *Meruit*.

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[363:2768](1060252.htm#fr_2767.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p9"></span> [Matt. xviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#028.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[363:2769](1060252.htm#fr_2768.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p10"></span> *Contortum*.

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[363:2770](1060252.htm#fr_2769.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p11"></span> [Matt. xviii.
31-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#031.md)<span
id="vii.xxxv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[363:2771](1060252.htm#fr_2770.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p13"></span> [Matt. xviii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#035.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[363:2772](1060252.htm#fr_2771.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p14"></span> [Luke
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[363:2773](1060252.htm#fr_2772.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p15"></span> [John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[363:2774](1060252.htm#fr_2773.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p17"></span> [Matt.
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[363:2775](1060252.htm#fr_2774.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p18"></span> *Vid*. Serm. lxiv. (cxiv. Ben.) 1.

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[363:2776](1060252.htm#fr_2775.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p19"></span> [Col.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#013.md), [Eph.
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[364:2777](1060252.htm#fr_2776.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p21"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[364:2778](1060252.htm#fr_2777.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p23"></span> [Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[364:2779](1060252.htm#fr_2778.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p24"></span> *Vid*. Serm. i. (li. Ben.) 31–5
(xxi.-iv.).

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[364:2780](1060252.htm#fr_2779.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p25"></span> [Luke iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p25.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[364:2781](1060252.htm#fr_2780.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p27"></span> *Sacramentum*.

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[364:2782](1060252.htm#fr_2781.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p28"></span> *Legitimo numero*.

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[364:2783](1060252.htm#fr_2782.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p30"></span> *Observet ergo ipsum peccatum*.

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[364:2784](1060252.htm#fr_2783.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p31"></span> *Vid*. Serm. i. (li. Ben.) 34 (xxiii.).

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[365:2785](1060252.htm#fr_2784.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p32"></span> *In magno sacramento*.

<span id="fn_2785"></span>[365:2786](1060252.htm#fr_2785.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p33"></span> [Exod. xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p33.1"></span>.
*Cilicina*; <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxv-p33.2"></span>
τριχίνας</span>, Sept.

<span id="fn_2786"></span>[365:2787](1060252.htm#fr_2786.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p33.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p34"></span> [Matt. xviii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#035.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2787"></span>[365:2788](1060252.htm#fr_2787.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p35"></span> *Disponis*.

<span id="fn_2788"></span>[365:2789](1060252.htm#fr_2788.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p37"></span> *Nolunt*.

<span id="fn_2789"></span>[365:2790](1060252.htm#fr_2789.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p38"></span> *Præscribunt*.

<span id="fn_2790"></span>[365:2791](1060252.htm#fr_2790.md) <span
id="vii.xxxv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxv-p39"></span> [1 Tim. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.xxxv-p39.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXXIV](1060253.md)
