[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060045)  [Next](1060047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p2"></span>53. “Therefore be not anxious,” says He,”
saying, What shall we eat? <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) or,
What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) (For after all these things do the
Gentiles seek:) for your Father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness; and
all these things shall be added <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396)
unto you.” Here He shows most manifestly that these things are not to be
sought as if they were our blessings in such sort, that on account of
them we ought to do well in all our actings, but yet that they are
necessary. For what the difference is between a blessing which is to be
sought, and a necessary which is to be taken for use, He has made plain
by this sentence, when He says, “Seek ye first the kingdom of God and
His righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.” <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) The kingdom and the righteousness of
God therefore are our good; and this is to be sought, and there the end
is to be set up, on account of which we are to do everything which we
do. But because we serve as soldiers in this life, in order that we may
be able to <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span
id="v.iii.xvi-Page_51"></span>reach that kingdom, and because our life
cannot be spent without these necessaries, “These things shall be added
unto you,” says He; “but seek ye first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness.” For in using that word “first,” He has indicated that
this is to be sought later, not in point of time, but in point of
importance: the one as being our good, the other as being something
necessary for us; but the necessary on account of that good.

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p7"></span>54. For neither ought we, for example, to
preach the gospel with this object, that we may eat; but to eat with
this object, that we may preach the gospel: for if we preach the gospel
for this cause, that we may eat, we reckon the gospel of less value than
food; and in that case our good will be in eating, but that which is
necessary for us in preaching the gospel. And this the apostle also
forbids, when he says it is lawful for himself even, and permitted by
the Lord, that they who preach the gospel should live of the gospel,
*i.e.* should have from the gospel the necessaries of this life; but yet
that he has not made use of this power. For there were many who were
desirous of having an occasion for getting and selling the gospel, from
whom the apostle wished to cut off this occasion, and therefore he
submitted to a way of living by his own hands. <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) For concerning these parties he says
in another passage, “That I may cut off occasion from them which
seek <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) occasion.” <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) Although even if, like the rest of the
good apostles, by the permission of the Lord he should live of the
gospel, he would not on that account place the end of preaching the
gospel in that living, but would rather make the gospel the end of his
living; *i.e.*, as I have said above, he would not preach the gospel
with this object, that he might get his food and all other necessaries;
but he would take such things for this purpose, in order that he might
carry out that other object, viz. that willingly, and not of necessity,
he should preach the gospel. For this he disapproves of when he says,
“Do ye not know, that they which minister in the temple <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) eat the things which are of the
temple? and they which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar?
Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel should
live of the gospel. But I have used none of these things.” Hence he
shows that it was permitted, not commanded; otherwise he will be held to
have acted contrary to the precept of the Lord. Then he goes on to say:
“Neither have I written these things, that it should be so done unto me:
for it were better for me to die, than that any man should make my
glorying void.” <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) This he said, as
he had already resolved, because of some who were seeking occasion, to
gain a living by his own hands. “For if I preach the gospel,” says he,
“I have nothing to glory of:” *i.e.*, if I preach the gospel in order
that such things may be done in my case, or, if I preach with this
object, in order that I may obtain those things, and if I thus place the
end of the gospel in meat and drink and clothing. But wherefore has he
nothing to glory of? “Necessity,” says he,” is laid upon me;” *i.e.* so
that I should preach the gospel for this reason, because I have not the
means of living, or so that I should acquire temporal fruit from the
preaching of eternal things; for thus, consequently, the preaching of
the gospel will be a matter of necessity, not of free choice. “For woe
is unto me,” says he, “if I preach not the gospel!” But how ought he to
preach the gospel? Evidently in such a way as to place the reward in the
gospel itself, and in the kingdom of God: for thus he can preach the
gospel, not of constraint, but willingly. “For if I do this thing
willingly,” says he, “I have a reward: but if against my will, a
dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me;” <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) if, constrained by the want of those
things which are necessary for temporal life, I preach the gospel,
others will have through me the reward of the gospel, who love the
gospel itself when I preach it; but I shall not have it, because it is
not the gospel itself I love, but its price lying in those temporal
things. And this is something sinful, that any one should minister the
gospel not as a son, but as a servant to whom a stewardship of it has
been committed; that he should, as it were, pay out what belongs to
another, but should himself receive nothing from it except victuals,
which are given not in consideration of his sharing in the kingdom, but
from without, for the support of a miserable bondage. Although in
another passage he calls himself also a steward. For a servant also,
when adopted into the number of the children, is able faithfully to
dispense to those who share with him that property in which he has
acquired the lot of a fellow-heir. But in the present case, where he
says, “But if against my will, a dispensation (stewardship) is committed
unto me,” he wished such a steward to be understood as dispenses what
belongs to another, and from it gets nothing himself.

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p14"></span>55. Hence anything whatever that is
sought for the sake of something else, is doubtless inferior to that for
the sake of which it is sought; and therefore that is first for the sake
of which you seek such a thing, not the thing which you seek for the
sake of that other. And for this reason, if we seek the gospel and the
kingdom <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="v.iii.xvi-Page_52"></span>of God for the sake of food, we place food
first, and the kingdom of God last; so that if food were not to fail us,
we would not seek the kingdom of God: this is to seek food first, and
then the kingdom of God. But if we seek food for this end, that we may
gain the kingdom of God, we do what is said, “Seek ye first the kingdom
of God and His righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto
you.” <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_394"></span>[50:395](1060046.htm#fr_394) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p3"></span> *Edemus…vestiemur*; Vulgate,
*manducabimus…operiemur*.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[50:396](1060046.htm#fr_395) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p4"></span> *Edemus…vestiemur*; Vulgate,
*manducabimus…operiemur*.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[50:397](1060046.htm#fr_396) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p5"></span> *Apponentur*; Vulgate, *adjicientur*.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[50:398](1060046.htm#fr_397) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p6"></span> [Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span id="v.iii.xvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[51:399](1060046.htm#fr_398) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p8"></span> [Acts xx.
34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034)<span id="v.iii.xvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[51:400](1060046.htm#fr_399) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p9"></span> *Quærunt*; Vulgate, *volunt*.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[51:401](1060046.htm#fr_400) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p10"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#012)<span id="v.iii.xvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[51:402](1060046.htm#fr_401) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p11"></span> *Templo*; Vulgate, *sacrario*.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[51:403](1060046.htm#fr_402) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p12"></span> *Inanem faciat*; Vulgate, *evacuet*.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[51:404](1060046.htm#fr_403) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p13"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
13-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#013)<span
id="v.iii.xvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[52:405](1060046.htm#fr_404) <span
id="v.iii.xvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xvi-p15"></span> Nor is it said, “Seek…in *order that*
all these things may be added:” simply, “*and all*,” etc., yet largely
inclusive,—sanctity *and* comfort. The comfort follows naturally. The
passage is a rebuke to those who condemn the amenities of life and art,
and a caution to those who place these things before themselves as a
chief end. The passage justifies the statement that religion (or
godliness) is profitable for the life that now is. The Psalmist never
saw the *righteous* forsaken. A traditional saying of Jesus, quoted by
Clement, Origen, and Eusebius, runs, “Ask great things, and little
things shall be added; ask heavenly things, and earthly things shall be
added.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](1060047)
