[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060174)  [Next](1060176) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.lxxix"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXXVIII.—Of the Question Whether
There is Any Contradiction Between Matthew and Mark on the One Hand, and
John on the Other, in So Far as the Former State that After Two Days Was
to Be the Feast of the Passover, and Afterwards Tells Us that He Was in
Bethany, While the Latter Gives a Parallel Narrative of What Took Place
at Bethany, But Mentions that It Was Six Days Before the
Passover.</span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p2"></span>152. Matthew continues thus: “And it
came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, He said unto
His disciples, Ye know that after two days will be the feast of the
passover, and the Son of man shall be betrayed to be crucified.” <span
id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197) This is attested in like manner by
the other two,—namely, Mark and Luke,—and that, too, with a thorough
harmony on the subject of the order of narration. <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198) They do not, however, introduce the
sentence as one spoken by the Lord Himself. They make no statement to
that effect. At the same time, Mark, speaking in his own person, does
tell us that “after two days was the feast of the passover and of
unleavened bread.” And Luke likewise gives this as his own affirmation:
“Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the
passover;” that is to say, it “drew nigh” in this sense, that it was to
take place after two days’ space, as the other two are more apparently
at one in expressing it. John, on the other hand, has mentioned in three
several places the nearness of this same feast-day. In the two earlier
instances the intimation is made when he is engaged in recording certain
matters of another tenor. But on the third occasion his narrative
appears clearly to deal with those very times, in connection with which
the other three evangelists also notice the subject,—that is to say, the
times when the Lord’s passion was actually imminent. <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199)

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p6"></span>153. But to those who look into the
matter without sufficient care, there may seem to be a contradiction
involved in the fact that Matthew and Mark, after stating that the
passover was to be after two days, have at once informed us how Jesus
was in Bethany on that occasion, on which the account of the precious
ointment <span id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-Page_171"></span>comes before us; whereas John, when he
is about to give us the same narrative concerning the ointment, begins
by telling us that Jesus came to Bethany six days before the
passover. <span id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200) Now, the question
is, how the passover could be spoken of by those two evangelists as
about to be celebrated two days after, seeing that we find them,
immediately after they have made this statement, in company with John,
giving us an account of the scene with the ointment in Bethany; while in
that connection the last-named writer informs us, that the feast of the
passover was to take place six days after. Nevertheless, those who are
perplexed by this difficulty simply fail to perceive that Matthew and
Mark have brought in their account of the scene which was enacted in
Bethany really in the form of a recapitulation, not as if the time of
its occurrence was actually subsequent to the \[time indicated in the\]
announcement made by them on the subject of the two days’ space, but as
an event which had already taken place at a date when there was still a
period of six days preceding the passover. For neither of them has
appended his account of what took place at Bethany to his statement
regarding the celebration of the passover after two days’ space in any
such terms as these: “After these things, when He was in Bethany.” But
Matthew’s phrase is this: “Now when Jesus was in Bethany.” And Mark’s
version is simply this: “And being in Bethany,” etc.; which is a method
of expression that may certainly be taken to refer to a period
antecedent to the utterance of what was said two days before the
passover. The case, therefore, stands thus: As we gather from the
narrative of John, Jesus came to Bethany six days before the passover;
there the supper took place, in connection with which we get the account
of the precious ointment; leaving this place, He came next to Jerusalem,
sitting upon an ass; and thereafter happened those things which they
relate to have occurred after this arrival of His in Jerusalem.
Consequently, even although the evangelists do not mention the fact, we
understand that between the day on which He came to Bethany, and which
witnessed the scene with the ointment, and the day to which all these
deeds and words which are at present before us belonged, there elapsed a
period of four days, so that at this point might come in the day which
the two evangelists have defined by their statement as to the
celebration of the passover two days after. Further, when Luke says,
“Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh,” he does not indeed make
any express mention of a two days’ space; but still, the nearness which
he has instanced ought to be accepted as made good by this very space of
two days. Again, when John makes the statement that “the Jews’ passover
was nigh at hand,” <span id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201) he does
not intend a two days’ space to be understood thereby, but means that
there was a period of six days before the passover. Thus it is that, on
recording certain matters immediately after this affirmation, with the
intention of specifying what measure of nearness he had in view when he
spoke of the passover as nigh at hand, he next proceeds in the following
strain: “Then Jesus, six days before the passover, came to Bethany,
where Lazarus had died, whom Jesus raised from the dead; <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202) and there they made Him a
supper.” <span id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203) This is the incident
which Matthew and Mark introduce in the form of a recapitulation, after
the statement that after two days would be the passover. In their
recapitulation they thus come back upon the day in Bethany, which was
yet a six days’ space off from the passover, and give us the account
which John also gives of the supper and the ointment. Subsequently to
that scene, we are to suppose Him to come to Jerusalem, and then, after
the occurrence of the other things recorded, to reach this day, which
was still a two days’ space from the passover, and from which these
evangelists have made this digression, with the object of giving a
recapitulatory notice of the incident with the ointment in Bethany. And
after the completion of that narrative, they return once more to the
point from which they made the digression; that is to say, they now
proceed to record the words spoken by the Lord two days before the
passover. For if we remove the notice of the incident at Bethany, which
they have introduced as a digression from the literal order, and have
given in the form of a recollection and recapitulation inserted at a
point subsequent to its actual historical position, and if we then set
the narrative in its regular connection, the recital will go on as
follows;—according to Matthew, the Lord’s words coming in thus: “Ye know
that after two days shall be the feast of the passover, and the Son of
man shall be betrayed to be crucified. Then assembled together the chief
priests and the elders of the people unto the palace of the high priest,
who was called Caiaphas, and consulted that they might take Jesus by
subtilty, and kill Him. But they said, Not on the feast-day, lest there
be an uproar among the people. Then one of the twelve, called Judas
Scarioth, went unto the chief priests,” <span
id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204) etc. For between the place where it
is said, “lest there be an uproar among the people,” and the passage
where we read, “then one of the disciples, called Judas, went,” etc.,
that notice of the scene at Bethany <span id="page_172">p. 172</span>
<span id="vi.v.lxxix-Page_172"></span>intervenes, which they have
introduced by way of recapitulation. Consequently, by leaving it out, we
have established such a connection in the narrative as may make our
conclusion satisfactory, that there is no contradiction here in the
matter of the order of times. Again, if we deal with Mark’s Gospel in
like manner, and omit the account of the same supper at Bethany, which
he also has brought in as a recapitulation, his narrative will proceed
in the following order: “Now after two days was the feast of the
passover, and of unleavened bread: and the chief priests and the scribes
sought how they might take Him by craft, and put Him to death. For they
said, <span id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205) Not on the feast-day,
lest there be an uproar of the people. And Judas Scariothes, one of the
twelve, went unto the chief priests, to betray Him.” <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206) Here, again, the incident at
Bethany which these evangelists have inserted, by way of recapitulation,
is placed between the clause, “lest there be an uproar of the people,”
and the verse which we have attached immediately to that, namely, “And
Judas Scariothes, one of the twelve.” Luke, on the other hand, has
simply omitted the said occurrence at Bethany. This is the explanation
which we give in reference to the six days before the passover, which is
the space mentioned by John when narrating what took place at Bethany,
and in reference to the two days before the passover, which is the
period specified by Matthew and Mark when presenting their account, in
direct sequence upon the statement thus made, of that same scene in
Bethany which has been recorded also by John. <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[170:1198](1060175.htm#fr_1197) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p3"></span> [Matt.
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002)<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p3.1"></span>.
\[It cannot be determined with certainty how much time is to be included
in the phrase “after two days.” Moreover, the difficulty in regard to
the time of the Last Supper affects this question, to some extent at
least.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[170:1199](1060175.htm#fr_1198) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p4"></span> [Mark
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001), [Luke
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001)<span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[170:1200](1060175.htm#fr_1199) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p5"></span> [John
11:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#055), [John
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001), [John
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)<span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[171:1201](1060175.htm#fr_1200) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p7"></span> [John xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[171:1202](1060175.htm#fr_1201) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p8"></span> [John xi.
55](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#055)<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[171:1203](1060175.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p9"></span> *Ubi fuerat Lazarus mortuus quem
suscitavit Jesus*.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[171:1204](1060175.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p10"></span> [John
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[171:1205](1060175.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p11"></span> [Matt.
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014)<span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p11.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[172:1206](1060175.htm#fr_1205) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p12"></span> *Dicebant enim*.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[172:1207](1060175.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p13"></span> [Mark
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#002),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#010)<span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[172:1208](1060175.htm#fr_1207) <span
id="vi.v.lxxix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxix-p14"></span> \[This view is rejected by Dr.
Robinson in his Harmony, but accepted by many commentators. See
Robinson’s Greek Harmony, rev. ed. pp. 236–238.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIX](1060176)
