[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060096)  [Next](1060098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.i"></span>

<span id="vi.v.i-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.i-p1.1"></span>The Prologue.</span>

<span id="vi.v.i-p2"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.i-p2.1"></span>Whereas</span>, in a discourse of no small
length and of imperative importance, which we have finished within the
compass of one book, we have refuted the folly of those who think that
the disciples who have given us these Gospel histories deserve only to
be disparagingly handled, for the express reason that no writings are
produced by us with the claim of being compositions which have proceeded
immediately from the hand of that Christ whom they refuse indeed to
worship as God, but whom, nevertheless, they do not hesitate to
pronounce worthy to be honoured as a man far surpassing all other men in
wisdom; and as, further, we have confuted those who strive to make Him
out to have written in a strain suiting their perverted inclinations,
but not in terms calculated, by their perusal and acceptance, to set men
right, or to turn them from their perverse ways, let us now look into
the accounts which the four evangelists have given us of Christ, with
the view of seeing how self-consistent they are, and how truly in
harmony with each other. And let us do so in the hope that no offence,
even of the smallest order may be felt in this line of things in the
Christian faith by those who exhibit more curiosity than capacity, in so
far as they think that a study of the evangelical books, conducted not
in the way of a merely cursory perusal, but in the form of a more than
ordinarily careful investigation, has disclosed to them certain matters
of an inapposite and contradictory nature, and in so far as their notion
is, that these things are to be held up as objections in the spirit of
contention, rather than pondered in the spirit of consideration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](1060098)
