[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060176)  [Next](1060178.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXXX.—Of the Harmony Characterizing
the Accounts Which are Given by Matthew, Mark, and Luke, of the Occasion
on Which</span> <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-Page_174"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p1.2"></span>He Sent His Disciples to Make Preparations
for His Eating the Passover.</span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p2"></span>157. Matthew proceeds thus: “Then one of
the twelve, who is called Judas \[of\] Scarioth, went unto the chief
priests, and said unto them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver
Him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver;”
and so on down to the words, “And the disciples did as Jesus had
appointed them, and they made ready the passover.” <span
id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215.md) Nothing in this section can be
supposed to stand in any contradiction with the versions of Mark and
Luke, who record this same passage in a similar manner. <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216.md) For as regards the statement given
by Matthew in these terms, “Go into the city to such a man, and say unto
him, The Master saith, My time is at hand: I will keep the passover at
thy house with my disciples,” <span id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217.md)
it just indicates the person whom Mark and Luke name the “goodman of the
house,” <span id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218.md) or the “master of the
house,” <span id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219.md) in which the
dining-room was shown them where they were to make ready the passover.
And Matthew has expressed this by simply bringing in the phrase, “to
such a man,” as a brief explanation introduced by himself with the view
of succinctly giving us to understand who the person referred to was.
For if he had said that the Lord addressed them in words like these: “Go
into the city, and say unto him \[or “it”\], <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220.md) The Master saith, My time is at
hand, I will keep the passover at thy house,” it might have been
supposed that the terms were intended to be directed to the city itself.
For this reason, therefore, Matthew has inserted the statement, that the
Lord bade them go “to such a man,” not, however, as a statement made by
the Lord, whose instructions he was recording, but simply as one
volunteered by himself, with the view of avoiding the necessity of
narrating the whole at length, when it seemed to him that this was all
that required to be mentioned in order to bring out with sufficient
accuracy what was really meant by the person who gave the order. For who
can fail to see that no one naturally speaks to others in such an
indefinite fashion as this, “Go ye to such a man”? If, again, the words
had been, “Go ye to any one whatsoever,” or “to any one you
please,” <span id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221.md) the mode of
expression might have been correct enough, but the person to whom the
disciples were sent would have been left uncertain: whereas Mark and
Luke present him as a certain definitely indicated individual, although
they pass over his name in silence. The Lord Himself, we may be sure,
knew to what person it was that He despatched them. And in order that
those also whom He was thus sending might be able to discover the
individual meant, He gave them, before they set out, a particular sign
which they were to follow,—namely, the appearance of a man bearing a
pitcher or a vessel of water,—and told them, that if they went after
him, they would reach the house which He intended. Hence, seeing that it
was not competent here to employ the phraseology, “Go to any one you
please,” which is indeed legitimate enough, so far as the demands of
linguistic propriety are concerned, but which an accurate statement of
the matter dealt with here renders inadmissible in this passage, with
how much less warrant could an expression like this have been used here
(by the speaker Himself), “Go to such a man,” which the usage of correct
language can never admit at all? But it is manifest that the disciples
were sent by the Lord, plainly, not to any man they pleased, but to
“such a man,” that is to say, to a certain definite individual. And that
is a thing which the evangelist, speaking in his own person, could quite
rightly have related to us, by putting it in this way: “He sent them to
such a man, <span id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222.md) in order to say
to him, I will keep the passover at thy house.” He might also have
expressed it thus: “He sent them to such a man, saying, Go, say to him,
I will keep the passover at thy house.” And thus it is that, after
giving us the words actually spoken by the Lord Himself, namely, “Go
into the city,” he has introduced this addition of his own, “to such a
man,” which he does, however, not as if the Lord had thus expressed
Himself, but simply with the view of giving us to understand, although
the name is left unrecorded, that there was a particular person in the
city to whom the Lord’s disciples were sent, in order to make ready the
passover. Thus, too, after the two \[or three\] words brought in that
manner as an explanation of his own, he takes up again the order of the
words as they were uttered by the Lord Himself, namely, “And say unto
him, The Master saith.” And if you ask now “to whom” they were to say
this, the correct reply is given \[at once\] in these terms, To that
particular man to whom the evangelist has given us to understand that
the Lord sent them, when, speaking in His own person, he introduced the
clause, “to such a man.” The clause thus inserted may indeed contain a
rather unusual mode of expression, but still it is a perfectly
legitimate phraseology when it is thus understood. Or it may be, that in
the Hebrew language, in which Matthew is reported to have written, there
is <span id="page_175">p. 175</span> <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-Page_175"></span>some peculiar usage which might make it
entirely accordant with the laws of correct expression, even were the
whole taken to have been spoken by the Lord Himself. Whether that is the
case, those who understand that tongue may decide. Even in the Latin
language itself, indeed, this kind of expression might also be used, in
terms like these: “Go into the city to such a man as may be indicated by
a person who shall meet you carrying a pitcher of water.” If the
instructions were conveyed in such words as these, they could be acted
upon without any ambiguity. Or again, if the terms were anything like
these, “Go into the city to such a man, who resides in this or the other
place, in such and such a house,” then the note thus given of the place
and the designation of the house would make it quite possible to
understand the commission delivered, and to execute it. But when these
instructions, and all others of a similar order, are left entirely
untold, the person who in such circumstances uses this kind of address,
“Go to such a man, and say unto him,” cannot possibly be listened to
intelligently for this obvious reason, that when he employs the terms,
“to such a man,” he intends a certain particular individual to be
understood by them, and yet offers us no hint by which he may be
identified. But if we are to suppose that the clause referred to is one
introduced as an explanation by the evangelist himself, \[we may find
that\] the requirements of brevity will render the expression somewhat
obscure, without, however, making it incorrect. Moreover, as to the
fact, that where Mark speaks of a pitcher <span
id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223.md) of water, Luke mentions a
vessel, <span id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224.md) the simple
explanation is, that the one has used a word indicative of the kind of
vessel, and the other a term indicative of its capacity, while both
evangelists have nevertheless preserved the real meaning actually
intended.

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p13"></span>158. Matthew proceeds thus: “Now when
the even was come, He sat down with the twelve disciples; and as they
did eat, He said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray
me. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to
say, Lord, is it I?” and so on, down to where we read, “Then Judas,
which betrayed Him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto
him, Thou hast said.” <span id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225.md) In what
we have now presented for consideration here, the other three
evangelists, <span id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226.md) who also record
such matters, offer nothing calculated to raise any question of serious
difficulty. <span id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[174:1216](1060177.htm#fr_1215.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p3"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
14-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014.md)<span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[174:1217](1060177.htm#fr_1216.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p4"></span> [Mark
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#010.md), [Luke
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#003.md)<span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[174:1218](1060177.htm#fr_1217.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p5"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#018.md)<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[174:1219](1060177.htm#fr_1218.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p6"></span> *Patrem familias*.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[174:1220](1060177.htm#fr_1219.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p7"></span> *Dominum domus*.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[174:1221](1060177.htm#fr_1220.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p8"></span> *Ite in civitatem et dicite ei*.
Turning on the identity of form retained by the Latin pronoun in all the
genders of the dative case, this, of course, cannot be precisely
represented in English.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[174:1222](1060177.htm#fr_1221.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p9"></span> *Ad quemcunque aut ad quemlibet*.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[174:1223](1060177.htm#fr_1222.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p10"></span> *Ad quendam*.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[175:1224](1060177.htm#fr_1223.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p11"></span> *Lagenam*, bottle.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[175:1225](1060177.htm#fr_1224.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p12"></span> *Amphoram*, large measure.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[175:1226](1060177.htm#fr_1225.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p14"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
20-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#020.md)<span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[175:1227](1060177.htm#fr_1226.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p15"></span> [Mark
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#017.md), [Luke
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#014.md), [John
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[175:1228](1060177.htm#fr_1227.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxxxi-p16"></span> \[No notice is taken by Augustin, in
this treatise, of the most serious difficulty connected with the
narratives of the Lord’s Supper; namely, that of the day of the month on
which it was instituted. The Synoptists distinctly declare that our Lord
ate the passover supper with His disciples at the regular time ([Matt.
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#017.md), [Mark
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012.md), [Luke
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#007.md)<span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p16.1"></span>), but some passages in [John
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027.md), [John
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028.md), [John
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031.md)<span
id="vi.v.lxxxi-p16.2"></span>) seem to indicate that the proper time of
its observance had not yet come. Hence many commentators think that the
Lord’s Supper was instituted on the evening of the 13th of Nisan, one
day before the regular time of the paschal supper.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](1060178.md)
