[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060213)  [Next](1060215.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.vii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Of Luke’s Gospel, and Specially
of the Harmony Between Its Commencement and the Beginning of the Book of
the Acts of the Apostles.</span>

<span id="vi.vii.ix-p2"></span>9. Next in succession, therefore, let us
now go over the Gospel of Luke in regular order. We shall omit, however,
those passages which he has in common with Matthew and Mark. For all
these have been already handled. Luke, then, begins his narrative in the
following fashion: “Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in
order a declaration of these things which have been fulfilled <span
id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617.md) among us, even as they delivered
them unto us, which from the beginning were eye-witnesses, and ministers
of the word; it seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding
of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in order, <span
id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618.md) most excellent Theophilus, that
thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou hast been
instructed.” <span id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619.md) This beginning
does not pertain immediately to the narrative presented in the Gospel.
But it suggests to us to be cognizant of the fact, that this same Luke
is also the writer of the other book which bears the name of the Acts of
the Apostles. Our ground for holding this opinion is not merely the
circumstance that the name of Theophilus occurs there as well as here.
For it might quite well happen that there was a second person with the
name of Theophilus; and even if it was one and the same person that was
referred to in both cases, still another composition might have been
addressed to him by a different individual, just as the Gospel was
written in his behoof by Luke. We base our view of the identity of
authorship, however, on the fact that this second book commences in the
following strain: “The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all
that Jesus began both to do and teach, until the day in which He, <span
id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620.md) through the Holy Ghost, gave
commandment unto the apostles whom He chose to preach the gospel.” <span
id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621.md) This statement gives us to
understand that, previous to this, he had written one of those four
books of the gospel which are held in the loftiest authority in the
Church. At the same time, when he tells us that he had composed a
treatise of all that Jesus began both to do and teach until the day in
which He gave commandment to the apostles, we are not to take this to
mean that he actually has given us a full account in his Gospel of all
that Jesus did and said when He lived with His apostles on earth. For
that would be contrary to what John affirms when he says that there are
also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be
written every one, the world itself could not contain the books. <span
id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622.md) And besides, it is the admitted
fact that not a few things have been narrated by the other evangelists,
which Luke himself has not touched upon in his history. The sense
therefore is, that he wrote a treatise of all these things, in so far as
he made a selection out of the whole mass of materials for his
narrative, and introduced those facts which he judged fit and suitable
for the satisfactory discharge of the responsible duty laid upon him.
Again, when he speaks of many who had “taken in hand to set forth in
order a declaration of those things which have been fulfilled among us,”
he seems to refer to certain parties who had not been able to complete
the task which they had assumed. Hence he also says that it seemed good
to him also to “write carefully in order, forasmuch as many have taken
in hand,” etc. The allusion here, however, we ought to take to be to
those writers who have attained to no authority in the Church, just
because they were utterly incompetent rightly to carry out what they
took in hand. Moreover, the author at present before us has not confined
himself to the task of bringing down his narrative to the <span
id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span id="vi.vii.ix-Page_230"></span>events
of the Lord’s resurrection and assumption; neither has it been his aim
simply to have a place commensurate in honour with his labours in the
company of the four writers of the Gospel Scriptures. But he has also
undertaken a record of what was done subsequently by the hands of the
apostles; and relating as many of those events as he believed to be
needful and helpful to the edification of the faith of readers or
hearers, he has given us a narrative so faithful, that his is the only
book that has been reckoned worthy of acceptance in the Church as a
history of the Acts of the Apostles; while all these other writers who
attempted, although deficient in the trustworthiness which was the first
requisite, to compose an account of the doings and sayings of the
apostles, have met with rejection. And, further, Mark and Luke certainly
wrote at a time when it was quite possible to put them to the test not
only by the Church of Christ, but also by the apostles themselves who
were still alive in the flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[229:1618](1060214.htm#fr_1617.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ix-p3"></span> *Completæ sunt*. \[So Revised
Version.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[229:1619](1060214.htm#fr_1618.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ix-p4"></span> \[*Et mihi assecuto a principio omnibus*
(some <span class="c13"><span id="vi.vii.ix-p4.1"></span>mss.</span>
have *omnia*) *diligenter ex ordine tibi scribere*. Comp. Revised
Version and Augustin’s explanation below.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[229:1620](1060214.htm#fr_1619.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ix-p5"></span> [Luke i.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.vii.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[229:1621](1060214.htm#fr_1620.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ix-p6"></span> *Usque in diem quo apostolis quos
elegit*, etc. Some editions read *quo apostolos elegit* = on which He
chose the apostles, giving them commandment, etc.

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[229:1622](1060214.htm#fr_1621.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ix-p7"></span> [Acts
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#002.md)<span id="vi.vii.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[229:1623](1060214.htm#fr_1622.md) <span
id="vi.vii.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii.ix-p8"></span> [John xxi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025.md)<span id="vi.vii.ix-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](1060215.md)
