[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060049)  [Next](1060051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xx"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xx-p2"></span>67. But inasmuch as the word “guileless”
may mislead some who are desirous of obeying God’s precepts, so that
they may think it wrong, at times, to conceal the truth, just as it is
wrong at times to speak a falsehood, and inasmuch as in this way,—by
disclosing things which the parties to whom they are disclosed are
unable to bear,—they may do more harm than if they were to conceal them
altogether and always, He very rightly adds: “Give not that which is
holy to the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they
trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.” For the
Lord Himself, although He never told a lie, yet showed that He was
concealing certain truths, when He said, “I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.” <span
id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443) And the Apostle Paul, too, says: “And
I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto
carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not
with meat: for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are
ye able. For ye are yet carnal.” <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444)

<span id="v.iii.xx-p5"></span>68. Now, in this precept by which we are
forbidden to give what is holy to the dogs, and to cast our pearls
before swine, we must carefully require what is meant by holy, what by
pearls, what by dogs, what by swine. A holy thing is something which it
is impious to violate and to corrupt; and the very attempt and wish to
commit that crime is held to be criminal, although that holy thing
should remain in its nature inviolable and incorruptible. By pearls,
again, are meant whatever spiritual things we ought to set a high value
upon, both because they lie hid in a secret place, are as it were
brought up out of the deep, and are found in wrappings of allegory, as
it were in shells that have been opened. We may therefore legitimately
understand that one and the same thing may be called both holy and a
pearl: but it gets the name of holy for this reason, that it ought not
to be corrupted; of a pearl for this reason, that it ought not to be
despised. Every one, however, endeavours to corrupt what he does not
wish to remain uninjured: but he despises what he thinks worthless, and
reckons to be as it were beneath himself; and therefore whatever is
despised is said to be trampled on. And hence, inasmuch as dogs spring
at a thing in order to tear it in pieces, and do not allow what they are
tearing in pieces to remain in its original condition, “Give not,” says
He, “that which is holy unto the dogs:” for although it cannot be torn
in pieces and corrupted, and remains unharmed and inviolable, yet we
must think of what is the wish of those parties who bitterly and in a
most unfriendly spirit resist, and, as far as in them lies, endeavour,
if it were possible, to destroy the truth. But swine, although they do
not, like dogs, fall upon an object with their teeth, yet by recklessly
trampling on it defile it: “Do not *therefore* cast your pearls before
swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend
you.” We may therefore not unsuitably understand dogs as used to
designate the assailants of the truth, swine the despisers of it.

<span id="v.iii.xx-p6"></span>69. But when He says, “they turn again and
rend you,” He does not say, they rend the pearls <span id="page_57">p.
57</span> <span id="v.iii.xx-Page_57"></span>themselves. For by
trampling on them, just when they turn in order that they may hear
something more, they yet rend him by whom the pearls have just been cast
before them which they have trampled on. For you would not easily find
out what pleasure the man could have who has trampled pearls under foot,
*i.e.* has despised divine things whose discovery is the result of great
labour. But in regard to him who teaches such parties, I do not see how
he would escape being rent in pieces through their anger and
wrathfulness. Moreover, both animals are unclean, the dog as well as the
swine. We must therefore be on our guard, lest anything should be opened
up to him who does not receive it: for it is better that he should seek
for what is hidden, than that he should either attack or slight at what
is open. Neither, in fact, is any other cause found why they do not
receive those things which are manifest and of importance, except hatred
and contempt, the one of which gets them the name of dogs, the other
that of swine. And all this impurity is generated by the love of
temporal things, *i.e.* by the love of this world, which we are
commanded to renounce, in order that we may be able to be pure. The man,
therefore, who desires to have a pure and single heart, ought not to
appear to himself blameworthy, if he conceals anything from him who is
unable to receive it. Nor is it to be supposed from this that it is
allowable to lie: for it does not follow that when truth is concealed,
falsehood is uttered. Hence, steps are to be taken first, that the
hindrances which prevent his receiving it may be removed; for certainly
if pollution is the reason he does not receive it, he is to be cleansed
either by word or by deed, as far as we can possibly do it.

<span id="v.iii.xx-p7"></span>70. Then, further, when our Lord is found
to have made certain statements which many who were present did not
accept, but either resisted or despised, He is not to be thought to have
given that which is holy to the dogs, or to have cast pearls before
swine: for He did not give such things to those who were not able to
receive them, but to those who were able, and were at the same time
present; whom it was not meet that He should neglect on account of the
impurity of others. And when tempters put questions to Him, and He
answered them, so that they might have nothing to gainsay, although they
might pine away from the effects of their own poisons, rather than be
filled with His food, yet others, who were able to receive His teaching,
heard to their profit many things in consequence of the opportunity
created by these parties. I have said this, lest any one, perhaps, when
he is not able to reply to one who puts a question to him, should seem
to himself excused, if he should say that he is unwilling to give that
which is holy to the dogs, or to cast pearls before swine. For he who
knows what to answer ought to do it, even for the sake of others, in
whose minds despair arises, if they believe that the question proposed
cannot be answered: and this in reference to matters that are useful,
and that belong to saving instruction. For many things which may be the
subject of inquiry on the part of idle people are needless and vain, and
often hurtful, respecting which, however, something must be said; but
this very point is to be opened up and explained, viz. why such things
ought not to form the subject of inquiry. In reference, therefore, to
things that are useful, we ought sometimes to give a reply to what is
asked of us: just as the Lord did, when the Sadducees had asked Him
about the woman who had seven husbands, to which of them she would
belong in the resurrection. For He answered that in the resurrection
they will neither marry, nor be given in marriage, but will be as the
angels in heaven. But sometimes, he who asks is to be asked something
else, by telling which he would answer himself as to the matter he asked
about; but if he should refuse to make a statement, it would not seem to
those who are present unfair, if he himself should not hear anything as
to the matter he inquired about. For those who put the question,
tempting Him, whether tribute was to be paid, were asked another
question, viz. whose image the money bore which was brought forward by
themselves; and because they told what they had been asked, *i.e.* that
the money bore the image of Cæsar, they gave a kind of answer to
themselves in reference to the question they had asked the Lord: and
accordingly from their answer He drew this inference, “Render therefore
unto Cæsar the things which are Cæsar’s, and unto God the things that
are God’s.” <span id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445) When, however, the
chief priests and elders of the people had asked by what authority He
was doing those things, He asked them about the baptism of John: and
when they would not make a statement which they saw to be against
themselves, and yet would not venture to say anything bad about John, on
account of the bystanders, “Neither tell I you,” says He, “by what
authority I do these things;” <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) a
refusal which appeared most just to the bystanders. For they said they
were ignorant of that which they really knew, but did not wish to tell.
And, in truth, it was right that they who wished to have an answer to
what they asked, should themselves first do what they required to be
done toward them; and if they had done this, they would certainly have
answered themselves. For they themselves had sent to John, asking who he
was; or rather they themselves, being priests and Levites, had been
<span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span id="v.iii.xx-Page_58"></span>sent,
supposing that he was the very Christ, but he said that he was not, and
gave forth a testimony concerning the Lord: <span
id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) a testimony respecting which if they
chose to make a confession, they would teach themselves by what
authority as the Christ He was doing those things; which as if ignorant
of they had asked, in order that they might find an avenue for calumny.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_443"></span>[56:444](1060050.htm#fr_443) <span
id="v.iii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xx-p3"></span> [John xvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span id="v.iii.xx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[56:445](1060050.htm#fr_444) <span
id="v.iii.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xx-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.xx-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[57:446](1060050.htm#fr_445) <span
id="v.iii.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xx-p8"></span> [Matt. xxii.
15-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015)<span id="v.iii.xx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[57:447](1060050.htm#fr_446) <span
id="v.iii.xx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xx-p9"></span> [Matt.
21.23-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023)<span
id="v.iii.xx-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[58:448](1060050.htm#fr_447) <span
id="v.iii.xx-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xx-p10"></span> [John i.
19-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019)<span
id="v.iii.xx-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](1060051)
