[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060244)  [Next](1060246) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxviii"></span> <span id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="vii.xxviii-Page_340"></span><span id="vii.xxviii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXVI.</span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>\[LXXVI. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p3"></span>*Again on* <span
id="vii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>*[Matt. xiv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)<span id="vii.xxviii-p3.2"></span>:
Of the Lord walking on the waves of the sea, and of Peter tottering.*

<span id="vii.xxviii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>The</span> Gospel which has just been read
touching the Lord Christ, who walked on the waters of the sea; <span
id="fr_2565"></span>[2566](#fn_2565) and the Apostle Peter, who as he
was walking, tottered through fear, and sinking in distrust, rose again
by confession, gives us to understand that the sea is the present world,
and the Apostle Peter the type of the One Church. For Peter in the order
of Apostles first, and in the love of Christ most forward, answers
oftentimes alone for all the rest. Again, when the Lord Jesus Christ
asked, whom men said that He was, and when the disciples gave the
various opinions of men, and the Lord asked again and said, “But whom
say ye that I am?” Peter answered, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God.” One for many gave the answer, Unity in many. Then said the
Lord to Him, “Blessed art thou, Simon Barjonas: for flesh and blood hath
not revealed it unto thee, but My Father which is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2566"></span>[2567](#fn_2566) Then He added, “and I say unto
thee.” As if He had said, “Because thou hast said unto Me, ‘Thou art the
Christ the Son of the living God;’ I also say unto thee, ‘Thou art
Peter.’” For before he was called Simon. Now this name of Peter was
given him by the Lord, and that in a figure, that he should signify the
Church. For seeing that Christ is the rock (Petra), Peter is the
Christian people. For the rock (Petra) is the original name. Therefore
Peter is so called  <span id="fr_2567"></span>[2568](#fn_2567) from the
rock; not the rock from Peter; as Christ is not called Christ from the
Christian, but the Christian from Christ. “Therefore,” he saith, “Thou
art Peter; and upon this Rock” which thou hast confessed, upon this Rock
which thou hast acknowledged, saying, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God, will I build My Church;” that is upon Myself, the Son of
the living God, “will I build My Church.” I will build thee upon Myself,
not Myself upon thee.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p8"></span>2. For men who wished to be built upon
men, said, “I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas,” <span
id="fr_2568"></span>[2569](#fn_2568) who is Peter. But others who did
not wish to be built upon Peter, but upon the Rock, said, “But I am of
Christ.” And when the Apostle Paul ascertained that he was chosen, and
Christ despised, he said, “Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for
you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?” <span
id="fr_2569"></span>[2570](#fn_2569) And, as not in the name of Paul, so
neither in the name of Peter; but in the name of Christ: that Peter
might be built upon the Rock, not the Rock upon Peter.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p11"></span>3. This same Peter therefore who had
been by the Rock pronounced “blessed,” bearing the figure of the Church,
holding the chief place in the Apostleship, <span
id="fr_2570"></span>[2571](#fn_2570) a very little while after that he
had heard that he was “blessed,” a very little while after that he had
heard that he was “Peter,” a very little while after that he had heard
that he was to be “built upon the Rock,” displeased the Lord when He had
heard of His future Passion, for He had foretold His disciples that it
was soon to be. He feared lest he should by death, lose Him whom he had
confessed as the fountain of life. He was troubled, and said, “Be it far
from Thee, Lord: this shall not be to Thee.” <span
id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571) Spare Thyself, O God, I am not
willing that Thou shouldest die. Peter said to Christ, I am not willing
that Thou shouldest die; but Christ far better said, I am willing to die
for thee. And then He forthwith rebuked him, whom He had a little before
commended; and calleth him Satan, whom he had pronounced “blessed.” “Get
thee behind Me, Satan,” he saith, “thou art an offence unto Me: for thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men.”
 <span id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572) What would He have us do in
our present state, who thus findeth fault because we are men? Would you
know what He would have us do? Give ear to the Psalm; “I have said, Ye
are gods, and ye are all the children of the Most High.” But by
savouring the things of men; “ye shall die like men.” <span
id="fr_2573"></span>[2574](#fn_2573) The very same Peter a little while
before blessed, afterwards Satan, in one moment, within a few words!
Thou wonderest at the difference of the names, mark the difference of
the reasons of them. Why wonderest thou that he who was a little before
blessed, is afterwards Satan? Mark the reason wherefore he is blessed.
“Because flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but My Father
which is in heaven.” <span id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574)
Therefore blessed, because flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto
thee. For if flesh and blood revealed this to thee, it were of thine
own; but because flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but My
Father which is in heaven, it is of Mine, not of thine own. Why of Mine?
“Because all things that the Father hath are Mine.” <span
id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575) So then thou hast heard the cause,
why he is “blessed,” and why he is “Peter.” But why was he that which we
shudder at, and are loth to repeat, why, but because it was of thine
own? “For thou savourest not the things which be of God, but those that
be of men.”

<span id="vii.xxviii-p18"></span>4. Let us, looking at ourselves in this
member <span id="page_341">p. 341</span> <span
id="vii.xxviii-Page_341"></span>of the Church, distinguish what is of
God, and what of ourselves. For then we shall not totter, then shall we
be founded on the Rock, shall be fixed and firm against the winds, and
storms, and streams, the temptations, I mean, of this present world. Yet
see this Peter, who was then our figure; now he trusts, and now he
totters; now he confesses the Undying, and now he fears lest He should
die. Wherefore? because the Church of Christ hath both strong and weak
ones; and cannot be without either strong or weak; whence the Apostle
Paul says, “Now we that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak.” <span id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576) In that Peter said,
“Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,” he represents the
strong: but in that he totters, and would not that Christ should suffer,
in fearing death for Him, and not acknowledging the Life, he represents
the weak ones of the Church. In that one Apostle then, that is, Peter,
in the order of Apostles first and chiefest, in whom the Church was
figured, both sorts were to be represented, that is, both the strong and
weak; because the Church doth not exist without them both.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p20"></span>5. And hence also is that which was
just now read, “Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the
water.” <span id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577) For I cannot do this
in myself, but in Thee. He acknowledged what he had of himself, and what
of Him, by whose will he believed that he could do that, which no human
weakness could do. Therefore, “if it be Thou, bid me;” because when thou
biddest, it will be done. What I cannot do by taking it upon
myself, <span id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578) Thou canst do by
bidding me. And the Lord said “Come.” <span
id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579) And without any doubting, at the
word of Him who bade him, at the presence of Him who sustained, at the
presence of Him who guided him, without any delay, Peter leaped down
into the water, and began to walk. He was able to do what the Lord was
doing, not in himself, but in the Lord. “For ye were sometimes darkness,
but now are ye light in the Lord.” <span
id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580) What no one can do in Paul, no one
in Peter, no one in any other of the Apostles, this can he do in the
Lord. Therefore well said Paul by a wholesome despising of himself, and
commending of Him; “Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptized in
the name of Paul?” <span id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581) So then,
ye are not *in* me, but together *with* me; not under me, but under Him.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p26"></span>6. Therefore Peter walked on the water
by the bidding of the Lord, knowing that he could not have this power of
himself. By faith he had strength to do what human weakness could not
do. These are the strong ones of the Church. Mark this, hear,
understand, and act accordingly. For we must not deal with the strong on
any other principle <span id="fr_2582"></span>[2583](#fn_2582) than
this, that so they should become weak; but thus we must deal with the
weak, that they may become strong. But the presuming on their own
strength keeps many back from strength. No one will have strength from
God, but he who feels himself weak of himself. “God setteth apart a
spontaneous rain for His inheritance.” <span
id="fr_2583"></span>[2584](#fn_2583) Why do you, who know what I was
about to say, anticipate me? Let your quickness be moderated, that the
slowness of the rest may follow. This I said, and I say it again; hear
it, receive it, and act on this principle. No one is made strong by God,
but he who feels himself weak of his own self. And therefore a
“spontaneous rain,” as the Psalm says, “spontaneous;” not of our
deserts, but “spontaneous.” “A spontaneous rain” therefore “God setteth
apart for his inheritance;” for “it was weak; but Thou hast perfected
it.” Because Thou “hast set apart for it a spontaneous rain,” not
looking to men’s deserts, but to Thine own grace and mercy. This
inheritance then was weakened, and acknowledged its own weakness in
itself, that it might be strong in Thee. It would not be strengthened,
if it were not weak, that by Thee it might be “perfected” in Thee.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p29"></span>7. See Paul a small portion of this
inheritance, see him in weakness, who said, “I am not meet to be called
an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God.” Why then art thou
an Apostle? “By the grace of God I am what I am. I am not meet, but by
the grace of God I am what I am.” Paul was “weak,” but Thou hast
“perfected” him. But now because by “the grace of God he is what he is,”
look what follows; “And His grace in me was not in vain, but I laboured
more abundantly than they all.” <span
id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584) Take heed lest thou lose by
presumption what thou hast attained <span
id="fr_2585"></span>[2586](#fn_2585) through weakness. This is well,
very well; that “I am not meet to be called an Apostle. By His grace I
am what I am, and His grace in me was not in vain:” all most excellent.
But, “I laboured more abundantly than they all;” thou hast begun, it
would seem, to ascribe to thyself what a little before thou hadst given
to God. Attend and follow on; “Yet not I, but the grace of God with me.”
Well! thou weak one; thou shalt be exalted in exceeding strength, seeing
thou art not unthankful. Thou art the very same Paul, little in thyself;
and great in the Lord. Thou art he who didst thrice beseech the Lord,
that “the thorn of the flesh, the messenger of Satan, by whom thou wast
buffeted, might be taken away from thee.” <span
id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586) And what was said to thee? what
didst thou hear when thou madest this petition? “My grace is sufficient
for thee: for My strength is <span id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span
id="vii.xxviii-Page_342"></span>made perfect in weakness.” <span
id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587) For he was “weak,” but Thou didst
“perfect” him.

<span id="vii.xxviii-p34"></span>8. So Peter also said, “Bid me come
unto Thee on the water.” I who dare this am but a man, but it is no man
whom I beseech. Let the God-man bid, that man may be able to do what man
cannot do. “Come,” said He. And He went down, and began to walk on the
water; and Peter was able, because the Rock had bidden him. Lo, what
Peter was in the Lord; what was he in himself? “When he saw the wind
boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried out, Lord, I
perish, save me.” When he <span id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588)
looked for strength from the Lord, he had strength from the Lord; as a
man he tottered, but he returned to the Lord. “If I said, my foot hath
slipped” <span id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589) (they are the words
of a Psalm, the notes of a holy song; and if we acknowledge them they
are our words too; yea, if we will, they are ours also). “If I said my
foot hath slipped.” How slipped, except because it was mine own. And
what follows? “Thy mercy, Lord, helped me.” Not mine own strength, but
Thy mercy. For will God forsake him as he totters, whom He heard when
calling upon Him? Where then is that, “Who hath called upon God, and
hath been forsaken by Him?”  <span id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590)
where again is that, “Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord,
shall be delivered.” <span id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591)
Immediately reaching forth the help of His right hand, He lifted him up
as he was sinking, and rebuked his distrust; “O thou of little faith,
wherefore didst thou doubt?” Once thou didst trust in Me, hast thou now
doubted of Me?

<span id="vii.xxviii-p39"></span>9. Well, brethren, my sermon must be
ended. Consider the world to be the sea; the wind is boisterous, and
there is a mighty tempest. Each man’s peculiar lust is his tempest. Thou
dost love God; thou walkest upon the sea, and under thy feet is the
swelling of the world. Thou dost love the world, it will swallow thee
up. It skilleth only how to devour its lovers, not to carry them. But
when thy heart is tossed about by lust, in order that thou mayest get
the better of thy lust, call upon the Divinity of Christ. Think ye that
the wind is then contrary, when there is this life’s adversity? For so
when there are wars, when there is tumult, when there is famine, when
there is pestilence, when even to every individual man his private
calamity arriveth, then the wind is thought to be contrary, then it is
thought that God must be called upon. But when the world wears her smile
of temporal happiness, it is as if there were no contrary wind. But do
not ask upon this matter the tranquil state of the times: ask only your
own lust. See if there be tranquillity within thee: see if there be no
inner wind which overturns thee; see to this. There needs great virtue
to struggle with happiness, lest this very happiness allure, corrupt,
and overthrow thee. There needs, I say, great virtue to struggle with
happiness, and great happiness not to be overcome by happiness. Learn
then to tread upon the world; remember to trust in Christ. And “if thy
foot have slipped;” if thou totter, if some things there are which thou
canst not overcome, if thou begin to sink, say, “Lord, I perish, save
me.” Say, “I perish,” that thou perish not. For He only can deliver thee
from the death of the body, who died in the body for thee. Let us turn
to the Lord, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2565"></span>[340:2566](1060245.htm#fr_2565) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p5"></span> [Matt. xiv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)<span id="vii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2566"></span>[340:2567](1060245.htm#fr_2566) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p6"></span> [Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2567"></span>[340:2568](1060245.htm#fr_2567) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p7"></span> Vide Sermon cclxx. 2, and ccxcv. 1.

<span id="fn_2568"></span>[340:2569](1060245.htm#fr_2568) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p9"></span> [1 Cor. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012)<span id="vii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2569"></span>[340:2570](1060245.htm#fr_2569) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p10"></span> [1 Cor. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span id="vii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2570"></span>[340:2571](1060245.htm#fr_2570) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p12"></span> *Apostolatus principatum*.

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[340:2572](1060245.htm#fr_2571) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p13"></span> [Matt. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span id="vii.xxviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[340:2573](1060245.htm#fr_2572) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p14"></span> [Matt. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span id="vii.xxviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2573"></span>[340:2574](1060245.htm#fr_2573) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p15"></span> [Ps.
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)<span id="vii.xxviii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[340:2575](1060245.htm#fr_2574) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p16"></span> [Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span id="vii.xxviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[340:2576](1060245.htm#fr_2575) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p17"></span> [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span id="vii.xxviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[341:2577](1060245.htm#fr_2576) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p19"></span> [Rom. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)<span id="vii.xxviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[341:2578](1060245.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p21"></span> [Matt. xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#028)<span id="vii.xxviii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[341:2579](1060245.htm#fr_2578) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p22"></span> *Præsumendo*.

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[341:2580](1060245.htm#fr_2579) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p23"></span> [Matt. xiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#029)<span id="vii.xxviii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[341:2581](1060245.htm#fr_2580) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p24"></span> [Eph. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[341:2582](1060245.htm#fr_2581) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p25"></span> [1 Cor. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span id="vii.xxviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2582"></span>[341:2583](1060245.htm#fr_2582) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p27"></span> *Alibi*.

<span id="fn_2583"></span>[341:2584](1060245.htm#fr_2583) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p28"></span> [Ps.
68.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxviii-p28.1"></span>, Sept. (lxviii. 9, English version).

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[341:2585](1060245.htm#fr_2584) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p30"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009)<span id="vii.xxviii-p30.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2585"></span>[341:2586](1060245.htm#fr_2585) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p31"></span> *Meruisti*.

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[341:2587](1060245.htm#fr_2586) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p32"></span> [2 Cor.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxviii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[342:2588](1060245.htm#fr_2587) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p33"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="vii.xxviii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[342:2589](1060245.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p35"></span> *Præsumsit de Domino*.

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[342:2590](1060245.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p36"></span> [Ps. xciv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#018)<span id="vii.xxviii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[342:2591](1060245.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p37"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
2.10](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xxviii-p37.1"></span>, Sept.

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[342:2592](1060245.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="vii.xxviii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxviii-p38"></span> [Joel ii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span id="vii.xxviii-p38.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXVII](1060246)
