[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060039)  [Next](1060041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.x"></span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p2"></span>36. But the distinction among these seven
petitions is to be considered and commended. For inasmuch as our
temporal life is being spent now, and that which is eternal hoped for,
and inasmuch as eternal things are superior in point of dignity, albeit
it is only when we have done with temporal things that we pass to the
other; although the three first petitions begin to be answered in this
life, which is being spent in the present world (for both the hallowing
of God’s name begins to be carried on just with the coming of the lord
of humility; and the coming of His kingdom, to which He will come in
splendour, will be manifested, not after the end of the world, but in
the end of the world; and the perfect doing of His will in earth as in
heaven, whether you understand by heaven and earth the righteous and
sinners, or spirit and flesh, or the Lord and the Church, or all these
things together, will be brought to completion just with the perfecting
of our blessedness, and therefore at the close of the world), yet all
three will remain to eternity. For both the hallowing of God’s name will
go on for ever, and there is no end of His kingdom, and eternal life is
promised to our perfected blessedness. Hence those three things will
remain consummated and thoroughly completed in that life which is
promised us.

<span id="v.iii.x-p3"></span>37. But the other four things which we ask
seem to me to belong to this temporal life. <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md) And the first of them is, “Give us
this day our <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="v.iii.x-Page_46"></span>daily bread.” For whether by this same thing
which is called daily bread be meant spiritual bread, or that which is
visible in the sacrament or in this sustenance of ours, it belongs to
the present time, which He has called “to-day,” not because spiritual
food is not everlasting, but because that which is called daily food in
the Scriptures is represented to the soul either by the sound of the
expression or by temporal signs of any kind: things all of which will
certainly no more have existence when all shall be taught of God, <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md) and thus shall no longer be making
known to others by movement of their bodies, but drinking in each one
for himself by the purity of his mind the ineffable light of truth
itself. For perhaps for this reason also it is called bread, not drink,
because bread is converted into aliment by breaking and masticating it,
just as the Scriptures feed the soul by being opened up and made the
subject of discourse; but drink, when prepared, passes as it is into the
body: so that at present the truth is bread, when it is called daily
bread; but then it will be drink, when there will be no need of the
labour of discussing and discoursing, as it were of breaking and
masticating, but merely of drinking unmingled and transparent truth. And
sins are at present forgiven us, and at present we forgive them; which
is the second petition of these four that remain: but then there will be
no pardon of sins, because there will be no sins. And temptations molest
this temporal life; but they will have no existence when these words
shall be fully realized, “Thou shall hide them in the secret of Thy
presence.” <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md) And the evil from
which we wish to be delivered, and the deliverance from evil itself,
belong certainly to this life, which as being mortal we have deserved at
the hand of God’s justice, and from which we are delivered by His mercy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_334"></span>[45:335](1060040.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="v.iii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p4"></span> Or, as he expresses it in another place
(*Sermon* lvii. 7), “to this life of our pilgrimage” (“*ista vita
peregrinationis nostræ*”).

<span id="fn_335"></span>[46:336](1060040.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="v.iii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p5"></span> [Isa.
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013.md), [John
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045.md)<span id="v.iii.x-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[46:337](1060040.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="v.iii.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p6"></span> [Ps. xxxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020.md)<span id="v.iii.x-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](1060041.md)
