[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060051)  [Next](1060053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p2"></span>74. Moreover, a certain strength and
vigour in walking along the path of wisdom ties in good morals, which
are made to extend as far as to purification and singleness of heart,—a
subject on which He has now been speaking long, and thus concludes:
“Therefore all good <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them:
for this is the law and the prophets.” In the Greek copies we find the
passage runs thus: “Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men
<span id="page_59">p. 59</span> <span
id="v.iii.xxii-Page_59"></span>should do to you, do ye even so to them.”
But I think the word “good” has been added by the Latins to make the
sentence clear. For the thought occurred, that if any one should wish
something wicked to be done to him, and should refer this clause to
that,—as, for instance, if one should wish to be challenged to drink
immoderately, and to get drunk over his cups, and should first do this
to the party by whom he wishes it to be done to himself,—it would be
ridiculous to imagine that he had fulfilled this clause. Inasmuch,
therefore, as they were influenced by this consideration, as I suppose,
one word was added to make the matter clear; so that in the statement,
“Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,”
there was inserted the word “good.” But if this is wanting in the Greek
copies, they also ought to be corrected: but who would venture to do
this? It is to be understood, therefore, that the clause is complete and
altogether perfect, even if this word be not added. For the expression
used, “whatsoever ye would,” ought to be understood as used not in a
customary and random, but in a strict sense. For there is no will except
in the good: for in the case of bad and wicked deeds, desire is strictly
spoken of, not will. Not that the Scriptures always speak in a strict
sense; but where it is necessary, they so keep a word to its perfectly
strict meaning, that they do not allow anything else to be understood.

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p4"></span>75. Moreover, this precept seems to
refer to the love of our neighbour, and not to the love of God also,
seeing that in another passage He says that there are two precepts on
which “hang all the law and the prophets.” For if He had said, All
things whatsoever ye would should be done to you, do ye even so; in this
one sentence He would have embraced both those precepts: for it would
soon be said that every one wishes that he himself should be loved both
by God and by men; and so, when this precept was given to him, that what
he wished done to himself he should himself do, that certainly would be
equivalent to the precept that he should love God and men. But when it
is said more expressly of men, “Therefore all things whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, do ye even so to them,” nothing else seems to
be meant than, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) But we must carefully attend to what
He has added here: “for this is the law and the prophets.” Now, in the
case of these two precepts, He not merely says, The law and the prophets
hang; but He has also added, “all the law and the prophets,” <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) which is the same as the whole of
prophecy: and in not making the same addition here, He has kept a place
for the other precept, which refers to the love of God. Here, then,
inasmuch as He is following out the precepts with respect to a single
heart, and it is to be dreaded lest any one should have a double heart
toward those from whom the heart can be hid, *i.e.* toward men, a
precept with respect to that very thing was to be given. For there is
almost nobody that would wish that any one of double heart should have
dealings with himself. But no one can bestow anything upon a fellowman
with a single heart, unless he so bestow it that he expects no temporal
advantage from him, and does it with the intention which we have
sufficiently discussed above, when we were speaking of the single eye.

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p7"></span>76. The eye, therefore, being cleansed
and rendered single, will be adapted and suited to behold and
contemplate its own inner light. For the eye in question is the eye of
the heart. Now, such an eye is possessed by him who, in order that his
works may be truly good, does not make it the aim of his good works that
he should please men; but even if it should turn out that he pleases
them, he makes this tend rather to their salvation and to the glory of
God, not to his own empty boasting; nor does he do anything that is good
tending to his neighbour’s salvation for the purpose of gaining by it
those things that are necessary for getting through this present life;
nor does he rashly condemn a man’s intention and wish in that action in
which it is not apparent with what intention and wish it has been done;
and whatever kindnesses he shows to a man, he shows them with the same
intention with which he wishes them shown to himself, viz. as not
expecting any temporal advantage from him: thus will the heart be single
and pure in which God is sought. “Blessed,” therefore, “are the pure in
heart: for they shall see God.” <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_452"></span>[58:453](1060052.htm#fr_452) <span
id="v.iii.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p3"></span> *Bona*; the Vulgate does not contain
it.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[59:454](1060052.htm#fr_453) <span
id="v.iii.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p5"></span> The nearest approach that any
uninspired Jewish teacher came to the Golden Rule—the designation by
which these words are known—was the saying of Hillel, “What is
unpleasant to thyself, do not to thy neighbour. This is the whole law,
and all the rest is commentary upon it.” Beautiful as the saying is, it
falls behind Christ’s words, because it is merely negative, while they
are a positive requirement. The Stoics and the Chinese ethics also have
a similar negative precept. It is strange that the *Teaching of the
Twelve Apostles* (i. 2) gives the negative form, and not the positive
precept. Augustin says we ought to be glad when writers before Christ
spoke things in the Gospel (*En. in Ps.* cxl. 6).

<span id="fn_454"></span>[59:455](1060052.htm#fr_454) <span
id="v.iii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p6"></span> [Matt. xxii.
37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="v.iii.xxii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[59:456](1060052.htm#fr_455) <span
id="v.iii.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxii-p8"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="v.iii.xxii-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](1060053)
