[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060092)  [Next](1060094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.—A Statement in Opposition
to Those Who Make the Complaint that the Bliss of Human Life Has Been
Impaired by the Entrance of Christian Times.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxiii-p2"></span>51. Finally, as to the complaint which
they make with respect to the impairing of the bliss of human life by
the entrance of Christian times, if they only peruse the books of their
own philosophers, who reprehend those very things which are now being
taken out of their way in spite of all their unwillingness and
murmuring, they will indeed find that great praise is due to the times
of Christ. For what diminution is made in their happiness, unless it be
in what they most basely and luxuriously abused, to the great injury of
their Creator? or unless, perchance, it be the case that evil times
originate in such circumstances as these, in which throughout almost all
states the theatres are failing, and with them, too, the dens of vice
and the public profession of iniquity: yea, altogether the forums and
cities in which the demons used to be worshipped are falling. How comes
it, then, that they are falling, unless it be in consequence of the
failure of those very things, in the lustful and sacrilegious use of
which they were constructed? Did not their own Cicero, when commending a
certain actor of the name of Roscius, call him a man so clever as to be
the only one worthy enough to make it due for him to come upon the
stage; and yet, again, so good a man as to be the only one so worthy as
to make it due for him not to approach it? <span
id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651.md) What else did he disclose with such
remarkable clearness by this saying, but the fact that the stage was so
base there, that a person was under the greater obligation not to
connect himself with it, in proportion as he was a better man than most?
And yet their gods were pleased with such things of shame as he deemed
fit only to be removed to a distance from good men. But we have also an
open confession of the same Cicero, where he says that he had to appease
Flora, the mother of sports, by frequent celebration; <span
id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652.md) in which sports such an excess of vice
is wont to be exhibited, that, in comparison with them, others are
respectable, from engaging in which, nevertheless, good men are
prohibited. Who is this mother Flora, and what manner of goddess is she,
who is thus conciliated and propitiated by a practice of vice indulged
in with more than usual frequency and with looser reins? How much more
honourable now was it for a Roscius to step upon the stage, than for a
Cicero to worship a goddess of this kind! If the gods of the Gentile
nations are offended because the supplies are lessened which are
instituted for the purpose of such celebrations, it is apparent of what
character those must be who are delighted with such things. But if, on
the other hand, the gods themselves in their wrath diminish these
supplies, their anger yields us better services than their placability.
Wherefore let these men either confute their own philosophers, who have
reprehended the same practices on the side of wanton men; or else let
them break in pieces those gods of theirs who have made such demands
upon their worshippers, if indeed they still find any such deities
either to break in pieces or to conceal. But let them cease from their
blasphemous habit of charging Christian times with the failure of their
true prosperity,—a prosperity, indeed, so used by them that they were
sinking into all that is base and hurtful,—lest thereby they be only
putting us all the more emphatically in mind of reasons for the ampler
praise of the power of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_651"></span>[99:652](1060093.htm#fr_651.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxiii-p3"></span> See Cicero’s *Oration in behalf of
Roscius*.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[99:653](1060093.htm#fr_652.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxxiii-p4"></span> See Cicero, *Against Verres*, 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](1060094.md)
