[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060310)  [Next](1060312) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xciv"></span> <span id="vii.xciv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.xciv-p1.1"></span>Sermon XCII.</span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.xciv-p2.1"></span>\[CXLII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p3"></span>*On the same words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.xciv-p3.1"></span>*[John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="vii.xciv-p3.2"></span>, “I
am the way,” etc.*

<span id="vii.xciv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.xciv-p4.1"></span>The</span> divine lessons raise us up, that we
be not broken by despair; and terrify us again, that we be not tossed to
and fro by pride. But to hold the middle, the true, the strait way, as
it were between the left hand of despair, and the right hand of
presumption, would be most difficult for us, had not Christ said, “I am
the Way, and the Truth, and the Life.” <span
id="fr_4200"></span>[4201](#fn_4200) As if He had said, “By what way
wouldest thou go? ‘I am the Way’. Whither wouldest thou go? ‘I am the
Truth.’ Where wouldest thou abide? ‘I am the Life.’” Let us then walk
with all assurance in the Way; but let us fear snares by the way side.
The enemy does not dare to lay his snares in the way; because Christ is
the Way; but most certainly by the way side he ceases not to do so.
Whence too it is said in the Psalm, “They have laid stumblingblocks for
me by the way side.”  <span id="fr_4201"></span>[4202](#fn_4201) And
another Scripture saith, “Remember that thou walkest in the midst of
snares.” <span id="fr_4202"></span>[4203](#fn_4202) These snares among
which we walk are not in the way; but yet they are “by the way side.”
What fearest thou, what art thou alarmed at, so thou walk in the Way?
Fear then, if thou forsake the Way. For for this reason is the enemy
even permitted to lay snares by the way side, lest through the security
of exultation the Way be forsaken, and ye fall into the snares.

<span id="vii.xciv-p8"></span>2. Christ Humbled is the Way; Christ the
Truth and the Life, Christ Highly Exalted and God. If thou walk in the
Humbled, thou shalt attain to the Exalted. If infirm as thou art, thou
despise not the Humbled, thou shalt abide exceeding strong in the
Exalted. For what cause was there of Christ’s Humiliation, save thine
infirmity? For solely and irremediably did thine infirmity press thee
in, and this circumstance it was that made so great a Physician come to
thee. For if thy sickness had been even such, that thou couldest have
gone to the Physician, this infirmity might have seemed endurable. But
because thou couldest not go to Him, He came to thee. He came teaching
humility, whereby we might return; for that pride allowed us not to
return to life; yea had even made us depart from life. For the heart of
man being lifted up against God, and neglecting in its sound state His
saving precepts, the soul fell away into infirmity; let her in her
infirmity learn to hear Him whom in her strength she despised. Let her
hear Him that she may rise, whom she despised, that she might fall. Let
her at length, taught by experience, give ear to what she had no mind,
when taught by precept, to obtain. For her misery hath taught her, how
evil a thing it is to go a whoring from the Lord. For to fall away from
that Simple and Singular Good, into this multitude of pleasures, into
the love of the world, and earthly corruption, is to go a whoring from
the Lord. And He hath addressed her as in a sense a harlot, to warn her
to return: very often by the Prophets doth He reproach her as a harlot,
but yet not despaired of, for that He who reproacheth the harlot hath in
His Hands the cleansing of the harlot too.

<span id="vii.xciv-p9"></span>3. For He doth not so reproach as to
insult her; but He would bring her to confusion of face to heal her.
Vehement are the exclamations of Scripture, nor doth it deal softly by
flattery with those whom it would by healing <span id="page_533">p.
533</span> <span id="vii.xciv-Page_533"></span>recover. “Ye adulterers,
know ye not that the friend of this world is constituted the enemy of
God?” <span id="fr_4203"></span>[4204](#fn_4203) The love of the world
maketh the soul adulterous, the love of the Framer of the world maketh
the soul chaste; but unless she blush for her corruption, she hath no
desire to return to that chaste embrace. Be she confounded that she may
return, who was vaunting herself that she should not return. It was
pride then that hindered the soul’s return. But whoso reproacheth doth
not cause the sin, but showeth the sin. What the soul was loth to see,
is placed before her eyes; and what she desired to have behind her back,
is brought before her face. See thyself in thyself. “Why seest thou the
mote in thy brother’s eye, but perceivest not the beam in thine own
eye?” <span id="fr_4204"></span>[4205](#fn_4204) The soul which went
away from herself, is recalled to herself. As she had gone away from
herself, so went she away from her Lord. For she had respect to herself,
and pleased herself, and became enamoured of her own power. She withdrew
from him, and abode not in herself; and from her own self she is
repelled, and from herself shut out, and she falleth away unto things
without her. She loves the world, loves the things of time, loves
earthly things; who if she but loved herself to the neglect of Him by
whom she was made, would at once be less, at once fail by loving that
which is less. For she is less than God; yea less by far, and by so much
less as the thing made is less than the Maker. It was God then That
ought to have been loved, yea in such wise ought God to be loved, that
if it might be so, we should forget ourselves. What then is this change?
The soul hath forgotten herself, but by loving the world; let her now
forget herself, but by loving the world’s Maker. Driven away even from
herself, I say, she hath in a manner lost herself, and hath not skilled
to see her own actions, she justifies her iniquities; she is puffed up,
and prides herself in insolence, in voluptuousness, in honours, in posts
of authority, in riches, in the power of vanity. She is reproved,
rebuked, is shown to herself, mislikes herself, confesses her deformity,
longs for her first beauty, and she who went away in profusion returns
in confusion. <span id="fr_4205"></span>[4206](#fn_4205)

<span id="vii.xciv-p13"></span>4. Seemeth he to pray against her, or for
her, who says, “Fill their faces with shame”? It seems to be an
adversary, it seems an enemy. Hear what follows, and see whether a
friend can offer this prayer. “Fill,” says he, “their faces with shame,
and they shall seek Thy Name, O Lord.” <span
id="fr_4206"></span>[4207](#fn_4206) Did he hate them whose faces he
desired to be filled with shame? See how he loves them whom he would
have seek the Name of the Lord. Does he love only, or hate only? or does
he both hate, and love? Yea, he both hates, and loves. He hates what is
thine, he loves thee. What is, “He hates what is thine, he loves thee”?
He hates what thou hast made, he loves what God hath made. For what are
thine own things but sins? And what art thou but what God made thee, a
man after His Own image and likeness? Thou dost neglect what thou wast
made, love what thou hast made. Thou dost love thine own works without
thee, dost neglect the work of God within thee. Deservedly dost thou go
away, deservedly fall off, yea, deservedly even from thine own self
depart; deservedly hear the words, “A spirit that goeth and returneth
not.” <span id="fr_4207"></span>[4208](#fn_4207) Hear rather Him That
calleth and saith, “Turn ye unto Me, and I will turn unto you.” <span
id="fr_4208"></span>[4209](#fn_4208) For God doth not really turn away,
and turn again; Abiding the Same He rebuketh, Unchangeable He rebuketh.
He hath turned away, in that thou hast turned thyself away. Thou hast
fallen from Him, He hath not fallen away from thee. <span
id="fr_4209"></span>[4210](#fn_4209) Hear Him then saying to thee, “Turn
ye unto Me, and I will turn unto you.” For this is, “I turn unto you, in
that ye turn unto Me.” He followeth on the back of him that flieth, He
enlighteneth the face of him that returneth. For whither wilt thou fly
in flying from God? Whither wilt thou fly in flying from Him who is
contained in no place, and is nowhere absent? He That delivereth him
that turneth to him, punisheth him that turneth away. Thou hast a Judge
by flying; have a Father by returning.

<span id="vii.xciv-p18"></span>5. But he had been swollen up by pride,
and by this swelling could not return by the strait way. He who became
the Way, crieth out, “Enter ye in by the strait gate.” <span
id="fr_4210"></span>[4211](#fn_4210) He tries to enter in, the swelling
impedes him; and his trying is so much the more hurtful, in proportion
as the swelling is a greater impediment. For the straitness
irritates <span id="fr_4211"></span>[4212](#fn_4211) his swelling; and
being irritated he will swell the more; and swelling more, when will he
enter in? So then let him bring down the swelling. And how? Let him take
the medicine of humility; let him against the swelling drink the bitter
but wholesome cup; drink the cup of humility. Why doth he squeeze
himself? The bulk, not for its size, but for its swelling, doth not
allow him. For size hath solidity, swelling inflation. Let not him that
is swollen fancy himself of great size; that he may be great, and
substantial, <span id="fr_4212"></span>[4213](#fn_4212) and solid, let
him bring down his swelling. Let him not long after these present
things, let him not glory in this pomp of things failing and
corruptible; let him hearken to Him who said, “Enter in by the strait
gate,” saying also, <span id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span
id="vii.xciv-Page_534"></span>“I am the Way.” <span
id="fr_4213"></span>[4214](#fn_4213) For as if some swollen one had
asked, “How shall I enter in?” He saith, “‘I am the Way.’ Enter in by
Me; Thou walkest only by Me, to enter in by the door.” For as He said,
“I am the Way;” so also, “I am the Door.” <span
id="fr_4214"></span>[4215](#fn_4214) Why seekest thou whereby to return,
whither to return, whereby to enter in? Lest thou shouldest in any
respect go astray, He became all for thee. Therefore in brief He saith,
“Be humble, be meek.” Let us hear Him saying this most plainly, that
thou mayest see whereby is the way, what is the way, whither is the way.
Whither wouldest thou come? But peradventure in covetousness thou
wouldest possess all things. “All things are delivered unto Me of My
Father,”  <span id="fr_4215"></span>[4216](#fn_4215) saith He. It may be
thou wilt say, “They were delivered to Christ: but are they to me?” Hear
the Apostle speak; hear, as I said some time ago, lest thou be broken by
despair; hear how thou wert loved when thou hadst nothing to be loved
for, hear how thou wert loved when unsightly, deformed, before there was
ought in thee which was meet to be loved. Thou wast first loved, that
thou mightest be made meet to be loved. For Christ, as the Apostle says,
“died for the ungodly.”  <span id="fr_4216"></span>[4217](#fn_4216)
What! will you say that the ungodly deserved to be loved? I ask, what
did the ungodly deserve? To be damned. Here you will answer, Yet,
“Christ died for the ungodly.” Lo, what was done for thee when ungodly;
what is reserved for thee now godly? “Christ died for the ungodly.” Thou
didst desire to possess all things; desire it not through covetousness,
seek it through piety, seek it through humility. For if thou seek thus,
thou shalt possess. For thou shalt have Him by whom all things were
made, and with Him shalt possess all things.

<span id="vii.xciv-p26"></span>6. I do not say this as though the result
of reasoning. Hear the Apostle himself saying, “He that spared not His
Own Son, but delivered Him up for us all; how hath He also not with Him
given us all things?” <span id="fr_4217"></span>[4218](#fn_4217) Lo,
covetous one, thou hast all things. All things that thou lovest,
despise, that thou be not kept back from Christ, and hold to Him in whom
thou mayest possess all things. The Physician Himself then needing no
such medicine, yet that He might encourage the sick, drank what He had
no need of; addressing him as it were refusing it, and raising him up in
his fear, He drank first. “The Cup,” saith He, “which I shall drink
of;” <span id="fr_4218"></span>[4219](#fn_4218) “I who have nothing in
Me to be cured by that Cup, am yet to drink it, that thou who needest to
drink it, may not disdain to drink.” Now consider, Brethren, ought the
human race to be any longer sick after having received such a medicine?
God hath been now Humbled, and is man still proud? Let him hear, let him
learn. “All things,” saith He, have been delivered unto Me of My
Father.” <span id="fr_4219"></span>[4220](#fn_4219) If thou desirest all
things, thou shalt have them with Me; if thou desirest the Father, by Me
and in Me thou shalt have Him. “No man knoweth the Father but the Son.”
Do not despair; come to the Son. Hear what follows, “And he to whom the
Son will reveal Him.” Thou saidst, “I am not able. Thou callest me
through a strait way; I am not able to enter in by a strait way.”
“Come,” saith He, “unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden.”
Your burden is your swelling. “Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of
Me.” <span id="fr_4220"></span>[4221](#fn_4220)

<span id="vii.xciv-p31"></span>7. The Master of the Angels crieth out,
the Word of God, by whom all reasonable souls are without failing fed,
the Food That refresheth, and abideth Entire, crieth out and saith,
“Learn of Me.” Let the people hear Him, saying, “Learn of Me.” Let them
make answer, “What do we learn of Thee?” For we must be going to hear I
know not what from the Great Artificer, when He saith, “Learn of Me.”
Who is it that saith, “Learn of Me”? He who formed the earth, who
divided the sea and the dry land, who created the fowls, who created the
animals of the earth, who created all things that swim, who set the
stars in the heaven, who distinguished the day and the night, who
established the firmament, who separated the light from the darkness, He
it is who saith, “Learn of Me.” Is He haply about to tell us this, that
we should do these things with Him? Who can do this? God Only doeth
them. “Fear not,” He saith, “I am not laying any burden on thee. ‘Learn
of Me,’ this which for thy sake I was made. ‘Learn of Me,’” saith He,
“not to form the creature which by Me was made. Neither do I tell you
indeed, to learn those things which I have granted to some, to whom I
would, not to all, to raise the dead, to give sight to the blind, to
open the ears of the deaf; nor to wish as for some great thing to learn
these things of Me.” The disciples returned with joy and exultation,
saying, “Lo, even the devils are subject unto us through Thy
Name.” <span id="fr_4221"></span>[4222](#fn_4221) And the Lord said to
them, “In this rejoice not, that the devils are subject unto you;
rejoice rather, because your names are written in heaven.” <span
id="fr_4222"></span>[4223](#fn_4222) To whom He would, He gave the power
to cast out devils, to whom He would, He gave the power to raise the
dead. Such miracles were done even before the Incarnation of the Lord;
the dead were raised, lepers were cleansed; <span
id="fr_4223"></span>[4224](#fn_4223) we read of these things. And who
did them then, but He who in after time was the Man-Christ after David,
<span id="page_535">p. 535</span> <span
id="vii.xciv-Page_535"></span>but God-Christ before Abraham? He gave the
power for all these things, He did them Himself by men; yet gave He not
that power to all. Ought they to whom He gave it not to despair, and say
that they have no part in Him because they have not been thought <span
id="fr_4224"></span>[4225](#fn_4224) worthy to receive these gifts? In
the body are divers members: this member can do one thing, that another.
God hath compacted the body together, He hath not given to the ear to
see, nor to the eye to hear, nor to the forehead to smell, nor to the
hand to taste; He hath not given them these functions; but to all the
members hath He given soundness, hath given union, hath given unity,
hath by His Spirit quickened and united all alike. And so here He hath
not given to some to raise the dead, to others He hath not given the
power of disputation; yet to all what hath He given? “Learn of Me, that
I am meek and lowly in heart.” Forasmuch as we have heard Him say, “I am
meek and lowly in heart;” here, my Brethren, is our whole remedy, “Learn
of Me, that I am meek and lowly in heart.” What doth it profit a man if
he do miracles, and is proud, is not meek and lowly in heart? Will he
not be reckoned in the number of those who shall come at the last day,
and say, “Have we not prophesied in Thy Name, and in Thy Name have done
many mighty works?” <span id="fr_4225"></span>[4226](#fn_4225) But what
shall they hear? “I know you not, Depart from Me, all ye that work
iniquity.” <span id="fr_4226"></span>[4227](#fn_4226)

<span id="vii.xciv-p38"></span>8. What then doth it profit us to learn?
“That I am meek,” saith He, “and lowly in heart.” He engrafteth charity,
and that most genuine charity, without confusion, without inflation,
without elation, without deceit; this doth He engraft, who saith, “Learn
of Me, that I am meek and lowly in heart.” How can one proud and puffed
up have any genuine <span id="fr_4227"></span>[4228](#fn_4227) charity?
He must needs be envious. And mayhap one who is envious, loves, and we
are mistaken? God forbid that any one should be so mistaken, as to say
that an envious man hath charity. And so what saith the Apostle?
“Charity envieth not.” Why doth it not envy? “It is not puffed
up;” <span id="fr_4228"></span>[4229](#fn_4228) he immediately annexed
the cause for which he took away envying from charity. Because it is not
puffed up, it envieth not. It is true, he said first, “Charity envieth
not;” but as though thou didst ask, “Why doth it not envy?” he added,
“It is not puffed up. If then it envieth because it is puffed up; if it
be not puffed up, it envieth not. If charity is not puffed up, and
therefore envieth not; then doth He engraft charity who saith, “Learn of
Me, that I am meek and lowly in heart.” <span
id="fr_4229"></span>[4230](#fn_4229)

<span id="vii.xciv-p42"></span>9. Let any man have then what he will,
let him boast himself of what he will. “If I speak with the tongues of
men and of Angels, but, have not charity, I am become as sounding brass,
or a tinkling cymbal.” What is more sublime than the gift of divers
tongues? It is “brass,” it is “a tinkling cymbal,” if thou take charity
away. Hear other gifts; “If I should know all mysteries.” <span
id="fr_4230"></span>[4231](#fn_4230) What more excellent? what more
magnificent? Hear yet another; “if I should have all prophecy, and all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, but have not charity, I am
nothing.” <span id="fr_4231"></span>[4232](#fn_4231) He comes to still
greater things, Brethren. What else has he said? “If I should distribute
all my goods to the poor.” What more perfect thing can be done? When
indeed the Lord commanded the rich man this for perfection’s sake,
saying, “If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell all that thou hast, and give
to the poor.” <span id="fr_4232"></span>[4233](#fn_4232) Was he then at
once perfect, because he sold all his goods and gave them to the poor?
No; and therefore He added, “And come, follow Me.” “Sell all,” saith He,
“give to the poor, and come, follow Me.” “Why should I follow Thee? Now
that I have sold all, and distributed to the poor, am I not perfect?
What need is there that I should follow Thee?” “Follow Me,” that thou
mayest learn that “I am meek and lowly in heart.” For what? can any man
sell all he hath, and give to the poor, who is not yet meek, not yet
lowly in heart? Assuredly he can. “For if I should distribute all my
goods to the poor.” And hear still further. For some, who had left all
they had and had already followed the Lord, but not yet followed Him
perfectly (for to follow Him perfectly is to imitate Him), could not
bear the trial of suffering. Peter, Brethren, was already one of those
who had left all and followed the Lord. For as that rich man went away
in sadness, when the disciples bring troubled, asked how then any one
could be perfect, and the Lord consoled them, they said to the Lord,
“Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed Thee; what shall we have
therefore?” <span id="fr_4233"></span>[4234](#fn_4233) And the Lord told
them what He would give them here, what He would reserve for them
hereafter. Now Peter was already of the number of those who had so done.
But when it came to the crisis <span
id="fr_4234"></span>[4235](#fn_4234) of suffering, at the voice of a
maid-servant he denied Him thrice with whom he had promised that he was
ready to die.

<span id="vii.xciv-p48"></span>10. Take good heed then, Beloved: “Go,”
saith He, “sell all that thou hast, give to the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven, and come, follow Me.” Peter is perfect, now
that the Lord sitteth in heaven at the right Hand of the Father, then
did he attain perfection and maturity. For when he followed the Lord to
His Passion, he was not perfect; but <span id="page_536">p. 536</span>
<span id="vii.xciv-Page_536"></span>when there began to be no one on
earth for him to follow, then was he perfected. But thou truly hast
always One before thee to follow; the Lord hath set up an example on
earth, when He left the Gospel with thee, in the Gospel He is with thee.
For He did not speak falsely when He said, “Lo, I am with you alway,
even unto the end of the world.” <span
id="fr_4235"></span>[4236](#fn_4235) Therefore follow the Lord. What is,
“Follow the Lord”? Imitate the Lord. What is, “Imitate the Lord”? “Learn
of Me, that I am meek and lowly in heart.” Because if I should
distribute all my goods to the poor, and give up my body to be burned,
but not have charity, it profiteth me nothing. To this charity then I
exhort your Charity; now I should not exhort to charity, but with some
charity. I exhort then that what is commenced may be filled up; and pray
that what is begun may be perfected. And I beg that ye would offer this
prayer for me, that what I advise may be perfected in me also. For we
are all now imperfect, and there shall we be perfected, where all things
are perfect. The Apostle Paul says, “Brethren, I do not reckon myself to
have apprehended.” <span id="fr_4236"></span>[4237](#fn_4236) He says,
“Not that I have already attained, either am already perfect.” <span
id="fr_4237"></span>[4238](#fn_4237) And shall any man dare to vaunt
himself on perfection? Yea rather let us acknowledge our imperfection,
that we may attain <span id="fr_4238"></span>[4239](#fn_4238)
perfection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4200"></span>[532:4201](1060311.htm#fr_4200) <span
id="vii.xciv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p5"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="vii.xciv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4201"></span>[532:4202](1060311.htm#fr_4201) <span
id="vii.xciv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p6"></span> [Ps.
140.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#005)<span id="vii.xciv-p6.1"></span>,
Sept. (cxl. 5, English version).

<span id="fn_4202"></span>[532:4203](1060311.htm#fr_4202) <span
id="vii.xciv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p7"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
9.13](../../../bib/apo/sir009.htm#013)<span id="vii.xciv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4203"></span>[533:4204](1060311.htm#fr_4203) <span
id="vii.xciv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p10"></span> [Jas. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004)<span id="vii.xciv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4204"></span>[533:4205](1060311.htm#fr_4204) <span
id="vii.xciv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p11"></span> [Matt. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)<span id="vii.xciv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4205"></span>[533:4206](1060311.htm#fr_4205) <span
id="vii.xciv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p12"></span> *Quæ ibat effusa redit confusa*.

<span id="fn_4206"></span>[533:4207](1060311.htm#fr_4206) <span
id="vii.xciv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p14"></span> [Ps.
83.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#016)<span
id="vii.xciv-p14.1"></span>, Sept. (lxxxiii. 16, English version).

<span id="fn_4207"></span>[533:4208](1060311.htm#fr_4207) <span
id="vii.xciv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p15"></span> [Ps.
78.39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)<span
id="vii.xciv-p15.1"></span>, Sept. (lxxviii. English version).

<span id="fn_4208"></span>[533:4209](1060311.htm#fr_4208) <span
id="vii.xciv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p16"></span> [Zech. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003)<span id="vii.xciv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4209"></span>[533:4210](1060311.htm#fr_4209) <span
id="vii.xciv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p17"></span> Tract. 2 in *Evang. Joan*. n. 8.

<span id="fn_4210"></span>[533:4211](1060311.htm#fr_4210) <span
id="vii.xciv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p19"></span> [Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)<span id="vii.xciv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4211"></span>[533:4212](1060311.htm#fr_4211) <span
id="vii.xciv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p20"></span> *Vexat*.

<span id="fn_4212"></span>[533:4213](1060311.htm#fr_4212) <span
id="vii.xciv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p21"></span> *Certus*.

<span id="fn_4213"></span>[534:4214](1060311.htm#fr_4213) <span
id="vii.xciv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p22"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="vii.xciv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4214"></span>[534:4215](1060311.htm#fr_4214) <span
id="vii.xciv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p23"></span> [John x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007)<span id="vii.xciv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4215"></span>[534:4216](1060311.htm#fr_4215) <span
id="vii.xciv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p24"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="vii.xciv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4216"></span>[534:4217](1060311.htm#fr_4216) <span
id="vii.xciv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p25"></span> [Rom. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006)<span id="vii.xciv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4217"></span>[534:4218](1060311.htm#fr_4217) <span
id="vii.xciv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p27"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="vii.xciv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4218"></span>[534:4219](1060311.htm#fr_4218) <span
id="vii.xciv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p28"></span> [Matt. xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022)<span id="vii.xciv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4219"></span>[534:4220](1060311.htm#fr_4219) <span
id="vii.xciv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p29"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="vii.xciv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4220"></span>[534:4221](1060311.htm#fr_4220) <span
id="vii.xciv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p30"></span> [Matt.
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="vii.xciv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4221"></span>[534:4222](1060311.htm#fr_4221) <span
id="vii.xciv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p32"></span> [Luke x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)<span id="vii.xciv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4222"></span>[534:4223](1060311.htm#fr_4222) <span
id="vii.xciv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p33"></span> [Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span id="vii.xciv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4223"></span>[534:4224](1060311.htm#fr_4223) <span
id="vii.xciv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p34"></span> [2 Kings
4:0](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#000), [2 Kings
5:0](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#000)<span id="vii.xciv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4224"></span>[535:4225](1060311.htm#fr_4224) <span
id="vii.xciv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p35"></span> *Meruerunt*.

<span id="fn_4225"></span>[535:4226](1060311.htm#fr_4225) <span
id="vii.xciv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p36"></span> [Matt. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)<span id="vii.xciv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4226"></span>[535:4227](1060311.htm#fr_4226) <span
id="vii.xciv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p37"></span> [Matt. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span id="vii.xciv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4227"></span>[535:4228](1060311.htm#fr_4227) <span
id="vii.xciv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p39"></span> *Sincerissimam*.

<span id="fn_4228"></span>[535:4229](1060311.htm#fr_4228) <span
id="vii.xciv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p40"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span id="vii.xciv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4229"></span>[535:4230](1060311.htm#fr_4229) <span
id="vii.xciv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p41"></span> [Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="vii.xciv-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4230"></span>[535:4231](1060311.htm#fr_4230) <span
id="vii.xciv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p43"></span> *Sacramenta*.

<span id="fn_4231"></span>[535:4232](1060311.htm#fr_4231) <span
id="vii.xciv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p44"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="vii.xciv-p44.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4232"></span>[535:4233](1060311.htm#fr_4232) <span
id="vii.xciv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p45"></span> [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="vii.xciv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4233"></span>[535:4234](1060311.htm#fr_4233) <span
id="vii.xciv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p46"></span> [Matt. xix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027)<span id="vii.xciv-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4234"></span>[535:4235](1060311.htm#fr_4234) <span
id="vii.xciv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p47"></span> *Articulum*.

<span id="fn_4235"></span>[536:4236](1060311.htm#fr_4235) <span
id="vii.xciv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p49"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="vii.xciv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4236"></span>[536:4237](1060311.htm#fr_4236) <span
id="vii.xciv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p50"></span> [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="vii.xciv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4237"></span>[536:4238](1060311.htm#fr_4237) <span
id="vii.xciv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p51"></span> [Phil. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)<span id="vii.xciv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4238"></span>[536:4239](1060311.htm#fr_4238) <span
id="vii.xciv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xciv-p52"></span> *Mereamur*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XCIII](1060312)
