[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060084)  [Next](1060086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—Of the Fact that the False Gods
Do Not Forbid Others to Be Worshipped Along with Themselves. That the
God of Israel is the True God, is Proved by His Works, Both in Prophecy
and in Fulfilment.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p2"></span>38. But further, in the case of the gods
of the Gentiles (in their willingness to worship whom they exhibit their
unwillingness to worship that God who cannot be worshipped together with
them), let them tell us the reason why no one is found in the number of
their deities who thinks of interdicting the worship of another; while
they institute them in different offices and functions, and hold them to
preside each one over objects which pertain properly to his own special
province. For if Jupiter does not prohibit the worship of Saturn,
because he is not to be taken merely for a man, who drove another man,
namely his father, out of his kingdom, but either for the body of the
heavens, or for the spirit that fills both heaven and earth, and because
thus he cannot prevent that supernal mind from being worshipped, from
which he is said to have emanated: if, on the same principle also,
Saturn cannot interdict the worship of Jupiter, because he is not \[to
be supposed to be merely\] one who was conquered by that other in
rebellion,—as was the case with a person of the same name, by the hand
of some one or other called Jupiter, from whose arms he was fleeing when
he came into Italy,—and because the primal mind favours the mind that
springs from it: yet Vulcan at least might \[be expected to\] put under
the ban the worship of Mars, the paramour of his wife, and Hercules
\[might be thought likely to interdict\] the worship of Juno, his
persecutor. What kind of foul consent must subsist among them, if even
Diana, the chaste virgin, fails to interdict the worship, I do not say
merely of Venus, but even of Priapus? For if the same individual decides
to be at once a hunter and a farmer, he must be the servant of both
these deities; and yet he will be ashamed to do even so much as erect
temples for them side by side. But they may aver, that by interpretation
Diana means a certain virtue, be it what they please; and they may tell
us that Priapus really denotes the deity of fecundity, <span
id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606) —to such an effect, at any rate, that
Juno may well be ashamed to have such a coadjutor in the task of making
females fruitful. They may say what they please; they may put any
explanation upon these things which in their wisdom they think fit:
only, in spite of all that, the God of Israel will confound all their
argumentations. For in prohibiting all those <span id="page_93">p.
93</span> <span id="vi.iv.xxv-Page_93"></span>deities from being
worshipped, while His own worship is hindered by none of them, and in at
once commanding, foretelling, and effecting destruction for their images
and sacred rites, He has shown with sufficient clearness that they are
false and lying deities, and that He Himself is the one true and
truthful God.

<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p4"></span>39. Moreover, to whom should it not seem
strange that those worshippers, now become few in number, of deities
both numerous and false, should refuse to do homage to Him of whom, when
the question is put to them as to what deity He is; they dare not at
least assert, whatever answer they may think to give, that He is no God
at all? For if they deny His deity, they are very easily refuted by His
works, both in prophecy and in fulfilment. I do not speak of those works
which they deem themselves at liberty not to credit, such as His work in
the beginning, when He made heaven and earth, and all that is in
them. <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) Neither do I specify here
those events which carry us back into the remotest antiquity, such as
the translation of Enoch, <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) the
destruction of the impious by the flood, and the saving of righteous
Noah and his house from the deluge, by means of the \[ark of\]
wood. <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) I begin the statement of
His doings among men with Abraham. To this man, indeed, was given by an
angelic oracle an intelligible promise, which we now see in its
realization. For to him it was said, “In thy seed shall all nations be
blessed.” <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) Of his seed, then,
sprang the people of Israel, whence came the Virgin Mary, who was the
mother of Christ; and that in Him all the nations are blessed, let them
now be bold enough to deny if they can. This same promise was made also
to Isaac the son of Abraham. <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611) It
was given again to Jacob the grandson of Abraham. This Jacob was also
called Israel, from whom that whole people derived both its descent and
its name so that indeed the God of this people was called the God of
Israel: not that He is not also the God of the Gentiles, whether they
are ignorant of Him or now know Him; but that in this people He willed
that the power of His promises should be made more conspicuously
apparent. For that people, which at first was multiplied in Egypt, and
after a time was delivered from a state of slavery there by the hand of
Moses, with many signs and portents, saw most of the Gentile nations
subdued under it, and obtained possession also of the land of promise,
in which it reigned in the person of kings of its own, who sprang from
the tribe of Judah. This Judah, also, was one of the twelve sons of
Israel, the grandson of Abraham. And from him were descended the people
called the Jews, who, with the help of God Himself, did great
achievements, and who also, when He chastised them, endured many
sufferings on account of their sins, until the coming of that Seed to
whom the promise was given, in whom all the nations were to be blessed,
and \[for whose sake\] they were willingly to break in pieces the idols
of their fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_606"></span>[92:607](1060085.htm#fr_606) <span
id="vi.iv.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p3"></span> Reading *fecunditatis*. *Fœditatis*,
foulness, also occurs.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[93:608](1060085.htm#fr_607) <span
id="vi.iv.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p5"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[93:609](1060085.htm#fr_608) <span
id="vi.iv.xxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p6"></span> [Gen. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024)<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[93:610](1060085.htm#fr_609) <span
id="vi.iv.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p7"></span> [Gen.
vii](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#000)<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[93:611](1060085.htm#fr_610) <span
id="vi.iv.xxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p8"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[93:612](1060085.htm#fr_611) <span
id="vi.iv.xxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p9"></span> [Gen. xxvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004)<span id="vi.iv.xxv-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](1060086)
