[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060024)  [Next](1060026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.</span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p2"></span>56. Hence the Lord goes on to say: “Ye
have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth: but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil; <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) but whosoever shall smite thee on thy
right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at
the law, and take away thy coat \[tunic, undergarment\], let him have
thy cloak <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md) also. And whosoever
shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Give to him that
asketh thee, <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md) and from him that
would borrow of thee turn not thou away.” It is the lesser righteousness
of the Pharisees not to go beyond measure in revenge, that no one should
give back more than he has received: and this is a great step. For it is
not easy to find any one who, when he has received a blow, wishes merely
to return the blow; and who, on hearing one word from a man who reviles
him, is content to return only one, and that just an equivalent; but he
avenges it more immoderately, either under the disturbing influence of
anger, or because he thinks it just, that he who first inflicted injury
should suffer more severe injury than he suffered who had not inflicted
injury. Such a spirit was in great measure restrained by the law, where
it was written, “An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth;” by which
expressions a certain measure is intended, so that the vengeance should
not exceed the injury. And this is the beginning of peace: but perfect
peace is to have no wish at all for such vengeance.

<span id="v.ii.xix-p6"></span>57. Hence, between that first course which
goes beyond the law, that a greater evil should be inflicted in return
for a lesser, and this to which the Lord has given expression for the
purpose of perfecting the disciples, that no evil at all should be
inflicted in return for evil, a middle course holds a certain place,
viz. that as much be paid back as has been received; by means of which
enactment the transition is made from the highest discord to the highest
concord, according to the distribution of times. See, therefore, at how
great a distance any one who is the first to do harm to another, with
the desire of injuring and hurting him, stands from him who, even when
injured, does not pay back the injury. That man, however, who is not the
first to do harm to any one, but who yet, when injured, inflicts a
greater injury in return, either <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span
id="v.ii.xix-Page_25"></span>in will or in deed, has so far withdrawn
himself from the highest injustice, and made so far an advance to the
highest righteousness; but still he does not yet hold by what the law
given by Moses commanded. And therefore he who pays back just as much as
he has received already forgives something: for the party who injures
does not deserve merely as much punishment as the man who was injured by
him has innocently suffered. And accordingly this incomplete, by no
means severe, but \[rather\] merciful justice, is carried to perfection
by Him who came to fulfil the law, not to destroy it. Hence there are
still two intervening steps which He has left to be understood, while He
has chosen rather to speak of the very highest development of mercy. For
there is still what one may do who does not come fully up to that
magnitude of the precept which belongs to the kingdom of heaven; acting
in such a way that he does not pay back as much, but less; as, for
instance, one blow instead of two, or that he cuts off an ear for an eye
that has been plucked out. He who, rising above this, pays back nothing
at all, approaches the Lord’s precept, but yet he does not reach it. For
still it seems to the Lord not enough, if, for the evil which you may
have received, you should inflict no evil in return, unless you be
prepared to receive even more. And therefore He does not say, “But I say
unto you,” that you are not to return evil for evil; although even this
would be a great precept: but He says, “that ye resist not evil;” <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md) so that not only are you not to pay
back what may have been inflicted on you, but you are not even to resist
other inflictions. For this is what He also goes on to explain: “But
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also:” for He does not say, If any man smite thee, do not wish to smite
him; but, Offer thyself further to him if he should go on to smite thee.
As regards compassion, they feel it most who minister to those whom they
greatly love as if they were their children, or some very dear friends
in sickness, or little children, or insane persons, at whose hands they
often endure many things; and if their welfare demand it, they even show
themselves ready to endure more, until the weakness either of age or of
disease pass away. And so, as regards those whom the Lord, the Physician
of souls, was instructing to take care of their neighbours, what else
could He teach them, than that they endure quietly the infirmities of
those whose welfare they wish to consult? For all wickedness arises from
infirmity <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) of mind: because
nothing is more harmless than the man who is perfect in virtue.

<span id="v.ii.xix-p9"></span>58. But it may be asked what the right
cheek means. For this is the reading we find in the Greek copies, which
are most worthy of confidence; though many Latin ones have only the word
“cheek,” without the addition of “right.” Now the face is that by which
any one is recognised; and we read in the apostle’s writings, “For ye
suffer, <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) if a man bring you into
bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt
himself, if a man smite you on the face:” then immediately he adds, “I
speak as concerning reproach;” <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md)
so that he explains what striking on the face is, viz. to be contemned
and despised. Nor is this indeed said by the apostle for this reason,
that they should not bear with those parties; but that they should bear
with himself rather, who so loved them, that he was willing that he
himself should be spent for them. <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173.md) But since the face cannot be called
right and left, and yet there may be a worth according to the estimate
of God and according to the estimate of this world, it is so distributed
as it were into the right and left cheek that whatever disciple of
Christ might have to bear reproach for being a Christian, he should be
much more ready to bear reproach in himself, if he possesses any of the
honours of this world. Thus this same apostle, if he had kept silence
respecting the dignity which he had in the world, when men were
persecuting in him the Christian name, would not have presented the
other cheek to those that were smiting the right one. For when he said,
I am a Roman citizen, <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174.md) he was not
unprepared to submit to be despised, in that which he reckoned as least,
by those who had despised in him so precious and life-giving a name. For
did he at all the less on that account afterwards submit to the chains,
which it was not lawful to put on Roman citizens, or did he wish to
accuse any one of this injury? And if any spared him on account of the
name of Roman citizenship, yet he did not on that account refrain from
offering an object they might strike at, since he wished by his patience
to cure of so great perversity those whom he saw honouring in him what
belonged to the left members rather than the right. For that point only
is to be attended to, in what spirit he did everything, how benevolently
and mildly he acted toward those from whom he was suffering such things.
For when he was smitten with the hand by order of the high priest, what
he seemed to say contumeliously when he affirms, “God shall smite thee,
thou whited wall,” <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="v.ii.xix-Page_26"></span>sounds like an insult to those who do not
understand it; but to those who do, it is a prophecy. For a whited wall
is hypocrisy, *i.e.* pretence holding forth the sacerdotal dignity
before itself, and under this name, as under a white covering,
concealing an inner and as it were sordid baseness. For what belonged to
humility he wonderfully preserved, when, on its being said to him,
“Revilest thou the high priest?” <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175.md)
he replied, “I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest; for it
is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.” <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176.md) And here he showed with what calmness
he had spoken that which he seemed to have spoken in anger, because he
answered so quickly and so mildly, which cannot be done by those who are
indignant and thrown into confusion. And in that very statement he spoke
the truth to those who understood him, “I wist not that he was the high
priest:” <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md) as if he said, I know
another High Priest, for whose name I bear such things, whom it is not
lawful to revile, and whom ye revile, since in me it is nothing else but
His name that ye hate. Thus, therefore, it is necessary for one not to
boast of such things in a hypocritical way, but to be prepared in the
heart itself for all things, so that he can sing that prophetic word,
“My heart is prepared, <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md) O God, my
heart is prepared.” For many have learned how to offer the other cheek,
but do not know how to love him by whom they are struck. But in truth,
the Lord Himself, who certainly was the first to fulfil the precepts
which He taught, did not offer the other cheek to the servant of the
high priest when smiting Him thereon; but, so far from that, said, “If I
have spoken evil, hear witness of the evil; <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) but if well, why smitest thou
me?” <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md) Yet was He not on that
account unprepared in heart, for the salvation of all, not merely to be
smitten on the other cheek, but even to have His whole body crucified.

<span id="v.ii.xix-p20"></span>59. Hence also what follows, “And if any
man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) also,” is rightly
understood as a precept having reference to the preparation of heart,
not to a vain show of outward deed. But what is said with respect to the
coat and cloak is to be carried out not merely in such things, but in
the case of everything which on any ground of right we speak of as being
ours for time. For if this command is given with respect to what is
necessary, how much more does it become us to contemn what is
superfluous! But still, those things which I have called ours are to be
included in that category under which the Lord Himself gives the
precept, when He says, “If any man will sue thee at the law, and take
away thy coat.” Let all these things therefore be understood for which
we may be sued at the law, so that the right to them may pass from us to
him who sues, or for whom he sues; such, for instance, as clothing, a
house, an estate, a beast of burden, and in general all kinds of
property. But whether it is to be understood of slaves also is a great
question. For a Christian ought not to possess a slave in the same way
as a horse or money: although it may happen that a horse is valued at a
greater price than a slave, and some article of gold or silver at much
more. But with respect to that slave, if he is being educated and ruled
by time as his master, in a way more upright, and more honourable, and
more conducing to the fear of God, than can be done by him who desires
to take him away, I do not know whether any one would dare to say that
he ought to be despised like a garment. For a man ought to love a
fellow-man as himself, inasmuch as he is commanded by the Lord of all
(as is shown by what follows) even to love his enemies.

<span id="v.ii.xix-p22"></span>60. It is carefully to be observed that
every tunic <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md) is a garment, <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md) but that every garment is not a tunic.
Hence the word garment means more than the word tunic. And therefore I
think it is so expressed, “And if any one will sue thee at the law, and
take away thy tunic, let him have thy garment also,” as if He had said,
Whoever wishes to take away thy tunic, give over to him whatever other
clothing thou hast. And so some have interpreted the word *pallium*,
which in the Greek as used here is <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xix-p24.1"></span>ἱμάτιον</span>.

<span id="v.ii.xix-p25"></span>61. “And whosoever,” says He, “shall
compel <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) thee to go a mile, go
with him other two.” And this, certainly, not so much in the sense that
thou shouldest do it on foot, as that thou shouldest be prepared in mind
to do it. For in the Christian history itself, which is authoritative,
you will find no such thing done by the saints, or by the Lord Himself
when in His human nature, which He condescended to assume, He was
showing us an example of how to live; while at the same time, in almost
all places, you will find them prepared to bear with equanimity whatever
may have been wickedly forced upon them. But are we to suppose it is
said for the sake of the mere expression, “Go with him other two;” or
did He rather wish that three should be completed,—the number which has
the meaning of perfection; so that <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="v.ii.xix-Page_27"></span>every one should remember when he does
this, that he is fulfilling perfect righteousness by compassionately
bearing the infirmities of those whom he wishes to be made whole? It may
seem for this reason also that He has recommended these precepts by
three examples: of which the first is, if any one shall smite thee on
the cheek; the second, if any one shall wish to take away thy coat; the
third, if any one shall compel thee to go a mile: in which third example
twice as much is added to the original unit, so that in this way the
triplet is completed. And if this number in the passage before us does
not, as has been said, mean perfection, let this be understood, that in
laying down His precepts, as it were beginning with what is more
tolerable, He has gradually gone on, until He has reached as far as the
enduring of twice as much more. For, in the first place, He wished the
other cheek to be presented when the right had been smitten, so that you
may be prepared to bear less than you have borne. For whatever the right
means, it is at least something more dear than that which is meant by
the left; and if one who has borne with something in what is more dear,
bears with it in what is less dear, it is something less. Then,
secondly, in the case of one who wishes to take away a coat, He enjoins
that the garment also should be given up to him: which is either just as
much, or not much more; not, however, twice as much. In the third place,
with respect to the mile, to which He says that two miles are to be
added, He enjoins that you should bear with even twice as much more:
thus signifying that whether it be somewhat less than the original
demand, or just as much, or more, that any wicked man shall wish to take
from thee, it is to be borne with tranquil mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[24:167](1060025.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p3"></span> *Adversus malum*; Vulgate, *malo*.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[24:168](1060025.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p4"></span> *Vestimentum*; Vulgate, *pallium*.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[24:169](1060025.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p5"></span> *Omni petenti te, da*; Vulgate, *qui
petit a te*, etc.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[25:170](1060025.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p7"></span> With Augustin, Calvin, Tholuck, Ewald,
Lange construe this as neuter, *evil*; Chrysostom, Theophylact, *the
devil*; De Wette, Meyer, Alford, Plumptre, as also the Revised Version,
*the man who does evil*. Renan says the practice of this doctrine put
down slavery: “It was not Spartacus who suppressed slavery, but rather
was it Blandina” (“*<span id="v.ii.xix-p7.1"></span>Ce n’est pas
Spartacus qui a supprimé l’esclavage, c’est bien plûtôt Blandine*”).

<span id="fn_170"></span>[25:171](1060025.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p8"></span> *Imbecillitate*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[25:172](1060025.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p10"></span> *Toleratis*; Vulgate, *sustinetis*.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[25:173](1060025.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p11"></span> [2 Cor.
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#021.md)<span id="v.ii.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[25:174](1060025.htm#fr_173.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p12"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#015.md)<span id="v.ii.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[25:175](1060025.htm#fr_174.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p13"></span> [Acts xxii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#025.md)<span id="v.ii.xix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[26:176](1060025.htm#fr_175.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p14"></span> *Principi sacerdotum*; Vulgate, *summum
sacerdotem*.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[26:177](1060025.htm#fr_176.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p15"></span> [Acts xxiii.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#003.md)<span id="v.ii.xix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[26:178](1060025.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p16"></span> Interpreted by modern commentators
usually of temporary forgetfulness, or, what is much better, failure to
recognise through infirmity of vision.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[26:179](1060025.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p17"></span> English version, “fixed”— [Ps. lvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007.md)<span id="v.ii.xix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[26:180](1060025.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p18"></span> *Exprobra de malo*; Vulgate,
*testimonium perhibe de malo*.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[26:181](1060025.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p19"></span> [John xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023.md)<span id="v.ii.xix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[26:182](1060025.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p21"></span> The coat or tunic was the
*under-garment*. The cloak, or pallium, was the *outer-garment*, and the
more precious.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[26:183](1060025.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p23"></span> English version, “coat.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[26:184](1060025.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p24"></span> English version, “cloak.”

<span id="fn_184"></span>[26:185](1060025.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="v.ii.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xix-p26"></span> The Greek word <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xix-p26.1"></span> ἀγγαρεύω</span> is derived from the Persian,
to press one into service, as a courier to bear despatches. (See Thayer,
*Lexicon*.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](1060026.md)
