[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060002)  [Next](1060004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span> <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span
id="iv-Page_vii"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="iv-p1.1"></span>Introductory Essay.</span>

<span id="iv-p2"></span><span class="c25"><span id="iv-p2.1"></span>St.
Augustin as an Exegete.</span>

<span id="iv-p3"></span>*<span class="c10"><span id="iv-p3.1"></span>By
the Rev. David Schley Schaff</span>*

<span id="iv-p4"></span>————————————

<span id="iv-p5"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv-p5.1"></span>The</span> exegetical writings of Augustin are
commentaries on Genesis (first three chapters), the Psalms, the Gospel
and First Epistle of John, the Sermon on the Mount, the Epistles to the
Romans and Galatians, and a *Harmony of the Gospels*. Many of his
commentaries, like those of Chrysostom, are expository homilies preached
to his congregation at Hippo; all are practical rather than grammatical
and critical. He only covered the first five verses of the first chapter
of Romans, and found his comments so elaborate, that, from fear of the
immense proportions a commentary on the whole Epistle would assume, he
drew back from the task. Augustin’s other writings abound in quotations
from Scripture, and pertinent expositions. His controversies with the
Manichæans and Donatists were particularly adapted to render him
thorough in the knowledge of the Bible, and skilled in its use.

<span id="iv-p6"></span>The opinions of Augustin’s ability as an
exegete, and the worth of his labors in the department of connected
Biblical exposition, have greatly differed. Some not only represent him
at his weakest in this capacity, but disparage his exegesis as of
inferior merit. Others have given him, and some at the present time
still give him, a very high rank among the chief commentators of the
early Church. Père Simon, as quoted by Archbishop Trench (*Sermon on the
Mount*, p. 65), says, “One must needs read a vast deal in the exegetical
writings of Augustin to light on any thing which is good.” Reuss
expresses himself thus: “The fact is, that his exegesis was the weak
side of the great man” <span id="iv-p6.1"></span>(*Gesch. d. heil.
Schriften N. T.* p. 263). Farrar, in his *History of Interpretation* (p.
24), declares his comments to be “sometimes painfully beside the mark,”
and in general depreciates the value of Augustin’s expository writings.

<span id="iv-p7"></span>On the other hand, the student is struck with
the profound esteem in which Augustin was held as an interpreter of
Scripture during the Middle Ages. His exposition was looked upon as the
highest authority; and a saying was current, that, if one had Augustin
on his side, it was sufficient (*Si Augustinus adest, sufficit ipse
tibi*). So powerful was his influence, that Rupert of Deutz, in the
preface to his Commentary on St. John, deemed it necessary to state, in
part in vindication of his own effort, that, though the eagle wings of
the Bishop of Hippo overshadowed the Gospel, he did not exhaust the
right of all Christians to handle the Gospel. The Reformers quote
Augustin more frequently than any Father, and were greatly indebted to
his writings, especially for their views on sin and grace. Among modern
opinions according to him a high rank in this department may be
mentioned two. The Rev. H. Browne, in the preface to the translation of
Augustin’s *Homilies on St. John*, in the Oxford Library of the Fathers
(I. vi.), is somewhat extravagant in his praise, when he says, that, “as
an interpreter of the Word of God, St. Augustin is acknowledged to stand
at an elevation which few have reached, none surpassed.” Archbishop
Trench, in the essay on Augustin as an interpreter of Scripture,
prefixed to his edition of the <span id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span
id="iv-Page_viii"></span>*Sermon on the Mount*, accords equal praise,
and speaks specifically of the “tact and skill with which he unfolded to
others the riches which the Word contains” (p. 133).

<span id="iv-p8"></span>The truth certainly is not with those who
minimize Augustin’s services in the department of exposition. Whether we
compare him with ancient or modern commentators, he will fall behind the
greatest in some particulars; but in profundity of insight into the
meaning of the text, in comprehensive knowledge of the whole Scriptures,
in simplicity of spiritual aim, he stands in the first rank. It is as a
contributor to theological and religious thought that he asserts his
eminence. Exposition is something more than bald textual and
lexicographical comment: it aims also at a spiritual perception of the
truth as it is in Christ, and requires a capacity to extract, for the
spiritual nutriment of the reader, the vital forces of the Scriptures.
In this sense Augustin is eminently worthy of study. Of textual details,
he gives only the barest minimum of any value. His mistakes, arising out
of his slender philological apparatus and his reverence for the LXX.,
are numerous and glaring. He often wanders far away from the plain
meaning of the text, into allegorical and typical fancies, like the
other Fathers, and many of the older Protestant commentators. He was not
prepared for, nor did he aim at, grammatico-historical exegesis in the
modern sense of the word; but he possessed extraordinary acumen and
depth, spiritual insight, an uncommon knowledge of Scripture as a whole,
and a pious intention to bring the truth to the convictions of men, and
to extend the kingdom of Christ.

<span id="iv-p9"></span>As to Augustin’s special equipment for the work
of an exegete and on his exegetical principles, the following may be
added:—

<span id="iv-p10"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv-p10.1"></span>Exegetical Equipment</span>.

<span id="iv-p11"></span>1. Augustin had no knowledge of Hebrew
(*Confessions*, xi. 3; in this ed. vol. i. p. 164). His knowledge of
Greek was only superficial, and far inferior to that of Jerome (vol. i.
p. 9). He depended almost entirely on the imperfect old Latin version
before its revision by Jerome, and was at first even prejudiced against
this revision, the so-called Vulgate. But it should be remembered that
only two of the great expositors of the ancient Church were familiar
with Hebrew,—Origen and Jerome. Augustin knew only a few Hebrew words.
In the treatise on *Christian Doctrine* (ii. 11, 16; this ed. vol. ii.
p. 540) he adduces the words *Amen* and *Hallelujah* as being left
untranslated on account of the sacredness of the original forms, and the
words *Racha* and *Hosanna* as being untranslatable by any single Latin
equivalents. In the *Sermon on the Mount* (i. 9, 23) he refers again to
*Racha*, and defends its Hebrew origin as against those who derived it
from the Greek term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv-p11.1"></span>ῥάκος</span> (a rag).

<span id="iv-p12"></span>Augustin’s linguistic attainments seem to have
included familiarity with Punic *(Sermon on the Mount*, ii. 14, 47). The
Phoenician origin of the North African people, the location of his
birthplace and his episcopal diocese, furnish an explanation of this.

<span id="iv-p13"></span>2. For the Old Testament, Augustin used,
besides the Latin version, occasionally the Septuagint, and had at hand
the versions of Symmachus, Theodotion, and Aquila (*Quæst. in Num*. 52).
He had profound reverence for the LXX., and was inclined to give credit
to the Jewish tradition that each of the translators was confined in a
separate cell, and on comparing their work, which they had accomplished
without communication with each other, found their several versions to
agree, word for word. He held that the original was given through them
in Greek by the special direction of the Holy Spirit, and in such a way
as to be most suitable for the Gentiles *(Christian Doctrine*, ii. 15,
22; this ed. p. 542). He declared that the Latin copies were to be
corrected from the LXX., which was as authoritative as the Hebrew. Such
a claim for the authority of the Greek translation would make a
knowledge of the Hebrew almost unnecessary.

<span id="iv-p14"></span>This excessive reverence for the LXX. has led
Augustin to uphold, in his exegesis of the Old Testament, all its errors
of translation, which a different view, coupled with a knowledge of
Hebrew, would in most cases have prevented him from accepting. Even at
its plain and palpable mistakes he takes no offence. He accepts the
translation, “Yet three days and Nineveh shall <span id="page_ix">p.
ix</span> <span id="iv-Page_ix"></span>be overthrown,” as of equal
authority with the “forty days” of the original, claiming a special
symbolic meaning for both.

<span id="iv-p15"></span>3. For the New Testament, Augustin used some
Latin translation or translations older than the Vulgate. He declares
the Latin translations to be without number (*Christian Doctr*. ii. 11,
16; this ed. vol. ii. p. 540). There was already in his day “an endless
diversity” of readings in the Latin manuscripts. He vindicated for the
Greek original the claim of final authority, to which the Latin copies
were to yield. As there was likewise diversity of text among the Greek
copies, he laid down the rule, that those manuscripts were to be chosen
for comparison by the Latin student which were preserved in the churches
of greater learning and research (*Christian Doctr*. ii. 15, 22; in this
ed. ii. p. 543). Not infrequently does Augustin cite the readings of the
Greek. In some cases he makes references to passages where there is a
conflict of text in the Latin authorities. He differs quite largely from
Jerome’s Vulgate, to which he offered opposition, on the ground that a
new translation might unsettle the faith of some. In these variations of
construction and language he was sometimes nearer the original than
Jerome. Sometimes he does not approximate so closely. As a matter of
interest, and for the convenience of the reader, the differences of
Augustin’s text and the Vulgate will be found, in all important cases,
noted down in this edition of the *Sermon on the Mount*.

<span id="iv-p16"></span>Examples of Augustin’s improvement upon the
Vulgate are the omission of the clause, “and despitefully use you” (*et
calumniantibus vos*, [Matt. v. 44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044.md)<span
id="iv-p16.1"></span>), the use of *quotidianum panem* (“daily bread”)
instead of *supersubstantialem*, and of *inferas* (“bring”) instead of
*inducas* (“lead”), in the fourth and sixth petitions of the Lord’s
Prayer ([Matt. 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="iv-p16.2"></span>.md). In
reference to the last passage, it must be said, however, that he notes a
difference in the Latin <span class="c13"><span
id="iv-p16.3"></span>mss</span>., some using *infero*, some *induco*;
and while he adopts the former verb, he finds the terms equivalent in
meaning (*Serm. on the Mt*. ii. 9, 30).

<span id="iv-p17"></span>4. Augustin’s textual and grammatical comments
are few in number, but they cannot be said to be wanting in all value. A
few instances will suffice for a judgment of their merit:—

<span id="iv-p18"></span>In the *Harmony of the Gospels* (ii. 29, 67),
writing of the daughter of Jairus ([Matt. ix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029)<span id="iv-p18.1"></span>.md), he
mentions that some codices contain the reading “woman” (*mulier*) for
“damsel.” Commenting on [Matt. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md)<span id="iv-p18.2"></span>,
“Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,” he includes the
expression “without a cause” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv-p18.3"></span>εἰκῆ</span>) without even a hint of its
spuriousness (*Serm. on the Mt*. i. 9, 25); but in his *Retractations*
(i. 19. 4) he makes the correction, “The Greek manuscripts do not
contain *sine causa*.” Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort, the Vulgate and
the Revised English Version, in agreement with the oldest <span
class="c13"><span id="iv-p18.4"></span>mss.</span>, omit the clause. He
refers to a conflict of the Greek and Latin text of [Matt. v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039.md)<span id="iv-p18.5"></span>
(“Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek”), and follows the
authority of the Greek in omitting the adjective “right” (*Serm. on the
Mt*. i. 19, 58). At [Matt. vi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv-p18.6"></span> he casts out, on the authority of the Greek, the
adverb *palam* (“openly”), which was found in many Latin translations
(as it is also found in the *Textus Receptus*, but not in the Vulgate,
and the Sinaitic, B, D, and other <span class="c13"><span
id="iv-p18.7"></span>mss.</span>). Commenting on [Matt. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012.md)<span id="iv-p18.8"></span>,
“Wherefore all things whatsoever ye would that men,” etc., he refers to
the addition of “good” before “things” by the Latins, and insists upon
its erasure on the basis of the Greek text (*Serm. on the Mt*. ii. 22,
74).

<span id="iv-p19"></span>On occasion, though very rarely, he quotes the
Greek, as in the *Sermon on the Mount* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv-p19.1"></span>νὴ τνν καύχησιν</span>, i. 17, 51; <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv-p19.2"></span>ἱμάτιον</span>, i. 19, 60), in
confirmation of his opinions of the text.

<span id="iv-p20"></span>At other times he compares Greek and Latin
terms of synonymous or kindred meanings. One of the most important of
these is the passage (*City of God*, x. 1; this ed. vol. ii. p. 181)
where he draws a clear distinction between <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv-p20.1"></span>λατρεία</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv-p20.2"></span>θρησκεία</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv-p20.3"></span> εὐσέβεια</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv-p20.4"></span> θεοσέβεια</span>. Other examples of the kind under
review are given by Trench (p. 20 sqq.).

<span id="iv-p21"></span>It is evident that Augustin’s equipment was
defective from the stand-point of the modern critical exegete. It would
be wrong, however, to say that he shows no concern about textual
questions. But his exegetical power shows itself in other ways than
minute textual investigation,<span id="page_x">p. x</span> <span
id="iv-Page_x"></span>—in comprehensive comparison of Scripture with
Scripture, and penetrating spiritual vision. To these qualities he adds
a purpose to be exhaustive, sparing no pains to develop the full meaning
of the passage under review. More exhaustive discussions can hardly be
found, to take a single example, than that on [Matt. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025.md)<span id="iv-p21.1"></span>, “Agree
with thine adversary quickly” *(Serm. on the Mt*. xi. 31, where,
however, the view least reasonable is taken), or spiritually
satisfactory ones than the discussion of the gradation of sin and its
punishment ([Matt. 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md)<span id="iv-p21.2"></span>; *Serm.
on the Mt*. ix. 22), and “Judge not, that ye be not judged” ([Matt.
7:0](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#000.md), [Matt.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#000)<span id="iv-p21.3"></span>.md), or
pungently suggestive than the handling of the words of our Lord at the
marriage feast at Cana: “Woman, what have I to do with thee?” ([John ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004.md)<span id="iv-p21.4"></span>; Homily
VIII.), or more indicative of great principles underlying the
vindication to the evangelists of a true historical character and of
independence of each other (at least in minor details) than discussions
like that about the differences in the details of the miracle of the
five loaves and two fishes, alone common of the miracles to the fourfold
Gospel (a sort of prelude to works like Blunt’s *Undesigned
Coincidences*), and the relation of this miracle to the miracle of the
seven loaves (*Harmony*, xlvi.-1).

<span id="iv-p22"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv-p22.1"></span>Exegetical Principles.</span>

<span id="iv-p23"></span>Augustin has laid down in a separate treatise a
code of exegetical principles. His *Christian Doctrine* (vol. ii. of
this series) is the earliest manual of Biblical hermeneutics. In spite
of irrelevant and lengthy digressions, it contains many suggestions of
value, which have not been improved upon in modern treatises on the
subject.

<span id="iv-p24"></span>1. He emphasizes Hebrew and Greek scholarship
as an important aid to the expositor, and an essential condition of the
interpretation of the figurative language of Scripture (ii. 11, 16; 16,
23, this ed., pp. 539, 543).

<span id="iv-p25"></span>2. He will have his interpreter acquainted with
sacred geography (ii. 29, 45, p. 549), natural history (ii. 16, 24, p.
543; 29, 45, p. 549), music (ii. 16, 26, p. 544), chronology (ii. 28,
42, p. 549) and the science of numbers (ii. 16, 25, p. 543), natural
science generally (ii. 29, 45 sqq., p. 549 sqq.), history (ii. 28, 43,
p. 549), dialectics (ii. 31, 48, p. 550), and the writings of the
ancient philosophers (ii. 40, 60, p. 554). He was the first to suggest a
work which has been realized in our dictionaries of the Bible. Pertinent
to the subject he says, “What some men have done in regard to all words
and names found in Scripture, in the Hebrew and Syriac and Egyptian and
other tongues, taking up and interpreting separately such as were left
in Scripture without interpretation; and what Eusebius has done in
regard to the history of the past…I think might be done in regard to
other matters.…For the advantage of his brethren a competent man might
arrange in their several classes, and give an account of, the unknown
places, and animals and plants, and trees and stones and metals, and
other species of things mentioned in Scripture” (ii. 39, 59, p. 554). It
is, in view of this sage suggestion, almost incomprehensible that
Augustin pays no attention to these subjects in his commentaries.
Jerome, on the other hand, is quite rich in these departments.

<span id="iv-p26"></span>3. He presses the view that the Scripture is
designed to have more interpretations than one *(Christ. Doctr*. iii.
27, 38 sq.; this ed. p. 567). Augustin constantly applies this canon
(e.g., on the petition, “Thy will be done,” *Sermon on the Mount*, ii.
7, 21–23). He adopted the seven rules of the Donatist Tichonius as
assisting to a deep understanding of the Word. These rules relate (1) to
the Lord and His body, (2) to the twofold division of the Lord’s body,
(3) to the promises and the Law, (4) to species and genus, (5) to times,
(6) to recapitulation, (7) to the devil and his body *(Christ. Doctr*.
iii. 30, 42, pp. 568–573). He explains and illustrates these laws at
length, but denies that they exhaust the rules for discovering the
hidden truth of Scripture.

<span id="iv-p27"></span>4. He commends the method of interpreting
obscure passages by the light of passages that are understood, and
prefers it before the interpretation by reason *(Christ. Doctr*. iii.
29, 39, p. 567).

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> <span id="iv-Page_xi"></span>

<span id="iv-p28"></span>5. The spirit and intent of the interpreter are
of more importance than verbal accuracy and critical acumen (a
qualification not always too strictly insisted upon in these modern days
of commentators and critical Biblical study). One must be in sympathy
with the Gospel of Christ to interpret its records. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) Even the mistakes of an exegete, properly
disposed, may confirm religious faith and character; and so far forth
are his labors to be commended, though he himself is to be corrected,
that he err not again after the same manner. “If the mistaken
interpretation,” he says, “tends to build up love, which is the end of
the commandment, the interpreter goes astray in much the same way as a
man who, by mistake, quits the highroad, but yet reaches, through the
fields, the same place to which the road leads” (*Christ. Doctr*. i. 36,
41 sq.; ii. p. 533).

<span id="iv-p32"></span>That Augustin followed his own canons of
interpretation, his writings show. He does not hesitate to put more than
one interpretation upon a text (as especially in the Psalms), and none
has been more elaborate in comparing Scripture with Scripture than he.
If he had possessed the familiarity with the Hebrew that he recommends
so strongly to others, he would have been preserved from the
misinterpretations with which his commentaries on the Old Testament
abound.

<span id="iv-p33"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iv-p33.1"></span>Use of Allegory.</span>

<span id="iv-p34"></span>Augustin’s use of allegory has exposed him to
much harsh criticism. What was the practice of all, ought not to be
considered a mortal fault in one. None of the ancient expositors were
free from it. Some of the modern expositors, except as their works are
designed only as a critical arsenal for the student, are defective
because of all absence of the allegorical element.

<span id="iv-p35"></span>Where Scripture itself has led the way, as in
the case of the allegory of Hagar and Sarah ([Gal.
iv](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#000)<span id="iv-p35.1"></span>..md) and
other cases, the uninspired penman will be pardoned if he follow. The
use of the allegorical method, however, was carried to the most
unreasonable excess, reaching its culmination in Gregory’s Commentary on
Job. That writer finds that the patriarch of Uz represents Christ, his
sons the clergy, his three daughters the three classes of the laity who
are to worship the Trinity, his friends the heretics, the oxen and
she-asses the heathen, etc. The frequent extravagance of Augustin,
proceeding out of his intellectual and Scriptural exuberance, cannot be
commended; but it will be found that his allegory is seldom commonplace,
and mingled with it, where it is most vicious, are comments of rare
aptness and common sense. In the Old Testament he looks upon almost
every character and event as symbolic of Christ and Christian
institutions. But, as Trench well says, “it is indeed far better to find
Christ everywhere in the Old Testament than to find Him nowhere” (p.
54).

<span id="iv-p36"></span>In his effort to display the unity and harmony
of all Scripture (to which he was forced by the controversy with the
Manichæans) he often strains after comparisons; and this came to be so
much of a habit with him, that, where he had no special purpose to gain,
he is guilty of the same excess. An instance among many is furnished in
the opening chapters of the *Sermon on the Mount* (iv. 11), where a
close comparison is instituted between the Beatitudes and the seven
Spiritual operations of [Isa. 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003.md)<span id="iv-p36.1"></span>. The
historical element is nowhere denied, but something else is constantly
being superinduced upon it, especially in the Old Testament.

<span id="iv-p37"></span>A single illustration of Augustin’s allegorical
interpretation will suffice. Turning away from the Psalms, where his
imagination is particularly fertile along this line, I extract one on
the parable of the five loaves and two fishes, as found in the XXIV.
Homily on John. The five loaves mean the five Books of Moses. They are
not wheaten, but barley, because they belong to the Old Testament. The
nature of barley is such that it is hard to be got at, as the kernel is
set in a coating of husk which is tenacious and hard to be stripped off.
Such is the letter of the Old Testa<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>
<span id="iv-Page_xii"></span>ment, enveloped in a covering of carnal
sacraments. The little lad represents the people of Israel, which, in
its childishness of mind, carried but did not eat. The two fishes
signify the persons of the Priest and King, which therefore point to
Christ. The multiplication of the loaves signifies the exposition into
many volumes of the five Books of Moses. There were five thousand people
fed, because they were under the Law, which is unfolded in five books.
“They sat upon the grass;” that is, they were carnally minded, and
rested in carnal things. The “fragments” are the truths of hidden import
which the people cannot receive, and which were therefore entrusted to
the twelve apostles.

<span id="iv-p38"></span>The excessive taste for this style of
interpretation, in which the homilists and Biblical writers of a
thousand years had revelled, was sternly rebuked by the Reformers.
Especially did Luther utter his protest, on the ground that the fancies
into which this method was apt to lead had a tendency to shake
confidence in the literal truth of the sacred volume. He remarks,
“Augustin said beautifully that a figure proves nothing;” but, probably
from the high regard he had for the great theologian, he did not condemn
his allegorizing exegesis. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md)

<span id="iv-p40"></span>However much the great African bishop may have
laid himself open to the rebuke of a more critical and mechanical age in
this regard and others, his exegesis will continue to be admired for the
diligence with which the sacred text is scanned, the reverent frame of
heart with which it is approached, and the rich treasures of spiritual
truth which it brings forth to the willing and devout reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xi:1](1060003.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p29"></span> On the principle that *Davidica intelligit,
qui Davidica patitur*; or, as the German couplet runs,—

<span id="iv-p30"></span>“<span id="iv-p30.1"></span>Wer den Dichter
will verstehen

<span id="iv-p31"></span><span id="iv-p31.1"></span>Muss in Dichters
Lande gehen.”

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xii:2](1060003.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p39"></span> The passage is quoted in full by Trench (p.
64). His work, *St. Augustin on the Sermon on the Mount*, 4th ed.,
London, 1881, contains an elaborate introductory essay on *Augustin as
an Interpreter of Scripture*. His use of allegory is considered in a
separate chapter (iv). An older work is by <span class="c13"><span
id="iv-p39.1"></span> Clausen</span>: *Augustinus, Sac. Script.
Interpres*, pp. 267, Berol. 1828.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Our Lord’s Sermon on the Mount.](1060004.md)
