[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060078)  [Next](1060080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—The Proof that This God is the
True God.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xix-p2"></span>27. But that must have been a vain
necessity and a ridiculous timidity. <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) We ask now what opinion regarding this
God is formed by those men whose pleasure it is that all gods ought to
be worshipped. For if He ought not to be worshipped, how are all
worshipped when He is not worshipped? And if He ought to be worshipped,
it cannot be that all others are to be worshipped along with Him. For
unless He is worshipped alone, He is really not worshipped <span
id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span id="vi.iv.xix-Page_88"></span>at all. Or
may it perhaps be the case, that they will allege Him to be no God at
all, while they call those gods who, as we believe, have no power to do
anything except so far as permission is given them by His judgment,—have
not merely no power to do good to any one, but no power even to do harm
to any, except to those who are judged by Him, who possesses all power,
to merit so to be harmed? But, as they themselves are compelled to
admit, those deities have shown less power than He has done. For if
those are held to be gods whose prophets, when consulted by men, have
returned responses which, that I may not call them false, were at least
most convenient for their private interests, how is not He to be
regarded as God whose prophets have not only given the congruous answer
on subjects regarding which they were consulted at the special time, but
who also, in the case of subjects respecting which they were not
consulted, and which related to the universal race of man and all
nations, have announced prophetically so long time before the event
those very things of which we now read, and which indeed we now behold?
If they gave the name of god to that being under whose inspiration the
Sibyl sung of the fates <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) of the
Romans, how is not He (to be called) God, who, in accordance with the
announcement aforetime given, has shown us how the Romans and all
nations are coming to believe in Himself through the gospel of Christ,
as the one God, and to demolish all the images of their fathers?
Finally, if they designate those as gods who have never dared through
their prophets to say anything against this God, how is not He (to be
designated) God, who not only commanded by the mouth of His prophets the
destruction of their images, but who also predicted that among all the
Gentiles they would be destroyed by those who should be enjoined to
abandon their idols and to worship Him alone, and who, on receiving
these injunctions, should be His servants? <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_569"></span>[87:570](1060079.htm#fr_569) <span
id="vi.iv.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xix-p3"></span> Or, Away with that vain necessity and
ridiculous timidity—*Sed fuerit ista vana necessitas*, etc.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[88:571](1060079.htm#fr_570) <span
id="vi.iv.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xix-p4"></span> Reading *fata*. Seven <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.iv.xix-p4.1"></span> mss.</span> give *facta* =
deeds.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[88:572](1060079.htm#fr_571) <span
id="vi.iv.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xix-p5"></span> \[This reference to the destruction of
idols has been used to fix the date of the *Harmony*; see Introductory
Notice of translator. The polemic character of the larger part of Book
i. seems due to the circumstances of that particular period in North
Africa.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](1060080)
