[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060225)  [Next](1060227) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ix"></span> <span id="vii.ix-p0.1"></span> <span
id="vii.ix-p0.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>Sermon VII.</span>

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.ix-p2.1"></span>\[LVII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.ix-p3"></span>*Again, on* [Matt.
6.5-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)<span id="vii.ix-p3.1"></span>*.
on the Lord’s Prayer. To the Competentes.*

<span id="vii.ix-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.ix-p4.1"></span>The</span> order established for your
edification requires that ye learn first what to believe, and afterwards
what to ask. For so saith the Apostle, “Whosoever shall call upon the
Name of the Lord, shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_2003"></span>[2004](#fn_2003) This testimony blessed Paul cited
out of the Prophet; for by the Prophet were those times foretold, when
all men should call upon God; “Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the
Lord, shall be saved.” And he added, “How then shall they call on Him in
whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in Him of whom
they have not heard? Or how shall they hear without a preacher? Or how
shall they preach except they be sent?” <span
id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004) Therefore were preachers sent. They
preached Christ. As they preached, the people heard, by hearing they
believed, and by believing called upon Him. Because then it was most
rightly and most truly said, “How shall they call on Him in whom they
have not believed?” therefore have ye first learned what to believe: and
to-day have learnt to call on Him in whom ye have believed.

<span id="vii.ix-p7"></span>2. The Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ,
hath taught us a Prayer; and though He be the Lord Himself, as ye have
heard and repeated in the Creed, the Only Son of God, yet He would not
be alone. He is the Only Son, and yet would not be alone; He hath
vouchsafed to have brethren. For to whom doth He say, “Say, Our Father,
which art in heaven?” <span id="fr_2005"></span>[2006](#fn_2005) Whom
did He wish us to call our Father, save His own Father? Did He grudge us
this? Parents sometimes when they have gotten one, or two, or three
children, fear to give birth to any more, lest they reduce the rest to
beggary. But because the inheritance which He promiseth us is such as
many may possess, and no one be straitened; therefore hath He called
into His brotherhood the <span id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span
id="vii.ix-Page_281"></span>peoples of the nations; and the Only Son
hath numberless brethren; who say, “Our Father, which art in heaven.” So
said they who have been before us; and so shall say those who will come
after us. See how many brethren the Only Son hath in His grace, sharing
His inheritance with those for whom He suffered death. We had a father
and mother on earth, that we might be born to labours and to death: but
we have found other parents, God our Father, and the Church our Mother,
by whom we are born unto life eternal. Let us then consider, beloved,
whose children we have begun to be; and let us live so as becomes those
who have such a Father. See, how that our Creator hath condescended to
be our Father!

<span id="vii.ix-p9"></span>3. We have heard whom we ought to call upon,
and with what hope of an eternal inheritance we have begun to have a
Father in heaven; let us now hear what we must ask of Him. Of such a
Father what shall we ask? Do we not ask rain of Him, to-day, and
yesterday, and the day before? This is no great thing to have asked of
such a Father, and yet ye see with what sighings, and with what great
desire we ask for rain, when death is feared, when that is feared which
none can escape. For sooner or later every man must die, and we groan,
and pray, and travail in pain, and cry to God, that we may die a little
later. How much more ought we to cry to Him, that we may come to that
place where we shall never die!

<span id="vii.ix-p10"></span>4. Therefore is it said, “Hallowed be Thy
Name.” This we also ask of Him that his Name may be hallowed in us; for
Holy is it always. And how is His Name hallowed in us, except while it
makes us holy. For once we were not holy, and we are made holy by His
Name; but He is always Holy, and His Name always Holy. It is for
ourselves, not for God, that we pray. For we do not wish well to God, to
whom no ill can ever happen. But we wish what is good for ourselves,
that His Holy Name may be hallowed, that that which is always Holy, may
be hallowed in us.

<span id="vii.ix-p11"></span>5. “Thy kingdom come.” <span
id="fr_2006"></span>[2007](#fn_2006) Come it surely will, whether we ask
or no. Indeed, God hath an eternal kingdom. For when did He not reign?
When did He begin to reign? For His kingdom hath no beginning, neither
shall it have any end. But that we may know that in this prayer also we
pray for ourselves, and not for God (for we do not say, “Thy kingdom
come,” as though we were asking that God may reign); we shall be
ourselves His kingdom, if believing in Him we make progress in this
faith. All the faithful, redeemed by the Blood of His Only Son, will be
His kingdom. And this His kingdom will come, when the resurrection of
the dead shall have taken place; for then He will come Himself. And when
the dead are risen, He will divide them, as He Himself saith, “and He
shall set some on the right hand, and some on the left.” <span
id="fr_2007"></span>[2008](#fn_2007) To those who shall be on the right
hand He will say, “Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom.”
This is what we wish and pray for when we say, “Thy kingdom come;” that
it may come to us. For if we shall be reprobates, that kingdom will come
to others, but not to us. But if we shall be of that number, who belong
to the members of His Only-begotten Son, His kingdom will come to us,
and will not tarry. For are there as many ages yet remaining, as have
already passed away? The Apostle John hath said, “My little children, it
is the last hour.” <span id="fr_2008"></span>[2009](#fn_2008) But it is
a long hour proportioned to this long day; and see how many years this
last hour lasteth. But nevertheless, be ye as those who watch, and so
sleep, and rise again, and reign. Let us watch now, let us sleep in
death; at the end we shall rise again, and shall reign without end.

<span id="vii.ix-p15"></span>6. “Thy will be done as in heaven, so in
earth.” <span id="fr_2009"></span>[2010](#fn_2009) The third thing we
pray for is, that His will may be done as in heaven so in earth. And in
this too we wish well for ourselves. For the will of God must
necessarily be done. It is the will of God that the good should reign,
and the wicked be damned. Is it possible that this will should not be
done? But what good do we wish for ourselves, when we say, “Thy will be
done as in heaven, so in earth”? Give ear. For this petition may be
understood in many ways, and many things are to be in our thoughts in
this petition, when we pray God, “Thy will be done as in heaven, so in
earth.” As Thy Angels offend Thee not, so may we also not offend Thee.
Again, how is “Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth,” understood?
All the holy Patriarchs, all the Prophets, all the Apostles, all the
spiritual are as it were God’s heaven; and we in comparison of them are
earth. “Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth;” as in them, so in
us also. Again, “Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth;” the
Church of God is heaven, His enemies are earth. So we wish well for our
enemies, that they too may believe and become Christians, and so the
will of God be done, as in heaven, so also in earth. Again, “Thy will be
done, as in heaven, so in earth.” Our spirit is heaven, and the flesh
earth. As our spirit is renewed by believing, so may our flesh be
renewed by rising again; and “the will of God be done, as in heaven, so
in earth.” Again, our mind whereby we see truth, and delight in this
truth, is heaven; as, “I <span id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span
id="vii.ix-Page_282"></span>delight in the law of God, after the inward
man.” What is the earth? “I see another law in my members, warring
against the law of my mind?” <span id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010)
When this strife shall have passed away, and a full concord brought
about of the flesh and spirit, the will of God will be done as in
heaven, so also in earth. When we repeat this petition, let us think of
all these things, and ask them all of the Father. Now all these things
which we have mentioned, these three petitions, beloved, have respect to
the life eternal. For if the Name of our God is sanctified in us, it
will be for eternity. If His kingdom come, where we shall live for ever,
it will be for eternity. If His will be done as in heaven, so in earth,
in all the ways which I have explained, it will be for eternity.

<span id="vii.ix-p18"></span>7. There remain now the petitions for this
life of our pilgrimage; therefore follows, “Give us this day our daily
bread.” <span id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011) Give us eternal
things, give us things temporal. Thou hast promised a kingdom, deny us
not the means of subsistence. Thou wilt give everlasting glory with
Thyself hereafter, give us in this earth temporal support. Therefore is
it “day by day,” and “to-day,” that is, in this present time. For when
this life shall have passed away, shall we ask for daily bread then? For
then it will not be called, “day by day,” but “to-day.” Now it is
called, “day by day,” when one day passes away, and another day
succeeds. Will it be called “day by day,” when there will be one eternal
day? This petition for daily bread is doubtless to be understood in two
ways, both for the necessary supply of our bodily food, and for the
necessities of our spiritual support. There is a necessary supply of
bodily food, for the preservation of our daily life, without which we
cannot live. This is food and clothing, but the whole is understood in a
part. When we ask for bread, we thereby understand all things. There is
a spiritual <span id="fr_2012"></span>[2013](#fn_2012) food also which
the faithful know, which ye too will know, when ye shall receive it at
the altar of God. This also is “daily Bread,” necessary only for this
life. For shall we receive the Eucharist when we shall have come to
Christ Himself, and begun to reign with Him for ever? So then the
Eucharist is our daily bread; but let us in such wise receive it, that
we be not refreshed in our bodies only, but in our souls. For the virtue
which is apprehended there, is unity, that gathered together into His
body, and made His members, we may be what we receive. Then will it be
indeed our daily bread. Again, what I am handling before you now is
“daily bread;” and the daily lessons which ye hear in church, are daily
bread, and the hymns ye hear and repeat are daily bread. For all these
are necessary in our state of pilgrimage. But when we shall have got to
heaven, shall we hear the word, <span
id="fr_2013"></span>[2014](#fn_2013) we who shall see the Word Himself,
and hear the Word Himself, and eat and drink Him as the angels do now?
Do the angels need books, and interpreters, and readers? Surely not.
They read in seeing, for the Truth Itself they see, and are abundantly
satisfied from that fountain, from which we obtain some few <span
id="fr_2014"></span>[2015](#fn_2014) drops. Therefore has it been said
touching our daily bread, that this petition is necessary for us in this
life.

<span id="vii.ix-p23"></span>8. “Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors.” <span id="fr_2015"></span>[2016](#fn_2015) Is this necessary
except in this life? For in the other we shall have no debts. For what
are debts, but sins? See, ye are on the point of being baptized, then
all your sins will be blotted out, none whatever will remain. Whatever
evil ye have ever done, in deed, or word, or desire, or thought, all
will be blotted out. And yet if in the life which is after Baptism there
were security from sin, we should not learn such a prayer as this,
“Forgive us our debts.” Only let us by all means do what comes next, “As
we forgive our debtors.” Do ye then who are about to enter in to receive
a plenary and entire remission of your debts, do ye above all things see
that ye have nothing in your hearts against any other, so as to come
forth from Baptism secure, as it were free and discharged of all debts,
and then begin to purpose to avenge yourselves on your enemies, who in
time past have done you wrong. Forgive, as ye are forgiven. God can do
no one wrong, and yet He forgiveth who oweth nothing. How then ought he
to forgive, who is himself forgiven, when He forgiveth all, who oweth
nothing that can be forgiven Him?

<span id="vii.ix-p25"></span>9. “Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil.” <span id="fr_2016"></span>[2017](#fn_2016) Will
this again be necessary in the life to come? “Lead us not into
temptation,” will not be said, except where there can be temptation. We
read in the book of holy Job, “Is not the life of man upon earth a
temptation?” <span id="fr_2017"></span>[2018](#fn_2017) What then do we
pray for? Hear what. The Apostle James saith, “Let no man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God.” <span
id="fr_2018"></span>[2019](#fn_2018) He spoke of those evil temptations,
whereby men are deceived, and brought under the yoke of the devil. This
is the kind of temptation he spoke of. For there is another sort of
temptation which is called a proving; of this kind of temptation it is
written, “The Lord your God tempteth (proveth) you to know whether ye
love Him.” <span id="fr_2019"></span>[2020](#fn_2019) What means “to
know”? “To make you know,” for He knoweth already. With that kind of
temptation, whereby we are deceived and seduced, God tempteth no man.
But undoubtedly in His deep and hidden judg<span id="page_283">p.
283</span> <span id="vii.ix-Page_283"></span>ment He abandons some. And
when He hath abandoned them, the tempter finds his opportunity. For he
finds in him no resistance against his power, but forthwith presents
himself to him as his possessor, if God abandon him. Therefore that He
may not abandon us, do we say, “Lead us not into temptation.” “For every
one is tempted,” says the same Apostle James, “when he is drawn away of
his own lust and enticed. Then lust, when it hath conceived, bringeth
forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.” <span
id="fr_2020"></span>[2021](#fn_2020) What then has he hereby taught us?
To fight against our lusts. For ye are about to put away your sins in
Holy Baptism; but lusts will still remain, wherewith ye must fight after
that ye are regenerate. For a conflict with your own selves still
remains. Let no enemy from without be feared: conquer thine own self,
and the whole world is conquered. What can any tempter from without,
whether the devil or the devil’s minister, do against thee? Whosoever
sets the hope of gain before thee to seduce thee, let him only find no
covetousness in thee; and what can he who would tempt thee by gain
effect? Whereas if covetousness be found in thee, thou takest fire at
the sight of gain, and art taken by the bait of this corrupt food. <span
id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021) But if he find no covetousness in
thee, the trap remains spread in vain. Or should the tempter set before
thee some woman of surpassing beauty; if chastity be within, iniquity
from without is overcome. Therefore that he may not take thee with the
bait of a strange woman’s beauty, fight with thine own lust within; thou
hast no sensible perception of thine enemy, but of thine own
concupiscence thou hast. Thou dost not see the devil, but the object
that engageth thee thou dost see. Get the mastery then over that of
which thou art sensible within. Fight valiantly, for He who hath
regenerated thee is thy Judge; He hath arranged the lists, He is making
ready the crown. But because thou wilt without doubt be conquered, if
thou have not Him to aid thee, if He abandon thee: therefore dost thou
say in the prayer, “Lead us not into temptation.” The Judge’s wrath hath
given over some to their own lusts; and the Apostle says, “God gave them
over to the lusts of their hearts.”  <span
id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022) How did He give them up? Not by
forcing, but by forsaking them.

<span id="vii.ix-p33"></span>10. “Deliver us from evil,” may belong to
the same sentence. Therefore, that thou mayest understand it to be all
one sentence, it runs thus, “Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil.” Therefore he added “but,” to show that all this belongs to
one sentence, “Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.”
How is this? I will propose them singly. “Lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.” By delivering us from evil, He leadeth us not
into temptation; by not leading us into temptation, He delivereth us
from evil.

<span id="vii.ix-p34"></span>11. And truly it is a great temptation,
dearly beloved, it is a great temptation in this life, when that in us
is the subject of temptation, whereby we attain <span
id="fr_2023"></span>[2024](#fn_2023) pardon, if in any of our
temptations we have fallen. It is a frightful temptation, when that is
taken from us, whereby we may be healed from the wounds of other
temptations. I know that ye have not yet understood me. Give me your
attention, that ye may understand. Suppose avarice tempts a man, and he
is conquered in any single temptation (for sometimes even a good
wrestler and fighter may get roughly handled <span
id="fr_2024"></span>[2025](#fn_2024) ): avarice then has got the better
of a man, good wrestler though he be, and he has done some avaricious
act. Or there has been a passing lust; it has not brought the man to
fornication, nor reached unto adultery, for when this does take place,
the man must at all events be kept back from the criminal act. But he
“hath seen a woman to lust after her;” <span
id="fr_2025"></span>[2026](#fn_2025) he has let his thoughts dwell on
her with more pleasure than was right; he has admitted the attack;
excellent combatant though he be, he has been wounded, but he has not
consented to it; he has beaten back the motion of his lust, has
chastised it with the bitterness of grief, he has beaten it back; and
has prevailed. Still in the very fact that he had slipped, has he ground
for saying, “Forgive us our debts.” And so of all other temptations, it
is a hard matter that in them all there should not be occasion for
saying, “Forgive us our debts.” What then is that frightful temptation
which I have mentioned, that grievous, that tremendous temptation, which
must be avoided with all our strength, with all our resolution; what is
it? When we go about to avenge ourselves. Anger is kindled, and the man
burns to be avenged. O frightful temptation! Thou art losing that,
whereby thou hadst to attain pardon for other faults. If thou hadst
committed any sin as to other senses, and other lusts, hence mightest
thou have had thy cure, in that thou mightest say, “Forgive us our
debts, as we also forgive our debtors.” But whoso instigateth thee to
take vengeance, will lose for thee the power thou hadst to say, “As we
also forgive our debtors.” When that power is lost, all sins will be
retained; nothing at all is remitted.

<span id="vii.ix-p38"></span>12. Our Lord and Master, and Saviour,
knowing this dangerous temptation in this life, when He taught us six or
seven petitions in this Prayer, took none of them for Himself to treat
of, and to commend to us with greater earnest<span id="page_284">p.
284</span> <span id="vii.ix-Page_284"></span>ness, than this one. Have
we not said, “Our Father, which art in heaven;” and the rest which
follows? Why after the conclusion of the Prayer, did He not enlarge upon
it to us, either as to what He had laid down in the beginning, or
concluded with at the end, or placed in the middle? For why said He not,
if the Name of God be not hallowed in you, or if ye have no part in the
kingdom of God, or if the will of God be not done in you, as in heaven,
or if God guard you not, that ye enter not into temptation; why none of
all these? but what saith He? “Verily I say unto you, that if ye forgive
men their trespasses;” <span id="fr_2026"></span>[2027](#fn_2026) in
reference to that petition, “Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive
our debtors.” Having passed over all the other petitions which He taught
us, this He taught us with an especial force. There was no need of
insisting <span id="fr_2027"></span>[2028](#fn_2027) so much upon those
sins in which if a man offend, he may know the means whereby he may be
cured: need of it there was, with regard to that sin in which if thou
sin, there is no means whereby the rest can be cured. For this thou
oughtest to be ever saying, “Forgive us our debts.” What debts? There is
no lack of them; for we are but men; I have talked somewhat more than I
ought, have said something I ought not, have laughed more than I ought,
have eaten more than I ought, have listened with pleasure to what I
ought not, have drunk more than I ought, have seen with pleasure what I
ought not, have thought with pleasure on what I ought not; “Forgive us
our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.” This if thou hast lost, thou
art lost thyself.

<span id="vii.ix-p41"></span>13. Take heed, my brethren, my sons, sons
of God, take heed, I beseech you, in that I am saying to you. Fight to
the uttermost of your powers with your own hearts. And if ye shall see
your anger making a stand against you, pray to God against it, that God
may make thee conqueror of thyself, that God may make thee conqueror, I
say, not of thine enemy without, but of thine own soul within. For He
will give thee His present help, and will do it. He would rather that we
ask this of Him, than rain. For ye see, beloved, how many petitions the
Lord Christ hath taught us; and there is scarce found among them one
which speaks of daily bread, that all our thoughts may be moulded after
the life to come? For what can we fear that He will not give us, who
hath promised and said, “Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you; for your
Father knoweth that ye have need of these things before ye ask Him. Seek
ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you.” <span id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028) For
many have been tried even with hunger, and have been found gold, and
have not been forsaken by God. They would have perished with hunger, if
the daily inward bread were to leave their heart. After this let us
chiefly hunger. For, “Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled.” <span
id="fr_2029"></span>[2030](#fn_2029) But He can in mercy look upon our
infirmity, and see us, as it is said, “Remember that we are dust.” <span
id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030) He who from the dust made and
quickened man, for that His work of clay’s sake, gave His Only Son to
death. Who can explain, who can worthily so much as conceive, how much
He loveth us?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[280:2004](1060226.htm#fr_2003) <span
id="vii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p5"></span> [Joel
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032), [Rom.
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013)<span id="vii.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[280:2005](1060226.htm#fr_2004) <span
id="vii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p6"></span> [Rom.
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span id="vii.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2005"></span>[280:2006](1060226.htm#fr_2005) <span
id="vii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p8"></span> [Matt. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)<span id="vii.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[281:2007](1060226.htm#fr_2006) <span
id="vii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p12"></span> [Matt. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="vii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[281:2008](1060226.htm#fr_2007) <span
id="vii.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p13"></span> [Matt. xxv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)<span id="vii.ix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[281:2009](1060226.htm#fr_2008) <span
id="vii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p14"></span> [1 John ii.
18](../../../bib/vul/jo1002.htm#018)<span id="vii.ix-p14.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[281:2010](1060226.htm#fr_2009) <span
id="vii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p16"></span> [Matt. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#010)<span id="vii.ix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[282:2011](1060226.htm#fr_2010) <span
id="vii.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p17"></span> [Rom.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span id="vii.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[282:2012](1060226.htm#fr_2011) <span
id="vii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p19"></span> [Matt. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#011)<span id="vii.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2012"></span>[282:2013](1060226.htm#fr_2012) <span
id="vii.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p20"></span> See Sermon vi. (lvi. Bened.) 10 and note.

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[282:2014](1060226.htm#fr_2013) <span
id="vii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p21"></span> *Codex*.

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[282:2015](1060226.htm#fr_2014) <span
id="vii.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p22"></span> *Irroramur*.

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[282:2016](1060226.htm#fr_2015) <span
id="vii.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p24"></span> [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="vii.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[282:2017](1060226.htm#fr_2016) <span
id="vii.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p26"></span> [Matt. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013)<span id="vii.ix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2017"></span>[282:2018](1060226.htm#fr_2017) <span
id="vii.ix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p27"></span> [Job vii.
1](../../../bib/sep/job007.htm#001)<span id="vii.ix-p27.1"></span>,
Sept.; <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ix-p27.2"></span>πειρατηρίον</span>.

<span id="fn_2018"></span>[282:2019](1060226.htm#fr_2018) <span
id="vii.ix-p27.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p28"></span> [Jas. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013)<span id="vii.ix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2019"></span>[282:2020](1060226.htm#fr_2019) <span
id="vii.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p29"></span> [Deut. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span id="vii.ix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2020"></span>[283:2021](1060226.htm#fr_2020) <span
id="vii.ix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p30"></span> [Jas.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015)<span id="vii.ix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[283:2022](1060226.htm#fr_2021) <span
id="vii.ix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p31"></span> *Vitiosæ escæ laqueo*.

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[283:2023](1060226.htm#fr_2022) <span
id="vii.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p32"></span> [Rom. i.
24](../../../bib/vul/rom001.htm#024)<span id="vii.ix-p32.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_2023"></span>[283:2024](1060226.htm#fr_2023) <span
id="vii.ix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p35"></span> *Meremur*.

<span id="fn_2024"></span>[283:2025](1060226.htm#fr_2024) <span
id="vii.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p36"></span> *Vulneratur*.

<span id="fn_2025"></span>[283:2026](1060226.htm#fr_2025) <span
id="vii.ix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p37"></span> [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="vii.ix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2026"></span>[284:2027](1060226.htm#fr_2026) <span
id="vii.ix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p39"></span> [Matt. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)<span id="vii.ix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2027"></span>[284:2028](1060226.htm#fr_2027) <span
id="vii.ix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p40"></span> *Commendanda*.

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[284:2029](1060226.htm#fr_2028) <span
id="vii.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p42"></span> [Matt. vi.
53](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#053)<span id="vii.ix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2029"></span>[284:2030](1060226.htm#fr_2029) <span
id="vii.ix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p43"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="vii.ix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[284:2031](1060226.htm#fr_2030) <span
id="vii.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p44"></span> [Ps.
103.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#014)<span id="vii.ix-p44.1"></span>,
Sept. (ciii. English version).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon VIII](1060227)
