[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060298)  [Next](1060300.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxxxii"></span> <span id="vii.lxxxii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxxxii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXX.</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxxxii-p2.1"></span>\[CXXX. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p3.1"></span>*[John vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.lxxxii-p3.2"></span>,
where the miracle of the five loaves and the two fishes is related.*

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxxxii-p4.1"></span>It</span> was a great miracle that was
wrought, dearly beloved, for five thousand men to be filled with five
loaves and two fishes, and the remnants of the fragments to fill twelve
baskets. A great miracle: but we shall not wonder much at what was done,
if we give heed to Him That did it. He multiplied the five loaves in the
hands of them that brake them, who multiplieth the seeds that grow in
the earth, so as that a few grains are sown, and whole barns are filled.
But, because he doth this every year, no one marvels. Not the
inconsiderableness <span id="fr_3889"></span>[3890](#fn_3889.md) of what is
done, but its constancy takes away admiration of it. But when the Lord
did these things, He <span id="page_499">p. 499</span> <span
id="vii.lxxxii-Page_499"></span>spake to them that had understanding,
not by words only, but even by the miracles themselves. The five loaves
signified the five books of Moses’ Law. The old Law is barley compared
to the Gospel wheat. In those books are great mysteries concerning
Christ contained. Whence He saith Himself, “If ye had believed Moses, ye
would believe Me also; for he wrote of Me.” <span
id="fr_3890"></span>[3891](#fn_3890.md) But as in barley the marrow is hid
under the chaff, so in the veil of the mysteries of the Law is Christ
hidden. As those mysteries of the Law are developed and unfolded; so too
those loaves increased when they were broken. And in this that I have
explained to you, I have broken bread unto you. The five thousand men
signify the people ordered under the five books of the Law. The twelve
baskets are the twelve Apostles, who themselves too were filled with the
fragments of the Law. The two fishes are either the two precepts of the
love of God and our neighbour, or the two people of the circumcision and
uncircumcision, or those two sacred personages of the king and the
priest. As these things are explained, they are broken; when they are
understood, they are eaten.

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p7"></span>2. Let us turn to Him who did these
things. He is Himself “The Bread which came down from heaven;” <span
id="fr_3891"></span>[3892](#fn_3891.md) but Bread which refresheth the
failing, and doth not fail; Bread which can be tasted, <span
id="fr_3892"></span>[3893](#fn_3892.md) cannot be wasted. This Bread did
the manna also figure. Wherefore it is said, “He gave them the Bread of
heaven, man ate Angels’ Bread.” <span
id="fr_3893"></span>[3894](#fn_3893.md) Who is the Bread of heaven, but
Christ? But in order that man might eat Angels’ Bread, the Lord of
Angels was made Man. For if He had not been made Man, we should not have
His Flesh; if we had not His Flesh, we should not eat the Bread of the
Altar. Let us hasten to the inheritance, seeing we have hereby received
a great earnest of it. My brethren, let us long for the life of Christ,
seeing we hold as an earnest the Death of Christ. How shall He not give
us His good things, who hath suffered our evil things? In this our
earth, in this evil world, what abounds, but to be born, to labour, and
to die? Examine thoroughly man’s estate, convict me if I lie: consider
all men whether they are in this world for any other end than to be
born, to labour, and to die? This is the merchandize of our country:
these things here abound. To such merchandize did that Merchantman
descend. And forasmuch as every merchant gives and receives; gives what
he has, and receives what he has not; when he procures anything, he
gives money, and receives what he buys: so Christ too in this His
traffic gave and received. But what received He? That which aboundeth
here, to be born, to labour, and to die. And what did He give? To be
born again, to rise again, and to reign for ever. O Good Merchant, buy
us. Why should I say buy us, when we ought to give Thee thanks that Thou
hast bought us? Thou dost deal out our Price to us, we drink Thy Blood;
so dost thou deal out to us our Price. And we read the Gospel, our
title <span id="fr_3894"></span>[3895](#fn_3894.md) deed. We are Thy
servants, we are Thy creatures: Thou hast made us, Thou hast redeemed
us. Any one can buy his servant, create him he cannot; but the Lord hath
both created and redeemed His servants; created them, that they might
be; redeemed them, that they might not be captives ever. For we fell
into the hands of the prince of this world, who seduced Adam, and made
him his servant, and began to possess us as his slaves. But the Redeemer
came, and the seducer was overcome. And what did our Redeemer to him who
held us captive? For our ransom he held out His Cross as a trap; he
placed in It as a bait His Blood. He indeed had power to shed His Blood,
he did not attain <span id="fr_3895"></span>[3896](#fn_3895.md) to drink
it. And in that he shed the Blood of Him who was no debtor, he was
commanded to render up the debtors; he shed the Blood of the Innocent,
he was commanded to withdraw from the guilty. He verily shed His Blood
to this end, that He might wipe out our sins. That then whereby he held
us fast was effaced by the Redeemer’s Blood. For he only held us fast by
the bonds of our own sins. They were the captive’s chains. He came, He
bound the strong one with the bonds of His Passion; He entered into his
house <span id="fr_3896"></span>[3897](#fn_3896.md) into the hearts, that
is, of those where he did dwell, and took away his vessels. We are his
vessels. He had filled them with his own bitterness. This bitterness too
he pledged to our Redeemer in the gall. He had filled us then as his
vessels; but our Lord spoiling his vessels, and making them His Own,
poured out the bitterness, filled them with sweetness.

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p14"></span>3. Let us then love Him, for He is
sweet. “Taste and see that the Lord is sweet.” <span
id="fr_3897"></span>[3898](#fn_3897.md) He is to be feared, but to be loved
still more. He is Man and God; the One Christ is Man and God; as one man
is soul and body: but God and Man are not two Persons. In Christ indeed
there are two substances, God and Man; but one Person, that the Trinity
may remain, and that there be not a quaternity introduced by the
addition of the human <span id="fr_3898"></span>[3899](#fn_3898.md) nature.
How then can it be that God should not have mercy upon us, for whose
sake God was made Man? Much is that which He hath done already; more
<span id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span
id="vii.lxxxii-Page_500"></span>wonderful is that which He hath done,
than what He hath promised; and by that which He hath done, ought we to
believe what He hath promised. For that which He hath done, we should
scarcely believe, unless we also saw it. Where do we see it? In the
peoples that believe, in the multitude that has been brought unto Him.
For that hath been fulfilled which was promised to Abraham; <span
id="fr_3899"></span>[3900](#fn_3899.md) and from these things which we see,
we believe what we do not see. Abraham was one single man, and to him
was it said, “In thy seed shall all nations be blessed.” If he had
looked to himself, when would he have believed? He was one single man,
and was now old; and he had a barren wife, and one who was so far
advanced in age, that she could not conceive, even though she had not
been barren. There was nothing at all from which any hope could be
drawn. But he looked to Him That gave the promise, and believed what he
did not see. Lo, what he believed, we see. Therefore from these things
which we see, we ought to believe what we see not. He begat Isaac, we
saw it not; and Isaac begat Jacob, and this we did not see; and Jacob
begat twelve sons, and them we saw not; and his twelve sons begat the
people of Israel; this great people we see. I have now begun to mention
those things which we do see. Of the people of Israel was born the
Virgin Mary, and she gave birth to Christ; and, lo, in Christ all
nations are blessed. What more true? more certain? more plain? Together
with me, long after the world to come, ye who have been gathered
together out of the nations. In this world hath God fulfilled His
promise concerning the seed of Abraham. How shall He not give us His
eternal promises, whom He hath made to be Abraham’s seed? For this the
Apostle saith: “But if ye be Christ’s” (they are the Apostle’s words),
“then are ye Abraham’s seed.”  <span
id="fr_3900"></span>[3901](#fn_3900.md)

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p19"></span>4. We have begun to be some great
thing; let no man despise himself: we were once nothing; but we are
something. We have said unto the Lord, “Remember that we are
dust;” <span id="fr_3901"></span>[3902](#fn_3901.md) but out of the dust He
made man, and to dust He gave life, and in Christ our Lord hath He
already brought this same dust to the Kingdom of Heaven. For from this
dust took He flesh, from this took earth, and hath raised earth to
heaven, He who made heaven and earth. If then these two new things, not
yet done, were set before us, and it were asked of us, “Which is the
most wonderful, that He who is God should be made Man, or he who is man
should be made a man of God? which is the more wonderful? which the more
difficult?” What hath Christ promised us? That which as yet we see not;
that is, that we should be His men, and reign with Him, and never die?
This is so to say with difficulty believed, that a man once born should
arrive at that life, where he shall never die. This is what we believe
with a heart well cleansed, <span id="fr_3902"></span>[3903](#fn_3902.md)
cleansed, I mean, of the world’s dust; that this dust close not up our
eye of faith. This it is that we are bid believe, that after we have
been dead, we shall be even with our dead bodies in life, where we shall
never die. Wonderful it is; but more wonderful is that which Christ hath
done. For which is the more incredible, that man should live for ever,
or that God should ever die? That men should receive life from God is
the more credible; that God should receive death from men I suppose is
the more incredible. Yet this hath been brought to pass already: let us
then believe that which is to be. If that which is the more incredible
hath been brought to pass, shall He not give us that which is the more
credible? For God hath power to make of men Angels, who hath made of
earthy and filthy spawn, <span id="fr_3903"></span>[3904](#fn_3903.md) men.
What shall we be? Angels. What have we been? I am ashamed to call it to
mind; I am forced to consider it, yet I blush to tell it. What have we
been? Whence did God make men? What were we before we were at all? We
were nothing. When we were in our mother’s wombs, what were we? It is
enough that ye remember. Withdraw your minds from the whence ye were
made, and think of what ye are. Ye live; but so do herbs and trees live.
Ye have sensation, and so have cattle sensation. Ye are men, ye have got
beyond the cattle, ye are superior to the cattle; for that ye understand
how great things He hath done for you. Ye have life, ye have sensation,
ye have understanding, ye are men. Now to this benefit what can be
compared? Ye are Christians. For if we had not received this, what would
it profit us, that we were men! So then we are Christians, we belong to
Christ. For all the world’s rage, it doth not break us; because we
belong to Christ. For all the world’s caresses, it doth not seduce us;
we belong to Christ.

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p23"></span>5. A great Patron have we found,
Brethren. Ye know that men depend <span
id="fr_3904"></span>[3905](#fn_3904.md) much upon their patrons. A
dependent of a man in power will make answer to any one who threatens
him. “Thou canst do nothing to me, as long as my lord’s head is safe.”
How much more boldly and surely may we say, “Thou canst do nothing to
us, whilst our Head is safe.” Forasmuch as our Patron is our Head.
Whosoever depend upon any man as patron, are his dependents; we are the
members of our Patron. Let Him bear us in Himself, and let no man tear
us away from Him. Since what labours soever we shall have endured <span
id="page_501">p. 501</span> <span id="vii.lxxxii-Page_501"></span>in
this world, all that passeth away, is nothing. The good things shall
come which shall not pass away; by labours we arrive at them. But when
we have arrived, no one teareth us away from them. The gates of
Jerusalem are shut; they receive the bolts too, that to that city it may
be said, “Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God, O Sion. For He
hath strengthened the bolts of thy gates; He hath blessed thy children
within thee. Who hath made thy borders peace.” <span
id="fr_3905"></span>[3906](#fn_3905.md) When the gates are shut, and the
bolts drawn, no friend goeth out, no enemy entereth in. There shall we
have true and assured security, if here we shall not have abandoned the
truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3889"></span>[498:3890](1060299.htm#fr_3889.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p5"></span> *Vilitas*.

<span id="fn_3890"></span>[499:3891](1060299.htm#fr_3890.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p6"></span> [John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046.md)<span id="vii.lxxxii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3891"></span>[499:3892](1060299.htm#fr_3891.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p8"></span> [John vi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#041.md)<span id="vii.lxxxii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3892"></span>[499:3893](1060299.htm#fr_3892.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p9"></span> *Qui sumi potest, consumi non potest*.

<span id="fn_3893"></span>[499:3894](1060299.htm#fr_3893.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p10"></span> [Ps.
78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#025.md)<span
id="vii.lxxxii-p10.1"></span>, Sept. (lxxviii. English version).

<span id="fn_3894"></span>[499:3895](1060299.htm#fr_3894.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p11"></span> *Instrumentum*.

<span id="fn_3895"></span>[499:3896](1060299.htm#fr_3895.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p12"></span> *Meruit*.

<span id="fn_3896"></span>[499:3897](1060299.htm#fr_3896.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p13"></span> [Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.lxxxii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3897"></span>[499:3898](1060299.htm#fr_3897.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p15"></span> [Ps.
34.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.lxxxii-p15.1"></span>, Vulgate (xxxiv. 8, English version).

<span id="fn_3898"></span>[499:3899](1060299.htm#fr_3898.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p16"></span> *Homine. Vid*. Serm. xvii. (lxvii.
Ben.) 7 (iv.), note.

<span id="fn_3899"></span>[500:3900](1060299.htm#fr_3899.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p17"></span> [Gen. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.lxxxii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3900"></span>[500:3901](1060299.htm#fr_3900.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p18"></span> [Gal. iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.lxxxii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3901"></span>[500:3902](1060299.htm#fr_3901.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p20"></span> [Ps.
103.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.lxxxii-p20.1"></span>, Sept. (ciii. English version).

<span id="fn_3902"></span>[500:3903](1060299.htm#fr_3902.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p21"></span> *Excusso*.

<span id="fn_3903"></span>[500:3904](1060299.htm#fr_3903.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p22"></span> *Semina*.

<span id="fn_3904"></span>[500:3905](1060299.htm#fr_3904.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p24"></span> *Tendunt se*.

<span id="fn_3905"></span>[501:3906](1060299.htm#fr_3905.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxii-p25"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.lxxxii-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXXI](1060300.md)
