[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060218)  [Next](1060220.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii"></span> <span id="page_239">p. 239</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_239"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>advertisement.</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>The</span> Sermons of St. Augustin, besides
their other excellencies, furnish a beautiful picture of perhaps the
deepest and most powerful mind of the Western Church adapting itself to
the little ones of Christ. In them, he who has furnished the mould for
all the most thoughtful minds for fourteen hundred years, is seen
forming with loving tenderness the babes in Christ. Very touching is the
child-like simplicity, with which he gradually leads them through what
to them were difficulties, watching all the while whether he made
himself clear to them, keeping up their attention, pleased at their
understanding, dreading their approbation, and leading them off from
himself to some practical result. Very touching the tenderness with
which he at times reproves, the allowance which he makes for human
infirmities and for those in secular life, if they will not make their
infirmities their boast, or in allowed duties and indulgences forget
God. But his very simplicity precludes the necessity of any preface. His
Sermons explain themselves. They appear from a passage in the Commentary
on the Psalms to have been often taken down in writing at the time by
the more attentive sort of hearers (as were those of St. Chrysostom);
Possidius states that this was done from the commencement of his
presbyterate, and that “thence <span
id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682.md) through the body of Africa,
excellent doctrine and the most sweet savour of Christ was diffused and
made manifest, the Church of God beyond seas, when it heard thereof,
partaking of the joy.” Those on the New Testament have been now
selected, both as furnishing a comment, and as a gradual introduction to
what is found in a larger measure elsewhere, the spiritual
interpretation of Holy Scripture. It will doubtless seem strange to some
at first sight that the spiritual meaning of numbers, for instance,
should be made a part of religious instruction. And yet, it might not
require any great diffidence to think that St. Augustin knew better than
any of us, the tendency and effects of his mode of teaching upon minds,
which he evidently treated with such tender care, and that they who have
entered into that system can estimate its value better than they who
have not. It will appear also, probably, that a system which sees a
meaning everywhere in Holy Scripture is more reverential than one which
overlooks it; as, on the other hand, as a fact, the anti-mystical
interpretation has both in ancient and modern times stood connected with
a cold rationalism, and with heresy. This is, however, a large subject,
upon which this does not seem the place to enter, since such
interpretations are here only incidental and subordinate, and it is here
intended only to give a practical warning. Those who close their eyes,
of course, never see. The eye also requires to be insensibly
familiarized with what, as new, is strange to it. But whoever will not
set himself against what is in fact the received mode of interpretation
of the Church, will be insensibly won by it, and will have his reward.
The interpretations of St. Augustin were, as he himself often says,
sought by his own prayers and the prayers of his people, and will, to
those who receive them, open a rich variety of meaning and instruction.
One might instance, of the most solemn sort, the analogy of the three
dead, whom our Lord raised, with the three stages of sin, consent, act,
and habit, as an affecting and impressive specimen of this mode of
instruction, which has been adopted, in a manner, by the spiritual
perception of the Western Church.

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span>On his directly practical teaching, it will
be borne in mind, that to him the Church is mainly indebted for the
overthrow of Pelagianism, and the vindication of the doctrine of the
free grace of God. When then he insists, as he does so frequently, on
the value of good works and especially almsgiving, to which he seems to
recur with such especial sympathy, it will not be hastily thought that
so deep and consistent a thinker, and so imbued with Divine truth, was
at variance with himself and with it, and we may in his teaching gain
more constraining motives to encourage ourselves and others, if so one
great stain of our times, the neglect of Christ’s poor, may be mitigated
or effaced. On the other hand, when he speaks of heresy, he speaks of
what he had himself been; of the nothingness of this world’s pleasures
and applause, of what he had himself, when unbaptized, too miserably
tasted; of Christ’s power to save out of them, what he had himself felt;
of the grace of God, <span id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_240"></span>what he had himself used; of the value of
alms, as having himself given up what was his; <span
id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683.md) of humility, as showing it in the
very language in which he praises it; of the joys of Heaven, and the
love of God, as that for which he had abandoned freely and for ever all
on earth, for which he was daily labouring, enduring, sighing.

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span>It remains to say, that the text used is
that of the Benedictines, in which their large resources in <span
class="c13"><span id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> have been so
excellently employed, and that the Editors are indebted for the
translation to the Rev. R. G. Macmullen, M.A., Fellow of Corpus Christi
College.

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span>E. B. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span> Pusey</span>.

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="vii.ii-p9.1"></span>Christ Church, Oxford,</span> *Feast of St.
Barnabas,* 1844.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[239:1683](1060219.htm#fr_1682.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span> *Vit.* c. 7.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[240:1684](1060219.htm#fr_1683.md) <span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span> This he did immediately on his conversion.
Possidius says, “He made no will, because as a poor man of God (*pauper
Dei*) he had nothing whereof to make one” (c. ult.). The poor, Possidius
calls his “*compauperes*,” of whom he says “he was ever mindful, and
supplied them out of the same sources as himself and all who lived with
him \[his clergy under monastic rule\],—out of the returns of the
possessions of the Church, or the oblations of the faithful” (c. 23).
Possidius speaks (c. 4), how the report of “the continency and deep
poverty of his monastery” won those separated from the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon I](1060220.md)
