[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060086)  [Next](1060088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—An Argument Urging It Upon
the Remnant of Idolaters that They Should at Length Become Servants of
This True God, Who Everywhere is Subverting Idols.</span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxvii-p2"></span>42. Let them now give their answer with
respect to the God of Israel, to whom, as teaching and enjoining such
things, witness is borne not only by the books of the Christians, but
also by those of the Jews. Regarding Him, let them ask the counsel of
their own deities, who have prevented the blaspheming of Christ.
Concerning the God of Israel, let them give a contumelious response if
they dare. But whom are they to consult? or where are they to ask
counsel now? Let them peruse the books of their own authorities. If they
consider the God of Israel to be Jupiter, as Varro has written (that I
may speak for the time being in accordance with their own way of
thinking), why then do they not believe that the idols are to be
destroyed by Jupiter? If they deem Him to be Saturn, <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618.md) why do they not worship Him? Or why do
they not worship Him in that manner in which, by the voice of those
prophets through whom He has made good the things which He has foretold,
He has ordained His worship to be conducted? Why do they not believe
that images are to be destroyed by Him, and the worship of other gods
forbidden? If He is neither Jove nor Saturn (and surely, if He were one
of these, He would not speak out so mightily against the sacred rites of
their Jove and Saturn), who then is this God, who, with all their
consideration for other gods, is the only Deity not worshipped by them,
and who, nevertheless, so manifestly brings it about that He shall
Himself be the sole object of worship, to the overthrow of all other
gods, and to the humiliation of everything proud and highly exalted,
which has lifted itself up against Christ in behalf of idols,
persecuting and slaying Christians? But, in good truth, men are now
asking into what secret recesses these worshippers withdraw, when they
are minded to offer sacrifice; or into what regions of obscurity they
thrust back these same gods of theirs, to prevent their being discovered
and broken in pieces by the Christians. Whence comes this mode of
dealing, if not from the fear of those laws and those rulers by whose
instrumentality the God of Israel discovers His power, and who are now
made subject to the name of Christ. And that it should be so He promised
long ago, when He said by the prophet: “Yea, all kings of the earth
shall worship Him: all nations shall serve Him.” <span
id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_618"></span>[94:619](1060087.htm#fr_618.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxvii-p3"></span> Reading *Si Saturnum putant*. Others
read, *Si Saturnum Deum putant* = if they deem Saturn to be God, etc.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[94:620](1060087.htm#fr_619.md) <span
id="vi.iv.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.xxvii-p4"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011.md)<span id="vi.iv.xxvii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](1060088.md)
