[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060124)  [Next](1060126.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.xxix"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—Of the Raising of the
Daughter of the Ruler of the Synagogue, and of the Woman Who Touched the
Hem of His Garment; Of the Question, Also, as to</span> <span
id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="vi.v.xxix-Page_134"></span><span
class="c2"><span id="vi.v.xxix-p1.2"></span>Whether the Order in Which
These Incidents are Narrated Exhibits Any Contradiction in Any of the
Writers by Whom They are Reported; And in Particular, of the Words in
Which the Ruler of the Synagogue Addressed His Request to the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p2"></span>64. Still keeping by the order of time,
Matthew next continues to the following effect: “While He spake these
things unto them, behold, there came a certain ruler, and worshipped
Him, saying, My daughter is even now dead; but come and lay Thy hand
upon her, and she shall live;” and so on, until we come to the words,
“and the maid arose. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that
land.” <span id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942.md) The other two, namely,
Mark and Luke, in like manner give this same account, only they do not
keep by the same order now. For they bring up this narrative in a
different place, and insert it in another connection; to wit, at the
point where He crosses the take and returns from the country of the
Gerasenes, after casting out the devils and permitting them to go into
the swine. Thus Mark introduces it, after he has related what took place
among the Gerasenes, in the following manner: “And when Jesus was passed
over again by ship unto the other side, much people gathered unto Him:
and He was nigh unto the sea. And there cometh one of the rulers of the
synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw Him, he fell at His feet,”
etc. <span id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943.md) By this, then, we are
certainly to understand that the occurrence in connection with the
daughter of the ruler of the synagogue did take place after Jesus had
passed across the lake again in the ship. <span
id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944.md) It does not, however, appear from the
words themselves how long after that passage this thing happened. But
that some time did elapse is clear. For had there not been an interval,
no period would be left within which those circumstances might fall
which Matthew has just related in the matter of the feast in his house.
These, indeed, he has told after the fashion of the evangelists, as if
they were the story of another person’s doings. But they are the story
really of what took place in his own case, and at his own house. And
after that narrative, what follows in the immediate context is nothing
else than this notice of the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue. For
he has constructed the whole recital in such a manner, that the mode of
transition from one thing to the other has itself indicated with
sufficient clearness that the words immediately following give the
narrative of what actually took place in immediate consecution. For
after mentioning, in connection with the former incident, those words
which Jesus spake with respect to the new cloth and the new wine, he has
subjoined these other words, without any interruption in the narrative,
namely, “While He spake these things unto them, behold, there came a
certain ruler.” And this shows that, if the person approached Him while
He was speaking these things, nothing else either done or said by Him
could have intervened. In Mark’s account, on the other hand, the place
is quite apparent, as we have already pointed out, where other things
\[left unrecorded by him\] might very well have come in. The case is
much the same also with Luke, who, when he proceeds to follow up his
version of the story of the miracle wrought among the Gerasenes, by
giving his account of the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue, does
not pass on to that in any such way as to place it in antagonism with
Matthew’s version, who, by his words, “While He yet spake these things,”
gives us plainly to understand that the occurrence took place after
those parables about the cloth and the wine. For when he has concluded
his statement of what happened among the Gerasenes, Luke passes to the
next subject in the following manner; “And it came to pass that, when
Jesus was returned, the people gladly received Him; for they were all
waiting for Him. And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was
a ruler of the synagogue, and he fell down at Jesus’ feet,” and so on.
 <span id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945.md) Thus we are given to understand
that the crowd did indeed receive Jesus forthwith on the said occasion:
for He was the person for whose return they were waiting. But what is
conveyed in the words which are directly added, “And, behold, there came
a man whose name was Jairus,” is not to be taken to have occurred
literally in immediate succession. On the contrary, the feast with the
publicans, as Matthew records it, took place before that. For Matthew
connects this present incident with that feast in such a way as to make
it impossible for us to suppose that any other sequence of events can be
the correct order. <span id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946.md)

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p8"></span>65. In this narrative, then, which we
have undertaken to consider at present, all these three evangelists
indeed are unquestionably at one in the account which they give of the
woman who was afflicted with the issue of blood. Nor is it a matter of
any real consequence, that something which is passed by in silence by
one of them is related by another; or that Mark says, “Who touched my
clothes?” while Luke says, “Who touched me?” For the one has only
adopted the phrase in use and wont, whereas the other has <span
id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span id="vi.v.xxix-Page_135"></span>given
the stricter expression. But for all that, both of them convey the same
meaning. For it is more usual with us to say, “You are tearing
me,” <span id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947.md) than to say, “You are
tearing my clothes;” as, notwithstanding the term, the sense we wish to
convey is obvious enough.

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p10"></span>66. At the same time, however, there
remains the fact that Matthew represents the ruler of the synagogue to
have spoken to the Lord of his daughter, not merely as one likely to
die, or as dying, or as on the very point of expiring, but as even then
dead; while these other two evangelists report her as now nigh unto
death, but not yet really dead, and keep so strictly to that version of
the circumstances, that they tell us how the persons came at a later
stage with the intelligence of her actual death, and with the message
that for this reason the Master ought not now to trouble Himself by
coming, with the purpose of laying His hand upon her, and so preventing
her from dying,—the matter not being put as if He was one possessed of
ability to raise the once dead to life. It becomes necessary for us,
therefore, to investigate this fact lest it may seem to exhibit any
contradiction between the accounts. And the way to explain it is to
suppose that, by reason of brevity in the narrative, Matthew has
preferred to express it as if the Lord had been really asked to do what
it is clear He did actually do, namely, raise the dead to life. For what
Matthew directs our attention to, is not the mere words spoken by the
father about his daughter, but what is of more importance, his mind and
purpose. Thus he has given words calculated to represent the father’s
real thoughts. For he had so thoroughly despaired of his child’s case,
that not believing that she whom he had just left dying, could possibly
now be found yet in life, his thought rather was that she might be made
alive again. Accordingly two of the evangelists have introduced the
words which were literally spoken by Jairus. But Matthew has exhibited
rather what the man secretly wished and thought. Thus both petitions
were really addressed to the Lord; namely, either that He should restore
the dying damsel, or that, if she was already dead, He might raise her
to life again. But as it was Matthew’s object to tell the whole story in
short compass, he has represented the father as directly expressing in
his request what, it is certain, had been his own real wish, and what
Christ actually did. It is true, indeed, that if those two evangelists,
or one of them, had told us that the father himself spake the words
which the parties who came from his house uttered,—namely, that Jesus
should not now trouble Himself, because the damsel had died,—then the
words which Matthew has put into his mouth would not be in harmony with
his thoughts. But, as the case really stands, it is not said that he
gave his consent to the parties who brought that report, and who bade
the Master no more think of coming now. And together with this, we have
to observe, that when the Lord addressed him in these terms, “Fear not:
believe only, and she shall be made whole,” <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948.md) He did not find fault with him on the
ground of his want of belief, but really encouraged him to a yet
stronger faith. For this ruler had faith like that which was exhibited
by the person who said, “Lord, I believe; help Thou mine
unbelief.” <span id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949.md)

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p13"></span>67. Seeing, then, that the case stands
thus, from these varied and yet not inconsistent modes of statement
adopted by the evangelists, we evidently learn a lesson of the utmost
utility, and of great necessity,—namely, that in any man’s words the
thing which we ought narrowly to regard is only the writer’s thought
which was meant to be expressed, and to which the words ought to be
subservient; and further, that we should not suppose one to be giving an
incorrect statement, if he happens to convey in different words what the
person really meant whose words he fails to reproduce literally. And we
ought not to let the wretched cavillers at words fancy that truth must
be tied somehow or other to the jots and tittles of letters; whereas the
fact is, that not in the matter of words only, but equally in all other
methods by which sentiments are indicated, the sentiment itself, and
nothing else, is what ought to be looked at.

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p14"></span>68. Moreover, as to the circumstance
that some codices of Matthew’s Gospel contain the reading, “For the
woman <span id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950.md) is not dead, but
sleepeth,” while Mark and Luke certify that she was a damsel of the age
of twelve years, we may suppose that Matthew has followed the Hebrew
mode of speech here. For in other passages of Scripture, as well as
here, it is found that not only those who had already known a man, but
all females in general, including untouched virgins, are called
women. <span id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951.md) That is the case, for
instance, where it is written of Eve, “He made it <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952.md) into a woman;” <span
id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953.md) and again, in the book of Numbers,
where the women <span id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954.md) who have not
known a man by lying with him, that is to say, the virgins, are ordered
to be saved from being put to death. <span
id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955.md) Adopting the same phraseology, Paul,
too, says of Christ Himself, that He was “made of a woman.” <span
id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956.md) And it is better, therefore, to
understand the matter according to these analogies, than to suppose that
<span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span
id="vi.v.xxix-Page_136"></span>this damsel of twelve years of age was
already married, or had known a man. <span
id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_942"></span>[134:943](1060125.htm#fr_942.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p3"></span> [Matt. ix.
18-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018.md)<span
id="vi.v.xxix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[134:944](1060125.htm#fr_943.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p4"></span> [Mark v.
21-43](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#021.md)<span
id="vi.v.xxix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[134:945](1060125.htm#fr_944.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p5"></span> \[The events can be arranged in the
order of Mark, with the exception of the passage, [Mark
2.15-22](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.v.xxix-p5.1"></span>. This must be placed, as Augustin says,
after the return from “the country of the Gerasenes.” Comp. § 89.—R.\]

<span id="fn_945"></span>[134:946](1060125.htm#fr_945.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p6"></span> [Luke viii.
40-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#040.md)<span
id="vi.v.xxix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_946"></span>[134:947](1060125.htm#fr_946.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p7"></span> \[This is one of the rare cases where
the order of Matthew is more exact than that of Mark and Luke. But the
former evangelist has dislocated a long series of events in the same
connection. See above.—R.\]

<span id="fn_947"></span>[135:948](1060125.htm#fr_947.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p9"></span> *Conscindis*.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[135:949](1060125.htm#fr_948.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p11"></span> [Luke viii.
50](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#050.md)<span id="vi.v.xxix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[135:950](1060125.htm#fr_949.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p12"></span> [Mark ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024.md)<span id="vi.v.xxix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[135:951](1060125.htm#fr_950.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p15"></span> *Mulier*.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[135:952](1060125.htm#fr_951.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p16"></span> *Mulieres*.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[135:953](1060125.htm#fr_952.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p17"></span> *Eam*, her.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[135:954](1060125.htm#fr_953.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p18"></span> [Gen. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#022.md)<span id="vi.v.xxix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[135:955](1060125.htm#fr_954.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p19"></span> *Mulieres*.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[135:956](1060125.htm#fr_955.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p20"></span> [Num. xxxi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#018.md)<span id="vi.v.xxix-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[135:957](1060125.htm#fr_956.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p21"></span> [Gal. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004.md)<span id="vi.v.xxix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[136:958](1060125.htm#fr_957.md) <span
id="vi.v.xxix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xxix-p22"></span> \[The curious variation in text noted
above was probably due to the scribe’s confounding the “damsel” with the
“woman” who had just been spoken of.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](1060126.md)
