[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060300)  [Next](1060302.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lxxxiv"></span> <span id="vii.lxxxiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXXII.</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p2.1"></span>\[CXXXII. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p3"></span>*On the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p3.1"></span>*[John vi.
55](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#055.md)<span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p3.2"></span>,“For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood
is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh,” etc.*

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p4.1"></span>As</span> we heard when the Holy Gospel was
being read, the Lord Jesus Christ exhorted us by the promise of eternal
life to eat His Flesh and drink His Blood. Ye that heard these words,
have not all as yet understood them. For those of you who have been
baptized and the faithful do know what He meant. But those among you who
are yet called Catechumens, or Hearers, could be hearers, when it was
being read, could they be understanders too? Accordingly our discourse
is directed to both. Let them who already eat the Flesh of the Lord and
drink His Blood, think What it is they eat and drink, lest, as the
Apostle says, “They eat and drink judgment to themselves.” <span
id="fr_3947"></span>[3948](#fn_3947.md) But they who do not yet eat and
drink, let them hasten when invited to such a Banquet. Throughout these
days the teachers feed you. Christ daily feedeth you, That His Table is
ever ordered before you. What is the reason. O Hearers, that ye see the
Table, and come not to the Banquet? And peradventure, just now when the
Gospel was being read, ye said in your hearts, “We are thinking what it
is that He saith, ‘My Flesh is meat indeed, and My Blood is drink
indeed.’  <span id="fr_3948"></span>[3949](#fn_3948.md) How is the Flesh of
the Lord eaten, and the Blood of the Lord drunk? We are thinking what He
saith.” Who hath closed it against thee, that thou dost not know this?
There is a veil over it; but if thou wilt, the veil shall be taken away.
Come to the profession, <span id="fr_3949"></span>[3950](#fn_3949.md) and
thou hast resolved the difficulty. For what the Lord Jesus said, the
faithful know well already. But thou art called a Catechumen, art called
a Hearer, and art deaf. For the ears of the booty thou hast open, seeing
that thou hearest the words which were spoken; but the ears of the heart
thou hast still closed, seeing thou understandest not what was spoken. I
plead, <span id="fr_3950"></span>[3951](#fn_3950.md) I do not discuss it.
Lo, Easter <span id="fr_3951"></span>[3952](#fn_3951.md) is at hand, give
in thy name for baptism. If the festivity arouse thee not, let the very
curiosity induce thee: that thou mayest know the meaning of, Whoso
eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood dwelleth in Me, and I in
him.” <span id="fr_3952"></span>[3953](#fn_3952.md) That thou mayest know
<span id="page_505">p. 505</span> <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-Page_505"></span>with me what is meant, “Knock, and it
shall be opened unto thee:” <span id="fr_3953"></span>[3954](#fn_3953.md)
and as I say to thee, “Knock, and it shall be opened unto thee,” so do I
too knock, open thou to me. When I speak aloud to the ears, I knock at
the breast.

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p12"></span>2. But if the Catechumens, my Brethren,
are to be exhorted not to delay to approach to this so great grace of
regeneration; what great care ought we to have in building up the
faithful, that their approaching may profit them, and that they eat and
drink not such a Banquet unto their own judgment? Now that they may not
eat and drink unto judgment, let them live well. Be ye exhorters, not by
words, but by your conduct; that they who have not been baptized, may in
such wise hasten to follow you, that they perish not by imitating you.
Do ye who are married keep the fidelity of the marriage-bed with your
wives. Render what you require. As a husband thou requirest chastity
from thy wife; give her an example, not words. Thou art the head, look
where thou goest. For thou oughtest to go where it may not be dangerous
for her to follow: yea, thou oughtest to walk thyself where thou
wouldest have her follow. Thou requirest strength from the weaker sex;
the lust of the flesh ye have both of you: let him that is the stronger,
be the first to conquer. And yet, which is to be lamented, many men are
conquered by the women. Women preserve chastity, which men will not
preserve; and in that they preserve it not, would wish to appear men: as
though he was in sex the stronger, only that the enemy might more easily
subdue him. There is a struggle, a war, a combat. The man is stronger
than the woman, the “man is the head of the woman.” <span
id="fr_3954"></span>[3955](#fn_3954.md) The woman combats and overcomes;
dost thou succumb to the enemy? The body stands firm, and does the head
lie low? But those of you who have not yet wives, and who yet already
approach to the Lord’s Table, and eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink His
Blood, if ye are about to marry, keep yourselves for your wives. As ye
would have them come to you, such ought they also to find you. What
young man is there who would not wish to marry a chaste wife? And if he
were to espouse a virgin who would not desire she should be unpolluted?
Thou lookest for one unpolluted, be unpolluted thyself. Thou lookest for
one pure, be not thyself impure. For it is not that she is able, and
thou art not able. If it were not possible, then could not she be so.
But, seeing that she can, let this teach thee, that it is possible. And
that she may have this power, God is her ruler. But thou wilt have
greater glory if thou shalt do it. Why greater glory? The vigilance of
parents is a check to her, the very modesty of the weaker sex is a
bridle to her; lastly, she is in fear of the laws of which thou art not
afraid. Therefore it is then that thou wilt have greater glory if thou
shalt do it; because if thou do it, thou fearest God. She has many
things to fear besides God, thou fearest God alone. But He whom thou
fearest is greater than all. He is to be feared in public, He in secret.
Thou goest out, thou art seen; thou goest in, thou art seen; the lamp is
lighted, He seeth thee; the lamp is extinguished, He seeth thee; thou
enterest into thy closet, He seeth thee; in the retirement <span
id="fr_3955"></span>[3956](#fn_3955.md) of thine own heart, He seeth thee.
Fear Him, Him whose care it is to see thee; and even by this fear be
chaste. Or if thou wilt sin, seek for some place where He may not see
thee, and do what thou wouldest.

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p15"></span>3. But ye who have taken the vow
already, chasten your bodies more strictly, and suffer not yourselves to
loosen the reins of concupiscence even after those things which are
permitted; that ye may not only turn away from an unlawful
connection, <span id="fr_3956"></span>[3957](#fn_3956.md) but may despise
even a lawful look. Remember, in whichever sex ye are, whether men or
women, that ye are leading on earth the life of Angels: “For the Angels
are neither given in marriage, nor marry.” <span
id="fr_3957"></span>[3958](#fn_3957.md) This shall we be, when we shall
have risen again. How much better are ye, who before death begin to be
what men will be after the resurrection! Keep your proper degrees, for
God keepeth for you your honours. The resurrection of the dead is
compared to the stars that are set in heaven. “For star differeth from
star in glory,” as the Apostle says; “so also is the resurrection of the
dead.” <span id="fr_3958"></span>[3959](#fn_3958.md) For after one manner
virginity shall shine there, after another shall wedded chastity shine
there, after another shall holy widowhood shine there. They shall shine
diversely, but all shall be there. The brilliancy unequal, the heaven
the same.

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p19"></span>4. With your thoughts then on your
degrees, and keeping your professions, approach ye to the Flesh of the
Lord, approach to the Blood of the Lord. Whoso knoweth himself to be
otherwise, let him not approach. Be moved to compunction rather by my
words. For they who know that they are keeping for their wives, what
from their wives they require, they who know that they are in every way
keeping continence, if this they have vowed to God, feel joy at my
words; but they who hear me say, “Whosoever of you are not keeping
chastity, approach not to that Bread,” are saddened. And I should have
no wish to say this; but what can I do? Shall I fear man, so as to
suppress the truth? What, if those servants do not fear the Lord, <span
id="page_506">p. 506</span> <span id="vii.lxxxiv-Page_506"></span>shall
I therefore too not fear? as if I do not know that it is said, “‘Thou
wicked and slothful servant,’ <span id="fr_3959"></span>[3960](#fn_3959.md)
thou shouldest dispense, and I require.” Lo, I have dispensed, O Lord my
God; lo, in Thy Sight, and in the sight of Thy Holy Angels, and of this
Thy people, I have laid out Thy money; for I am afraid of Thy judgment.
I have dispensed, do Thou require. Though I should not say it, Thou
wouldest do it. Therefore I rather say, I have dispensed, do Thou
convert, do Thou spare. Make them chaste who have been unchaste, that in
Thy Sight we may rejoice together when the judgment shall come, both he
who hath dispensed and he to whom it hath been dispensed. Doth this
please you? May it do so! Whosoever of you are unchaste, amend
yourselves, whilst ye are alive. For I have power to speak the word of
God, but to deliver the unchaste, who persevere in wickedness, from the
judgment and condemnation of God, have I no power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3947"></span>[504:3948](1060301.htm#fr_3947.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p5"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3948"></span>[504:3949](1060301.htm#fr_3948.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p6"></span> [John vi.
55](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#055.md)<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3949"></span>[504:3950](1060301.htm#fr_3949.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p7"></span> Baptismal profession.

<span id="fn_3950"></span>[504:3951](1060301.htm#fr_3950.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p8"></span> *Disputo non dissero*.

<span id="fn_3951"></span>[504:3952](1060301.htm#fr_3951.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p9"></span> *Pascha*.

<span id="fn_3952"></span>[504:3953](1060301.htm#fr_3952.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p10"></span> [John vi.
56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056.md)<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3953"></span>[505:3954](1060301.htm#fr_3953.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p11"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3954"></span>[505:3955](1060301.htm#fr_3954.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p13"></span> [Eph. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023.md)<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3955"></span>[505:3956](1060301.htm#fr_3955.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p14"></span> *In corde versaris*.

<span id="fn_3956"></span>[505:3957](1060301.htm#fr_3956.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p16"></span> *Concubitu*.

<span id="fn_3957"></span>[505:3958](1060301.htm#fr_3957.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p17"></span> [Matt. xxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030.md)<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3958"></span>[505:3959](1060301.htm#fr_3958.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p18"></span> [1 Cor.
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041.md),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042.md)<span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3959"></span>[506:3960](1060301.htm#fr_3959.md) <span
id="vii.lxxxiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p20"></span> [Matt. xxv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#026.md)<span id="vii.lxxxiv-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXXIII](1060302.md)
