[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060272)  [Next](1060274) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.lvi"></span> <span id="vii.lvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p1"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vii.lvi-p1.1"></span>Sermon LIV.</span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.lvi-p2.1"></span>\[CIV. Ben.\]</span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p3"></span>*Again, on the words of the Gospel,* <span
id="vii.lvi-p3.1"></span>*[Luke x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#038)<span id="vii.lvi-p3.2"></span>,
etc., about Martha and Mary.*

<span id="vii.lvi-p4"></span>1. <span class="c13"><span
id="vii.lvi-p4.1"></span>When</span> the holy Gospel was being read, we
heard that the Lord was received by a religious woman into her house,
and her name was Martha. And while she was occupied in the care of
serving, her sister Mary was sitting at the Lord’s Feet, and hearing His
Word. The one was busy, the other was still; one was giving out, the
other was being filled. Yet Martha, all busy as she was in that
occupation and toil of serving, appealed to the Lord, and complained of
her sister, that she did not help her in her labour. But the Lord
answered Martha for Mary; and He became her Advocate, who had been
appealed to as Judge. “Martha,” He saith, “thou art occupied about many
things, when one thing is necessary. Mary hath chosen the better part,
which shall not be taken from her.” <span
id="fr_3329"></span>[3330](#fn_3329) For we have heard both the appeal
of the appellant, and the sentence of the Judge. Which sentence answered
the appellant, defended the other’s cause. For Mary was intent on the
sweetness of the Lord’s word. Martha was intent, how she might feed the
Lord; Mary intent how she might be fed by the Lord. By Martha a feast
was being prepared for the Lord, in whose feast Mary was even now
delighting herself. As Mary then was listening with sweet pleasure to
His most sweet word, and was feeding with the most earnest affection,
when the Lord was appealed to by her sister, how, think we, did she
fear, lest the Lord should say to her, “Rise and help thy sister”? For
by a wondrous sweetness was she held; a sweetness of the mind which is
doubtless greater than that of the senses. <span
id="fr_3330"></span>[3331](#fn_3330) She was excused, she sat in greater
confidence. And how excused? Let us consider, examine, investigate it
thoroughly as we can, that we may be fed also.

<span id="vii.lvi-p7"></span>2. For what, do we imagine that Martha’s
serving was blamed, whom the cares of hospitality had engaged, who had
received the Lord Himself into her house? How could she be rightly
blamed, who was gladdened by so great a guest? If this be true, let men
give over their ministrations to the needy; let them choose for
themselves “the better part, which shall not be taken from” them; let
them give themselves <span id="fr_3331"></span>[3332](#fn_3331) wholly
to the word, let them long after the sweetness of doctrine; be occupied
about the saving knowledge; let it be no care to them, what stranger is
in the street, who there is that wants bread, or clothing, or to be
visited, to be redeemed, to be buried; let works of mercy cease, earnest
heed be given to knowledge only. If this be “the better part,” why do
not all do this, when we have the Lord Himself for our defender in this
behalf? For we do not fear in this matter, lest we should offend His
justice, when we have the support of His judgment.

<span id="vii.lvi-p9"></span>3. And yet it is not so; but as the Lord
spake so it is. It is not as thou understandest; but it is as thou
oughtest to understand it. So mark; “Thou art occupied about many
things, when one thing is needful. Mary hath chosen the better part.”
Thou hast not chosen a bad part; but she a better. And how better?
Because thou art “about many things,” she about “one thing.” One is
preferred to many. For one does not come from many, but many from one.

<span id="vii.lvi-p10"></span>The things which were made, are many, He
who made them is One. The heaven, the earth, the sea, and all things
that in them are, how many are they! Who could enumerate them? who
conceive their vast number? Who made all these? God made them all.
Behold, “they are very good.” <span id="fr_3332"></span>[3333](#fn_3332)
Very good are the things He made; how much better is He who made them!
Let us consider then our “occupations about many things.” Much serving
is necessary for the refreshment of our bodies. Wherefore is this?
Because we hunger, and thirst. Mercy is necessary for the miserable.
Thou breakest bread to the hungry; because thou hast found an hungry
man; take hunger away; to whom dost thou break bread? Take houseless
wandering <span id="fr_3333"></span>[3334](#fn_3333) away; to whom dost
thou show hospitality? Take nakedness away; to whom dost thou furnish
clothes? Let there be no sickness; whom dost thou visit? No captivity;
whom dost thou redeem? No quarrelling; whom dost thou reconcile? No
death; whom dost thou bury? In that world to come, these evils will not
be; therefore these services will not be either. Well then did Martha,
as touching the bodily—what shall I call it, want, or will, of the
Lord?—minister to His mortal flesh. But who was He in that mortal flesh?
“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God:” <span id="fr_3334"></span>[3335](#fn_3334) see what Mary was
listening to! “The Word was made flesh, and dwelt <span id="page_430">p.
430</span> <span id="vii.lvi-Page_430"></span>among us:” <span
id="fr_3335"></span>[3336](#fn_3335) see to whom Martha was ministering!
Therefore “hath Mary chosen the better part, which shall not be taken
from her.” For she chose that which shall abide for ever; “it shall not
be taken from her.” She wished to be occupied about “one thing.” She
understood already, “But it is good for me to cleave to the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3336"></span>[3337](#fn_3336) She sat at the feet of our Head.
The more lowlily she sat, the more amply did she receive. For the water
flows together to the low hollows of the valley, runs down from the
risings of the hill. The Lord then did not blame Martha’s work, but
distinguished between their services. “Thou art occupied about many
things; yet one thing is needful.” Already hath Mary chosen this for
herself. The labour of manifoldness passeth away, and the love of unity
abideth. Therefore what she hath chosen, “shall not be taken from her.”
But from thee, that which thou hast chosen (of course this follows, of
course this is understood) from thee, that which thou hast chosen shall
be taken away. But to thy blessedness shall it be taken away, that that
which is better may be given. For labour shall be taken away from thee,
that rest may be given. Thou art still on the sea, she is already in
port.

<span id="vii.lvi-p16"></span>4. Ye see then, dearly Beloved, and, as I
suppose, ye understand already, that in these two women, who were both
well pleasing to the Lord, both objects of His love, both disciples; ye
see, I say (and an important thing it is which whosoever understand,
understand hereby, a thing which, even those of you who do not
understand ought to give ear to, and to know), that in these two women
the two lives are figured, the life present, and the life to come, the
life of labour, and the life of quiet, the life of sorrow, and the life
of blessedness, the life temporal, and the life eternal. These are the
two lives: do ye think of them more fully. What this life contains, I
speak not of a life of evil, or iniquity, or wickedness, or
luxuriousness, or ungodliness; but of labour, and full of sorrows, by
fears subdued, by temptations disquieted: even this harmless life I
mean, such as was suitable for Martha: this life I say, examine as best
ye can; and as I have said, think of it more fully than I speak. But a
wicked life was far from that house, and was neither with Martha nor
with Mary; and if it ever had been, it fled at the Lord’s entrance.
There remained then in that house, which had received the Lord, in the
two women the two lives, both harmless, both praiseworthy; the one of
labour, the other of ease; neither vicious, neither slothful. Both
harmless, both, I say, praiseworthy: but one of labour, the other of
ease: neither vicious, which the life of labour must beware of; neither
slothful, which the life of ease must beware of. There were then in that
house these two lives, and Himself, the Fountain of life. In Martha was
the image of things present, in Mary of things to come. What Martha was
doing, that we are now; what Mary was doing, that we hope for. Let us do
the first well, that we may have the second fully. For what of it have
we now? How far have we it? As long as we are here, how much of it is
there that we have? For in some measure are we employed in it now, and
ye too when removed from business, and laying aside domestic cares, ye
meet together, stand, listen. In so far as ye do this, ye are like Mary.
And with greater facility do ye do that which Mary doeth, than I who
have to distribute. Yet if I say ought, it is Christ’s; therefore doth
it feed you, because it is Christ’s. For the Bread is common to us all,
of which I too live as well as you. “But now we live, if ye, Brethren,
stand fast in the Lord.”  <span id="fr_3337"></span>[3338](#fn_3337) I
would not that ye should stand fast in us, but in the Lord. “For neither
is he that planteth anything, neither he that watereth; but God that
giveth the increase.” <span id="fr_3338"></span>[3339](#fn_3338)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3329"></span>[429:3330](1060273.htm#fr_3329) <span
id="vii.lvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p5"></span> [Luke
10:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#042)<span id="vii.lvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3330"></span>[429:3331](1060273.htm#fr_3330) <span
id="vii.lvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p6"></span> *Ventris*.

<span id="fn_3331"></span>[429:3332](1060273.htm#fr_3331) <span
id="vii.lvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p8"></span> *Vacent*.

<span id="fn_3332"></span>[429:3333](1060273.htm#fr_3332) <span
id="vii.lvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p11"></span> [Gen. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031)<span id="vii.lvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3333"></span>[429:3334](1060273.htm#fr_3333) <span
id="vii.lvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p12"></span> *Peregrinationem*.

<span id="fn_3334"></span>[429:3335](1060273.htm#fr_3334) <span
id="vii.lvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p13"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="vii.lvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3335"></span>[430:3336](1060273.htm#fr_3335) <span
id="vii.lvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p14"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="vii.lvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3336"></span>[430:3337](1060273.htm#fr_3336) <span
id="vii.lvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p15"></span> [Ps. lxxiii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028)<span id="vii.lvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3337"></span>[430:3338](1060273.htm#fr_3337) <span
id="vii.lvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p17"></span> [1 Thess. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#008)<span id="vii.lvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3338"></span>[430:3339](1060273.htm#fr_3338) <span
id="vii.lvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.lvi-p18"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="vii.lvi-p18.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LV](1060274)
