[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060059)  [Next](1060061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv"></span> <span id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span
id="vi.iv-Page_77"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span class="c19"><span
id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>the harmony of the gospels.</span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="vi.iv-p3.1"></span>Book I.</span>

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span>The treatise opens with a short statement on
the subject of the authority of the evangelists, their number, their
order, and the different plans of their narratives. Augustin then
prepares for the discussion of the questions relating to their harmony,
by joining issue in this book with those who raise a difficulty in the
circumstance that Christ has left no writing of His own, or who falsely
allege that certain books were composed by Him on the arts of magic. He
also meets the objections of those who, in opposition to the evangelical
teaching, assert that the disciples of Christ at once ascribed more to
their Master than He really was, when they affirmed that He was God, and
inculcated what they had not been instructed in by Him, when they
interdicted the worship of the gods. Against these antagonists he
vindicates the teaching of the apostles, by appealing to the utterances
of the prophets, and by showing that the God of Israel was to be the
sole object of worship, who also, although He was the only Deity to whom
acceptance was denied in former times by the Romans, and that for the
very reason that He prohibited them from worshipping other gods along
with Himself, has now in the end made the empire of Rome subject to His
name, and among all nations has broken their idols in pieces through the
preaching of the gospel, as He had promised by His prophets that the
event should be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](1060061)
