[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060034)  [Next](1060036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.v"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.</span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p2"></span>17. Let the new people, therefore, who are
called to an eternal inheritance, use the word of the New Testament, and
say, “Our Father who art in heaven,” <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276.md) *i.e.* in the holy and the just. For
God is not contained in space. For the heavens are indeed the higher
material bodies of the world, but yet material, and therefore cannot
exist except in some definite place; but if God’s place is believed to
be in the heavens, as meaning the higher parts of the world, the birds
are of greater value than we, for their life is nearer to God. But it is
not written, The Lord is nigh unto tall men, or unto those who dwell on
mountains; but it is written, “The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a
broken heart,” <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277.md) which refers
rather to humility. But as a sinner is called earth, when it is said to
him, “Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt thou return;” <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278.md) so, on the other hand, a righteous man
may be called heaven. For it is said to the righteous, “For the temple
of God is holy, which temple ye are.” <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md) And therefore, if God dwells in His
temple, and the saints are His temple, the expression “which art in
heaven” is rightly used in the sense, which art in the saints. And most
suitable is such a similitude, so that spiritually there may be seen to
be as great a difference between the righteous and sinners, as there is
materially between heaven and earth.

<span id="v.iii.v-p7"></span>18. And for the purpose of showing this,
when we stand at prayer, we turn to the east, whence the heaven rises:
not as if God also <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="v.iii.v-Page_40"></span>were dwelling there, in the sense that He
who is everywhere present, not as occupying space, but by the power of
His majesty, had forsaken the other parts of the world; but in order
that the mind may be admonished to turn to a more excellent nature,
*i.e.* to God, when its own body, which is earthly, is turned to a more
excellent body, *i.e.* to a heavenly one. It is also suitable for the
different stages of religion, and expedient in the highest degree, that
in the minds of all, both small and great, there should be cherished
worthy conceptions of God. And therefore, as regards those who as yet
are taken up with the beauties that are seen, and cannot think of
anything incorporeal, inasmuch as they must necessarily prefer heaven to
earth, their opinion is more tolerable, if they believe God, whom as yet
they think of after a corporeal fashion, to be in heaven rather than
upon earth: so that when at any future time they have learned that the
dignity of the soul exceeds even a celestial body, they may seek Him in
the soul rather than in a celestial body even; and when they have
learned how great a distance there is between the souls of sinners and
of the righteous, just as they did not venture, when as yet they were
wise only after a carnal fashion, to place Him on earth, but in heaven,
so afterwards with better faith or intelligence they may seek Him again
in the souls of the righteous rather than in those of sinners. Hence,
when it is said, “Our Father which art in heaven,” it is rightly
understood to mean in the hearts of the righteous, as it were in His
holy temple. And at the same time, in such a way that he who prays
wishes Him whom he invokes to dwell in himself also; and when he strives
after this, practises righteousness,—a kind of service by which God is
attracted to dwell in the soul.

<span id="v.iii.v-p8"></span>19. Let us see now what things are to be
prayed for. For it has been stated who it is that is prayed to, and
where He dwells. First of all, then, of those things which are prayed
for comes this petition, “Hallowed be Thy name.” And this is prayed for,
not as if the name of God were not holy already, but that it may be held
holy by men; *i.e.*, that God may so become known to them, that they
shall reckon nothing more holy, and which they are more afraid of
offending. For, because it is said, “In Judah is God known; His name is
great in Israel,” <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) we are not to
understand the statement in this way, as if God were less in one place,
greater in another; but there His name is great, where He is named
according to the greatness of His majesty. And so there His name is said
to be holy, where He is named with veneration and the fear of offending
Him. And this is what is now going on, while the gospel, by becoming
known everywhere throughout the different nations, commends the name of
the one God by means of the administration of His Son.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[39:277](1060035.htm#fr_276.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p3"></span> “The address puts us into the proper
attitude of prayer. It indicates our filial relation to God as ‘Father’
(word of faith), fraternal relation to our fellow-men (‘our,’ word of
love), and our destination of ‘heaven’ (word of hope).”

<span id="fn_277"></span>[39:278](1060035.htm#fr_277.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p4"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018.md)<span id="v.iii.v-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[39:279](1060035.htm#fr_278.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p5"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019.md)<span id="v.iii.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[39:280](1060035.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p6"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017.md)<span id="v.iii.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[40:281](1060035.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="v.iii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p9"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md)<span id="v.iii.v-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](1060036.md)
