[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060138)  [Next](1060140.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.xliii"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLII.—Of His Coming into His Own
Country, and of the Astonishment of the People at His Doctrine, as They
Looked with Contempt Upon His Lineage; Of Matthew’s Harmony with Mark
and Luke in This Section; And in Particular, of the Question Whether the
Order of Narration Which is Presented by the First of These Evangelists
Does Not Exhibit Some Want of Consistency with that of the Other
Two.</span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p2"></span>89. Matthew thence proceeds as follows:
“And it came to pass that, when Jesus had finished these parables, He
departed thence: and when He was come into His own country, He taught
them in their synagogues;” <span id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028.md)
and so on, down to the words, “And He did not many mighty works there
because of their unbelief.” <span id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029.md)
Thus he passes from the above discourse containing the parables, on to
this passage, in such a way as not to make it absolutely necessary for
us to take the one to have followed in immediate historical succession
upon the other. All the more may we suppose this to be the case, when we
see how Mark passes on from these parables to a subject which is not
identical with Matthew’s directly succeeding theme, but quite different
from that, and agreeing rather with what Luke introduces; and how he has
constructed his narrative in such a manner as to make the balance of
credibility rest on the side of the supposition, that what followed in
immediate historical sequence was rather the occurrences which these two
latter evangelists both insert in near connection \[with the
parables\],—namely, the incidents of the ship in which Jesus was asleep,
and the miracle performed in the expulsion of the devils in the country
of the Gerasenes, <span id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030.md) —two events
which Matthew has already recalled and introduced at an earlier stage of
his record. <span id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031.md) At present,
therefore, we have to consider whether \[Matthew’s report of\] what the
Lord spoke, and what was said to Him in His own country, is in concord
with the accounts given by the other two, namely, Mark and Luke. For, in
widely different and dissimilar sections of his history, John mentions
words, either spoken to the Lord or spoken by Him, <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032.md) which resemble those recorded in
this passage by the other three evangelists.

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p8"></span>90. Now Mark, indeed, gives this passage
in terms almost precisely identical with those which meet us in Matthew;
with the one exception, that what he says the Lord was called by His
fellow-townsmen is, “the carpenter, and the son of Mary,” <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033.md) and not, as Matthew tells us, the
“carpenter’s son.” Neither is there anything to marvel at in this, since
He might quite fairly have have been designated by both these names. For
in taking Him to be the son of a carpenter, they naturally also took Him
to be a carpenter. Luke, on the other hand, sets forth the same incident
on a wider scale, and records a variety of other matters which took
place in that connection. And this account he brings in at a point not
long subsequent to His baptism and temptation, thus unquestionably
introducing by anticipation what really happened only after the
occurrence of a number of intervening circumstances. In this, therefore,
every one may see an illustration of a principle of prime consequence in
relation to this most weighty question concerning the harmony of the
evangelists, which we have undertaken to solve by the help of God,<span
id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span id="vi.v.xliii-Page_145"></span>—the
principle, namely, that it is not by mere ignorance that these writers
have been led to make certain omissions, and that it is as little
through simple ignorance of the actual historical order of events that
they have \[at times\] preferred to keep by the order in which these
events were recalled to their own memory. The correctness of this
principle may be gathered most clearly from the fact that, at a point
antecedent to any account given by him of anything done by the Lord at
Capharnaum, Luke has anticipated the literal date, and has inserted this
passage which we have at present under consideration, and in which we
are told how His fellow-citizens at once were astonished at the might of
the authority which was in Him, and expressed their contempt for the
meanness of His family. For he tells us that He addressed them in these
terms: “Ye will surely say unto me, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever
we have heard done in Capharnaum, do also here in thy country;” <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034.md) while, so far as the narrative of
this same Luke is concerned, we have not yet read of Him as having done
anything at Capharnaum. Furthermore, as it will not take up much time,
and as, besides, it is both a very simple and a highly needful matter to
do so, we insert here the whole context, showing the subject from which
and the method in which the writer has come to give the contents of this
section. After his statement regarding the Lord’s baptism and
temptation, he proceeds in these terms: “And when the devil had ended
all the temptation, he departed from Him for a season. And Jesus
returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and there went out a
fame of Him through all the region round about. And He taught in their
synagogues, and was magnified of all. And He came to Nazareth, where He
had been brought up: and, as his custom was, He went into the synagogue
on the Sabbath-day, and stood up for to read. And there was delivered
unto Him the book of the prophet Esaias: and when He had opened the
book, He found the place where it was written, The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, because He hath anointed me. He hath sent me to preach the
gospel to the poor, to proclaim deliverance to the captives, and sight
to the blind; to set at liberty them that are bruised, to proclaim the
accepted year of the Lord, and the day of retribution. And when He had
closed the book, He gave it again to the minister, and sat down: and the
eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on Him. And He
began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your
ears. And all bare Him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which
proceeded out of His mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph’s son? And
He said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician,
heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capharnaum, do also here
in thy country.” <span id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035.md) And so he
continues with the rest, until this entire section in his narrative is
gone over. What, therefore, can be more manifest, than that he has
knowingly introduced this notice at a point antecedent to its historical
date, seeing it admits of no question that he knows and refers to
certain mighty deeds done by Him before this period in Capharnaum,
which, at the same time, he is aware he has not as yet narrated in
detail? For certainly he has not made such an advance with his history
from his notice of the Lord’s baptism, as that he should be supposed to
have forgotten the fact that up to this point he has not mentioned any
of the things which took place in Capharnaum; the truth being, that he
has just begun here, after the baptism, to give us his narrative
concerning the Lord personally. <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[144:1029](1060139.htm#fr_1028.md) <span
id="vi.v.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p3"></span> Three <span class="c13"><span
id="vi.v.xliii-p3.1"></span>mss.</span>, however, give *in synagoga
eorum*—in their synagogue—as in our version.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[144:1030](1060139.htm#fr_1029.md) <span
id="vi.v.xliii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p4"></span> [Matt. xiii.
53-58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053.md)<span
id="vi.v.xliii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[144:1031](1060139.htm#fr_1030.md) <span
id="vi.v.xliii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p5"></span> [Mark
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#035.md), [Mark
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#017.md), [Luke
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.v.xliii-p5.1"></span>. \[On the variations in the name, see
critical editions of Greek text. Comp. Revised Version. The Latin
versions generally read “Gerasenes” in all three accounts.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[144:1032](1060139.htm#fr_1031.md) <span
id="vi.v.xliii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p6"></span> [Matt. viii.
23-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.v.xliii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[144:1033](1060139.htm#fr_1032.md) <span
id="vi.v.xliii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p7"></span> [John vi.
42](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#042.md)<span id="vi.v.xliii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[144:1034](1060139.htm#fr_1033.md) <span
id="vi.v.xliii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p9"></span> [Mark vi.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.v.xliii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[145:1035](1060139.htm#fr_1034.md) <span
id="vi.v.xliii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p10"></span> [Luke iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#023.md)<span id="vi.v.xliii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[145:1036](1060139.htm#fr_1035.md) <span
id="vi.v.xliii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p11"></span> [Luke iv.
13-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#013.md)<span
id="vi.v.xliii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[145:1037](1060139.htm#fr_1036.md) <span
id="vi.v.xliii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.xliii-p12"></span> \[The question of the identity of the
visits to Nazareth is still an open one. But there are some points
ignored by Augustin which indicate that Luke refers to an earlier
visit.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII](1060140.md)
