[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060162)  [Next](1060164.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v.lxvii"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXVI.—Of the Colt of the Ass Which
is Mentioned by Matthew, and of the Consistency of His Account with that
of the Other Evangelists, Who Speak Only of the Ass.</span>

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p2"></span>127. Matthew goes on with his narrative
in the following terms: “And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and
were come to Bethphage, unto the Mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two
disciples, saying unto them, Go into the village over against you, and
straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her;” and so on,
down to the words, “Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord:
Hosanna in the highest.” <span id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130.md) Mark
also records this occurrence, and inserts it in the same order. <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131.md) Luke, on the other hand, tarries a
space by Jericho, recounting certain matters which these others have
omitted,—namely, the story of Zacchæus, the chief of the publicans, and
some sayings which are couched in parabolic form. After instancing these
things, however, this evangelist again joins company with the others in
the narrative relating to the ass on which Jesus sat. <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132.md) And let not the circumstance
stagger us, that Matthew speaks both of an ass and of the colt of an
ass, while the others say nothing of the ass. For here again we must
bear in mind the rule which we have already introduced in dealing with
the statements about the seating of the people by fifties and by
hundreds on the occasion on which the multitudes were fed with the five
loaves. <span id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133.md) Now, after this
principle has been brought into application, the reader should not feel
any serious difficulty in the present case. Indeed, even had Matthew
said nothing about the colt, just as his fellow-historians have taken no
notice of the ass, the fact should not have created any such perplexity
as to induce the idea of an insuperable contradiction between the two
statements, when the one writer speaks only of the ass, and the others
only of the colt of the ass. But how much less cause then for any
disquietude ought there to be, when we see that the one writer has
mentioned the ass to which the others have omitted to refer, in such a
manner as at the same time not to leave unnoticed also the colt of which
the rest have spoken! In fine, where it is possible to suppose both
objects to have been included in the occurrence, there is no real
antagonism, although the one writer may specify only the one thing, and
another only the other. How much less need <span id="page_159">p.
159</span> <span id="vi.v.lxvii-Page_159"></span>there be any
contradiction, when the one writer particularizes the one object, and
another instances both!

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p7"></span>128. Again, although John tells us
nothing as to the way in which the Lord despatched His disciples to
fetch these animals to Him, nevertheless he inserts a brief allusion to
this colt, and cites also the word of the prophet which Matthew makes
use of. <span id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134.md) In the case also of
this testimony from the prophet, the terms in which it is reproduced by
the evangelists, although they exhibit certain differences, do not fail
to express a sense identical in intention. Some difficulty, however, may
be felt in the fact that Matthew adduces this passage in a form which
represents the prophet to have made mention of the ass; whereas this is
not the case, either with the quotation as introduced by John, or with
the version given in the ecclesiastical codices of the translation in
common use. An explanation of this variation seems to me to be found in
the fact that Matthew is understood to have written his Gospel in the
Hebrew language. Moreover, it is manifest that the translation which
bears the name of the Septuagint differs in some particulars from the
text which is found in the Hebrew by those who know that tongue, and by
the several scholars who have given us renderings of the same Hebrew
books. And if an explanation is asked for this discrepancy, or for the
circumstance that the weighty authority of the Septuagint translation
diverges in many passages from the rendering of the truth which is
discovered in the Hebrew codices, I am of opinion that no more probable
account of the matter will suggest itself, than the supposition that the
Seventy composed their version under the influence of the very Spirit by
whose inspiration the things which they were engaged in translating had
been originally spoken. This is an idea which receives confirmation also
from the marvellous consent which is asserted to have characterized
them. <span id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135.md) Consequently, when
these translators, while not departing from the real mind of God from
which these sayings proceeded, and to the expression of which the words
ought to be subservient, gave a different form to some matters in their
reproduction of the text, they had no intention of exemplifying anything
else than the very thing which we now admiringly contemplate in that
kind of harmonious diversity which marks the four evangelists, and in
the light of which it is made clear that there is no failure from strict
truth, although one historian may give an account of some theme in a
manner different indeed from another, and yet not so different as to
involve an actual departure from the sense intended by the person with
whom he is bound to be in concord and agreement. To understand this is
of advantage to character, with a view at once to guard against what is
false, and to pronounce correctly upon it; and it is of no less
consequence to faith itself, in the way of precluding the supposition
that, as it were with consecrated sounds, truth has a kind of defence
provided for it which might imply God’s handing over to us not only the
thing itself, but likewise the very words which are required for its
enunciation; whereas the fact rather is, that the theme itself which is
to be expressed is so decidedly deemed of superior importance to the
words in which it has to be expressed, <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136.md) that we would be under no
obligation to ask about them at all, if it were possible for us to know
the truth without the terms, as God knows it, and as His angels also
know it in Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[158:1131](1060163.htm#fr_1130.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p3"></span> [Matt. xxi.
1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[158:1132](1060163.htm#fr_1131.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p4"></span> [Mark xi.
1-10](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[158:1133](1060163.htm#fr_1132.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p5"></span> [Luke xix.
1-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[158:1134](1060163.htm#fr_1133.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p6"></span> See above, chap. xlvi. § 98.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[159:1135](1060163.htm#fr_1134.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p8"></span> [John
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#015.md)<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[159:1136](1060163.htm#fr_1135.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p9"></span> \[The reference here is to the story of
Aristeas, to the effect that the translators, though separated, produced
identical versions. Compare translator’s remark in Introductory
Notice.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[159:1137](1060163.htm#fr_1136.md) <span
id="vi.v.lxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.lxvii-p10"></span> Reading *quæ dicenda est, sermonibus
per quos dicenda*. The Ratisbon edition and twelve <span
class="c13"><span id="vi.v.lxvii-p10.1"></span>mss.</span> give in both
instances *discenda* = to be learned, instead of *dicenda* = to be
expressed. See Migne.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVII](1060164.md)
