[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1060054)  [Next](1060056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="v.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.</span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p2"></span>82. But seeing that, however pure an eye
one may have, *i.e.* with however single and sincere a heart one may
live, he yet cannot look into the heart of another: whatever things
could not have become apparent in deeds or words, are disclosed by
trials. Now trial is twofold; either in the hope of obtaining some
temporal advantage, or in the terror of losing it. And especially must
we be on our guard, lest, when striving after wisdom, which can be found
in Christ alone, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge; <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) —we must be on our
guard, I say, lest, under the very name of Christ, we be deceived by
heretics, or by any parties whatever defective in intelligence, and
lovers of this world. For on this account He adds a warning, saying,
“Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, <span
id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven; but he that doeth the will of My Father which is in heaven, he
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven:” lest we should think that the
mere fact of one saying to our Lord, “Lord, Lord,” belongs to those
fruits; and from that he should seem to us to be a good tree. But those
are the fruits, to do the will of the Father who is in heaven, in the
doing of which He has condescended to exhibit Himself as an example.

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p5"></span>83. But the question may fairly be
started, how with this sentence the statement of the <span
id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span id="v.iii.xxv-Page_62"></span>apostle is
to be reconciled, where he says, “No man speaking by the Spirit of God
calleth Jesus accursed; and no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but
by the Holy Ghost:” <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) for neither
can we say that any who have the Holy Spirit will not enter into the
kingdom of heaven, if they persevere onwards to the end; nor can we
affirm that those who say, “Lord, Lord,” and yet do not enter into the
kingdom of heaven, have the Holy Spirit. How then does no one say “that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost,” unless it is because the
apostle has used the word “say” here in a strict and proper sense, so
that it implies the will and understanding of him who says? But the Lord
has used the word which He employs in a general sense: “Not every one
that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.”
For he also who neither wishes nor understands what he says, seems to
say it; but he properly says it, who gives expression to his will and
mind by the sound of his voice: just as, a little before, what is called
“joy” among the fruits of the Spirit is called so in a strict and proper
sense, not in the way in which the same apostle elsewhere uses the
expression, “Rejoiceth not in iniquity:” <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) as if any one could rejoice in
iniquity: for that transport of a mind making confused and boisterous
demonstrations of joy is not joy; for this latter is possessed by the
good alone. Hence those also seem to say it, who neither perceive with
the understanding nor engage with the deliberate consent of the will in
this which they utter, but utter it with the voice merely; and after
this manner the Lord says, “Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.” But truly and properly
those parties say it whose utterance in speech really represents their
will and intention; and it is in accordance with this signification that
the apostle has said, “No one can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost.”

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p8"></span>84. And besides, it belongs especially to
the matter in hand, that, in striving after the contemplation of the
truth, we should not only not be deceived by the name of Christ, by
means of those who have the name and have not the deeds; but also not by
certain deeds and miracles, for when the Lord performed of the same kind
for the sake of unbelievers, He has warned us not to be deceived by such
things, thinking that an invisible wisdom is present where we see a
visible miracle. Hence He annexes the statement: “Many will say to Me on
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy name, and in Thy
name have cast out devils, and in Thy name done many wonderful works?
And then will I say <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) unto them, I
never knew you: depart from Me, ye that work iniquity.” He will not,
therefore, recognise any but the man that worketh righteousness. For He
forbade also His own disciples themselves to rejoice in such things,
viz. that the spirits were subject unto them: “But rejoice,” says He,
“because your names are written in heaven;” <span
id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) I suppose, in that city of Jerusalem
which is in heaven, in which only the righteous and holy shall reign.
“Know ye not,” says the apostle, “that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the kingdom of God?” <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475)

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p12"></span>85. But perhaps some one may say that
the unrighteous cannot perform those visible miracles, and may believe
rather that those parties are telling a lie, who will be found saying,
“We have prophesied in Thy name, and have cast out devils in Thy name,
and have done many wonderful works.” Let him therefore read what great
things the magi of the Egyptians did who resisted Moses, the servant of
God; <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) or if he will not read
this, because they did not do them in the name of Christ, let him read
what the Lord Himself says of the false prophets, speaking thus: “Then,
if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it
not. For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, insomuch that the very elect shall be
deceived. <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) Behold, I have told
you before.” <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478)

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p16"></span>86. How much need, therefore, is there
of the pure and single eye, in order that the way of wisdom may be
found, against which there is the clamour of so great deceptions and
errors on the part of wicked and perverse men, to escape from all of
which is indeed to arrive at the most certain peace, and the immoveable
stability of wisdom! For it is greatly to be feared, lest, by eagerness
in quarrelling and controversy, one should not see what can be seen by
few, that small is the disturbance of gainsayers, unless one also
disturbs himself. And in this direction, too, runs that statement of the
apostle: “And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be
gentle <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) unto all men, apt to
teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that think
differently; <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) if God peradventure
will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.” <span
id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) “Blessed,” therefore, “are the
peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.” <span
id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482)

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span id="v.iii.xxv-Page_63"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p21"></span>87. Hence we must take special notice
how terribly the conclusion of the whole sermon is introduced:
“Therefore, whosoever heareth these sayings of Mine, and doeth them, is
like <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) unto a wise man, which
built his house upon the rock.” For no one confirms what he hears or
understands, unless by doing. And if Christ is the rock, as many
Scripture testimonies proclaim <span id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484)
that man builds in Christ who does what he hears from Him. “The rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) upon that house; and it fell not: for
it was founded upon a rock.” Such an one, therefore, is not afraid of
any gloomy superstitions (for what else is understood by rain, when it
is put in the sense of anything bad?), or of turnouts of men, which I
think are compared to winds; or of the river of this life, as it were
flowing over the earth in carnal lusts. For it is the man who is seduced
by the prosperity that is broken down by the adversities arising from
these three things; none of which is feared by him who has his house
founded upon a rock, *i.e.* who not only hears, but also does, the
Lord’s commands. And the man who hears and does them not is in dangerous
proximity to all these, for he has no stable foundation; but by hearing
and not doing, he builds a ruin. For He goes on to say: “And every one
that heareth these sayings of Mine, and doeth them not, shall be like
unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand:  <span
id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) and the rain descended, and the floods
came, and the winds blew, and beat <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) upon that house; and it fell: and
great was <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) the fall of it. And it
came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were
astonished at His doctrine: for He taught them as one having authority,
and not as their scribes.” <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) This
is what I said before was meant by the prophet in the Psalms, when he
says: “I will act confidently in regard of him. The words of the Lord
are pure words: as silver tried and proved in a furnace of earth,
purified seven times.” <span id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) And from
this number, I am admonished to trace back those precepts also to the
seven sentences which He has placed in the beginning of this sermon,
when He was speaking of those who are blessed; and to those seven
operations of the Holy Spirit, which the prophet Isaiah mentions; <span
id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491) but whether the order before us, or
some other, is to be considered in these, the things we have heard from
the Lord are to be done, if we wish to build upon a rock.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_469"></span>[61:470](1060055.htm#fr_469) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p3"></span> [Col. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[61:471](1060055.htm#fr_470) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p4"></span> Many called Him Lord, but He never
called any one Lord (*ipsum multi, etiam amplissimi viri,—ipse neminem
ne Pilatum quidem*, dominum *vocavit*.—Bengel).

<span id="fn_471"></span>[62:472](1060055.htm#fr_471) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[62:473](1060055.htm#fr_472) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p7"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[62:474](1060055.htm#fr_473) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p9"></span> *Dicam*; Vulgate, *confitebor*; Greek,
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iii.xxv-p9.1"></span>ὁμολογήσω</span>.
Meyer says, “It is the conscious dignity of the future Judge of the
world.” Bengel calls attention to the great power of the word (*magna
potestas hujus dicti*). In this action Christ lays the most confident
claim to functions not imparted to any human being.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[62:475](1060055.htm#fr_474) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p10"></span> [Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[62:476](1060055.htm#fr_475) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p11"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[62:477](1060055.htm#fr_476) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p13"></span> [Exod.
7:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#000), [Exod.
8:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#000)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[62:478](1060055.htm#fr_477) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p14"></span> *Inducantur etiam electi*; Vulgate,
*inducantur, si fieri potest, etiam electi*.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[62:479](1060055.htm#fr_478) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p15"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
23-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023)<span
id="v.iii.xxv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[62:480](1060055.htm#fr_479) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p17"></span> *Mitem…diversa sentientes*; Vulgate,
*mansuetum…resistunt veritati*.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[62:481](1060055.htm#fr_480) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p18"></span> *Mitem…diversa sentientes*; Vulgate,
*mansuetum…resistunt veritati*.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[62:482](1060055.htm#fr_481) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p19"></span> [2 Tim.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[62:483](1060055.htm#fr_482) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p20"></span> [Matt. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[63:484](1060055.htm#fr_483) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p22"></span> *Similis est…*; Vulgate,
*assimilabitur*. Meyer, Tholuck, etc, refer this to the future judgment,
“I will make him like,” etc., when Christ will establish those who keep
His sayings for ever (opposed by Alford etc.).

<span id="fn_484"></span>[63:485](1060055.htm#fr_484) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p23"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p23.1"></span>.
So Alford, who thinks this signification too plain to be overlooked.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[63:486](1060055.htm#fr_485) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p24"></span> *Offenderunt*; Vulgate, *irruerunt*.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[63:487](1060055.htm#fr_486) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p25"></span> The transitory teachings and
institutions of men as opposed to Christ’s own word.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[63:488](1060055.htm#fr_487) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p26"></span> *Offenderunt*; Vulgate, *irruerunt*.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[63:489](1060055.htm#fr_488) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p27"></span> *Facta est*; Vulgate, *fuit*.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[63:490](1060055.htm#fr_489) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p28"></span> Vulgate adds *et Pharisæi*. The people
were astonished, not merely at His teachings, but the dignity and
self-consciousness with which Christ uttered them, *quod nova quædam
majestas et insueta hominum mentes ad se raperet* (Calvin). The Scribes
spoke as expounders of the law, and referred back to Moses for their
authority; Christ spoke in His own name, and as an independent
legislator, vested with greater authority than Moses and a higher
dignity. The Scribes by elaborate sophistry often drew many meanings
from a single precept, and burdened the people with an intricate and
endless variety of precepts for the details of conduct, laying painful
stress upon their observance; Christ directed attention from outward
acts to the motive and intent of the heart. “He opposed a genuine
righteousness to the mock righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees.”

<span id="fn_490"></span>[63:491](1060055.htm#fr_490) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p29"></span> [Ps.
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[63:492](1060055.htm#fr_491) <span
id="v.iii.xxv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p30"></span> [Isa.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)<span id="v.iii.xxv-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Harmony of the Gospels.](1060056)
