<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](busc17)  [Next](busc19) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

### XV

### BIRTH-STORY OF KING MAHĀSĪLAVA

<span class="small">"<span class="smallcaps">Resist</span> not him that
is evil, but whosoever smiteth thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
other also." It has been said that if the principles of the Sermon on
the Mount were put into practice, the world could not go on. This story
is interesting as showing that a Buddhist asked himself the question
whether the principle is practicable, and answered it in the
affirmative. It is also curious to notice that the moral expressly
inculcated in the verse is the homely one of perseverance. The prose
part of the story has probably been transformed, and the verse belonging
to an earlier form of the story retained.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Long</span> ago, when Brahmadatta was ruling in
Benares, the Bodhisatta was re-born as the son of the chief queen. On
his naming-day they gave him the name of prince Sīlava \[*i.e.* the
virtuous\]. At the age of sixteen he had attained perfection in all
branches of learning; and afterwards, on the death of his father, he was
established in the kingdom, and under the name of king Mahāsīlava became
a righteously ruling king. He built six almshalls, four at the four
gates of the city, one in the middle, and one at his palace-door, gave

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

alms to poor travellers, kept the commandments, and performed the
fast-day duties, being filled with patience, kindness, and compassion.
As a parent cherishes a son seated on his hip, so he cherished all
beings, and ruled his kingdom in righteousness.

Now one of his ministers misconducted himself in the harem, and this
became commonly known. The ministers informed the king. The king
inquiring into the matter found it out himself, and, sending for the
minister, said, "Blind fool, you have acted wrongly, you are not worthy
to dwell in my kingdom. Take your property, your wife and children, and
go elsewhere." And he sent him forth from the country. The minister left
the Kāsi country, and, going to the king of Kosala, gradually became a
confidant of the king.

One day he said to the king of Kosala, "Your majesty, the kingdom of
Benares is like a honeycomb free from flies. The king is very mild, and
with even a small military force it is possible to take the kingdom of
Benares." The king, on hearing his words, thought, "The kingdom of
Benares is great; can he be a hired robber in saying it is possible to
take it even with a small force?" and he replied, "You are hired for
this, I suppose." "I am not hired, your Majesty, I speak the real truth;
if you do not believe me, send me with some men to waste a border
village. When the men are taken and brought before the

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

king, he will give them money and send them away." The king replied, "He
speaks as a very brave man, I will test him then "; and sending his men
he caused them to waste a border village. The robbers were caught and
brought before the king of Benares. The king, on seeing them, asked, "My
children, why did you waste the village?" "We cannot get a living," they
said. "Then why did you not come to me? Henceforth do not do the like
again." And, giving them money, he sent them away. They went, and
announced to the king of Kosala what had happened. But notwithstanding
this he did not dare to go, and again he sent men to waste the country
in the middle of the kingdom. In the same way the king gave the robbers
money, and sent them away. Notwithstanding this, however, he did not go,
but again sent men to plunder in the very streets of Benares. The king
gave money to these robbers also, and sent them away likewise. Then the
king of Kosala, seeing that he was a very righteous king, said, "I will
capture the kingdom of Benares," and set out with an army.

Now at that time the king of Benares had a thousand invincible heroic
warriors, who would not turn back from the advance of a mad elephant,
intrepid even against the thunderbolt falling on their heads, and if
king Sīlava wished it, able to subdue the whole of Jambudīpa \[India\].
They, on hearing that the king of Kosala was coming,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

approached their king, and said, "Your Majesty, the king of Kosala is
coming, saying he will take the kingdom of Benares; let us go, and, even
before he has entered the border of our kingdom, smite him and capture
him." "My children," he replied, "for my sake no suffering is to be
inflicted upon others. Let those who want kingdoms take this." And he
forbade them to go.

The king of Kosala crossed the border, and entered the middle of the
country. Again the ministers of the king of Benares approached him, and
spoke as before, but the king again refused. The king of Kosala stopped
outside the city, and sent a message to king Sīlava, "Let him either
resign his kingdom or give battle." The king, on hearing, sent the
reply, "I have nothing to do with fighting; let him take the kingdom."
And again the ministers approached the king, saying, "Your Majesty, let
us not allow the king of Kosala to enter the city; even outside the city
let us smite and capture him." But once more the king refused, and,
causing the city gates to be opened, sat with his thousand ministers
round him on his throne in the great hall.

The king of Kosala with a great army entered Benares. Not seeing even a
single enemy he went to the king's palace, and, finding the doors open,
ascended to the splendidly adorned royal hall, thronged with ministers,
caused the guiltless king Sīlava, who was seated there, to be seized

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

with his thousand ministers, and said, "Come, bind this king and his
ministers with their hands tightly fastened behind their backs, and take
them to a cemetery. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) Bury them in holes
up to their necks, and so cover them with earth that they cannot move
even a hand. At night the jackals will come and do what is fitting."

The men, hearing the command of the robber king, bound the king and his
ministers with their hands tightly fastened behind their backs and took
them away. Even at that moment king Sīlava harboured no thought of
violence against the robber king, and there was not one of the
ministers, when being bound and led off, who could disobey the king's
word, so well disciplined was his assembly.

Then the king's men took king Sīlava and his ministers, buried them in
holes up to their necks, the king in the middle, with the ministers on
both sides. They placed them all in holes, scattered earth over and made
it firm, and came away. King Sīlava addressed his ministers and exhorted
them, "Give not way to anger against the robber king, but practise
kindness, my children."

Now at midnight the jackals came saying, "Let us eat human flesh." The
king and his

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

ministers, on seeing them, gave a shout with one voice. The jackals fled
in terror. Then they turned to look back, and, seeing that no one was
following, came up again. A second time the men uttered the shout. As
many as three times the jackals fled away, and again looking back and
seeing that not a single person was following, they thought, "These must
be men sentenced to death"; and they became bold, and when the shout was
raised again, they did not flee. The oldest jackal came up to the king,
and the others approached the ministers. The king, who was clever in
device, marked the jackal's approach, and as though giving him the
opportunity to bite, threw back his neck, and as the jackal was biting
seized his neck with his teeth, and held him firm as in a vice. Being
held by the teeth of the king, who was strong as an elephant, the
jackal, firmly held by the neck, and being unable to free himself, was
in fear of death, and gave a great howl. The other jackals, hearing his
cry of pain, thought he must have been seized by some man, and, not
daring to approach the ministers, they all fled in fear of their lives.

Through the king holding firmly to the jackal that he had seized, the
earth was loosened, as the jackal moved to and fro, and the terrified
animal removed the earth with his four feet on the upper part of the
king. Then the king, seeing that the earth was loosened, released the
jackal, and, moving

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

to and fro with the strength of an elephant, got both hands free, and
clutching the edge of the hole, came out like a cloud driven before the
wind, comforted the ministers, removed the earth, took them all out, and
stood in the cemetery surrounded by his ministers.

Now at that time some persons had thrown away a corpse in the cemetery,
and had placed it on a boundary between the territories of two goblins
\[yakkhas\]. The goblins, being unable to divide the corpse, said, "We
cannot divide it, but king Sīlava is righteous, he will divide it and
give it to us; let us go to him." Taking the corpse and dragging it by
the foot they went to the king, and said, "Your Majesty, divide this and
give it to us." "Well, goblins," he replied, "I would divide and give it
to you, but I am dirty; I must first bathe." The goblins, through their
magic power, brought scented water prepared for the robber king's use,
and gave it to king Sīlava for bathing. After he had bathed they brought
and gave him clothes intended for the robber king. He put these on, and
they brought him a box with the four kinds of scent with which he
anointed himself, and then various kinds of flowers, placed upon
jewelled fans in a gold casket. When he had adorned himself with the
flowers, they asked, "Can we do anything else?" The king made a sign of
hunger. They went and brought him food flavoured with various

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

kinds of excellent essences, which had been prepared for the robber
king, and king Sīlava, bathed, anointed, dressed, and adorned, ate the
food flavoured with the various kinds of excellent essences. The goblins
brought him scented drink in a golden cup and golden bowl, prepared for
the robber king's use. Then he drank the water and rinsed his mouth,
and, as he washed his hands, they brought him the robber king's betel,
prepared with the five kinds of scent, and, after he had chewed it, they
asked, "Can we do anything else?" "Go and bring the robber king's sword
of state, which lies by his head-pillow," said the king; and they went
and brought this also. The king took the sword, set the corpse upright,
and smote it from the middle of the skull downwards into two parts, and,
thus dividing it, gave an equal part to each goblin, and, washing the
sword, he stood with it girded on.

Then the goblins ate the flesh, and, being well disposed and delighted
in heart, asked, "What else can we do, O king?" "Well, then, by your
magic power set me down in the robber king's royal bedchamber, and put
these ministers again each in his own house." They replied, "Very well,
your Majesty," and did so. At that time the robber king was lying asleep
on his royal bed in the royal bedchamber. King Sīlava smote his stomach
with the flat of his sword, as he lay asleep and unconscious. He awoke
in a fright,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

and, recognizing king Sīlava by the light of a lamp, arose from his bed,
summoned his courage, and stood up and addressed the king, "O king, in a
night like this, with the house guarded, the doors shut, and the place
inaccessible owing to the guard set, how did you come with sword girded
on and fully adorned to my bedside?" The king recounted in full all the
details of his coming. The robber king, on hearing, replied with
terrified mind, "O king, I, although a man, did not know your virtue,
but your virtues are known to fierce and cruel goblins, devourers of
flesh and blood; I will no longer, O king, be an enemy to you, who are
endowed with such goodness." Then on the sword he swore an oath, asked
the king's pardon, caused him to lie down on the state bed, while he
himself lay on a small couch.

When it dawned and the sun rose, he caused a drum to be sounded,
assembled all the trade-gilds, ministers, brahmins, and householders,
and recounted before them the virtues of king Sīlava, as though he were
making the full moon rise in the heavens. And again in the midst of the
assembly he asked the king's pardon, delivered back the kingdom to him,
and said, "Henceforth it shall be my charge to deal with robbers who
rise against you. Do you rule your kingdom with me to keep guard." Then
he passed sentence on the calumniator, and with his army departed to his
own kingdom.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

But king Sīlava, splendidly adorned, sat beneath the white umbrella on a
golden throne which had legs shaped like those of a deer, and as he
beheld his glory he thought, "This great glory and the lives of these
thousand ministers being saved would not have happened, if I had not
acted with perseverance. It was by the power of perseverance that I
recovered this splendour that I had lost, and saved the lives of my
thousand ministers. One should show perseverance without abandoning
one's desire, for thus the fruit of practising perseverance ripens."
And, making a solemn utterance, he spoke this verse:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">So should a mortal strive and strive,  
Let not the wise man be cast down:  
This truth in my own fate I see,  
According as I wished it came.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus the
Bodhisatta expressing his solemn utterance in this verse, showing how
surely the fruit of perseverance ripens in those who are endowed with
virtue, and doing good throughout his life, passed away according to his
deeds \[karma\]. (*Jat*. No. 51.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[84:1](busc18.htm#fr_7) The Pāli word means a
cemetery for the disposal of dead bodies which have not received the due
rites of cremation and burial.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. Birth-Story of the City with Four Gates](busc19)

</div>
