<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](busc08)  [Next](busc10) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

### VI

### THE BEGINNING OF BUDDHA'S PREACHING

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> first discourse of the Buddha was
given to the five disciples who had deserted him when he abandoned his
austerities. It is given in the Vinaya in explaining the rules as to how
the elder and younger brethren are to be addressed. The phrase "I have
attained the immortal," used by Buddha, has nothing to do with immortal
life. It refers to the permanent state of Nirvana, which does not pass
away as do compound things. As the Vijaya Discourse puts it:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The bhikkhu, filled with wisdom here,  
In lust, desire, delighting not,  
He has attained immortal peace,  
The unchangeable Nirvana-state.

</div>

The latter part of the following discourse, beginning with the words,
"These two extremes," forms the *Discourse of setting in motion the
Wheel of the Doctrine*. It teaches the middle path between the two
extremes of self-indulgence and self-mortification. The statement is
sometimes made that Buddha rejected asceticism. He certainly repudiated
self-torture as a means of salvation, but not the asceticism which
rejects all the lower desires in the pursuit of one highest goal.
Compare the Ten Commandments below.

<span class="smallcaps">Now</span> the Lord by gradual journeying came
to Benares, to the deer-park Isipatana, where were the five brethren.
The five brethren saw the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lord coming from
afar, and on seeing him they decided among themselves, "This, friends,
is the ascetic Gotama coming, who lives in abundance, has given up
exertion, and turned to a life of abundance. We must not address him,
nor rise to greet him, nor take his bowl and robe, but a seat shall be
set for him. If he wishes he may sit down." But as the Lord approached
the five brethren, so the five brethren did not abide by their
agreement, but went to meet the Lord, and one took his bowl and robe,
one arranged a seat, one set water for his feet, a footstool, and a
cloth. The Lord sat on the appointed seat, and having sat down the Lord
washed his feet. Then they addressed the Lord by name, and by the title
of friend. When they spoke thus, the Lord said to the five brethren,
"Brethren, do not address the Tathāgata by name, nor by the title of
friend. The Tathāgata, brethren, is an arahat, and has obtained complete
enlightenment. Give ear, brethren, I have attained the immortal, I
instruct, I teach the doctrine. If you walk according to the teaching,
for the sake of which noble youths go forth completely from a house to a
houseless life, you will soon, on going forth yourselves, realize the
transcendent faculties in this life, and will live in the attainment of
the aim of the highest religious life." At these words the five brethren
said to the Lord, "By that exercise, friend

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gotama, by that
course, that practice of penance, you have not attained supernatural
excellence of most noble knowledge and insight. Will you, when you live
in abundance, have given up exertion, and have turned to a life of
abundance, now attain supernatural excellence of most noble knowledge
and insight?" When they spoke thus, the Lord said to the five brethren,
"Brethren, the Tathāgata does not live in abundance, he has not given up
exertion, and has not turned to a life of abundance. The Tathāgata,
brethren, is an arahat, and has attained complete enlightenment. Give
ear, brethren, I have attained the immortal, I instruct, I teach the
doctrine. If you walk according to the teaching, for the sake of which
noble youths go forth completely from a house to a houseless life, you
will soon, on going forth yourselves, realize the transcendent faculties
in this life, and will live in the attainment of the aim of the highest
religious life." \[A second and third time the brethren asked the
question, and the third time the Buddha replied: \] "Do you perceive,
brethren, that I have never spoken to you thus before now?" "Never thus,
reverend sir." "The Tathāgata, brethren, is an arahat, and has attained
complete enlightenment . . ." \[etc., down to, "religious life "\]. Then
the Lord was able to convince the five brethren. They listened again to
the Lord, gave ear, and fixed their minds on the knowledge.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Then the Lord addressed the five brethren: "These two extremes,
brethren, are not to be practised by one who has given up the world.
What are the two? The one, devotion to lusts and pleasures, base,
sensual, vulgar, ignoble, and useless, and the other, devotion to
self-mortification, painful, ignoble, and useless. By avoiding these two
extremes, brethren, the Tathāgata has gained perfect knowledge of the
middle path, which produces insight and knowledge, and conduces to
tranquillity, to transcendent knowledge, to complete enlightenment, to
Nirvana. What is this middle path, brethren? It is the Noble Eightfold
Path, that is, right views, right aspiration, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right endeavour, right watchfulness, and right
meditation. This, brethren, is the middle path, of which the Tathāgata
has gained perfect knowledge, which produces insight and knowledge, and
conduces to tranquillity, to supernatural faculty, to complete
enlightenment, to Nirvana. This, brethren, is the noble truth of
suffering: birth is suffering, old age is suffering, illness is
suffering, death is suffering. Union with unpleasant things is
suffering, separation from pleasant things is suffering, not obtaining
what we wish is suffering, in short the fivefold clinging to existence
is suffering. And this, brethren, is the noble truth of the cause of
suffering: craving, which causes rebirth, accompanied by pleasure

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

and lust, and rejoices at finding delight here and there, that is,
craving for pleasure, craving for existence, and craving for prosperity.
And this, brethren, is the noble truth of the destruction of suffering:
which is the complete and trackless destruction of that thirst, its
abandonment and relinquishment, liberation, and aversion. And this,
brethren, is the noble truth of the path that leads to the destruction
of suffering, that is, right views, right aspiration, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right endeavour, right watchfulness, and
right meditation." (*Vin. Mahāv.* I. 6, 10 ff.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Ordination of Yasa](busc10)

</div>
