<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](busc12)  [Next](busc14) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### X

### THE WEAVER'S DAUGHTER

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">The</span> Dhammapada,
consisting of 423 verses, is accompanied by a commentary, which gives a
quasi-historical account of how each verse came to be uttered. The
following is the commentary on verse 174.</span>

"<span class="smallcaps">Blind</span> and unseeing."—This exposition of
the doctrine was spoken by the Master while dwelling at the Aggālava
shrine, about a certain weaver's daughter. One day, when the Master had
arrived at Ālavī, the inhabitants invited him, and gave alms. The
Master, after the preparation for the meal, by way of giving thanks
said: "Uncertain is life, certain is death. Of necessity I must die, and
my life ends in death. Practise reflection on death, thinking, life is
unsure, death is sure. For they who do not practise reflection on death
are at their last hour like a man who is terrified at seeing a poisonous
snake, and filled with terror they utter a cry of fear and perish. But
they who practise reflection on death are like a man who sees a
poisonous snake from a

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

distance, and going with a long stick he throws it away, and is not
terrified. Therefore let reflection on death be practised."

On hearing this exposition of the doctrine the rest of the people went
away intent on their business; but a certain weaver's daughter, who was
about sixteen years old, thought, "Wonderful is the teaching of the
Buddhas," and she practised reflection on death. The Master went from
thence, and reached Jetavana. Now the girl practised reflection on death
for three years. Then on a certain day the Master at dawn, observing the
world, called her to mind, and considered, "How may she be?" And he had
the knowledge that, "This girl from the day when she heard my exposition
of the doctrine has practised reflection on death for three years. I
will now go there and ask the girl four questions; and when she explains
them I will express approval at each of the four points, and will utter
the verse. By means of the verse she will be established in the fruit of
the First Path (entering the stream), and through her the teaching will
be profitable to many."

Then with an assembly of five hundred brethren he left Jetavana, and by
degrees came to the monastery at Aggālava. The people of Ālavī, hearing
that the Master had come, went to the monastery, and gave him an
invitation. The girl also heard of the Master's coming and, glad

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

at heart, she thought, "Verily the moon-faced, great Gotama Buddha, my
father, my lord, my teacher, has come. After three years I shall see the
golden-hued Master again. Now I shall be able to see his golden-hued
body, and hear his sweet, most excellent doctrine." But her father,
going to the workshop, said, "My daughter, some one has ordered a robe
from me, and a foot of it is not yet woven. I will finish it to-day. Get
the shuttle ready for me quickly, and bring it." She thought, "I want to
hear the doctrine of the Master. My father calls me, so how shall I be
able to hear the Master's doctrine? I won't get my father's shuttle
ready and bring it." Then she thought, "If I don't prepare the shuttle,
my father might strike and beat me, so I will prepare the shuttle and
give it to him and afterwards I will hear the doctrine." So, sitting
down on a chair, she prepared the shuttle.

The inhabitants of Ālavī waited on the Master, took his bowl, and stood
for him to give thanks. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) The Master
thought, "I have come a journey of thirty leagues for the sake of a
noble daughter, and now to-day she does not take the occasion. When she
takes the occasion I will give thanks." And he sat down in silence. When
the Master is thus silent, no one in the world of gods and men dares to
say anything to him.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Meanwhile the girl prepared the shuttle, put it in a basket, took it to
her father, and then went to the edge of the assembly, looking for the
Master. The Master raised his head and saw her. At the sign of his
looking she perceived, "The Master seated in such an assembly as this
looks for me and expects my coming, even into his presence he expects my
coming." Setting down the shuttle-basket she went into the presence of
the Master. But why did the Master look at her? It was thus that he
thought, "If she goes and dies like the common people, her future state
of existence will be uncertain, but by coming into my presence she will
gain the fruit of the First Path, and her future existence being
certain, she will be reborn in the Tusita heaven." But there was no
liberation for her, if she died on that day. She, understanding that she
was being looked at, approached the Master, and entering within the
six-coloured rays (of his halo), saluted him and stood on one side. And
on her saluting the Master, who was seated silent in the midst of such
an assembly, as she stood there, he said to her, "My girl, whence have
you come?" "I do not know, reverend sir." "Whither will you go?" "I do
not know, reverend sir." "Do you not know?" "I know, reverend sir." "Do
you know?" "I do not know, reverend sir." So the Master asked her the
four questions, and the multitude

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

murmured, "See, for shame, this weaver's daughter talks with the
All-enlightened One about whatever she wants; surely when she was asked
whence she had come, she should have said from the weaver's house, and
when asked where she was going, she should have said to the weaver's
workshop." The Master, silencing the multitude, asked, "My girl, when
you were asked whence you came, why did you say you did not know?" She
replied, "Reverend sir, you know that I have come from the weaver's
house, and in asking whence I have come you asked whence I have come in
being re-born here, and I do not know whence I have come in being
re-born here." The Master said to her, "Well done, well done, girl, you
have explained the question that I asked you." And expressing approval
he asked further, "When you were asked where you will go, why did you
say you did not know?" "Reverend sir, you know that I shall take the
shuttle-basket and go to the weaver's workshop. But you asked me where I
shall be re-born when I go hence, and I do not know where I shall be
re-born, when I go hence after death." Then the Master said, "You have
explained this question also," and a second time he expressed approval,
and asked further, "And why did you say that you knew, when you were
asked if you do not know?" "Reverend sir, I know that I shall die, and
hence I spoke thus." The Master

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

said, "You have explained this question also," and, expressing approval,
asked further, "Why, when I said 'Do you know,' did you say you did not
know?" "I know indeed that I shall die, reverend sir, but that I shall
die at such and such a time, such as at night or by day, I do not know,
and therefore I spoke thus." Then the Master said, "You have explained
this question also," and the fourth time he expressed approval, and,
addressing the assembly said, "None of you knew what she said, and you
only murmured. They who have not the eye of wisdom are blind, and they
who have the eye of wisdom are seeing." So saying he spoke this verse:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Blind and unseeing is the world,  
And few are those with insight here;  
As a bird from a net released,  
But few are they who heaven attain.</span>

</div>

When the teaching was ended, the girl was established in the fruit of
the First Path, and the teaching was also profitable to the multitude.

Then she took her shuttle-basket and went back to her father. Now he had
sat down and was fallen asleep, and she, without noticing, handed him
the shuttle-basket. The shuttle-basket knocked against the top of the
beam of the loom, and fell, making a noise. He woke up, and seizing the
loom he dragged it along. The beam moved, struck her on the breast, and
she

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

fell down dead. Then her father looked at her fallen down with all her
body blood-stained, and saw that she was dead. And great grief came upon
him, and, lamenting, "No one else can extinguish my sorrow," went into
the presence of the Master, and told him of the matter, saying,
"Reverend sir, extinguish my sorrow." The Master consoled him, saying,
"Sorrow not, for in the endless round of existence, even as at the time
of your daughter's death, the tears that are shed are more than four
oceans." And he preached a discourse of the endlessness of birth and
death. The weaver, with his sorrow appeased, asked the Master for
admission to the Order, and receiving ordination he in no long time
attained to Arahatship. (*Dhammapada Comm.* 174.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[59:1](busc13.htm#fr_2) This consisted in giving
them some instruction in the doctrine, as at his previous visit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. The Questions of Mālunkyāputta](busc14)

</div>
