<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](busc14)  [Next](busc16) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

### XII

### THE QUESTIONS OF UTTIYA

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Uttiya</span> and Vaccha, as
will be seen from their mode of addressing Buddha, are not his
followers. They are interested in the "views" or metaphysical theories
discussed by the various philosophical schools. All such speculation as
a means of salvation Buddha rejected. The only view admitted is the
"right view" of the Noble Eightfold Path.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Now</span> the wandering ascetic Uttiya
approached the Lord, and, having approached, he exchanged friendly
greetings with the Lord, and after the customary salutations he sat down
at one side. The ascetic Uttiya, as he sat at one side, said, "How is
it, sir Gotama, is the world eternal, this being true and any other view
foolish?" "I have not explained, Uttiya, that the world is eternal, that
this is true and any other view foolish." "But is the world not eternal,
sir Gotama, this being true and any other view foolish?" "This also,
Uttiya, I have not explained, that the world is not eternal, that this
is true and any other view foolish." \[In the same way Uttiya asks
whether the world is finite, whether

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

the soul is the same as the body or different, whether a Buddha exists
after death, whether he both exists and does not exist after death, and
whether he is both non-existent and not non-existent after death.\]

"Well, sir Gotama, when you are asked whether the world is eternal, and
whether this is true and any other view false, you say it has not been
explained by you. . . . Now what has been explained by you, sir Gotama?"
"With higher knowledge, Uttiya, I teach the doctrine to disciples, for
the purification of beings, for the overcoming of grief and lamentation,
for the destruction of suffering and sorrow, for the acquiring of good
conduct and the realization of Nirvana."

"Once more, sir Gotama, when you teach the doctrine with higher
knowledge, for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of grief
and lamentation, for the destruction of suffering and sorrow, for the
acquiring of good conduct and the realization of Nirvana, will all
beings attain this, or a half of them, or a third?" At these words the
Lord remained silent. Then the elder Ānanda thought, "The ascetic Uttiya
must not get a wrong opinion by supposing that the Samana Gotama, when
questioned by him, is embarrassed, and is unable to reply; this would be
a painful misfortune for a long time to the ascetic Uttiya." So the
elder Ānanda said to the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

ascetic Uttiya, "Now then, friend Uttiya, I will give you an example.
With an example some intelligent people can understand the meaning of
what is said. Suppose, friend Uttiya, a king had a border city with
strong foundations and walls, and one gate. It has a gatekeeper,
learned, intelligent, and wise, who keeps out strangers, and admits
those whom he knows. As he goes all round the city he cannot see an
aperture in the ramparts, or even a hole large enough for a cat to
enter. He certainly has not the knowledge that such and such a number of
living beings enter or leave this city; but in this matter he rather
thinks, 'Whatever beings of larger size enter or leave this city all
enter or leave it by this gate.' And in the same way, Uttiya, the
Tathāgata does not care about whether all beings or a half or a third
will thereby go \[to Nirvana\]. On the contrary the Tathāgata in this
matter rather thinks, 'All who have gone, or are going, or will go,
reject the five hindrances, the depravities of the mind which weaken the
understanding, and with thought firmly fixed on the four earnest
meditations duly cultivate the seven faculties for obtaining perfect
knowledge, and thus they have gone, are going, or will go from the
world.' But the question which you, friend Uttiya, asked the Lord, you
asked from a wrong point of view. Therefore the Lord did not explain it
to you." (*Ang. Nik.* V. I.93 ff.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. The Questions of Vacchagotta](busc16)

</div>
