<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](busc11)  [Next](busc13) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### IX

### THE FIRE DISCOURSE

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Gotama</span>, when
intending to carry out his great Renunciation, says, "When the fire of
lust, the fire of hate, the fire of delusion, are extinguished, Nirvana
is won." This metaphor of the individual and world being on fire often
recurs. When these passions cease to exist, the state of "coolness" of
the Arahat is brought about. The fire of samsāra goes out, as Buddha
expounds to Vacchagotta, through want of fuel to feed on.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Lord having stayed at Uruvelā as long
as he wished, went forward to Gayāsīsa with a great assembly of
brethren, with a thousand brethren, who had all previously been
ascetics. There the Lord addressed the brethren: "Everything, brethren,
is on fire. How, brethren, is everything on fire? The eye, brethren, is
on fire, visible objects are on fire, the faculty of the eye is on fire,
the sense of the eye is on fire, and also the sensation, whether
pleasant or unpleasant or both, which arises from the sense of sight, is
on fire. With what is it on fire? With the fire of passion, of hate, of
illusion is it

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

on fire, with birth, old age, death, grief, lamentation, suffering,
sorrow, and despair. Thus I declare. The ear is on fire, sounds are on
fire \[etc.\]. . . . The nose is on fire, scents are on fire, the tongue
is on fire, tastes are on fire, the body is on fire, objects of touch
are on fire, the mind is on fire, mental objects are on fire, the
faculty of the mind is on fire, the perception of the mind is on fire,
the sensation, whether pleasant or unpleasant or both, which arises from
the inner sense is on fire. With what is it on fire? With the fire of
passion, of hate, of illusion is it on fire, with birth, old age, death,
grief, lamentation, suffering, sorrow, and despair. Thus I declare.

"The wise and noble disciple, brethren, perceiving this, is indifferent
to the eyes, indifferent to visible objects, indifferent to the faculty
of the eye, indifferent to sensation, whether pleasant or unpleasant or
both, which arises from the sense of sight. He is indifferent to the
ear, indifferent to sounds, indifferent to the nose, indifferent to
scents, indifferent to the tongue, indifferent to tastes, indifferent to
the body, indifferent to objects of touch, indifferent to the mind,
indifferent to mental objects, indifferent to the faculty of the mind,
indifferent to the perception of the mind, indifferent to the sensation,
whether pleasant or unpleasant or both, which arises from the inner
sense. And being indifferent he becomes free from passion, by absence of
passion is he

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

liberated, and when he is liberated the knowledge 'I am liberated'
arises. Re-birth is destroyed, a religious life is lived, duty is done,
and he knows there is nothing more for him in this state." And when this
exposition was spoken the minds of the thousand brethren were freed from
the passions and liberated. (*Vin. Mahāv.* I. 21.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. The Weaver's Daughter](busc13)

</div>
