<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](busc02)  [Next](busc04) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES

### INTRODUCTION

To what extent can we speak of Buddhism as a religion—a system which
rejects a belief in an immortal soul and an eternal God? We shall do
well not to seek to answer this by fitting our reply into the limits of
a ready-made definition. Buddhism implies a certain attitude to the
universe, a conception which gives meaning to life, but it does not look
upon the ultimate reality of things as personal. It succeeds indeed,
more than any other system, in evading ultimate questions, though even
in rejecting metaphysics it was unable to remain wholly unmetaphysical.

The chief ontological principle of Buddhism is that all compound things
are impermanent; and it went on to assert that all things are compound
except space and Nirvana. The self is compound, and hence impermanent.
When the individual is analysed into body and mind with its qualities
and functions, what is there remaining

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

behind? The soul, ātman, said the Vedāntin, that permanent entity which
is in reality identical with the absolute and eternal Brahma. But the
Buddhist answer was that there is nothing remaining. The elements of the
self are the self, just as the parts of the chariot are the chariot.
Whether this is philosophically or even psychologically sound is another
question. This analysis was applied to all things and beings, and hence
also to the gods. The gods were not denied, but their permanence was,
and hence there was no *paramātman* or universal soul, of which the
gods, according to the orthodox philosophy, were the manifestations. In
this sense Buddhism is atheistic. The gods were merely beings, involved
like us in incessant change, who by merit had acquired their high rank
of existence, and who would lose it when their merit was exhausted. They
were, as the Sānkhya philosophy said, office-holders, and any one by
sufficient merit could attain to that rank. Buddha himself, according to
the legends of his previous births, several times became Sakka (Indra)
and even Brahma. In the birth-story of the hare (Jātaka, No. 316), when
the hare resolves to sacrifice himself to provide food for the brahmin,
the throne of Sakka, king of the gods, becomes hot, and Sakka becomes
uneasy on finding that there is a being with so much merit who is likely
to displace him.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Buddhism, however, is no theory that the world is a concourse of
fortuitous phenomena. It retained the Indian doctrines of rebirth and
karma. Karma, "action," is the law of cause and effect applied to the
moral world. Every action brings its fruit, either in this life or
another. It makes possible the moral government of the world without a
moral governor. But action can only lead to temporary happiness or
misery. It cannot—any more than in the Christian system—bring salvation.
Salvation, the freedom from the circle of birth and death, results from
knowledge, and the saving knowledge which is the essence of positive
Buddhist teaching consists in the four truths—the fact of suffering, the
cause of suffering, the destruction of suffering, and the Noble
Eightfold Path leading thereto. This is the teaching which makes
Buddhism a religion. Buddhism offers not merely a philosophy, but a
theory of life for those who are suffering, for the weary and
heavy-laden, which has for centuries met the religious needs of a great
part of the human race. "In religion," said Hegel, "all that awakens
doubt and perplexity, all sorrow and care, all limited interests of
finitude, we leave behind us on the bank and shoal of time. . . It is in
this native land of the spirit that the waters of oblivion flow, from
which it is given to Psyche to drink and forget all her sorrows." In no
religion has this been more deeply realised than

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

in the perfect calm of the Buddhist saint, who in his earthly life has
"crossed to the farther shore," and realised the eternal great Nirvana.

As there is no soul, no permanent entity which transmigrates, the
doctrine of rebirth had to be modified in the Buddhist system. The
elements or factors of the individual are composed of five groups
(khandhas): (1) the body, (2) sensations, (3) perceptions, (4) the
predispositions (sankhāras) forming the mental and moral character, (5)
consciousness. It is through these groups that transmigration takes
place, and the cause which leads to rebirth is "thirst" or clinging to
existence. Impelled by this thirst the being is reborn as an individual
in a new existence, higher or lower according to the karma accumulated.
Rebirth ceases when this thirst is extinguished. To bring about this
extinction many bonds have to be broken, errors corrected, and delusions
destroyed, on the Noble Eightfold Path leading to perfect knowledge.

What the early Buddhists meant by Nirvana ("blowing out, extinction")
has been much discussed, but it is at least possible to remove certain
misconceptions about it. It has been confused with another question
which has much exercised Western thought—what takes place at death? Is
it

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">To drop head-foremost in the jaws  
Of vacant darkness and to cease?</span>

</div>

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

The ordinary Buddhist was not oppressed with this doubt. He knew that
the ordinary man, who had not completed the Eightfold Path, was reborn.
Nirvana is the extinction not of the self, but of the clinging to
existence. To look upon it as the extinction of the soul is merely to
substitute a question debated by Western theologians and materialists.
Nirvana may be attained during life. It is a further question to ask
what becomes at death of the Arahat in whom the clinging to existence is
extinguished. The word Nirvana is used in two senses. To assert this is
not a mere inference, for the two meanings are distinguished in the
sacred texts. The Nirvana attained during life is called *sa-upādisesa*,
"having the khandhas or elements of the individual remaining," and the
Nirvana at death is *anupādisesa*, "not having the khandhas remaining."
All the descriptions of Nirvana that speak of enjoying a blissful state
refer to the Arahat who has attained liberation while alive. Buddha won
Nirvana when he attained enlightenment under the Bodhi-tree. A good
example occurs in the Discourse of the Right Wandering of a Monk (Sutta
Nipāta, II. 13), where Buddha is thus addressed:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">We ask the Sage, firm-minded, of great wisdom,  
Who has crossed to the other shore, and reached Nirvana,  
How should the monk, abandoning a dwelling,  
Rejecting the passions, rightly wander in the world?</span>

</div>

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The verb here used
(*parinibbuta*) for "reached Nirvana" is the same as used in the account
of the death of Buddha; and Buddha shortly before his death, when
warning his favourite disciple Ānanda that Chunda, who gave the food
which led to his last illness, is not to be reproached for it, defines
this final Nirvana as *anupādisesa*, "consisting in the complete passing
away of the elements of being."

The question then remains as to what becomes at death of the Arahat who
has attained Nirvana. That question was put to Buddha, and he refused to
answer it, but we can see what the inevitable view is on the Buddhist
theory of the self. In the account of Buddha's death there is no hint of
his continued existence, but only a repetition of the Buddhist truth,
"impermanent are all compounded things." In the Questions of Milinda the
answer is more definite: "The Lord has reached Nirvana with the
extinction of the roots which consists in the complete passing away of
the khandhas. The Lord has perished, and it is impossible to point him
out, saying, 'Here he is' or 'There he is.' But the Lord can be pointed
out in the body of the doctrine, for the doctrine was taught by the
Lord."

But what appears the obvious conclusion from these passages, and from
the Questions of Mālunkyāputta, Uttiya, and Vaccha, given below, has not
led to harmony in the theories of Western

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

scholars. Some of these views will be found discussed in Mrs. Rhys
Davids’ *Buddhism*. The matter is still further complicated, because the
later developments of Mahāyāna Buddhism did definitely introduce the
idea of an after-life of bliss for the Arahat. The form of Buddhism
which arose in Northern India some four centuries after Buddha's death,
and which called itself Mahāyāna, "The Great Vehicle," exaggerated the
view that all compound things are impermanent into the theory that all
phenomena are illusory. In this respect it is parallel to the Vedānta
doctrine of Māyā; and there is little doubt that the Vedānta influenced
this development. Further, as the Vedānta taught a permanent reality
behind the illusion of Māyā, so in Mahāyāna Buddhism the idea of Nirvana
was converted into a positive conception, the idea of an eternal
reality, in which dwell all the Buddhas as pure spirit. But whether this
teaching be considered a logical development of the original system, or
an accretion and corruption, it is certain that it does not belong to
primitive Buddhism, nor to those schools of Buddhism which have best
preserved the original tradition. The reader will find some valuable
information on this question in Dr. Barnett's introduction to *The Path
of Light* in the same series as the present volume.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The Buddhist Scriptures</span>

The Buddhist scriptures, as preserved by the Buddhists of Ceylon and
Further India, are in the Pāli language, a language related to Sanskrit
much as Italian is related to Latin; and for several centuries before
and after Christ it was spoken in varying dialects over most of Northern
India. Buddha, according to the Ceylon tradition, died 543 B.C., but it
is generally agreed that this date is too early. The latest calculation
by an Indian scholar, Mr. V. Gopala Aiyer, makes the date fifty-six
years later, 487 B.C. Immediately after Buddha's death the first council
is said to have been held at Rājagaha (now Rajgir in Behar on the
borders of Bengal), where the Vinaya (discipline) and Dhamma (doctrine)
were recited and fixed. The historical evidence for this council is much
disputed, but it is extremely probable that some such collection was
made about this time. Nothing was written down. It was preserved, as the
Vedas had already been preserved for centuries, by memory. It is this
very fact which strengthens the view that we possess a faithful picture
of the preaching of Buddha, a preaching which extended over more than
forty years. To determine to what extent the discourses have been worked
up into other forms and added to, and especially how the rules

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

of the Order have been gradually elaborated, is a work for future
scholars.

In the third century B.C. the great king Asoka ruled over Magadha, and
Buddhism became the established religion. Missionary embassies were sent
out, and after the council of Patna, about 250 B.C., Asoka's own son
Mahinda carried the faith to Ceylon. It was not until 160 years after
his arrival that the text of the sacred books was written down.

These Buddhist scriptures as we possess them consist of the Tipiṭaka,
"three baskets," in the following divisions:

*Vinaya Piṭaka* (Discipline of the Order, with commentary explaining how
each rule came to be established).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Suttavibhanga*.

*Khandhakas* (*Mahāvagga* and *Cullavagga*).

*Parivāra*.

</div>

*Sutta Piṭaka* (Basket of Discourses).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. *Dīgha Nikāya* ("Long collection," 34 discourses).

2\. *Majjhima Nikāya* ("Middle collection," 152 discourses).

3\. *Samyutta Nikāya* ("Connected collection," 55 groups).

4\. *Anguttara Nikāya* ("The add-one-collection").

</div>

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

5\. *Khuddaka Nikāya* (Miscellaneous collection).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

\(a\) *Khuddaka-pāṭha* (Short passages).

\(b\) *Dhammapada* (Anthology of verses).

\(c\) *Udāna* (Verses of solemn utterances spoken by Buddha at times of
strong emotion).

\(d\) *Iti-vuttaka* (Passages beginning "Thus it was said" \[by
Buddha\]).

\(e\) *Sutta-nipāta* (Discourses chiefly in verse).

\(f\) *Vimāna-vatthu* ("Stories of celestial abodes").

\(g\) *Peta-vatthu* ("Stories of petas \[ghosts\]").

\(h\) and (i) *Thera*- and *Therī-gāthā* (Psalms of the brethren and
sisters).

\(j\) *Jātaka* (Stories of Buddha's previous births).

\(k\) *Niddesa* (A commentary on the latter part of (e)).

\(1\) *Paṭisambhidā* ("Analytical science," on the fourfold power of
wisdom of Arahats).

\(m\) *Apadāna* (Stories of Arahats).

\(n\) *Buddha-vansa* (Lives of the 24 preceding Buddhas).

\(o\) *Cariyā-piṭaka* (Versifications of some of the Jātaka stories).

</div>

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

*Abhidhamma Piṭaka* ("Further Dhamma," more elaborate discussion of the
principles of the Doctrine).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. *Dhamma-sangaṇi*.

2\. *Vibhanga*.

3\. *Kathā-vatthu*.

4\. *Puggala-paññatti*.

5\. *Dhātu-kathā*.

6\. *Yamaka*.

7\. *Patthāna*.

</div>

One of the most important of the extra-canonical Buddhist works is the
*Questions of Milinda*. It was written, according to Prof. Rhys Davids,
in the first century, A.D. It gives an exposition of the doctrine in the
form of answers by the sage Nāgasena to the questions of king Milinda.
It is not history, but romance, though Milinda or Menander was a Greek
king of Bactria in the second century B.C. According to Strabo he was
the most important of the Bactrian kings, who are said to have subdued
more nations in India than Alexander. Two passages from the work are
given in the present selection.

<span class="smallcaps">Christian Parallels</span>

The high morality both of Buddhism and Christianity, and the
personalities of their founders, have led to theories as to the
influence

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

of one on the other. The subject is a complicated one, because there is
no doubt that the two religions at a later date did come into contact in
Tibet and other parts of Asia. This later relationship will be found
discussed in Dr. Carus's *Buddhism and its Christian Critics* (London,
1897). The resemblances in earlier Buddhism do not amount to more than
independent parallels, although Fausböll was inclined to think that the
Sutta-Nipāta, in which several of them occur, was not anterior to the
time of Christ. These are given below, [p. 107](busc22.htm#page_107).

Buddhism, in spite of fundamental differences from Christianity, has
more in common with it than appears at first sight. Its deepest
distinction is that it has no Saviour. Buddha was reborn from the Tusita
heaven out of compassion to teach the truth, but still each man must
work out his own salvation. His destiny, whether he wins Nirvana or not,
depends in the long run upon himself.

It is sometimes unintelligently said that continued rebirth is a dreary
doctrine. But it does not necessarily mean rebirth upon earth. The good
Buddhist, just as the Christian, hopes to go to heaven, and fears to go
to hell, and he has more possibilities than this. There are five states
of rebirth, as a god in heaven, as a human being, as an animal, as a
ghost, or in hell. A sixth state is sometimes added, that of the Asuras
or

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Titans. There are,
further, several heavens with many subdivisions, eight great hells, and
one hundred and twenty-eight minor hells. Nor does the Buddhist,
although he hopes finally to escape rebirth, look upon the chief end as
extinction. Nirvana is the attainment of the highest bliss, and involves
the extinction of all the lower desires. In this it is in accord with
the type of Christianity which makes the monk its ideal, and places
virginity higher than marriage. But—and here is another deep
difference—the infinity of bliss comes to be only the infinite cessation
of sorrow. This is the summing up in the Sutta of the Great Decease:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Righteousness, and earnest meditation,  
Wisdom, and highest liberation,  
These are the doctrines comprehended  
By Gotama the Glorious One.  
The Enlightened One with perfect knowledge  
Proclaimed the doctrine to the brethren,  
The Master, who puts an end to sorrow,  
The Seer, who has reached Nirvana.</span>

</div>

Buddha is said to have prophesied that the Doctrine would last five
hundred years, and it is the fact that by that time the decay set in in
India, which with the contamination of other philosophical systems, and
the adoption of debased forms of worship, led to its extinction in the
land of its birth. But it is still the most widely spread religion of
Asia. Ceylon, Burma, Siam,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

and Kambodia preserve the "tradition of the elders," the Pāli tradition
from which the following selections are taken. "In Burma," as a modern
Bhikkhu writes, "It still reigns supreme; the message of It is written
over all the land in Shrine and Monastery and Temple; written still
deeper in the hearts and lives of women and of men. Forty long years
after that supreme Illumination, the Master lived and taught His growing
band of followers; passing at last Himself from Life for ever, into the
Silence, the Utter Peace whereunto He had shown the way."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Dream of Queen Māyā](busc04)

</div>
