<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phc05)  [Next](phc07.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philistines*, by R.A.S. Macalister, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

III\. <span class="smallcaps">Their Decline and Disappearance</span>.

A few simple figures will show the comparative insignificance into which
the Philistines fell after their wars with David. In the first book of
Samuel, the name 'Philistine' or 'Philistines' occurs 125 times. In the
second book it occurs only twenty-four times, and some of these are
reminiscent passages, referring to earlier incidents. In the two books
of the Kings together the name occurs only six times.

Achish was still 'King of Gath', as we have already seen, at the
beginning of Solomon's reign, and the coast\] and strip was still
outside Hebrew territory. Gezer was presented to Solomon's wife as a
marriage portion. After the partition of the kingdom, Nadab son of
Jeroboam I besieged Gibbethon, a now unknown Philistine village, where
he was killed by his successor Baasha. The siege was apparently renewed
at the end of Baasha's own reign, but why this village was made a centre
of attack is a question as obscure as its topography. Ahaziah sent to
consult the Oracle of Ekron. The Shunammite woman who had entertained
Elisha sojourned during the seven years' famine in the land of the
Philistines—a testimony to the superior fertility of that part of the
country. Turning to the records of the southern kingdom, we learn from
the Chronicler that certain of the Philistines brought presents and
silver for tribute to Jehoshaphat: but that under his son Jehoram they
revolted and carried away his substance. In the parallel version in
Kings the revolt is localized in the insignificant town of Libnah. The
great king Uzziah, on the other hand, broke the walls of Gath—which had
probably been already weakened by the raid of Hazael of Syria

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (2 Kings xii.
18)—as well as the walls of Jabneh and of Ashdod, and established cities
of his own in Philistine territory. This is the last we hear of the
important city of Gath in history: henceforth it is omitted from the
enumerations of Philistine cities in prophetic denunciations of the
race. In the time of Ahaz there seems to have been a revival of the old
spirit among the beaten people. Profiting by the Edomite raid which
already harassed Judah, they took some cities from Southern Judah,
including Beth-shemesh, Aijalon, Gederoth, Shocho, Timnath, and Gimzo,
which are not elsewhere reckoned as Philistine property (2 Chron.
xxviii. 18); certainly the first of these was a Hebrew village even at
the time of the greatest extension of Philistine power. This 'Philistine
revival' seems to have inspired Isaiah in a denunciation of Ephraim
(Isa. ix. 12), but whether the invasion of the northern kingdom there
threatened ever took place is not recorded. Probably not, as Hezekiah
once more reversed the situation, smiting the Philistines as far as Gaza
(2 Kings xviii. 8).

At this point we glean some welcome details of history from the annals
of the Assyrian kings. Hadad-Nirari III (812–783) enumerates the
Philistines among the Palestinian states conquered by him about 803 R.
c., but enters into no particulars. Tiglath-Pileser III, however,
(745–727) gives us fuller details. Rezōn (in the Hebrew Rezīn) of Syria,
and Pekah of Samaria were in league, whereas Ahaz of Jerusalem had
become a vassal of the king of Assyria. The Philistines had attached
themselves to the Syrian league, so that in 734 B.C. Tiglath-Pileser
came up with the special purpose of sacking Gaza. Ḫanunu, the king of
Gaza, fled to Sebako, king of Egypt; but he afterwards returned and,
having made submission, was received with favour. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88.md)

Some four years earlier Mitinti, king of Ashkelon, had revolted,
trusting to the support of Rezon. But the death of Rezon so terrified
the king that he fell sick and died—possibly he poisoned himself,
knowing what punishment would be in store for him at the hands of the
ferocious Assyrian. His son Rukipti, who reigned in his stead, hastened
to make submission.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

About 713 another Philistine city comes into prominence. This is Ashdod,
the king of which, Azuri, refused to pay tribute and endeavoured to stir
up the neighbouring princes to revolt. Sargon, king of Assyria
(722–705), came down, expelled Azuri, and established in his stead his
brother Aḫimiti. An attempt was made by the Philistines—Sargon's scribe
calls them Hittites—to substitute one Yamani, who had no claim to the
throne. But this bold usurper fled to the land of Meluḫḫa in N. Arabia
when Sargon was on his way to the city. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) These operations of Sargon against Ashdod
are referred to in a note of time in Isaiah xx. 1.

The next king, Sennacherib (705–681), had trouble with the remnant of
the Philistines. Mitinti's son Rukipti had been succeeded by his son
Sarludâri, but it seems as though this ruler had been deposed, and a
person called Zidka reigned in his stead. Sennacherib found conspiracy
in Zidka, and brought the gods of his father's house, himself, and his
family into exile to Assyria, restoring Sarludâri to his former throne,
while of course retaining the suzerainty. In this operation he took the
cities of Beth-Dagon, Joppa, Bene-Berak, and Azuri, which belonged to
Zidka. These names still survive in the villages of Beit Dejan, Ibrak,
and Yazur, in the neighbourhood of Jaffa.

At the same time the Ekronites had revolted against the Assyrian. Their
king, Padi, had remained a loyal vassal to his overlord, but his
turbulent subjects had put him in fetters and sent him to Hezekiah, king
of Judah, who cast him into prison. The Ekronites summoned assistance
from North Arabia and Egypt, and met Sennacherib in El-Tekeh. Here they
were defeated, and Sennacherib marched against Ekron, slaying and
impaling the chief officers. Padi was rescued from Jerusalem, his
deliverance being no doubt part of the tribute paid by Hezekiah (2 Kings
xviii. 14).

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sennacherib then
cut off some of the territory of Judah and divided it among his vassals,
Mitinti, king of Ashdod, Padi the restored king of Ekron, and Zilbel,
king of Gaza. <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md)

Sennacherib was assassinated in 681, and his son Esarhaddon (681–668)
reigned in his stead. In the lists of kings in subjection to this
monarch we find Mitinti, king of Ashkelon (the Assyrian records seem to
confuse Ashkelon and Ashdod), and Zilbel, king of Gaza, of whom we have
heard before. Padi has disappeared from Ekron, and to him has succeeded
a king with the old Philistine name of Ikausu (= Achish). On the other
hand a king with the Semitic name of Aḫimilki (Ahimelech) is king of
Ashdod. All these kings survived into the reign of Assurbanipal, who
began to reign in 668. <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91.md)

According to Jeremiah xlvii. 1 (not the Greek Version) 'Pharaoh smote
Gaza' in the time of that prophet. This most likely was Necho, on his
way northward when Josiah, with fatal consequences to himself, tried to
check him. Herodotus is supposed to refer to this when he says (ii. 159)
that Necho took a great city of Syria called 'Kadytis', which elsewhere
(iii. 5) he describes as a city in his opinion not smaller than Sardis.
It is a possible, but not a convincing,

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

hypothesis, that Kadytis may represent some form of the name of
Gaza. <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md)

Here the Assyrian records leave us. We have, however, one more Biblical
reference, in the last paragraph of the book of Nehemiah, which is of
very great importance (xiii. 23, 24). The walls of Jerusalem had been
restored; the law published and proclaimed; all the steps had been taken
to establish an exclusive theocratic state in accordance with the
priestly legislation; when the leader was dismayed to discover certain
Jews who had married women of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab, the very
communities that had put so many obstacles in the way of the work of
restoration. <span id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93.md) Not only so, but there
were already children; and as is usual in such cases of mixed marriage,
these children spoke the language of their mothers only. Nehemiah
indulged in a passionate display of temper, treating the culprits with
personal violence, and probably he compelled them to put away their
wives, as Ezra did in a similar case. But the interest for us is not in
Nehemiah's outburst, but in his reference to the speech of the children.
They spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the
Jews’ language. In spite of Sennacherib's transportations and
deportations; in spite of the long and exhausting siege of twenty-nine
years which the city (according to Herodotus ii. 157) sustained in the
following century at the hands of Psammetichus; yet the ancient tongue
of the Philistines lingered still in Ashdod, the town which probably
retained exotic characteristics the longest. The distinction which
Strabo (XVI. ii. 1) draws between the Γαζαῖοι and the Ἀζώτιοι ('Jews,
Idumaeans, Gazaeans, and Azotii' being the four minor races of Syria
which he enumerates) may possibly be founded on a reminiscence of these
linguistic survivals. No doubt the language was by now much contaminated
with Semitic words and idioms, but still it possessed sufficient
individuality to be unintelligible without special study. It had of
course lost all political importance, so that it was not as in the days
of Samson and Jonathan, when every Hebrew of position was obliged to
know something of the tongue of the powerful rivals of his people: it
was now a despised *patois*, much as are the ancient Celtic languages in
the eyes of the average Saxon. In the chatter of these little
half-breeds the stern Jewish puritan was perhaps privileged to hear the
last accents of the speech of Minos, whose written records still 'mock
us, undeciphered'.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

It is true that some critics have explained the 'speech of Ashdod' as
being the tongue of Sennacherib's colonists. If so, however, Nehemiah
(himself a returned exile from a neighbouring empire to Sennacherib's)
would probably have had some understanding of it and of its origin, and
would have described it differently. The Semitic speech of the children
of the Ammonite and Moabite mothers does not seem to have caused him so
much vexation.

In Gaza, too, Philistine tradition still survived. Down to the time of
the Maccabean revolt there remained here a temple of Dagon, destroyed by
Jonathan Maccabaeus (1 Macc. x. 83, 84; xi. 4). But these traditional
survivals of religious peculiarities are mere isolated phenomena: apart
from them the absorption of Philistia in the ocean of Semitic humanity
is so complete that its people ceases to have an independent history. It
were profitless to trace the story of Philistia further, through the
campaigns of Alexander, the wars of the Maccabees and the Seleucids, the
Roman domination, and the complex later developments: the record is no
longer the history of a people; it is that of a country.

Nevertheless, the tradition of the Philistines still lives, and will
continue to live so long as the land which they dominated three thousand
years ago continues to be called 'Palestine', and so long as its peasant
parents continue to tell their children their tales of the *Fenish*. One
accustomed to the current English pronunciation of the name of the
*Phoenicians* might for a moment be misled into supposing that these
were the people meant: but the equation is philologically impossible.
There can be no doubt that this people of tradition, supposed to have
wrought strange and wonderful deeds in the land, to have hewn out its
great artificial caves and built its castles and even the churches and
monasteries whose fast-decaying ruins dots its landscape—that this
people is none other than the mighty nation of the Philistines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[63:1](phc06.htm#fr_88.md) . . . The town of . . .
over the land Beth-Omri . . . I cast its whole extent under the rule of
Assyria: I put my officials as lieutenants over it. Ḫanunu of Gaza fled
before my arms, and escaped to Egypt. Gaza I plundered, its possessions
and its gods . . . and I put my royal image (?)—in his palace. I laid
the service of the gods of his land under the service of Asshur. I laid
tribute upon him . . . As a bird he flew hither (made submission) and I
set him again to his place.'—*Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek*, ii, pp.
32, 33; Schrader, *Keilinschriften*<sup>3</sup>, p. 56. See also Rost,
*Keilinschr. Tiglath-Pilesers*, p. 78.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[64:1](phc06.htm#fr_89.md) 'Azuri, king of Ashdod,
devised in his heart to bring no more tribute, and sent an invitation to
the kings of his neighbourhood to hostility against Asshur. On account
of the misdeeds he wrought, I removed him from the lordship of the
people of his land and put his brother Aḫimiti in lordship over them.
But evil-plotting Hittites were hostile to his lordship and set over
themselves Yamani, who had no claim to the throne, who like them had no
respect for my lordship. In my fury I did not send the whole body of my
troops. . . . I led merely the body-guard, who follows me wherever I go,
to Ashdod. But Yamani fled as I approached to the border of Egypt, which
lies beside Meluḫḫa, and was seen no more. I besieged and plundered
Ashdod, Gath, and Ashdodimmu \["The port of Ashdod," ‏אשדוד הים‎ or,
"Gath of the Ashdodites," according to some interpreters\], and carried
off as booty their goods, women, sons and daughters, property, the
palace treasures, and the people of the land. I re-peopled those towns
anew . . . and put my lieutenants over them and counted them to the
people of Assyria.'—*Keil. Bibl.* ii, pp. 66, 67. *KAT*<sup>3</sup>. p.
71.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[65:1](phc06.htm#fr_90.md) Menahem of the town of
Samaria, Ethba’al of Sidon, Mitinti of Ashdod \[and a number of others\]
all the kings of the West brought rich presents . . . and kissed my
feet. And Zidḳa, the king of Ashkelon, who had not submitted to my yoke,
the gods of his house, himself, his wife, his sons, his daughters, his
brothers, the seed of his house, I dragged off and brought them to
Assyria. Sarludari, the son of Rukipti, their former king, I set again
as king over the people of Ashkelon, took tribute and submission from
him, and he became obedient to me. In the course of my expedition, I
besieged Beth-Dagon, Joppa, Bene-Barka, Azuri, the towns of Zidḳa, which
had not promptly submitted to me: I plundered them and dragged booty
away from them. The principal men of Amḳarruna (Ekron) who had cast
Padi, who by the right and oath of Assyria was the king, into fetters
and delivered him up to Hezekiah of Judah, who had shut him in
prison—their heart feared. The kings of the land of Egypt sent archers,
chariots, and horses of the king of Meluḫḫa, a countless army, and came
to help them. Their army stood against me before the town El-Tekeh, they
raised their weapons. Trusting in Asshur, my Lord, I fought with them
and subdued them; I took the chiefs of the chariots and the son of one
of the kings of Egypt, and the chief of the chariots of the king of
Meluḫḫa prisoners with my own hand in the *mêlée:* I besieged El-Tekeh
and Timnath, and plundered them and took away their booty. Then I turned
before Ekron, the chief men who had done evil I slew and hung their
bodies on poles round the city: the inhabitants who had done evil I led
out as prisoners: with the rest, who had done no evil, I made peace.
Padi their king I led from Jerusalem and put him again on the throne of
his lordship. I laid the tribute of my lordship upon him. Of Hezekiah .
. . I besieged forty-six fortified towns . . . his towns which I had
plundered, I took from his land and gave them to Mitinti, king of
Ashdod, Padi, king of Ekron, and Zilbel, king of Gaza, and I cut his
land short. To the former tribute I added the tribute due to my lordship
and laid it upon them.'—*KḄ.* ii, pp. 90–95.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[65:2](phc06.htm#fr_91.md) KḄ. ii, pp. 148, 149,
and 238–241.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[66:1](phc06.htm#fr_92.md) See Meyer's *History of
the City of Gaza*, p. 38. Noordtzij, *De Filistijnen*, p. 171,
identifies it with Kadesh, which is reasonable.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[66:2](phc06.htm#fr_93.md) Neb. iv. 7. See also Ps.
lxxxiii, which, according to the most likely view, was composed during
the anxieties attending the restoration of Jerusalem.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: The Land of the Philistines](phc07.md)

</div>
