<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phc08)  [Next](phc10.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philistines*, by R.A.S. Macalister, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. THEIR ORGANIZATION.

### A. *Political*.

From the time when the Philistines first appear in their Palestinian
territory they are governed by *Lords*, ṣerānīm, each of whom has
domination in one of the five chief cities, but who act in council
together for the common good of the nation. They seem, indeed, to engage
personally in duties which an Oriental monarch would certainly delegate
to a messenger. They negotiate with Delilah. They convene the great
triumph-feast to which Samson put so disastrous an

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

end. There is a democratic instinct manifested by the men of Ashdod and
Ekron, who peremptorily 'summoned' the council of lords to advise them
what to do on the outbreak of plague: just as the merchants of the
Zakkala obliged even a forceful ruler like Zakar-Baal to make an
unsatisfactory compromise in the matter of Wen-Amon, and in much later
times the people of Ekron deposed and imprisoned a ruler who persisted
in the unpopular course of submission to Assyria. Achish makes
arrangements with David, which his colleagues overrule. Of the methods
of election of these officers we know absolutely nothing. From the
Assyrian documents we hear of a series of rulers over Ashdod, father and
son, but this does not necessarily prove that the hereditary principle
was recognized. Such a political organization was quite unlike that of
the nations round about: but the government of the Etruscans, who, as we
have seen, were probably a related race, presents some analogy. There is
a considerable similarity between the *lucumones* of Etruria and the
Philistine ṣeranīm.

Nowhere do we read of a king of the Philistines. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111.md) To infer, as has actually been done,
from 1 Kings iv. 21 ('Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms from the River
unto the land of the Philistines') that their territory was organized as
a kingdom, displays a sad lack of a sense of humour. When Hebrew writers
speak of 'a king of Gath' (1 Sam. xxvii. 2), 'him that holdeth the
sceptre from Ashkelon' (Amos i. 8), 'all the kings of the land of the
Philistines' (Jer. xxv. 20), 'the king \[perishing\] from Gaza' (Zech.
ix. 5), they obviously are merely offering a Hebrew word or periphrasis
as a translation of the native Philistine title. The same is true of the
analogous expressions in the Assyrian tablets. The case of the Etruscan
'kings' seems exactly similar, though there appears to have been an
Achish-like king in Clusium.

In Gibeah, and probably in other towns as well, a resident officer, like
a Turkish *mudir*, was maintained at the time of their greatest power.

It is possible that, if we had before us all the documents relating to
the history of the Philistines, we might be able to divide them into
clans, corresponding perhaps in some degree to the threefold division of
the Egyptian monuments—Zakkala, Washasha, and Pulasati, i.e. as we have
tried to show already, Cretans, Rhodians, and Carians. The continually
recurring phrase 'Cherethites and Pelethites' suggests some twofold
division. Ezekiel xxv. 16 ('Behold, I will stretch out my hand upon the
Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethites') may

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

or may not imply a similar division. The report of the young Egyptian (1
Sam. xxx. 14) implies that the name 'Cherethites', if it had a specific
meaning apart from 'Philistines', denoted the dwellers in the extreme
south of Philistine territory: and we have already made passing note of
the occurrence of the name Ziklag, a possible echo of the Zakkala, in
that part of the country. The almost accidental allusion to Carians in
the history of the kings must not be overlooked. But our data are so
slender that very little can be built upon them. All we can say is that
the origin of the Philistines makes it improbable that they were a
single undivided tribe, and that the scanty hints which the history
affords render it still more unlikely.

Nor can we necessarily infer that the peculiar government by a council
of the lords of five cities implies that they were divided into five
tribes. For though there seems to have been an actual division of the
territory into districts, each of them under the hegemony of one of
these cities, the limits are rather indefinite; and to judge from the
scanty materials at our disposal, seem to have varied from time to time.
The recurrence of the phrase '\[such a city\] and the border
thereof' <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112.md) seems to indicate a
definite division of the country into provinces governed each by one of
the cities; and this is confirmed by David's speech to Achish, <span
id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_113.md) 'Give me a place in one of the cities in
the country (‏באחת ערי השדה‎), for why should thy servant dwell in the
royal city (‏בעיר הממלכה‎) with thee?' A similar polity is traceable in
Etruria.

Of the division of the minor cities of the Philistine territory among
the Pentapolis—perhaps Pentarchy would be a more correct term to use—we
know very little. In the time of David's exile Ziklag was under the
control of the king of Gath. Sargon, according to one interpretation of
his inscription, supposes Gath itself to belong to Ashdod. We may
compare 'Gazara that bordereth on Azotus' (1 Macc. xiv. 34), though they
are about sixteen miles apart, and each only just visible on the other's
horizon. Rather curiously, Joppa and the neighbouring villages depended,
according to Sennacherib, on *Ashkelon*.

Besides these towns we hear of certain unwalled villages (1 Sam. vi. 18)
which are not specified by name.

#### B. *Military*.

Certain functionaries called sārīm meet us from time to time in the
history (1 Sam. xviii. 30, xxix. 3, 9). It is the sārīm whose protest

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

prevents David from joining in the battle of Gilboa. The word is, of
course, a commonplace Semitic term, and is applied in Deborah's Song to
the princes of Issachar, and by Zephaniah to those of Jerusalem. Among
the Philistines the officials denoted by this word were no doubt
military captains.

It is obvious throughout the whole history, from the days of the Medinet
Habu sculptures onwards, that the military forces of the Philistines
were well organized. In 1 Samuel xiii. 5 we read of 30,000 chariots and
6,000 horsemen, which, even if the numbers are not to be taken
literally, indicates a considerable wealth in war equipment. Elsewhere
(ib. xxix. 2) we hear of 'hundreds and thousands', which may indicate a
system of division into centuries and regiments. Of their methods of
fighting we have no certain information: Judges i. 19 emphasizes their
corps of war-chariots: in the account of the battle of Gilboa the
archers are specially alluded to. The Medinet Habu sculptures and the
description of the equipment of the champions are analysed in the
following section.

#### C. *Domestic*.

On the subject of family life among the Philistines nothing is known.
The high-minded sense of propriety attributed to Abimelech in the
patriarchal narratives has already been touched upon. Samson's relations
with his Timnathite wife can hardly be made to bear undue stress: a
Semitic marriage of the ṣadīḳa type is pictured by the storyteller. The
wife remains in her father's house and is visited by her husband from
time to time. Men and women apparently mingle freely in the temple of
Dagon at Gaza. No further information is vouchsafed us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[88:1](phc09.htm#fr_111.md) 1 Except Abimelech,
Gen. xxvi. 1. *Exceptio probat regulam*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[89:1](phc09.htm#fr_112.md) See Judg. i. 18, 1
Sam. v. 6, 2 Kings xviii. 8.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[89:2](phc09.htm#fr_113.md) 1 Sam. xxvii. 5.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Their Religion](phc10.md)

</div>
