<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phc06)  [Next](phc08.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philistines*, by R.A.S. Macalister, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

### CHAPTER III

### THE LAND OF THE PHILISTINES

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> country of the Philistines is
definitely limited, in Joshua xiii. 2, between the Shīḫōr or 'River of
Egypt', the present Wady el-Arīsh, on the Egyptian frontier, which joins
the sea at Rhinocolura—and 'the borders of Ekron northward, which is
counted to the Canaanites'. Westward it was bounded by the Mediterranean
Sea: eastward by the foothills of the Judean mountains. From Deuteronomy
ii. 23 we learn that this territory had previously been in the
possession of a tribe called *‘Avvim*, of whom we know nothing but the
name: from the passage in Joshua just quoted it would appear that a
remnant of these aborigines still remained crowded down to the south.
They may possibly have been of the same stock as the neolithic
pre-Semitic people whose remains were found at Gezer. No doubt, as in
the majority of cases of the kind, they survived as a substratum of the
population in the rest of their ancient territory as well, engaged in
the hard manual labour to which the wily Gibeonites were condemned.

We also learn from Joshua (xi. 21) that there was a Rephaite or 'Anakim'
remnant left in some of the chief cities of the Philistine territory,
which must have been of considerable importance, to judge from the
stories of giant champions analysed on a previous page. How far the
alliance of these formidable aborigines (which probably represent a
pre-Canaanite immigration, later than the insignificant *‘Avvim*)
enabled the southern Philistines to hold their ground so much longer
than the northern Zakkala is an interesting question the answer to
which, however, could be nothing more than speculative.

Though no ancient authority definitely states it, there can hardly be
any doubt that the repulse of the great attack on Egypt, in the days of
Ramessu III, was the event which led to the permanent settlement of the
Cretan tribes on the coastland. It is possible, indeed, that they
already occupied the country as a military base for their operations
against Egypt: the description, in the Medinet Habu temple, of the
advance of the invaders through the lands of the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hittites and North
Syrians makes this at least not improbable. However the exact details of
chronology work out, we cannot dissociate the invasion of Egypt from the
contemporaneous settlement by foreigners on the sea-coast.

Israel was already, as we learn from the stela of Merneptah, established
in the promised land; and the Hebrew tribes had already been reinforced
by the contingent of Egyptian serfs (possibly the enslaved descendants
of the Bedawin invaders known to history as the Hyksos) and Kenites,
whose traditions became the received version of Hebrew *origines*. The
tribe of Dan, situated on the seacoast, was driven inland, and forced to
establish itself elsewhere: but as we have seen, the whole length of the
shore was occupied by the intruders, even north of Joppa. Wen-Amon has
chronicled for us the settlement of Zakkala at Dor: that Sisera belonged
to this tribe is also highly probable: and the remarkable developments
displayed by the Phoenicians which distinguished them from all other
Semites—developments to be noted in the following chapter—make it no
longer possible to doubt that a very large Philistine or Zakkala element
entered into the composition of that people.

In the earlier part of the history, as we have already indicated, the
empire of the Philistines was widely spread over the country. As is well
known, the name *Palestine* is merely a corruption of *Philistia;* and
when Zephaniah or one of his editors calls Canaan 'the land of the
Philistines' (ii. 4) he is expressing little more than what was at one
time a fact. Their domination over the Hebrews is insisted on in both
Judges and Samuel: the early kings of the Hebrews are elected with the
specific purpose of freeing the people frown the foreign yoke: a
governor is established in a town close to Jerusalem: even at Beth-Shan,
at the inner end of the plain Esdraelon, which once swarmed with the
chariots of Sisera, the Philistines were able to fix Saul's body as a
trophy: and the course of the history shows that they were there
established in sufficient strength and with sufficient permanence to
make the recovery of the trophy difficult.

The name of Beth-Dagon, the house of their chief god, is found among the
towns enumerated to the northern coast-dwellers of the tribe of Asher
(Joshua xix. 27); and there was a similarly named and better known town
in the land of the southern Philistines; but these names, as we shall
see in the following chapter, are older than the Philistine settlement.
'The stronghold above Jericho called Dagon

(mentioned in Josephus, *Ant*. xiii. 8. 1, *Wars*, i. 2. 3) is no doubt
the same as Dok (now ‘Ain ed-Dūk) where Simon was murdered (1 Macc. xvi.
15): probably the form of the name in Josephus is

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

an error. There is a modern Beit Dejan near Nablus, which marks a third
place of the same name, not recorded in history.

The Northern tribe of the foreigners must have become early absorbed by
their Semitic neighbours. The Southern people, however, seated on their
rich coast-plain and established in their powerful metropolitan cities,
were longer able to maintain their ethnic independence. The wars of
David drove them back on the coast, and reduced them to a subordinate
position; and, as the names of the kings recorded in the Assyrian
records show, they rapidly became semitized as time went on. As we have
seen in the last chapter, however, their national traditions fought a
long fight against absorption and oblivion. The pride of the
Philistines—their persistent refusal to submit to Hebrew prejudices,
such as the tabu against eating flesh with the blood and forbidden
meats—was as offensive to Deutero-Zechariah (ix. 7) as is the pride of
the Irish or Welsh nationalist to the average Englishman. Though in the
later history we hear so little about them, they must still have been
troublesome neighbours; otherwise there would not be such a constant
chain of prophetic denunciations. Amos first, then Isaiah, Zephaniah,
Joel, and the later prophets Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Zechariah all
pronounce woes upon them. One of Ezekiel's strongest denunciations of
the corruptions of his own people well expresses the national
hatred—even the daughters of the Philistines are ashamed at
contemplating them (Ezek. xvi. 27). The son of Sirach says that 'his
heart abhorreth them that sit upon the mountains of Samaria, and them
that dwelt among the Philistines' (Ecclus. l. 26). Except for the
naturalized Philistines in David's entourage, there is but one lull in
the storm of war between the two nations throughout the Old Testament.
This is in the charming poem, Psalm lxxxvii, written apparently under
some one of the later kings. The psalmist pictures Yahweh enthroned upon
His best-loved seat, the holy mountains of Zion, and reading, as it
were, a census-roll of His people. This one was born in Egypt or
Babylon—that one in Philistia or Tyre—yet all own Zion as their common
Mother. The psalm is a miniature edition of the Book of Jonah: the
poet's large-hearted universalism looks forward to an abolition of
national jealousies.

Their cities all existed from pre-Philistine days. They are all, except
the Beth-Dagons, mentioned in the Tell el-Amarna correspondence, and
were then already communities of importance: how much farther back their
history may go it is impossible to tell. Like the Hebrews, who appear to
have added only one city—Samaria—to those which they inherited in the
Promised Land, the Philistines

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

were not city builders. Indeed we hardly would expect this of the
'Peoples of the Sea'. Ziklag, somewhere in the south of the Philistine
territory, but not yet identified satisfactorily, may have been a new
foundation: this, however, rests merely upon the vague circumstance that
it has been impossible to find a satisfactory Semitic etymology for the
name, which conceivably echoes the name of the Zakkala. If so, we
understand better how the *southern* sept of the Philistines comes to be
specifically called 'Cherethites'. or 'Cretans'. On the other hand, we
elsewhere find the Zakkala in the *north*.

The five metropolitan cities of the Philistines were Gaza, Ashkelon,
Gath, Ashdod, and Ekron. The first-mentioned is the only one of the five
that still retains anything of its former importance. It is a modern,
well-watered, and populous town, standing on the ancient site, and in
the form *Ghuzzeh* retaining the ancient name. It is prominent in the
Samson epic. We have already noticed the revolt of its leader, Hanunu,
against the king of Assyria—a revolt that led to the battle of Raphia
(710 B.C.), the first struggle between Egypt and Assyria. From Amos i. 6
we learn that Gaza was the centre of a slave-trade, which added
bitterness to the relations between the Philistines and their Israelite
neighbours. In 332 B.C. the city was besieged for two months by
Alexander the Great. Its later history but slightly concerns us, though
we may mention its total destruction by Alexander Jannaeus. It recovered
even from this catastrophe, and we find it in the second and third
centuries A. D. as the centre of worship of a deity peculiar to itself,
called *Marna*, the ritual of whose service recalls in some respects
that of the rites of Dagon. This cult, indeed, was probably the last
relic of the Philistines, apart from the vague modern traditions to
which we have already referred.

The city was surrounded by a wall, and watch-towers were erected at a
distance from it, to give warning as early as possible of the approach
of an enemy (2 Kings xviii. 8). <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94.md) A
neighbouring harbour town, called Μαιουμᾶ Γάζης, was of considerable
importance and for a time was the site of a bishopric.

*Ashkelon* was the only city of the five that stood on the seacoast,
though other maritime cities, such as Joppa, were (at least from time to
time) also in Philistine hands. Its harbour, though inadequate for
modern use, was sufficient for the small ships of antiquity. Samson
visited Ashkelon to seize the wager he was obliged to pay after his
riddle had been solved. <span id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95.md) It is,
however, from

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

much later times—Maccabean, early Arab, and Crusader—that the chief
historical importance of the city dates. These lie outside our present
scope. We need not do more than mention the etymological speculations of
Stephanus of Byzantium, who tells us that this city was founded by
Askalos, brother of Tantalos and son of Hymenaios; and the statement of
Benjamin of Tudela that Ezra re-founded Ashkelon under the name
Benebrah. <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96.md)

*Gath*, reasonably identified with the enormous mound known as Tell
eṣ-Ṣāfi at the embouchure of the Valley of Elah, had a different history
from the rest. It seems in the time of the greatest extension of the
Philistine power to have been the principal city of the five: at least
the application to its ruler Achish of the title *melek*, 'king' (rather
than the technical term *ṣeren*, applied normally to the 'lords' of the
Philistines), if not a mere inadvertence, suggests that at least he was
*primus inter pares*. He has, however, to bow to the wishes of his
colleagues in the matter of David's alliance with him. In David's lament
over Saul and Jonathan, Gath and Ashkelon are the two prominent cities
specially mentioned; and (probably through the influence of that popular
lay) 'tell it not in Gath' became a current catchword, which we meet
once again in Micah i. 10. It is not infrequently used as such among
ourselves; but in Hebrew it has a further aid to popularity in an
alliteration, as though one should say 'gad not in Gath'.

But as we have already noticed, the name drops out from all references
to the Philistines in the later literature: the Pentapolis becomes a
Tetrapolis, and the hegemony passes over to Ashdod, which in time
becomes the last typical Philistine city. This cannot be explained,
however, by a total destruction of the city of Gath. For the excavations
carried on by the Palestine Exploration Fund in 1900 at Tell eṣ-Ṣāfi
showed that the site had been continuously occupied from very early
times to the days of a modern village, whose houses and extensive
graveyards seal up the secrets of the greater part of this important
mound from the curiosity of the explorer. The true explanation is, that
from the time of its conquest by Uzziah, Gath was reckoned a city of
Judah by the Hebrew prophets. In the gradual shrinking of the Philistine
border it would be one of the first to fall into Hebrew hands.

A destruction of Gath—probably the sacking by Uzziah—was still

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

fresh in memory when Amos prophesied, and was used by hint as an
illustration to enforce his denunciation of Samaria (vi. 2); in his
first chapter we already find Gath omitted from the list of Philistine
cities; and the reference immediately afterwards to 'the remnant of the
Philistines' (i. 8) suggests that that people had shortly before
suffered loss. In iii. 9 the words 'publish in the palaces at Ashdod'
may possibly be an adaptation of the proverbial catchword already
mentioned, modified to suit the altered circumstances. It likewise is
assonantal in Hebrew.

Sargon, it is true, shortly after Uzziah's time, calls the city 'Gath of
the Ashdodites' (if this be the correct translation of the phrase); but
no doubt it was a matter of indifference in the eyes of the great king
which of two trumpery communities claimed the possession of a town, so
long as he himself had a satisfying share of the plunder.

It is unfortunate that the city had such a commonplace name. Its
meaning, 'winepress,' was applicable to many sites, and it was evidently
used for snore places than one. This makes the reconstruction of the
history of Gath rather difficult. Thus, the Gath fortified by Rehoboam
(2 Chron. xi. 8) can hardly be the Philistine city of that name; and
certain other places such as Gath-hepher, Gath-rimmon, and
Moresheth-gath, must be carefully distinguished therefrom. The same word
appears in the *Gethsemane* of the New Testament.

Ashdod, the city to which the ark was first taken, is now represented by
an insignificant village, whose only object of interest is the ruin of a
large Saracenic *khan:* but ruins of more important buildings seem to
have been seen here by seventeenth-century travellers. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97.md) Yet it must have been a city of special
importance in the Pentapolis. Like Gaza, it had its 'palaces' (Amos iii.
9). As we have seen, Ashdod longest preserved the Philistine national
tradition. 'The speech of Ashdod' lasted down to the time of Nehemiah.
The temple of Dagon stood there till destroyed by the Maccabees (1 Macc.
x. 83, 84). But the 'altars and gods' of the city, destroyed by Judas a
few years before (1 Macc. v. 68), were perhaps objects rather of
*Hellenic* cult, which at this date was well established in Western
Palestine.

The great siege of Ashdod by Psammeticus, already referred to, is
unknown to us except from Herodotus. It seems almost incredibly
protracted, and probably there is something wrong with Herodotus’
figures. Jeremiah's references to the *remnant* of Ashdod (xxv. 20) and
Zephaniah's emphasis on a siege which shall drive out Ashdod at

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the noonday (ii. 4)—i.e. which shall last half a day only—are plausibly
supposed to imply allusion to this event. A small inlet in the
neighbouring coastline served Ashdod for a harbour: it is now called
*Mīnet* *el-Ḳal‘ah*, 'the harbour of the fortress': a tradition of some
fortification of the harbour is thus preserved, as well as the Greek
name λίμνη which has been transformed into the Arabic El-Mīneh; the
initial λ having been mistaken for the Arabic article.

Ekron, since the time of Robinson, has always been equated to the
village of ‘Akir, now the site of a flourishing Jewish colony, whose red
roofs are conspicuous on the seaward side of the Jerusalem railway soon
after leaving Ramleh. But there are no remains of any ancient occupation
here commensurate with the importance of the place. 'There are a few
local traditions in ‘Akir, but they are quite vague. Bauer
(*Mittheilungen d. deutsch. Pal. Vereins*, 1899, p. 43) describes a
visit he paid to the old mosque, the one stone building in the fellah
village, erected on its highest point. There is a forecourt and portico
with two rows of pillars. The thresholds are of marble. An old sheikh
told him that the mosque was as old as the time of Abraham; but many
such tales are told in Palestine of comparatively modern buildings.
Ekron, if the place of the ancient oracle of Baal-zebub were really at
‘Akir, has vanished utterly, leaving scarcely a potsherd behind. This is
not what usually happens to ancient Palestine cities. With some
hesitation I venture on the following suggestions.

To me there seems to be a confusion between two places of the same name.
In Joshua xiii. 1–3, where the land not possessed by Joshua is detailed,
we find mention made of the region of the Philistines and of the little
southern tribe of the Geshurites, to 'the border of Ekron-Ṣaphōnah,
*which is counted to the Canaanites*', and also the five lords of the
*Philistines*, among which by contrast are enumerated the Ekronites.
This expression 'Ekron-Ṣaphōnah' is correctly translated 'Ekron
northward' in the English Bible; but it can also mean 'Northern Ekron',
which to me seems here to give a more intelligible sense.

Again, in Joshua xv. 11 we find the border of the territory of Judah as
running 'unto the side of Ekron-Ṣaphōnah'; an expression which I take to
mean that this city, though adjoining the territory of Judah, was
actually beyond its border. If so, it would be in the tribe of Dan; and
in Joshua xix. 43 we actually find an Ekron enumerated among the Danite
towns. Here, as there is no ambiguity, the qualifying adjective
'Northern' is omitted. The Southern Ekron

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

would then belong to the tribe of Judah, in the theoretical scheme
elaborated in the book of Joshua; and we find it duly mentioned, between
Mareshah and Ashdod.

Again, the story of the rout after the battle of Ephes-Daminim (1 Sam.
xvii. 52–54) is suggestive. The pursuit went 'by the way to the two
gates, to Gath and to Ekron'. ‘Akir, the usual site given for Ekron,
cannot be spoken of a gate, in the sense that Gath, commanding as it
does the mouth of the valley of Elah, can be so termed; and a chase of
the Philistines prolonged *through Philistine territory* for such a long
distance as from Gath to ‘Akir is not very probable. We seem to find the
other gate at a subsidiary outlet of the Valley of Elah, to the south of
Gath, where stands a village called Dhikerīn. And Dhikerīn lies exactly
in a straight line between Beit Jibrīn and ‘Esdūd, the modern
representatives of Mareshah and Ashdod.

Written in English letters, 'Dhikerīn' is not unlike 'Ekron' in general
appearance. But philologically there can be no direct connexion between
them, and my arguments in favour of the identification here suggested
rest on grounds different from the superficial similarity of name. The
single letter *k* in English represents two entirely different sounds in
Hebrew and Arabic; one of these (‏כ‎) appears in '*Dhikerin*', the other
(‏ק‎) in *Ekron*, as in *‘Akir*. These letters can be treated as
interchangeable in one case only. As in English, so in Greek, one sound
and one character represent these two letters: and if for a while a
district had become thoroughly Hellenized, the Greek κ might have been
(so to speak) as a 'bridge' for the passing of one sound into the other.
When the Semitic speech reasserted itself, it might have taken up the
name with the wrong *k*. There is thus a possibility that a different
word has become substituted for a half-forgotten and wholly
misunderstood Hebrew name. But no stress can be laid upon this possible
accident.

Dhikerin presents obvious signs of antiquity. Great artificial caves and
huge cisterns are cut in the rock, testifying to its former importance,
and it has never been finally identified with any other ancient site,
though some of the earlier explorers have thought to find here no less a
place than Gath itself. The Talmuds have nothing to say about it save
that the name is derived from ‏דכרא‎ 'male', because the women there all
bear male children. <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98.md) Clermont-Ganneau
(*Recueil d’arch. orient.* iv. 254) suggests a connexion between this
place-name and that of the Zakkala.

Let us now look back for a moment to the story of the wanderings of the
Ark. Suppose that the Gittites, when the plague broke out

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

among them, sent the Ark, not to ‘Akin, but to Dhikerin—which way much
nearer and more convenient—we have then an immediate answer to an
obvious difficulty. Why did the Philistines expect the ark to go
anywhere near Beth-Shemesh at all? We must remember that they were not
merely trying to get rid of the ark: they were on the look-out for a
sign that the pestilence was a manifestation of the wrath of the God of
the Hebrews. They must therefore have expected the Ark to return whence
it had come, to the sanctuary at Shiloh, of whose existence and
importance they could not have been ignorant. This was the natural goal
of the sacred symbol, north of the great Canaanite wedge that centred in
Jerusalem and separated the northern Israelites from their brethren in
the south. From Shiloh the Ark had been taken: Shiloh was the chief
centre of Hebrew religious life at the time: and to Shiloh the Ark
should be expected to find its way back. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99.md) Therefore, if it was at the time in ‘Akir,
it ought to have gone by the northern valley route, into the Valley of
Aijalon, so striking into the road for Shiloh some ten miles north of
Jerusalem. If from ‘Akir it went southward it would be shunted off south
of the Canaanites into the southern territory, where no specially
important shrine of the period is recorded. From ‘Akir, therefore, it
should not go within miles of Beth-Shemesh. But from Dhikerin, the only
way toward Shiloh, avoiding Jerusalem, is by a valley route that leads
straight to Beth-Shemesh and perforce passes that town.

Further evidence is given us by the story of the march of Sennacherib.
That monarch was engaged in reducing places easily identified as the
modern Jaffa, Yazur, Ibn Berak, and Beit Dejan, when the Ekrouites
leagued themselves with the North Arabians and the Egyptians.
Sennacherib met the allies at El-Tekeh, a place unfortunately not
identified: it presumably was near the Northern Ekron, as the two places
are mentioned together as border towns in Dan, Joshua xix. 40. This
Northern Ekron, we may agree, might well be represented by ‘Akir, whose
poverty in antiquities accords with the apparent insignificance of the
Danite town. Close to ‘Akir is a village in the plain, called Zernukah,
a name which may possibly echo the name of El-Tekeh. In any case
Sennacherib was victorious and then went straight to Timnath, which he
reduced, after which he proceeded to attack Ekron. This order of
proceedings is inconsistent

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

with ‘Akir as the site of Ekron. Sennacherib's successful progress
against the south we should expect to proceed steadily southward,
involving an attack on ‘Akir before the reduction of Timnath. Ekron must
therefore have been south from Tibneh, which fits the conditions of the
site now suggested.

<span id="img_07700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig 3. Sketch-map
of Philistia.](tn/07700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07700.jpg.md)  
Fig 3. Sketch-map of Philistia.  
</span>

The denunciations of Ekron in the prophetic books help us very little in
the solution of the problem. But there is a suggestive hint in the
opening verses of 2 Kings. Ahaziah having met with an accident sent to
inquire of Baal-zebub 'lord of flies', the god of Ekron, as to his
prospects of recovery. When we find that less than a couple of miles
from Dhikerin there is a village bearing the name of *Deir edh-Dhubhān*,
'the convent of the flies', we feel some

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

justification in asking, can it be that Baal-zebub still rules his
ancient lordship?

The land of the Philistines, dominated by these five cities, has been so
often described that it is needless to waste space in an account of it.
Briefly, we may say that whoever held that part of the country was at an
enormous advantage. With the possible exception of the plain of
Esdraelon, it is the most fertile land in Western Palestine. Though
there are few perennial streams, water can be found wherever one chooses
to dig for it. Through it runs the great trade-route from Egypt by
Damascus to Babylon. The mart of Gaza is the natural rendezvous of all
who have commerce with Arabia. The seaports of Southern Palestine are
all commanded, as are the valleys which are the doorways to the
Hinterland: so that the coast dwellers can engage in commerce on their
own account, while at the same time they can control the progress and
civilization among the aliens in the interior. When we stand on some
eminence that commands this rich strip of territory we find it easy to
understand the bitterness with which through the centuries the Hebrews
regarded the Philistines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[71:1](phc07.htm#fr_94.md) So a sentry-station was
established on a hill some way S. of Gezer: see my *Excavation of
Gezer*, vol. ii, p. 365.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[71:2](phc07.htm#fr_95.md) It has been suggested
that this took place not at Ashkelon, but at a small site <span
id="page_72">p. 72</span> in the valley of Elah called *Khurbet* (=
ruin) ‘Asḳalân. This is certainly nearer to Timnath, but there are here
no traceable remains older than the Roman period.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[72:1](phc07.htm#fr_96.md) A description of the
remains at Ashkelon, with a plan, will be found in the *Quarterly
Statement* of the Palestine Exploration Fund for January 1913.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[73:1](phc07.htm#fr_97.md) See Sepp, *Jerusalem and
das heilige Land*, vol. ii, p. 598.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[75:1](phc07.htm#fr_98.md) Neubauer, *Geog. d.
Talm.* p. 71.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[76:1](phc07.htm#fr_99.md) Meyer, *Gesch. d.
Alterthums*, i, p. 358, suggests from Jer. vii. 14, that Shiloh was
destroyed. But the space of time between Samuel and Jeremiah is so long,
that many unrecorded events might have taken place in the meanwhile:
and, indeed, Shiloh is still an important sanctuary in 1 Sam. xiv. 3.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Their Language](phc08.md)

</div>
