<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phc09)  [Next](phc11.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Philistines*, by R.A.S. Macalister, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

III\.

*Their Religion*.

Of the religion of the Philistines we know just enough to whet a
curiosity that for the present seeks satisfaction in vain. The only
hints given us in the Old Testament history are as follows:

\(1\) The closing scene of Samson's career took place in a temple of
Dagon at Gaza, which must have been a large structure, as different as
possible from the native High Places of Palestine.

\(2\) In this temple sacrifices were offered at festivals conducted by
the 'Lords' of the Philistines (Judg. xvi. 23). It is not unreasonable
to suppose that Samson was destined to be offered in sacrifice at the
great feast of rejoicing there described. This was probably an annual
festival, occurring at a fixed time of the year, and not a special
celebration of the capture of Samson: because an interval of some
months, during which Samson's shorn hair grew again, must have taken
place

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

between the two events. We are reminded of the Athenian Θαργήλια, with
Samson in the rôle of the φαρμακός. Human sacrifices were offered in the
temple of Marna at Gaza down to the fourth century A. D., as we learn
from a passage presently to be quoted from Marcus the Deacon.

\(3\) There was also a temple of Dagon at Ashdod, which indicates that
the deity was a universal god of the Philistines, not a local divinity
like the innumerable Semitic Ba‘alim. Here there were priests, and here
a rite of 'leaping on (or rather stepping over) the threshold' was
observed. A sculptured image of the god stood in this temple.

\(4\) There was somewhere a temple of Ashtaroth (Samuel) or of Dagon
(Chronicles) where the trophies of Saul were suspended. It is not
expressly said that this temple was in Beth-shan, to the wall of which
the body of Saul was fastened.

\(5\) The Philistines were struck with terror when the Ark of Yahweh was
brought among them. Therefore they believed in (a) the existence and (b)
the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the Hebrew deity. This suggests a
wider conception of the limitations of divine power than was current
among the contemporary Semites.

\(6\) Small portable images (‏עצבים‎) were worn by the Philistines and
carried as amulets into battle (2 Sam. v. 21). 'This practice lasted
till quite late (2 Macc. xii. 40).

\(7\) News of a victory was brought to the image-houses, probably
because they were places of public resort, where they could be
proclaimed (1 Sam. xxxi. 9).

\(8\) At Ekron there was an oracle of Baal-zebub, consulted by the
Israelite king Ahaziah (2 Kings i. 2).

Let us clear the ground by first disposing of the last-named deity. This
one reference is the only mention of him in the Old Testament, and
indeed he is not alluded to elsewhere in Jewish literature. He must,
however, have had a very prominent position in old Palestinian life, as
otherwise the use of the name in the Gospels to denote the 'Prince of
the Devils' (Matt. xii. 24, &c.) would be inexplicable. A hint in Isaiah
ii. 6 shows us that the Philistines, like the Etruscans, were proverbial
for skill in soothsaying, and it is not unlikely that the shrine of
Baal-zebub should have been the site of their principal oracle. If so,
we can be sure that Ahaziah was not the only Israelite who consulted
this deity on occasion, and it is easy to understand that post-exilic
reformers would develop and propagate the secondary application of his
name in order to break the tradition of such illegitimate practices. It
is, however, obvious that the Philistines who worked the oracle of
Baal-zebub simply entered into an old

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

Canaanite inheritance. This is clear from the Semitic etymology of the
name. When they took over the town of Ekron and made it one of their
chief cities, they naturally took over what was probably the most
profitable source of emolument that the town contained. The local
divinity had already established his lordship over the flies when the
Philistines came on the scene.

This was no contemptible or insignificant lordship. A man who has passed
a summer and autumn among the house-flies, sand-flies, gnats,
mosquitoes, and all the other winged pests of the Shephelah will not
feel any necessity to emend the text so as to give the Ba‘al of Ekron 'a
lofty house' or 'the Planet Saturn' or anything else more worthy of
divinity <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114.md); or to subscribe to
Winckler's arbitrary judgement: 'Natürlich nicht Fliegenba‘al, sondern
Ba‘al von Zebub, worunter man sich eine Oertlichkeit in Ekron
vorzustellen hat, etwa den Hügel auf dem der Tempel stand' (*Geschichte
Israels*, p. 224). The Greek Version lends no countenance to such
euhemerisms, for it simply reads τῷ Βάαλ μυῖαν. Josephus avoids the use
of the word *Ba‘al*, and says 'he sent to the Fly' (*Ant*. ix. 2. 1).
The evidence of a form with final *l* is, however, sufficiently strong
to be taken seriously. Although the vocalization is a difficulty, the
old explanation seems to me the best, namely, that the by-form is a
wilful perversion, designed to suggest *zebel*, 'dung.' The Muslim
*argot* which turns ḳiyámah (*Anastasis* = the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre) into ḳumámah (dung-heap) is a modern example of the same kind
of bitter wit.

The Lord of Flies is hardly a fly-averter, like the Ζεὺς ἀπόμυιος of
Pliny and other writers, with whom he is frequently compared. In fact,
what evidence there is would rather indicate that the original
conception was a god in the bodily form of the vermin, the notion of an
averter being a later development: that, for instance, *Apollo
Smintheus* has succeeded to a primitive mouse-god, who very likely gave
oracles through the movements of mice. That Baal-zebub gave oracles by
his flies is at least probable. A passage of Iamblichus (*apud* Photius,
ed. Bekker, p. 75) referring to Babylonian divinations has often been
quoted in this connexion; but I think that probably mice rather than
flies are there in question. Lenormant (*La divination chez les
Chaldéens*, p. 93) refers to an omen-tablet from which auguries are
drawn from the behaviour or peculiarities of flies, but unfortunately
the tablet in question is too broken to give any continuous sense. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[2](#fn_115.md)

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

A curious parallel may he cited from Scotland. In the account of the
parish of Kirkmichael, Banffshire, is a description (*Statistical
Account of Scotland*, vol. xii, p. 464) of the holy well of St. Michael,
which was supposed to have healing properties:

<span class="small">'Many a patient have its waters restored to health
and many more have attested the efficacies of their virtues. But as the
presiding power is sometimes capricious and apt to desert his charge, it
now \[A. D. 1794\] lies neglected, choked with weeds, unhonoured, and
unfrequented. In better days it was not so; for the winged guardian,
*under the semblance of a fly*, was never absent from his duty. If the
sober matron wished to know the issue of her husband's ailment, or the
love-sick nymph that of her languishing swain, they visited the well of
St. Michael. Every movement of the sympathetic fly was regarded in
silent awe; and as he appeared cheerful or dejected, the anxious
votaries drew their presages; their breasts vibrated with correspondent
emotions. Like the Dalai Lama of Thibet, or the King of Great Britain,
whom a fiction of the English law supposes never to die, the guardian
fly of the well of St. Michael was believed to be exempted from the laws
of mortality. To the eye of ignorance he might sometimes appear dead,
but, agreeably to the Druidic system, it was only a transmigration into
a similar form, which made little alteration in the real
identity.'</span>

In a foot-note the writer of the foregoing account describes having
heard an old man lamenting the neglect into which the well had fallen,
and saying that if the infirmities of years permitted he would have
cleared it out and 'as in the days of youth enjoyed the pleasure of
seeing the guardian fly'. Let us suppose the old man to have been eighty
years of age: this brings the practice of consulting the fly-oracle of
Kirkmichael down to the twenties of the eighteenth century, and probably
even later.

Leaving out Baal-zebub, therefore, we have a female deity, called
*Ashtaroth* (Aštoreth) in the passage relating to the temple of
Bethshan, and a male deity called *Dagon*, ascribed to the Philistines.
We may incidentally recall what was said in the first chapter as to the
possibility of the obscure name Beth-Car enshrining the name of an
eponymous Carian deity: it seems at least as likely as the meaning of
the name in Hebrew, 'house of a lamb.' Later we shall glance at the
evidence which the Greek writers preserve as to the peculiar cults of
the Philistine cities in post-Philistine times, which no doubt preserved
reminiscences of the old worship. In the meanwhile let us concentrate
our attention on the two deities named above.

I. <span class="smallcaps">Ashtoreth</span>. At first sight we are
tempted to suppose that the Philistines, who otherwise succeeded in
preserving their originality, had from the first completely succumbed to
Semitic influences in the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

province of religion. 'As immigrants', says Winckler in his *Geschichte
Israels*, 'they naturally adopted the civilization of the land they
seized, and with it the cultus also.' And certainly Ashtaroth or
Ashtoreth was *par excellence* the characteristic Semitic deity, and
worshippers of this goddess might well be said to have become completely
semitized.

But there is evidence that makes it doubtful whether the assimilation
had been more than partial. We begin by noting that Herodotus <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116.md) specially mentions the temple of ἡ
Οὐρανία Ἀφροδίτη as standing at Ashkelon, and he tells us that it was
the oldest of all the temples dedicated to this divinity, older even
than that in Cyprus, as the Cyprians themselves admitted: also that the
Scythians plundered the temple and were in consequence afflicted by the
goddess with a hereditary νοῦσος θήλεια. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117.md) The remarkable inscription found at
Delos, in which one Damon of Ashkelon dedicates an altar to his tutelary
divinities, brilliantly confirms the statement of Herodotus. It runs:

<span id="img_09400"></span> ![](img/09400.jpg)

'To Zeus, sender of fair winds, and Astarte of Palestine, and Aphrodite
Urania, to the divinities that hearken, Damon son of Demetrios of
Ashkelon, saved from pirates, makes this vow. It is not lawful to offer
in sacrifice an animal of the goat or pig species, or a cow.' <span
id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_118.md)

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

The Palestinian Astarte is here distinguished from the Aphrodite of
Ashkelon; and though there obviously was much confusion between them,
the distinction was real. From Lucian <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119.md) we learn that there were two goddesses,
whom he keeps carefully apart, and who indeed were distinguished by
their bodily form. The goddess of Hierapolis, of whose worship he gives
us such a lurid description, was in human form: the goddess of
Phoenicia, whom he calls Derkĕto (a Greek corruption of the Semitic
Atargatis, ‏עתר-עתה‎), had the tail of a fish, like a mermaid.

The name of this goddess, as written in Sidonian inscriptions, was long
ago explained as a compound of ‏עתר‎ and ‏עתה‎, ‘Atar and ‘Ate. These
are two well-established divine names; the former is a variant of
‘Ashtart, but the latter is more obscure: it is possibly of Lydian
origin. <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120.md) In Syriac and Talmudic
writings the compound name appears as Tar‘atha.

The fish-tailed goddess was already antiquated when Lucian wrote. He saw
a representation of her in Phoenicia (*op. cit.* § 14), which seemed to
him unwonted. No doubt he was correct in keeping the two apart; but it
is also clear that they had become inextricably entangled with one
another by his time. The figure of the goddess of Hierapolis was adorned
with a *cestus* or girdle, an ornament peculiar to Urania (§ 32), who,
as we learn from Herodotus, was regarded as the goddess of Ashkelon.
There was another point of contact between the two goddesses—sacred fish
were kept at their shrines. The fish-pond of Hierapolis is described by
Lucian (§§ 45, 46) as being very deep, with an altar in the middle to
which people swam out daily, and with many fishes in it, some of large
size—one of these being decorated with a golden ornament on its fin.

To account for the mermaid shape of the Ashkelonite goddess a story was
told of which the fullest version is preserved for us by Diodorus
Siculus (ii. 4). 'In Syria is a city called Ashkelon, and not far from
it is a great deep lake full of fishes; and beside it is a shrine of a
famous goddess whom the Syrians called Derketo: and she has the face of
a woman, and otherwise the entire body of a fish, for some reason such
as this: the natives most skilful in legend fable that Aphrodite being
offended by the aforesaid goddess inspired

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

her with furious love for a certain youth among those sacrificing: and
that Derketo, uniting with the Syrian, bore a daughter, and being
ashamed at the fault, caused the youth to disappear and exposed the
child in certain desert and stony places: and cast herself in shame and
grief into the lake. The form of her body was changed into a fish:
wherefore the Syrians even yet abstain from eating this creature, and
honour fishes as gods.' The legend is told to the same effect by
Pausanias (II. xxx. 3).

This legend is of great importance, for it helps us to detect the
Philistine element in the Ashkelonite Atargatis. An essentially
identical legend was told in Crete, the heroine being Britomartis or
Dictynna. According to Callimachus’ *Hymn to Artemis* Britomartis was a
nymph of Gortyna beloved of Artemis, whom Minos, inflamed with love,
chased over the mountains of Crete. The nymph now hid herself in the
forests, now in the low-lying meadows; till at last, when for nine
months she had been chased over crags, and Minos was on the point of
seizing her, she leaped into the sea from the high rocks of the Dictaean
mountain. But she sprang into fishers’ nets (δίκτυα) which saved her;
and hence the Cydonians called the nymph Dictynna, and the mountain from
which she had leaped called they Dictaean; and they set up altars to her
and perform sacrifices.

The myth of the Atargatis of Ashkelon fits very badly on to the Syrian
deity. She was the very last being to be troubled with shame at the
events recorded by Diodorus Siculus: she had no special connexion with
the sea, except in so far as fishes, on account of their extreme
fertility, might be taken as typical of the departments of life over
which she presided. There can surely be little question that the coyness
of the Cretan nymph, her leap into the sea, and her deliverance by means
of something relating to fishes, has been transferred to the Ashkelonite
divinity by the immigrants. The Atargatis myth is more primitive than
that of Britomartis: the union from which Britomartis was fleeing has
actually taken place, and the metamorphosis into a fish is of the
crudest kind; the ruder Carians of the mainland might well have
preserved an earlier phase of the myth which the cultured Cretans had in
a measure refined.

The cult of Britomartis was evidently very ancient. Her temple was said
to have been built by Daedalus. The name is alleged to mean *uirgo
dulcis* <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md); and as Hesychius and the
*Etymologicon Magnum* give us respectively γλυκύ and ἀγαθόν as meanings
of βριτύ or βρίτον,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the explanation is very likely correct. The name of the barley drink,
βρύτος or βρύτον, may possibly have some connexion with this word. See
also the end of the quotation from Stephanus of Byzantium, *ante* p. 15.

Athenaeus (viii. 37) gives us an amusing piece of etymology on the
authority of Antipater of Tarsus, to the effect that one Gatis was a
queen of Syria who was so fond of fish that she allowed no one to eat
fish without inviting her to the feast—in fact, that no one could eat
ἄτερ Γάτιδος: and that the common people thought her name was
'Atergatis' on account of this formula, and so abstained from fish
altogether. He further quotes from the *History of Asia* by Mnaseus to
the effect that Atargatis was originally a tyrannous queen who forbade
the use of fish to her subjects, because she herself was so
extravagantly fond of this article of diet that she wanted it all for
herself; and therefore a custom still prevails to offer gold or silver
fish, or real fish, well cooked, which the priests of the goddess eat.
Another tale is told by Xanthus and repeated by Athenaeus in the same
place, that Atargatis was taken prisoner by Mopsus king of Lydia, and
with her son Ἰχθύς ('fish') cast into the lake near Ashkelon (ιν τῇ περὶ
Ἀσκάλωνα λίμνῃ) because of her pride, and was eaten by fishes.

Indeed, the Syrian avoidance of fish as an article of food is a
commonplace of classical writers. A collection of passages on the
subject will be found in Selden, *De Diis Syris*, II. iii.

Lucian further tells us (§ 4) that the temple at Sidon was said to be a
temple of Astarte; but that one of the priests had informed him that it
was really dedicated to Europa, sister of Cadmus. This *daughter of King
Agenor* the Phoenicians honoured with a temple 'when she had vanished'
(ἐπειδή τε ἀφανὴς ἐγεγόνεε), and related the legend about her that Zeus,
enamoured of her, chased her, in the form of a bull, to Crete.

Here then we have distinctly a legend to the effect that a certain
temple of the Syrian goddess was really dedicated to a deity who had
fled from an unwelcome lover, and who was directly connected with Crete.
In fact, we have here a confused version of the Britomartis legend on
the Syrian coast. And when we turn to the *Metamorphoses* of Antoninus
Liberalis, ch. 30, we find a version of the Britomartis story that is
closely akin to the tale told by the Sidonian priest to Lucian. We read
there that 'of Cassiepeia and Phoenix *son of Agenor* was born Carmē:
and that Zeus uniting with the latter begat Britomartis. She, fleeing
from the converse of men, wished to be a perpetual virgin. And first she
came to Argos from Phoenicia, with Buzē, and Melitē, and Maera, and
Anchiroē, daughters of

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Erasinos; and
thereafter she went up to Cephallenia from Argos; and the Cephallenians
call her Laphria; and they erected a temple to her as to a deity.
Thereafter she went to Crete, and Minos seeing her and being enamoured
of her, pursued her; but she took refuge among fishermen, and they
caused her to hide in the nets, and from this the Cretans call her
Dictynna, and offer sacrifices to her. And fleeing from Minos,
Britomartis reached Aegina in a ship, with a fisherman Andromēdes, and
he laid hands on her, being desirous to unite with her; but Britomartis,
having stepped from the ship, fled to a grove where there is now her
temple, and there she vanished (ἐγένετο ἀφανής); and they called her
Aphaea, and in the temple of Artemis the Aeginetans called the place
where Britomartis vanished Aphaē, and offered sacrifices as to a deity.'
The relationship to Agenor, the love-chase, and the curious reference to
'vanishing' can scarcely be a mere coincidence. Lucian, though careless
of detail and no doubt writing from memory, from the report of a priest
who being a Syrian was not improbably inaccurate, has yet preserved
enough of the Britomartis legend as told in Sidon to enable us to
identify it under the guise of the story of Europa.

To the same Cretan-Carian family of legends probably belongs the
sea-monster group of tales which centre in Joppa and its neighbourhood.
The chief among them is the story of Perseus the Lycian hero and
Andromeda; and a passage in Pliny seems to couple this legend with that
of Derketo. <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122.md) Some such story as
this may have suggested to the author of the Book of Jonah the machinery
of his sublime allegory; and no doubt underlies the mediaeval legends of
St. George and the Dragon, localized in the neighbouring town of Lydd.
We can scarcely avoid seeing in these tales literary parallels to the
beautiful designs which the Cretan artists evolved from the curling
tentacles of the octopus.

We are now, I think, in a position to detect a process of evolution in
these tangled tales. We begin with a community dwelling somewhere on the
sea-coast, probably at the low cultural level of the tribes who heaped
the piles of midden refuse on the coasts of Eastern Denmark. These
evolved, from the porpoises and other sea-monsters that came under their
observation, the conception of a mermaid sea-goddess who sent them their
food; and no doubt prayers and charms and magical formulae were uttered
in her name to ensure that the creeks should he filled with fish. The
sacredness of fish to the goddess would

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

follow as a matter of course, and would be most naturally expressed by a
prohibition against eating certain specified kinds. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123.md) And aetiological myths would of course
be developed to account for her fish-tail shape. The Dictynna legend,
with a *Volksetymologie* connecting the name of the nymph with a
fishing-net, is one version; the legend afterwards attached to Atargatis
is another.

When the Carian-Cretan league, after their repulse from Egypt, settled
on the Palestine coast, they of course brought their legends with them.
In their new home they found a *Bona Dea* all powerful, to whom *inter
alia* fish were sacred, and with her they confused their own *Virgo
Dulcis*, patroness of fishermen. They built her temples—a thing
unheard-of before in Palestine—and told of her the same tales that in
their old home they had told of Britomartis. They transferred the scene
of the tragedy from the eastern headland of Crete to the λίμνη of
Ashkelon, and they fashioned the legend into the form in which it
ultimately reached the ears of Diodorus Siculus.

To the legend of Atargatis Diodorus adds that the exposed child was
tended and fed by doves till it was a year old, when it was found by one
Simma, who being childless adopted it, and named it *Semiramis*, a name
derived from the word for 'dove' in the Syrian language. In after years
she became the famous Babylonian queen: and the Syrians all honour doves
as divine in consequence. The etymology is of the same order as Justin's
derivation of 'Sidon' from 'a Phoenician word meaning "fish"': the tale
was no doubt told primarily to account for the sacredness of doves to
the Syrian goddess. The goddess of Ashkelon was likewise patroness of
doves, and this bird frequently figures on coins of the city.

II\. <span class="smallcaps">Dagon</span> was evidently the head of the
pantheon of the Philistines, after their settlement in Palestine. We
hear of his temple at Gaza, Ashdod, and, possibly, according to one
version of the story of the death of Saul, at Beth-Shan. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[2](#fn_124.md) Jerome in commenting on 'Bel boweth
down, Nebo stoopeth', in Isaiah xlvi. 1 (where some versions of the
Greek have *Dagon* for *Nebo*), says Dagon is the idol of Ashkelon,
Gaza, and the other cities of the Philistines. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[3](#fn_125.md) The important temple

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

of Gaza is mirrored for us in the graphic story of the death of Samson,
as we shall see in the following section.

In the temple of Ashdod there was an image of the god—a thing probably
unknown in the rude early Canaanite shrines. Josephus (*Wars*, v. 9. 4)
calls it a ξόανον, which possibly preserves a true tradition that the
figure was of wood. Some interesting though obscure particulars are
given us regarding it in 1 Samuel v. 1–5. The Ark, captured at Aphek,
was laid up two nights in the temple. The first night the image of Dagon
fell on its face before the Ark, and was replaced by 'the priests of
Dagon'; the only reference we have to specifically religious
functionaries among the Philistines. The second night he was fallen
again, and the head of the figure and the palms of its hands were broken
off and lay on the threshold.

The account of the abasement of Dagon is of considerable importance with
regard to the question of the form under which he was represented. The
current idea is that he was of merman form, the upper half man, the
lower half fish. This theory is by modern writers derived from the
mediaeval Jewish commentators: Rabbi Levi, in the third century, said
that Dagon was in the figure of a man: the first statement of his
half-fish form, so far as extant authorities go, is made by David Ḳimḥi,
who writes, They say that Dagon had the shape of a fish front his navel
downwards, because he is called Dagon \[‏דג‎ = fish\] and upwards from
his navel the form of a man, as it is said "both the palms of his bands
were cut off on the threshold".' Abarbanel appears to make the god even
more monstrous by supposing that it was the *upper* end which was the
fishy part. But the idea must have been considerably older than Ḳimḥi.
As we shall see presently, it underlies one of the readings of the Greek
translation: and the attempts at etymology in the *Onomastica* <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126.md) show clearly that the idea arose out of
the accident that ‏דג‎ means 'a fish', while the story in 1 Samuel v
requires us to picture the god with hands; coupled with vague
recollections of the bodily form of the Atargatis of Ashkelon.

If we examine the passage, we note, first, that he had a head and hands,
so that he must have been at least partly human. Next we observe that
exactly the same phrase is used in describing both falls of the idol.
The first time it was unbroken, and the priests could

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

put it in its place again. The second time it was fallen again, but the
projecting parts of it were broken off. In other words, the first fall
of the statue was just as bad as the second, except that it was not
broken: there is no statement made that on the second occasion the
image, whatever its form, snapped across in the middle. In both cases it
fell *as a whole*, being smashed the second time, just as might happen
to a china vase; this would imply that what was left standing and intact
was not so much any part of the statue itself, as the pedestal or some
other accessory.

The difficulty lies in the words which follow the account of the
fracture of the statue—‏רק דגון נשאר עליו‎. In the English version these
are rendered 'only \[the stump of\] Dagon was left'. The words in
brackets, for which the Hebrew gives no warrant, are inserted as a
makeshift to make some kind of sense of the passage. Wellhausen
ingeniously suggested omission of the ‏ן‎ at the end of ‏דגון‎,
supposing that it had been inserted by dittography before the initial
‏נ‎ of the following word. This would make the word mean 'only his fish
was left'. But this assumes the thesis to be proved.

When we turn to the Greek Version we find that it represents a much
fuller text. It reads thus: …. The passage in brackets has no equivalent
in the Hebrew text: it suggests that a line has been lost from the
archetype of the extant Hebrew Version. <span
id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127.md) If with some MSS. we omit the first
χειρῶν (which makes no satisfactory sense with ἴχνη), this lost line
would imply that Dagon's feet were also fallen on the threshold (ἀμαφέθ
= Hebrew ‏המפתתן‎). This does not accord with the 'fish-tail'
hypothesis. But, on the other hand, it shows that the fishtail
conception is considerably older than Kimhi, for χειρῶν must in the
first instance have been inserted by a glossator obsessed with it.

And what are we to make of πλὴν ἡ ῥάχις ὐπελείφθη? 'The backbone of
Dagon was left' is as meaningless as the traditional Hebrew, if not
worse. But when we look back at the Hebrew we begin to wonder whether we
may not here be on the track of another Philistine word—the technical
term for, let us say, the pedestal or console on which the image stood;
or, it may be, some symbol associated with it. Wellhausen (*Text d.
Buch. Sam.* p. 59) has

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

put forward the suggestion that ῥάχις really depends on ‏רק‎ 'only'. But
the translators would presumably have understood this simple word—they
have indeed rendered it correctly, by πλήν. We need a *second* ‏רק‎ to
account for ῥάχις, and such, I submit, must have stood in the Hebrew
text. Some word like (let us say) ‏רקד‎, especially if unintelligible to
a late Hebrew copyist, would certainly drop out sooner or later from the
collocation ‏רק רקד דגון‎. It would be very natural for the original
author to use such a word, for the sake of the paronomasia; and it would
fully account for ῥάχις, which in this case is not the Greek word at
all, but a transliteration of an unknown word in the Hebrew original.
The word ἀμαφέθ, immediately before, which has given much trouble to the
copyists of the Greek text (see the numerous variants in Holmes and
Parsons), is an example of an even easier word in the Hebrew being
transferred to the Greek untranslated.

Further we are told that the priests and those who entered the house of
Dagon—an indication that the temple was open to ordinary worshippers—did
not tread on the threshold of the temple in Ashdod, in consequence, it
was said, of this catastrophe; but, as the Greek translators add
'overstepping they overstepped it' (ὑπερβαίνοντες). That the explanation
was fitted to a much more ancient rite we need not doubt: the various
rites and observances relating to *thresholds* are widespread and this
prohibition is no isolated phenomenon. <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128.md) It is not certain whether the threshold
of the Ashdod temple only was thus reverently regarded, or whether the
other Dagon temples had similar observances: the latter is probable,
though evidently the writer of Samuel supposed that the former was the
case. The possible connexion between the Ashdod prohibition and the
'leaping on (preferably over) the threshold' of Zephaniah i. 9, has
already been noted.

We must, however, face the fact that Dagon cannot be considered as
exclusively a Philistine deity, even though the Semitic etymologies
which have been sought for his name are open to question. There are ‏דג‎
'fish', as already mentioned, and ‏דגן‎ 'corn'. Philo Byblios favoured
the second of these. The inscription of Eshmunazar, king of Sidon, is
well known to refer to Joppa and Dor as ‏ארין דגן‎, which seems at first
sight to mean 'the land of Dagon'. But more probably this is simply a
reference to that fertile region as 'the land of corn'. However we have,
through Philo, references associating Dagon with the Phoenicians. In the
Sanchuniathon cosmogony reported in the

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

fragments of Philo we have an account of his birth from Ouranos and
Ge, <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129.md) with his brethren Ēlos and
Kronos and Baetylos; he is equated to Σίτων 'corn', which is apparently
personified; and by virtue of this equation he is identified with a Ζεὺς
Ἀρότριος. All this is very nebulous: and not more definite is the
curious note respecting the gods Taautos, Kronos, Dagon and the rest
being symbolized by sacred letters. <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130.md) If these passages mean anything at all,
they imply that the people who taught the Phoenicians the use of letters
(and possibly also of baetylic stones) also imparted to them the
knowledge of the god Dagon. But stories which ostensibly reach us at
third hand afford a rather unsafe *apparatus criticus*.

In Palestine itself there is clear evidence of the presence of Dagon
before the coming of the Philistines. A certain Dagan-takala contributed
two letters <span id="fr_131"></span>[3](#fn_131.md) to the Tell el-Amarna
correspondence. By ill-luck they do not mention the place of which he
was apparently the chieftain, nor do they tell us anything else to the
point: the one letter is merely a protestation of loyalty, the other the
usual petition for deliverance from the Aramaean invaders. 'Dagan' is
not here preceded by the usual determinative prefix of divinity; but
neither is the name so preceded in the references to the town of
Beth-Dagon in the inscriptions of Sennacherib.

This name, Beth-Dagon, appears in several Palestinian villages. They are
not mentioned in the Tell el-Amarna correspondence; and we might fairly
infer that they were Philistine foundations but for the fact that the
name appears in the list of Asiatic towns conquered by Ramessu III at
Medinet Habu—a list probably copied from an earlier list of Ramessu II.
There seems no possibility of escaping the conclusion that by <span
id="img_10300"></span> ![](img/10300.jpg) Bty-Dkn which appears in this
list, is meant one of the towns called Beth-Dagon. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[4](#fn_132.md)

Of these villages, one was in the tribe of Asher, another in Judah. The
southern village described by Jerome <span
id="fr_133"></span>[5](#fn_133.md) as of large size,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

was in his time called Caferdago, between Diospolis and Jamnia (Lydd and
Yebnah). Jerome's village is probably to be identified with a ruin known
as Dajun, close by the present village of Beit Dejan; the latter has
preserved the old name and is built on a mound which is possibly the old
site.

Moreover, the name Dagan appears in Mesopotamia: there seems no longer
to be any doubt that a certain group of cuneiform signs, relating to a
deity, is to be read *Da-gān*. In Babylonia it enters into the
composition of proper names of about 2400 B.C.: a king dated 2145 B.C.
was Idin-Dagān and he had a son Išme-Dagān: a seal-cylinder exists of a
certain Dagān-abi son of Ibni-Dagān. In Assyria we find it in the name
of Dagān-bīlu-uṣur, eponym of the year 879 B.C.: and the name is several
times coupled with that of Anu <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134.md) in
cosmogonies and in invocations of various Assyrian kings. The name
disappears after the ninth century: the late reference to Dagon in the
Hebrew version of Tobit, chap. i <span id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_135.md),
speaking of Sennacherib being killed ‏בשעה שנבנם להחפלל לפני דגון טעותו‎
'at the hour when he went in to pray to his idol Dagon', is not of any
special importance.

The fragments of Berossos relate how originally the people of Babylon
lived like animals, without order: but a being named Oannes rose out of
the Erythraean sea, with a complete fish-body, and a man's head under
the fish-head, and human feet and voice. This being was a culture-hero,
teaching the knowledge of the arts, writing, building, city-dwelling,
agriculture, &c., to men: he rose from the sea by day, and returned to
it at sunset.

Other fragments of Berossos tell us that Oannes was followed by similar
beings, who appeared from time to time under certain of the antediluvian
kings. There were in all seven, the second and probably the following
four being called Annedotos, and the last being called Odakon (᾽Ωδάκων
or Ὀδάκων). The last resembles 'Dagon' in outward form: but the
elaborate discussion of Hrozný <span id="fr_136"></span>[3](#fn_136.md) has
shown that the comparison between the two cannot stand: that the -ων of
Ὠδάκων is a mere termination: that the names Oannes and Odakon (not
however Annedotos, so far as has yet been discovered) have their
prototypes in Sumerian, and cannot be equated to the Babylonian and
Assyrian Dagan. The sole evidence for the fish-form of Dagan therefore
disappears. The statements of Damascius (*de Principiis*,

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

c\. 125) about a Babylonian divine pair, Δάχος and Δαχή <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137.md) add nothing to the problem: as Rev. P.
Boylan and Mr. Alton have both pointed out to me, the D is a mistake for
an A in both cases, and the beings referred to are evidently Lahmu and
Lahamu.

That Dagān and the pre-Philistine Dagon of Palestine are one and the
same being can scarcely be questioned. Hrozný (*op. cit.* p. 103) points
out that the difference of the vowel is no difficulty, especially as the
name appears once in Assyrian as an element in a proper name in the form
Dagūna. But we may perhaps ask if the post-Philistine deity was
identical with the pre-Philistine god, and whether there may not have
been a conflation analogous to that which has taken place between
Britomartis and Atargatis.

It is relevant to notice here in passing that the Philistine religion
never had any attraction for the reactionary kings of the Hebrews. Only
in a rather vague passage (Judges x. 6) is there any indication of the
influence of Philistine worship on that of the Israelites. Elsewhere we
read of altars built to the abomination of the Zidonians, of Moab, of
the Ammonites, but never of the Philistines. The solitary exception is
the consultation of the Ekronite oracle, which, as we have seen, was not
Philistine at all. In spite of the semitization of the Philistines
during the latter part of the Hebrew monarchy, their cult still remained
too exotic to attract the Semitic temperament.

Now strange though it may seem, there is a possibility that the
Philistines brought with them from their western home a god whose name
was similar to Dagon. We have not found any trace of him in or around
Crete: the decipherment of the Minoan tablets may possibly tell us
something about this in the future. But the Etruscans, kinsmen of the
Philistines, had a myth of a certain Tages, who appeared suddenly <span
id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138.md) from the earth in the guise of a boy,
and who, as they related, was their instructor in the arts of
soothsaying. This took place 'when an Etruscan named Tarchon was
ploughing near Tarquinii'—names which immediately recall the *Tarkhu*,
*Tarkon-demos*, and similar names of Asia Minor. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[3](#fn_139) Festus (*sub voce*.md) describes Tages as a
'genii filius, nepos Iouis'. As the Etruscans rejected the letter D,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tages is closely
comparable to a name beginning with Dag-; and indeed the -*es*
termination is probably not part of the Etruscan name, but a nominative
termination added by the foreign writers who have reported the story. If
the Philistines brought such a deity with them in their Syrian home,
they might well have identified him with the god *Dagon*, whom they
found there before them.

It is difficult otherwise to explain how Dagān, whose worship seems to
have been on the whole of secondary importance, should have acquired
such supreme importance among the foreigners.

But after all, the Canaanite Dagon and the hypothetical Philistine Dag-
may have been one—the latter having been borrowed by the
'proto-Philistines', as we may for convenience call them, at some remote
period. The intercourse which led to the adoption of clay tablets as
writing materials by the Cretans at the beginning of the middle Minoan
period, and to the adoption of certain details of legal procedure (if
there be any value in the conjectures given in this book regarding the
Phaestos disk)—may well have led to the borrowing of the god of one
nation by the other.

The *Etymologicon Magnum* calls Dagon—or rather Βητάγων, substituting
the place Beth-Dagon for the name of the god—ὁ Κρόνος ὑπὸ Φοινίκων.

After the collapse of the Philistine power in David's time, we hear
nothing more about Dagon except the vague guesses of etymologists and
mythographers. The temple, and presumably the worship of the deity,
under the old name, lasted down to the time of the Maccabees in Ashdod
(1 Macc. x. 83, 84). But in Gaza the case was different. Here powerful
Hellenic influences introduced numerous foreign deities, which, however,
there is every reason to believe were grafted on to the old local gods
and *numina*. Josephus tells us of a temple of Apollo; but our leading
source is the life of Porphyrius, bishop of Gaza at the end of the
fourth and beginning of the fifth century, written by his friend the
deacon Marcus.

This valuable little work gives us a picture of the last struggle of
heathenism, of which Gaza was the storm-centre. The descriptions are
terse but vivid. We see Porphyrius, after his appointment to the
bishopric, making his way painfully from Diospolis (Lydd) because the
heathen living in the villages on the way erected barriers to prevent
his passing, and annoyed him by burning substances that gave forth fetid
odours. After they had arrived, a drought fell in the same year, which
the heathen ascribed to the wrath of Marna their god, on account of the
coming of Porphyrius. For two months no rain fell, notwithstanding their
prayers to Marna ('whom they say

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

is Zeus') in his capacity of lord of rain. There was a place of prayer
outside the city, and the whole of the heathen population frequented
this for intercession to the κύριος τῶν ὄμβρων. This place was no doubt
a sanctuary with an ancient tradition; most probably to be identified
with the Aldioma, or place of Zeus Aldemios. This, according to the
*Etymologicon Magnum*, was the name of the chief god of Gaza, and a god
of fertility; probably therefore identical with Marna. <span
id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140.md) We hear of the same sanctuary in the
Talmud: near Gaza was a place called Yerīd or ‘Ithōza (‏עטלוזה‎, also
written ‏אטליז‎ and ‏אטלים‎) outside the city where an idol was
worshipped. <span id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141.md) In the sequel we learn
that Porphyrius took from the Aldioma the stones with which he built the
church erected by him on the site of the Marneion.

Near modern Gaza is a hill, crowned by the shrine of a Muslim saint
called *Sheikh Muntar*. As usual, this true believer has succeeded to
the honours of a pagan divinity. Muntar means 'a watch tower'; but
possibly the name is a corruption of Marna or \[Brito\]martis.

The name *Marna* is capable of being rendered in Aramaic, Mar-na, <span
id="fr_142"></span>[3](#fn_142.md) Our Lord,' and not improbably this is
its actual meaning. If so, it is probably an illustration of the
widespread dislike to, or actual prohibition of, the mention of the real
name of a divinity. <span id="fr_143"></span>[4](#fn_143.md) At some time a
hesitation to name the god—who can hardly be other than Dagon—had
arisen: the respectful expression 'Our Lord' had by frequent use become
practically the personal name of the divinity, and had assumed a Greek
form Μάρνας, with a temple called the Μαρνεῖον, the chief temple of
Gaza.

It is likely that Gaza at the time claimed to be a sacred city: the
rigidness of the tabu against carrying a dead body into it suggests that
such an act would pollute it. The Christians had serious trouble, soon
after the coming of Porphyrius, on account of the case of one Barōchus,
a zealous young Christian, who was set upon by heathen outside the city
and beaten, as was thought, to death. His friends happening to find him
lying unconscious, wished to carry him

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

home; but only succeeded in doing so with the greatest difficulty, owing
to the uproar caused by their carrying the apparent corpse into the
city.

Stirred by events of this kind, Porphyrius determined to invoke the
civil power to aid him in his struggle with heathendom, and sending
Marcus to Constantinople obtained an order for the closing of the
temples of Gaza. As usual, however, in the East, the official
responsible for the carrying out of the order did so with one hand,
allowing the other hand to be 'greased' to undo the work
surreptitiously. In other words, Hilarios, the adjutant sent to carry
out the order, and especially charged to close the Marneion and to put a
stop to the consultation of the oracle, while appearing to execute the
duty committed to him, secretly took bribes to permit the rites of
heathen religion to be carried on as before. Porphyrius therefore went
in person to Constantinople; interviewed the empress Eudoxia; obtained
her favour by the prophecy of the birth of a son to her, which was
fulfilled by the birth of Theodosius; and obtained her intercession with
the emperor to secure the closing of the temples. So Porphyrius returned
with his suite, and was received at Gaza with jubilation on the part of
the Christians, and corresponding depression on that of the Pagans.

Some valuable hints are preserved to us by Marcus of the nature of the
worship thus destroyed. A few excerpts from his work may be here given.

'As we entered the city, about the place called the Four Ways, there was
standing a marble pillar, which they said was Aphrodite; and it was
above a stone altar, and the form of the pillar was that of an undraped
woman, ὲχουσης ὅλα τὰ ἄσχημα φαινόμενα, <span
id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144.md) and they all of the city used to honour
the pillar, especially the women, lighting lamps and burning incense.
For they used to say of her that she used to answer in a dream those who
wished to enter into matrimony; and telling falsehoods they used to
deceive one another.' The worship of this statue evidently retained some
of the most lurid details of the High Place worship. This statue was the
first to be destroyed—by a miracle, Marcus says, on the exhibition of
the Cross. He is probably mindful of the prostration of Dagon on the Ark
being brought into his presence.

Ten days afterwards Cynēgius, the emperor's messenger, arrived with a
band of soldiers, to destroy the temples, of which there were eight—of
the Sun, Aphrodite, Apollo, Korē (Persephone), Hekatē,

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the Hērōeion, the Tychaion or temple of the Luck (τύχη) of the city, and
the Marneion, or temple of the Crete-born Zeus, the most honourable of
all the temples, which has already been mentioned. Besides these there
were a countless number of minor deities in the houses and the villages.
The destroying party first made its way to the Marneion. The priests,
however, had been forewarned, and blocked the doors of the inner chamber
with great stones. In the inner chamber or *adytum* they stored the
sacred furniture of the temple and the images of the god, and then fled
by other exits, of which it was said there were several, opening out of
the adyta of the temple in various directions. Baffled therefore for the
time, the destroying party made their way to the other temples, which
they demolished; Porphyrius, like another Joshua, laying under an
anathema any of the Christians who should take to himself any plunder
from the treasuries. This work occupied ten days, and the question of
the fate of the Marneion was then discussed. Some were for razing it,
some for burning it, others again wished to preserve it and after
purifying it, to dedicate it for Christian worship. Porphyrius therefore
proclaimed a fast with prayer for Divine guidance in the difficulty. The
Divine guidance came in strange wise; and though it has nothing to do
with the Philistines, the story is so curious that it is well worth
relating exactly as Marcus himself tells it. As the people, fasting and
praying, were assembled in the church, a child of seven years, standing
with his mother, suddenly cried out in the Syrian tongue, 'Burn the
temple to the ground: for many hateful things have taken place in it,
especially human sacrifices. And in this manner burn ye it. Bring liquid
pitch and sulphur and lard, and mix them together and smear the brazen
doors therewith, and lay fire to them, and so the whole temple will
burn; it is impossible any other way. And leave the outer part (τὸν
ἐζώτερον) with the enclosing wall (περίβολος). And after it is burnt,
cleanse the place and there build a holy church. I witness to you before
God, that it may not be otherwise: for it is not I who speak, but Christ
that speaketh in me.' And when they all heard they wondered, and
glorified God. And this portent came to the ears of the holy bishop
(Porphyrius), who stretching his hands to heaven gave glory to God and
said, 'Glory to Thee, Holy Father, who hast hidden from the wise and
prudent, and hast revealed even these things to babes.' When the people
were dismissed from the church he summoned the child and his mother to
him in the bishop's house, and setting the child apart he said to the
woman, 'I adjure thee by the Son of the Living God to say if it was on
thy suggestion or of some other known to thee that

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

thy son spoke as he did concerning the Marneion.' The woman said, 'I
deliver myself to the dread and awful judgement-seat of Christ, if I had
fore-knowledge of any of those things that my son spoke this day. But if
it seem fit to thee, behold the boy, take him and examine him with
threats, and if he said these things on the suggestion of any, he will
confess it in fear; if he says nothing else it will be clear that he was
inspired by the Holy Spirit.' So to make a long story short, the boy was
brought in, and the bishop bade him speak and say who had put these
words in his mouth—brandishing a whip as he spoke. The poor bewildered
child kept silence, even though 'We who were around him '—Marcus speaks
as an eye-witness—repeated the questions likewise with threats. At last
the child opened his mouth and made exactly the same utterance as
before, but this time in Greek—a language of which, as appeared on
inquiry from the mother, he was ignorant. This settled the matter, and
sealed the fate of the Marneion. The bishop gave three pieces of money
to the mother, but the child, seeing them in her hand, said in the
Syrian tongue, 'Take it not, mother, sell not thou the gift of God for
money!' So the woman returned the money, saying to the bishop, 'Pray for
me and my son, and recommend us to God.' And the bishop dismissed them
in peace. It is a strange coincidence that the first and last events in
the recorded history of Philistia have a mantic prodigy as their central
incident!

The reference to human sacrifices is for our immediate purpose the most
noteworthy point in this remarkable story. The sequel was equally
remarkable. The method approved by the oracle was applied, and
*immediately* the whole temple, which on the first occasion had resisted
their assaults, was wrapped in flames. It burnt for many days, during
which there was a good deal of looting of treasures; in the course of
this at least one fatal accident occurred. At the same time a
house-to-house search for idols, books of sorcery, and the like relics
of heathenism, was effected, and anything of the kind discovered was
destroyed.

When the plan of the new church came to be discussed some were for
rebuilding it after the fashion of the old temple; others for making a
complete break with heathen tradition by erecting a building entirely
different. The latter counsel ultimately prevailed. Important for us is
the *fact* of the dispute, because, *à propos* thereof Marcus has given
us a few words of description which tell us something of what the
building was like. It was cylindrical, with two porticoes, one inside
the other; in the middle like a ciborium (the canopy above an altar)
'puffed out' (i.e. presumably domed) but stretched upwards (= stilted),

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

and it had other things fit for idols and suited to the horrible and
lawless concomitants of idolatry. <span id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145.md)

This clearly takes us far away from the *megaron* plan of the old Dagon
temple. We have to do with a peristyle circular building, not unlike the
Roman Pantheon, but with a stilted dome and surrounded by two rows of
columns (see the sketch, p. 124). The 'other things' suitable for
idol-worship were presumably the adyta of which we have already heard,
which must have been either recesses in the wall or else underground
chambers. The apparently secret exits made use of by the priests seem to
favour the latter hypothesis. Not improbably they were ancient sacred
caves. I picture the temple to myself as resembling the Dome of the Rock
at Jerusalem, substituting the double portico for the aisle that runs
round that building.

In clearing off the ashes and *débris* of the Marneion, Porphyrius came
upon certain marbles, or a 'marble incrustation'—μαρμάρωσις—which the
Marna-worshippers considered holy and not to be trodden upon, especially
by women. We are of course reminded of the threshold of Dagon at Ashdod,
but as we have no information as to the part of the temple to which the
marbles belonged, we cannot say if there was any very close analogy.
Porphyrius, we are told, paved the street with these sacred stones, so
that not only men, but 'women, dogs, pigs, and beasts' should be
compelled to tread upon them—a proceeding which we learn caused more
pain to the idolaters than even the destruction of their temple. 'But
yet to this day', says Marcus, 'most of them, especially the women, will
not tread on the marbles.'

On coins of Gaza of the time of Hadrian a different temple is
represented, with an ordinary distyle front. This type bears the
inscription GAZA MARNA, with figures of a male and female divinity,
presumably Marna and Tyche. The coin is evidence that the distyle
temple—the old megaron type—survived in Gaza till this time, and it is
not improbable that the Marneion destroyed by Porphyrius was built
immediately afterwards. The resemblance to the Dome of the Rock at
Jerusalem may be more than merely superficial. This structure was built
on the ruins of Hadrian's temple of Jupiter, the Dodecapylon, which he
erected over the sacred Rock, when he made his determined effort to
paganize the Holy City. We have no description of this building, which
was already in ruins in AḌ. 333; but its situation seems to require a
round or symmetrically polygonal structure, and the name *dodecapylon*
suggests a twelve-sided

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

building. The Dome of the Rock (an octagon) may well have been built
after this model; and the Pantheon, which has also been compared with
the building indicated by the account of Marcus, is likewise of the time
of Hadrian. The Marneion, therefore, might have been erected under the
auspices of that enthusiastic builder, or at least after the model of
other buildings which he had left behind

<span id="img_11200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 5. Coins of
Gaza and Ashkelon](tn/11200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11200.jpg.md)  
Fig. 5. Coins of Gaza and Ashkelon  
</span>

<span class="small">Fig. 5. Coins of Gaza and Ashkelon:—1. Coin of Gaza
showing Temple of Marna. 2. Coin of Gaza bearing the figure and name of
Io, and a debased Phoenician *M*, the symbolic initial of Marna. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146.md) 3. Coin of Gaza bearing the figure and
name of Minos. 4. Coin of Gaza bearing the initial of Marna. 5. Coin of
Ashkelon, with the sacred fishpond. 6. Coin of Ashkelon, with figure of
Astarte. 7. Coin of Ashkelon, with figure bearing a dove: below, a
sea-monster. 8. Coin of Ashkelon, with figure of a dove.</span>

him in Palestine. This would give a date for the break with the
tradition of the old building. The sacred marbles might well have been
some stones preserved from the old structure, and on that account of
peculiar sanctity.

The rest of the acts of Porphyrius do not concern us, though we may note
that there was a well in the courtyard of the Marneion,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

as we learn from the account of a miracle performed by him soon after
the erection of the church.

Jerome, in his *Life of Hilarion*, <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147.md)
narrates sundry miraculous events, especially a remarkable victory in
the circus by a Christian combatant, in which even the pagans were
compelled to acknowledge *Marnas victus a Christo*. Epiphanius of
Constantia in his *Ancoratus*, p. 109, <span
id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_148.md) enumerating a number of persons who have
been deified, speaks of Marnas the slave of Asterios of Crete as having
so been honoured in Gaza. Here again the persistent Cretan tradition
appears, but what the value or even the meaning of this particular form
of it may be we cannot say. Mr. Alton has ingeniously suggested to me
that Epiphanios saw and misunderstood a dedicatory inscription from the
old sanctuary inscribed ΜΑΡΝΑι ΑCΤΕΡΙωι ΚΡΗΤΑΓΕΝΗι.

Outside Gaza there is scarcely any hint of Marna-worship. The name is
used as an expletive in Lampridius's *Life of Alexander Severus*: and
Waddington <span id="fr_149"></span>[3](#fn_149.md) reports an inscription
from Kanata (Kerak), built into a modern wall, and reading ΑΝΝΗΛ\[Ο\]C
ΚΑΜΑCΑΝΟΥ ΕΠΟΗCΕ ΔΙΙ ΜΑΡΝΑι Τωι ΚΥΡΙωι. But Annēlos very likely was a
native of Gaza. A well-known statue found many years ago near Gaza, and
now in the Imperial Ottoman Museum at Constantinople, has been supposed
to represent Marna; but there is no evidence of this. The eccentric Lady
Hester Stanhope found a similar statue at Ashkelon, but destroyed it.

Certain heathenized Jews of Constantia adored as deities Marthus (or
Marthys) and Marthana, the daughters of a certain false prophet of the
time of Trajan, by name Elzai <span id="fr_150"></span>[4](#fn_150.md): but
this is hardly more than a coincidence.

In Ashkelon, also, there was a special deity in late Pagan times. This
was Ἀσκληπιὸς λεοντοῦχος, once referred to by Marinus, writing in the
fifth century A. D. <span id="fr_151"></span>[5](#fn_151.md) It may be that
this is the deity spoken of in the Talmud, which mentions a temple of
Ṣaripa (‏צריפא‎) at Ashkelon, evidently a form of Serapis. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[6](#fn_152.md) But we know nothing of 'Asclepius the
lion-holder' but his name. Probably the name of the town suggested a
dedication to the similarly sounding Asclepius, just as it suggested the
word ΑCΦΑΛΗC on the coins of the city. Asclepius does not appear, so far
as I can find, on any coins of Ashkelon. Mars, Neptune,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the genius of the city, and Aphrodite Urania, are the deities generally
found on the coins: once or twice the latter is represented standing on
lions. <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153.md) On other coins an erection
is represented which may be the λίμν or fish-pond for which the
sanctuary was famous (see fig. 5, p. 112).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[92:1](phc10.htm#fr_114.md) Neither will he feel
any necessity to picture John the Baptist feeding on locust-pods instead
of locusts, which the fellahin still eat with apparent relish.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[92:2](phc10.htm#fr_115.md) For Babylonian omens
derived from various insects see Hunger, *Babylonische Tieromina in
Mitt. vorderas. Gesell.* (1909), 3.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[94:1](phc10.htm#fr_116.md) i. 105.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[94:2](phc10.htm#fr_117.md) Some have compared
with this the outbreak of disease consequent on the capture of the Ark.
But the two are entirely independent. The Scythian disease, whatever it
may have been, was not bubonic plague, and the Philistine disease was
not a hereditary curse. (The Scythian disease is much more like the
*cess noinden* or 'childbirth pangs' with which the men of Ulster were
periodically afflicted in consequence of the curse of Macha, according
to the Irish legend of the *Tain Bó Cuailnge*. This is supposed to be a
distorted tradition of the custom of the *couvade*, a theory which only
adds difficulties to the original obscurity of the myth.)

<span id="fn_118"></span>[94:3](phc10.htm#fr_118.md) Clermont-Ganneau,
discussing this inscription (*Acad. des Inscriptions*, 1909), acutely
points out that αἴγειον, ὑικόν are neuter adjectives, depending on some
such word as ζῷον, so that all animals of these species are forbidden:
whereas *female* animals of the cow kind alone are forbidden, so that
bulls are lawful. Such limitations of the admissible sacrificial animals
are well known in analogous inscriptions: <span id="page_95">p.
95</span> the triple prohibition in this case probably corresponds to
the triple dedication, the purpose being to secure that none of the
three deities in joint ownership of the altar shall be offended by a
sacrifice unlawful in his or her worship. Other inscriptions are quoted
in the same article showing a considerable intercourse between the
Ashkelonites and the island of Delos.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[95:1](phc10.htm#fr_119.md) *De Dea Syria*, 14.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[95:2](phc10.htm#fr_120.md) See a careful
discussion in Baethgen, *Beitr*. 71 ff.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[96:1](phc10.htm#fr_121.md) 'Cretes Dianam
religiosissime venerantur, βριθομάρτην gentiliter nominantes quod
sermone nostro sonat uirginem dulcem.'—Solinus, *Polyhistor*. ch. xvi.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[98:1](phc10.htm#fr_122.md) 'Iope Phoenicum,
antiquior terrarum inundatione, ut ferunt. Insidet collem praeiacente
saxo, in quo uinculorum Andromedae uestigia ostendunt; colitur illic
fabulosa &lt;Der&gt;ceto.'—*Hist. Nat.* v. xiii. 69.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[99:1](phc10.htm#fr_123.md) Possibly some
apparently irrational prohibition of a palatable species is at the base
of the half-humorous stories of the greedy queen.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[99:2](phc10.htm#fr_124.md) Assuming the trophy to
have been exposed in the same town as the body—which is nowhere
stated—then even if it were actually hung in the temple of 'Ashtaroth'
(i.e. Atargatis-Britomartis), there was probably a temple of Dagon also
in the town, to give rise to the parallel tradition.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[99:3](phc10.htm#fr_125.md) 'Nabo autem et ipsum
idolum est quod interpretatur *prophetia et divinatio*, quam post
Euangelii ueritatem in toto orbe conticuisse significat. Siue, iuxta
LXX, *Dagon*, qui tamen in Hebraico non habetur. Et est idolum
Ascalonis, Gazae, et reliquarum urbium Philisthiim.'

<span id="fn_126"></span>[100:1](phc10.htm#fr_126.md) … (Vatican
Onomasticon, ed. Lagarde, p. 215): 'Dagon piscis tristitiae' (Jerome,
Liber interpret. hebraic. nominum, ed. Lagarde, p. 62). The analysis
suggested is ‏דג-און‎. It reminds one of Stephanus of Byzantium's story
about Ashdod: ….

<span id="fn_127"></span>[101:1](phc10.htm#fr_127.md) Probably two adjacent
lines ended thus:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

‏דגון ושתי‎

‏המפתן ושתי‎

</div>

and the homoeoteleuton caused the scribe's eye to wander.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[102:1](phc10.htm#fr_128.md) On the whole subject
see H. C. Trumbull, *The Threshold Covenant, or the Beginning of
Religious Rites* (Edinburgh, 1896).

<span id="fn_129"></span>[103:1](phc10.htm#fr_129.md) ….—Frag. Philo
Byblios 13, Müller, *Fragmm*. iii, p. 567.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[103:2](phc10.htm#fr_130.md) ….—ib. p. 569.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[103:3](phc10.htm#fr_131.md) Winckler, 215, 216;
Knudtzon, 317, 318.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[103:4](phc10.htm#fr_132.md) See Max Müller,
*Egyptian Researches*, i. 49, plate 68.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[103:5](phc10.htm#fr_133.md) *De situ et nominibus
locorum*, ed. Lagarde, p. 138.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[104:1](phc10.htm#fr_134.md) See Jensen,
*Kosmologie der Babylonier*, pp. 449–456, and Paton's article 'Dagan' in
Hastings's *Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[104:2](phc10.htm#fr_135.md) Ed. Neubauer, p. 20,
xlvii.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[104:3](phc10.htm#fr_136.md)
*Sumerisch-babylonische Mythen von dem Gotte Ninrag* (Mitth. der
vorderas. Gesell. (1903), 5).

<span id="fn_137"></span>[105:1](phc10.htm#fr_137.md) ….

<span id="fn_138"></span>[105:2](phc10.htm#fr_138.md) Cf. the sudden
appearances of Britomartis in Aegina, Pausanias, II. xxx. 3.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[105:3](phc10.htm#fr_139.md) See Cic. *de
Divinatione*, ii. 23.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[107:1](phc10.htm#fr_140.md) Aldemios was probably
another name of Marna. The *Etymologicon Magnum* gives us ….—*Etym.
Magn.* ed: Gaisford, col. 58. 20.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[107:2](phc10.htm#fr_141.md) Neubauer, *Geog. d.
Talmud*. With Yerīd compare *‘Ain Yerdeh*, the name of a spring outside
the important city of Gezer.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[107:3](phc10.htm#fr_142.md) It is probably a mere
coincidence that there was a river-god of the same name at Ephesus,
mentioned on coins of that city of the time of Domitian (ΜΑΡΝΑC or
ΕΦΕCΙΩΝ ΜΑΡΝΑC), as well as in an inscription from an aqueduct at
Ephesus, now in the British Museum. See Roscher, *Lexicon*, s.v.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[107:4](phc10.htm#fr_143.md) The word *Mar*,
'Lord,' is used in the modern Syrian church as a title of respect for
saints and bishops. A pagan name ‏מריחב‎ (= ‏מרי יחב‎, 'Mar has given')
illustrates its application to divinity.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[108:1](phc10.htm#fr_144.md) The fish-tail has now
disappeared.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[111:1](phc10.htm#fr_145.md) ….

<span id="fn_146"></span>[112:1](phc10.htm#fr_146.md) ….—Damascius.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[113:1](phc10.htm#fr_147.md) Ed. Migne, xxiii. 27.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[113:2](phc10.htm#fr_148.md) Ed. Migne, xliii.
209: ….

<span id="fn_149"></span>[113:3](phc10.htm#fr_149.md) Inscriptions, in Le
Bas, *Voyage archéologique en Grèce* . . .

<span id="fn_150"></span>[113:4](phc10.htm#fr_150.md) Epiphanius, *Contra
Haeres*. I. xix.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[113:5](phc10.htm#fr_151.md) ….—Marinus, *Vita
Procli*, ch. 19.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[113:6](phc10.htm#fr_152.md) Hildesheimer,
*Beiträge zur Geog. Palästinas*, p. 3.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[114:1](phc10.htm#fr_153.md) See De Saulcy,
*Numismatique de la Terre Sainte*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Their Place in History and Civilization](phc11.md)

</div>
