<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rotm44)  [Next](rotm46) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f44"></span>

CHAPTER XLIV. OF THE ONSLAUGHT OF THE MEN OF THE STEER, THE BRIDGE, AND
THE BULL

Wild was the turmoil and confusion in the Market-stead; for the more
part of the men therein knew not what had befallen about the altar,
though some clomb up to the top of that stack of faggots built for the
burning of the thralls, and when they saw what was toward fell to
yelling and cursing; and their fellows on the plain Place could not hear
their story for the clamour, and they also fell to howling as if a wood
full of wild dogs was there.

And still the shafts rained down on that throng from the Bent of the
Bowmen, for another two score men of the Woodlanders had crept down the
hill to them, and shafts failed them not.  But the Dusky Men about the
altar, for all their terror, or even maybe because of it, now began to
turn upon the scarce-seen foemen, and to press up wildly toward the
hill-side, though as it were without any order or aim. Every man of them
had his weapons, and those no mere gilded toys, but their very tools of
battle; and some, but no great number, had their bows with them and a
few shafts; and these began to shoot at whatsoever they could see on the
hill-side, but at first so wildly and hurriedly that they did no harm.

It must be said of them that at first only those about the altar fell on
toward the hill; for those about the road that led southward knew not
what had betided nor whither to turn.  So that at this beginning of the
battle, of all the thousands in the great Place it was but a few
hundreds that set on the Bent of the Bowmen, and at these the bowmen of
the kindreds shot so close and so wholly together that they fell one
over another in the narrow ways between the houses whereby they must
needs go to gather on the plain ground betwixt the backs of the houses
and the break of the hill-side.  But little by little the archers of the
Dusky Men gathered behind the corpses of the slain, and fell to shooting
at what they could see of the men of the kindreds, which at that while
was not much, for as bold as they were, they fought like wary hunters of
the Wood and the Waste.

But now at last throughout all that throng of Felons in the Market-place
the tale began to spread of foemen come into the Dale and shooting from
the Bents, and all they turned their faces to the hill, and the whole
set of the throng was thitherward; though they fared but slowly, so evil
was the order of them, each man hindering his neighbour as he went.  And
not only did the Dusky Men come flockmeal toward the Bent of the Bowmen,
but also they jostled along toward the road that led southward.  That
beheld Wood-wise from the Bent, and he was minded to get him and his
aback, now that they had made so great a slaughter of the foemen; and
two or three of his fellows had been hurt by arrows, and Bow-may, she
would have been slain thrice over but for the hammer-work of the
Alderman.  And no marvel was that; for now she stood on a little mound
not half covered by a thin thorn-bush, and notched and loosed at
whatever was most notable, as though she were shooting at the mark on a
summer evening in Shadowy Vale. But as Wood-wise was at point to give
the word to depart, from behind them rang out the merry sound of the
Burgdale horns, and he turned to look at the wood-side, and lo!
thereunder was the hill bright and dark with men-at-arms, and over them
floated the Banners of the Wolf, and the Banners of the Steer, the
Bridge, and the Bull.  Then gave forth the bowmen of the kindreds their
first shout, and they made no stay in their shooting; but shot the
eagerer, for they deemed that help would come without their turning
about to draw it to them:  and even so it was.  For straightway down the
bent came striding Face-of-god betwixt the two Banners of the Wolf, and
beside him were Red-wolf the tall and War-grove, and therewithal
Wood-wont and Wood-wicked, and many other men of the Wolf; for now that
the men of the kindreds had been brought face to face with the foe, and
there was less need of them for way-leaders, the more part of them were
liefer to fight under their own banner along with the Woodlanders; so
that the company of those who went under the Wolves was more than three
long hundreds and a half; and the bowmen on the edge of the bent shouted
again and merrily, when they felt that their brothers were amongst them,
and presently was the arrow-storm at its fiercest, and the twanging of
bow-strings and the whistle of the shafts was as the wind among the
clefts of the mountains; for all the new-comers were bowmen of the best.

But the kindreds of the Steer, the Bridge, and the Bull, they hung yet a
while longer on the hills' brow, their banners floating over them and
their horns blowing; and the Dusky Felons in the Market-place beheld
them, and fear and rage at once filled their hearts, and a fierce and
dreadful yell brake out from them, and joyously did the Men of Burgdale
answer them, and song arose amongst them even such as this:

The Men of the Bridge sing:

Why stand ye together, why bear ye the shield,  
Now the calf straineth tether at edge of the field?

Now the lamb bleateth stronger and waters run clear,  
And the day groweth longer and glad is the year?

Now the mead-flowers jostle so thick as they stand,  
And singeth the throstle all over the land?

The Men of the Steer sing:

No cloud the day darkened, no thunder we heard,  
But the horns' speech we hearkened as men unafeared.

Yea, so merry it sounded, we turned from the Dale,  
Where all wealth abounded, to wot of its tale.

The Men of the Bridge sing:

What white boles then bear ye, what wealth of the woods?  
What chafferers hear ye bid loud for your goods?

The Men of the Bull sing:

O the bright beams we carry are stems of the steel;  
Nor long shall we tarry across them to deal.

Hark the men of the cheaping, how loudly they cry  
On the hook for the reaping of men doomed to die!

They all sing:

Heave spear up! fare forward, O Men of the Dale!  
For the Warrior, our war-ward, shall hearken the tale.

Therewith they ceased a moment, and then gave a great and hearty shout
all together, and all their horns blew, and they moved on down the hill
as one man, slowly and with no jostling, the spear-men first, and then
they of the axe and the sword; and on their flanks the deft archers
loosed on the stumbling jostling throng of the Dusky Men, who for their
part came on drifting and surging up the road to the hill.

But when those big spearmen of the Dale had gone a little way the horns'
voice died out, and their great-staved spears rose up from their
shoulders into the air, and stood so a moment, and then slowly fell
forward, as the oars of the longship fall into the row-locks, and then
over the shoulders of the foremost men showed the steel of the five
ranks behind them, and their own spears cast long bars of shadow on the
whiteness of the sunny road.  No sound came from them now save the
rattle of their armour and the tramp of their steady feet; but from the
Dusky Men rose up hideous confused yelling, and those that could free
themselves from the tangle of the throng rushed desperately against the
on-rolling hedge of steel, and the whole throng shoved on behind them. 
Then met steel and men; here and there an ash-stave broke; here and
there a Dusky Felon rolled himself unhurt under the ash-staves, and
hewed the knees of the Dalesmen, and a tall man came tottering down; but
what men or wood-wights could endure the push of spears of those mighty
husbandmen?  The Dusky Ones shrunk back yelling, or turned their backs
and rushed at their own folk with such fierce agony that they entered
into the throng, till the terror of the spear reached to the midmost of
it and swayed them back on the hindermost; for neither was there outgate
for the felons on the flanks of the spearmen, since there the feathered
death beset them, and the bowmen (and the Bride amongst the foremost)
shot wholly together, and no shaft flew idly.  But the wise leaders of
the Dalesmen would not that they should thrust in too far amongst the
howling throng of the Dusky Men, lest they should be hemmed in by them;
for they were but a handful in regard to them:  so there they stayed,
barring the way to the Dusky Men, and the bowmen still loosed from the
flanks of them, or aimed deftly from betwixt the ranks of the spearmen.

And now was there a space of ten strides or more betwixt the Dalesmen
and their foes, over which the spears hung terribly, nor durst the Dusky
Men adventure there; and thereon was nought but men dead or sorely
hurt.  Then suddenly a horn rang thrice shrilly over all the noise and
clamour of the throng, and the ranks of the spearmen opened, and forth
into that space strode two score of the swordsmen and axe-wielders of
the Dale, their weapons raised in their hands, and he who led them was
Iron-hand of the House of the Bull:  tall he was, wide-shouldered,
exceeding strong, but beardless and fair-faced. He bore aloft a
two-edged sword, broad-bladed, exceeding heavy, so that few men could
wield it in battle, but not right long; it was an ancient weapon, and
his father before him had called it the Barley-scythe.  With him were
some of the best of the kindreds, as Wolf of Whitegarth, Long-hand of
Oakholt, Hart of Highcliff, and War-well the captain of the Bridge. 
These made no tarrying on that space of the dead, but cried aloud their
cries:  'For the Burg and the Steer! for the Dale and the Bridge! for
the Dale and the Bull!' and so fell at once on the Felons; who fled not,
nor had room to flee; and also they feared not the edge-weapons so
sorely as they feared those huge spears.  So they turned fiercely on the
swordsmen, and chiefly on Iron-hand, as he entered in amongst them the
first of all, hewing to the right hand and the left, and many a man fell
before the Barley-scythe; for they were but little before him.  Yet as
one fell another took his place, and hewed at him with the steel axe and
the crooked sword; and with many strokes they clave his shield and brake
his helm and rent his byrny, while he heeded little save smiting with
the Barley-scythe, and the blood ran from his arm and his shoulder and
his thigh.

But War-well had entered in among the foe on his left hand, and
unshielded hove up a great broad-bladed axe, that clave the iron helms
of the Dusky Men, and rent their horn-scaled byrnies.  He was not very
tall, but his shoulders were huge and his arms long, and nought could
abide his stroke.  He cleared a ring round Iron-hand, whose eyes were
growing dim as the blood flowed from him, and hewed three strokes before
him; then turned and drew the champion out of the throng, and gave him
into the arms of his fellows to stanch the blood that drained away the
might of his limbs; and then with a great wordless roar leaped back
again on the Dusky Men as the lion leapeth on the herd of swine; and
they shrank away before him; and all the swordsmen shouted, 'For the
Bridge, for the Bridge!' and pressed on the harder, smiting down all
before them.  On his left hand now was Hart of Highcliff wielding a good
sword hight Chip-driver, wherewith he had slain and hurt a many,
fighting wisely with sword and shield, and driving the point home
through the joints of the armour.  But even therewith, as he drave a
great stroke at a lord of the Dusky Ones, a cast-spear came flying and
smote him on the breast, so that he staggered, and the stroke fell
flatlings on the shield-boss of his foe, and Chip-driver brake atwain
nigh the hilts; but Hart closed with him, and smote him on the face with
the pommel, and tore his axe from his hand and clave his skull
therewith, and slew him with his own weapon, and fought on valiantly
beside War-well.

Now War-well had fought so fiercely that he had rent his own hauberk
with the might of his strokes, and as he raised his arm to smite a huge
stroke, a deft man of the Felons thrust the spike of his war-axe up
under his arm; and when War-well felt the smart of the steel, he turned
on that man, and, letting his axe fall down to his wrist and hang there
by its loop, he caught the foeman up by the neck and the breech, and
drave him against the other Dusky Ones before him, so that their weapons
pierced and rent their own friend and fellow. Then he put forth the
might of his arms and the pith of his body, and hove up that felon and
cast him on to the heads of his fellow murder-carles, so that he rent
them and was rent by them.  Then War-well fell on again with the axe,
and all the champions of the Dale shouted and fell on with him, and the
foe shrank away; and the Dalesmen cleared a space five fathoms' length
before them, and the spearmen drew onward and stood on the space whereon
the first onslaught had been.

Then drew those hewers of the Dale together, and forth from the company
came the man that bare the Banner of the Bridget and the champions
gathered round him, and they ordered their ranks and strode with the
Banner before them three times to and fro across the road athwart the
front of the spearmen, and then with a great shout drew back within the
spear-hedge.  Albeit five of the champions of the Dale had been slain
outright there, and the more part of them hurt more or less.

But when all were well within the ranks, once again blew the horn, and
all the spears sank to the rest, and the kindreds drave the
spear-furrow, and a space was swept clear before them, and the cries and
yells of the Dusky Men were so fierce and wild that the rough voices of
the Dalesmen were drowned amidst them.

Forth then came every bowman of the kindred that was there and loosed on
the Dusky Men; and they forsooth had some bowmen amongst them, but
cooped up and jostled as they were they shot but wildly; whereas each
shaft of the Dale went home truly.

But amongst the bowmen forth came the Bride in her glittering war-gear,
and stepped lightly to the front of the spearmen.  Her own yew bow had
been smitten by a shaft and broken in her hand:  so she had caught up a
short horn bow and a quiver from one of the slain of the Dusky Men; and
now she knelt on one knee under the shadow of the spears nigh to her
grandsire Hall-ward, and with a pale face and knitted brow notched and
loosed, and notched and loosed on the throng of foemen, as if she were
some daintily fashioned engine of war.

So fared the battle on the road that went from the south into the
Market-stead.  Valiantly had the kindred fought there, and no man of
them had blenched, and much had they won; but the way was perilous
before them, for the foe was many and many.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV. Of Face-of-god's Onslaught](rotm46)

</div>
