<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rotm23)  [Next](rotm25) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f23"></span>

CHAPTER XXIII. TALK IN THE HALL OF THE HOUSE OF THE FACE

In sooth they were come to the very Gate of Burgstead, and the great
gates were shut, and only a wicket was open, and a half score of stout
men in all their war-gear were holding ward thereby.  They gave place to
Hall-face and his company, albeit some of the warders followed them
through the wicket that they might hear the story told.

The street was full of folk, both men and women, talking together
eagerly concerning all these tidings, and when they saw the men of the
Hue-and-cry they came thronging about them, so that they might scarce
get to the door of the House of the Face because of the press; so
Hall-face (who was a very tall man) cried out:

'Good people, all is well! the runaways are slain, and Face-of-god is
come back with us; give place a little, that we may come into our
house.'

Then the throng set up a shout, and made way a little, so that Hall-face
and Gold-mane and the others could get to the door.  And they entered
into the Hall, and saw much folk therein; and men were sitting at table,
for supper was not yet over.  But when they saw the new-comers they
mostly rose up from the board and stood silent to hear the tale, for
they had been talking many together each to each, so that the Hall was
full of confused noise.

So Hall-face again cried out:  'Men in this hall, good is the tidings. 
The runaways are slain; and it was Face-of-god who slew them as he came
back safe from the waste.'

Then they shouted for joy, and the brethren and Stone-face with them
(for he had entered with them from the street) went up on to the dais,
while the others of the Hue-and-cry gat them seats where they might at
the endlong tables.

But when Face-of-god came up on to the dais, there sat Iron-face looking
down on the thronged Hall with a ruddy cheerful countenance, and beside
him sat the Bride; for he had caused her to be brought thither when he
had heard of the tidings of battle.  She was daintily clad in a
flame-coloured kirtle embroidered with gold about the bosom and sleeves,
and there was a fillet of golden roses on her ruddy hair.  Her eyes
shone bright and eager, and the pommels of her cheeks were flushed and
red contrary to their wont.  Needs must Gold-mane sit by her, and when
he came close to her he knew not what to do, but he put forth his hand
to her, yet with a troubled countenance; for he feared her grief mingled
with her beauty:  as for her, she wavered in her mind whether she should
forbear to touch him or not; but she saw that men about were looking at
them, and especially was Iron-face looking on her:  therefore she stood
up and took Gold-mane's hand and kissed his face as she had been wont to
do, and by then was her face as white as paper; and her anguish pierced
his heart, so that he well-nigh groaned for grief of her.  But Iron-face
looked on her and said kindly:

'Kinswoman, thou art pale; thou hast feared for thy mate amidst all
these tidings of war, and still fearest for him.  But pluck up a heart;
for the man is a deft warrior for all his fair face, which thou lovest
as a woman should, and his hands may yet save his head. And if he be
slain, yet are there other men of the kindred, and the earth will not be
a desert to thee even then.'

She looked at Iron-face, and the colour was come back to her face
somewhat, and she said:

'It is true; I have feared for him; for he goeth into perilous places. 
But for thee, thou art kind, and I thank thee for it.'

And therewith she kissed Iron-face and sat down in her place, and strove
to overmaster her grief, that her face might not be changed by it; for
now were thoughts of battle, and valiant hopes arising in men's hearts;
and it seemed to her too grievous if she should mar that feast on the
eve of battle.

But Iron-face kissed and embraced his son and said:  'Art thou late come
from the waste?  Hast thou seen new things?  We look to have a notable
tale from thee; though here also have been tidings, and it is not unlike
that we shall presently have new work on our hands.'

'Father,' quoth Face-of-god, 'I deem that when thou hast heard my tale
thou wilt think no less of it than that there are valiant folk to be
holpen, poor folk to be delivered, and evil folk to be swept from off
the face of the earth.'

'It is well, son,' said Iron-face.  'I see that thy tale is long; let it
alone for to-night.  To-morrow shall we hold a Gate-thing, and then
shall we hear all that thou hast to tell.  Now eat thy meat and drink a
bowl of wine, and comfort thy troth-plight maiden.'

So Gold-mane sat down by the Bride, and ate and drank as he needs must;
but he was ill at ease and he durst not speak to her.  For, on the one
hand, he thought concerning his love for the Sun-beam, and how sweet and
good a thing it was that she should take him by the hand and lead him
into noble deeds and great fame, caressing him so softly and sweetly the
while; and, on the other hand, there sat the Bride beside him, sorrowful
and angry, begrudging all that sweetness of love, as though it were
something foul and unseemly; and heavy on him lay the weight of that
grudge, for he was a man of a friendly heart.

Stone-face sat outward from him on the other side of the Bride; and he
leaned across her towards Gold-mane and said:

'Fair shall be thy tale to-morrow, if thou tellest us all thine
adventure.  Or wilt thou tell us less than all?'

Said Face-of-god:  'In good time shalt thou know it all, foster-father;
but it is not unlike that by the time that thou hast heard it, there
shall be so many other things to tell of, that my tale shall seem of
little account to thee--even as the saw saith that one nail driveth out
the other.'

'Yea,' said Stone-face, 'but one tale belike shall be knit up with the
others, as it fareth with the figures that come one after other on the
weaver's cloth; though one maketh not the other, yet one cometh of the
other.'

Said Face-of-god:  'Wise art thou now, foster-father, but thou shalt be
wiser yet in this matter by then a month hath worn:  and to-morrow shalt
thou know enough to set thine hands a-work.'

So the talk fell between them; and the night wore, and the men of
Burgdale feasted in their ancient hall with merry hearts, little weighed
down by thought of the battle that might be and the trouble to come; for
they were valorous and kindly folk.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Face-of-god Giveth that Token to the Bride](rotm25)

</div>
