<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rotm16)  [Next](rotm18) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f16"></span>

CHAPTER XVI. THE BRIDE SPEAKETH WITH FACE-OF-GOD

February had died into March, and March was now twelve days old, on a
fair and sunny day an hour before noon; and Face-of-god was in a meadow
a scant mile down the Dale from Burgstead.  He had been driving a bull
into a goodman's byre nearby, and had had to spend toil and patience
both in getting him out of the fields and into the byre; for the beast
was hot with the spring days and the new grass. So now he was resting
himself in happy mood in an exceeding pleasant place, a little meadow to
wit, on one side whereof was a great orchard or grove of sweet
chestnuts, which went right up to the feet of the Southern Cliffs: 
across the meadow ran a clear brook towards the Weltering Water, free
from big stones, in some places dammed up for the flooding of the deep
pasture-meadow, and with the grass growing on its lips down to the very
water.  There was a low bank just outside the chestnut trees, as if
someone had raised a dyke about them when they were young, which had
been trodden low and spreading through the lapse of years by the faring
of many men and beasts.  The primroses bloomed thick upon it now, and
here and there along it was a low blackthorn bush in full blossom; from
the mid-meadow and right down to the lip of the brook was the grass well
nigh hidden by the blossoms of the meadow-saffron, with daffodils
sprinkled about amongst them, and in the trees and bushes the birds, and
chiefly the blackbirds, were singing their loudest.

There sat Face-of-god on the bank resting after his toil, and happy was
his mood; since in two days' wearing he should be pacing the Maiden Ward
awaiting the token that was to lead him to Shadowy Vale; so he sat
calling to mind the Friend as he had last seen her, and striving as it
were to set her image standing on the flowery grass before him, till all
the beauty of the meadow seemed bare and empty to him without her.  Then
it fell into his mind that this had been a beloved trysting-place
betwixt him and the Bride, and that often when they were little would
they come to gather chestnuts in the grove, and thereafter sit and
prattle on the old dyke; or in spring when the season was warm would
they go barefoot into the brook, seeking its treasures of troutlets and
flowers and clean-washed agate pebbles. Yea, and time not long ago had
they met here to talk as lovers, and sat on that very bank in all the
kindness of good days without a blemish, and both he and she had loved
the place well for its wealth of blossoms and deep grass and goodly
trees and clear running stream.

As he thought of all this, and how often there he had praised to himself
her beauty, which he scarce dared praise to her, he frowned and slowly
rose to his feet, and turned toward the chestnut-grove, as though he
would go thence that way; but or ever he stepped down from the dyke he
turned about again, and even therewith, like the very image and ghost of
his thought, lo! the Bride herself coming up from out the brook and
wending toward him, her wet naked feet gleaming in the sun as they trod
down the tender meadow-saffron and brushed past the tufts of daffodils. 
He stood staring at her discomforted, for on that day he had much to
think of that seemed happy to him, and he deemed that she would now
question him, and his mind pondered divers ways of answering her, and
none seemed good to him.  She drew near and let her skirts fall over her
feet, and came to him, her gown hem dragging over the flowers:  then she
stood straight up before him and greeted him, but reached not forth her
hand to him nor touched him. Her face was paler that its wont, and her
voice trembled as she spake to him and said:

'Face-of-god, I would ask thee a gift.'

'All gifts,' he said, 'that thou mayest ask, and I may give, lie open to
thee.'

She said:  'If I be alive when the time comes this gift thou mayst well
give me.'

'Sweet kinswoman,' said he, 'tell me what it is that thou wouldest have
of me.'  And he was ill-at-ease as he waited for her answer.

She said:  'Ah, kinsman, kinsman!  Woe on the day that maketh kinship
accursed to me because thou desirest it!'

He held his peace and was exceeding sorry; and she said:

'This is the gift that I ask of thee, that in the days to come when thou
art wedded, thou wilt give me the second man-child whom thou begettest.'

He said:  'This shalt thou have, and would that I might give thee much
more.  Would that we were little children together other again, as when
we played here in other days.'

She said:  'I would have a token of thee that thou shalt show to the
God, and swear on it to give me the gift.  For the times change.'

'What token wilt thou have?' said he.

She said:  'When next thou farest to the Wood, thou shalt bring me back,
it maybe a flower from the bank ye sit upon, or a splinter from the dais
of the hall wherein ye feast, or maybe a ring or some matter that the
strangers are wont to wear.  That shall be the token.'

She spoke slowly, hanging her head adown, but she lifted it presently
and looked into his face and said:

'Woe's me, woe's me, Gold-mane!  How evil is this day, when bewailing me
I may not bewail thee also!  For I know that thine heart is glad. All
through the winter have I kept this hidden in my heart, and durst not
speak to thee.  But now the spring-tide hath driven me to it. Let summer
come, and who shall say?'

Great was his grief, and his shame kept him silent, and he had no word
to say; and again she said:

'Tell me, Gold-mane, when goest thou thither?'

He said:  'I know not surely, may happen in two days, may happen in
ten.  Why askest thou?'

'O friend!' she said, 'is it a new thing that I should ask thee whither
thou goest and whence thou comest, and the times of thy coming and
going.  Farewell to-day!  Forget not the token.  Woe's me, that I may
not kiss thy fair face!'

She spread her arms abroad and lifted up her face as one who waileth,
but no sound came from her lips; then she turned about and went away as
she had come.

But as for him he stood there after she was gone in all confusion, as if
he were undone:  for he felt his manhood lessened that he should thus
and so sorely have hurt a friend, and in a manner against his will.  And
yet he was somewhat wroth with her, that she had come upon him so
suddenly, and spoken to him with such mastery, and in so few words, and
he with none to make answer to her, and that she had so marred his
pleasure and his hope of that fair day.  Then he sat him down again on
the flowery bank, and little by little his heart softened, and he once
more called to mind many a time when they had been there before, and the
plays and the games they had had together there when they were little. 
And he bethought him of the days that were long to him then, and now
seemed short to him, and as if they were all grown together into one
story, and that a sweet one.  Then his breast heaved with a sob, and the
tears rose to his eyes and burned and stung him, and he fell a-weeping
for that sweet tale, and wept as he had wept once before on that old
dyke when there had been some child's quarrel between them, and she had
gone away and left him.

Then after a while he ceased his weeping, and looked about him lest
anyone might be coming, and then he arose and went to and fro in the
chestnut-grove for a good while, and afterwards went his ways from that
meadow, saying to himself:  'Yet remaineth to me the morrow of
to-morrow, and that is the first of the days of the watching for the
token.'

But all that day he was slow to meet the eyes of men; and in the hall
that eve he was silent and moody; for from time to time it came over him
that some of his manhood had departed from him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The Token Cometh from the Mountain](rotm18)

</div>
