<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](rotm36)  [Next](rotm38.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f36"></span>

CHAPTER XXXVI. FOLK-MIGHT SPEAKETH WITH THE BRIDE

It must be told that those footprints which Face-of-god and the Sun-beam
had blessed betwixt jest and earnest had more to do with them than they
wotted of.  For Folk-might, who had had many thoughts and longings since
he had seen the Bride again, rose up early about sunrise, and went
out-a-doors, and wandered about the Burg, letting his eyes stray over
the goodly stone houses and their trim gardens, yet noting them little,
since the Bride was not there.

At last he came to where there was an open place, straight-sided, longer
than it was wide, with a wall on each side of it, over which showed the
blossomed boughs of pear and cherry and plum-trees:  on either hand
before the wall was a row of great lindens, now showing their first
tender green, especially on their lower twigs, where they were sheltered
by the wall.  At the nether end of this place Folk-might saw a grey
stone house, and he went towards it betwixt the lindens, for it seemed
right great, and presently was but a score of paces from its door, and
as yet there was no man, carle or queen, stirring about it.

It was a long low house with a very steep roof; but belike the hall was
built over some undercroft, for many steps went up to the door on either
hand; and the doorway was low, with a straight lintel under its arch. 
This house, like the House of the Face, seemed ancient and somewhat
strange, and Folk-might could not choose but take note of it.  The front
was all of good ashlar work, but it was carven all over, without heed
being paid to the joints of the stones, into one picture of a flowery
meadow, with tall trees and bushes in it, and fowl perched in the trees
and running through the grass, and sheep and kine and oxen and horses
feeding down the meadow; and over the door at the top of the stair was
wrought a great steer bigger than all the other neat, whose head was
turned toward the sun-rising and uplifted with open mouth, as though he
were lowing aloud.  Exceeding fair seemed that house to Folk-might, and
as though it were the dwelling of some great kindred.

But he had scarce gone over it with his eyes, and was just about to draw
nigher yet to it, when the door at the top of those steps opened, and a
woman came out of the house clad in a green kirtle and a gown of brazil,
with a golden-hilted sword girt to her side.  Folk-might saw at once
that it was the Bride, and drew aback behind one of the trees so that
she might not see him, if she had not already seen him, as it seemed not
that she had, for she stayed but for a moment on the top of the stair,
looking out down the tree-rows, and then came down the stair and went
soberly along the road, passing so close to Folk-might that he could see
the fashion of her beauty closely, as one looks into the work of some
deftest artificer.  Then it came suddenly into his head that he would
follow her and see whither she was wending.  'At least,' said he to
himself, 'if I come not to speech with her, I shall be nigh unto her,
and shall see somewhat of her beauty.'

So he came out quietly from behind the tree, and followed her softly;
and he was clad in no garment save his kirtle, and bare no weapons to
clash and jingle, though he had his helm on his head for lack of a
softer hat.  He kept her well in sight, and she went straight onward and
looked not back.  She went by the way whereas he had come, till they
were in the main street, wherein as yet was no one afoot; she made her
way to the Bridge, and passed over it into the meadows; but when she had
gone but a few steps, she stayed a little and looked on the ground, and
as she did so turned a little toward Folk-might, who had drawn back into
the last of the refuges over the up-stream buttresses.  He saw that
there was a half-smile on her face, but he could not tell whether she
were glad or sorry.  A light wind was beginning to blow, that stirred
her raiment and raised a lock of hair that had strayed from the golden
fillet round about her head, and she looked most marvellous fair.

Now she looked along the grass that glittered under the beams of the
newly-risen sun, and noted belike how heavy the dew lay on it; and the
grass was high already, for the spring had been hot, and haysel would be
early in the Dale.  So she put off her shoes, that were of deerskin and
broidered with golden threads, and turned somewhat from the way, and
hung them up amidst the new green leaves of a hawthorn bush that stood
nearby, and so went thwart the meadow somewhat eastward straight from
that bush, and her feet shone out like pearls amidst the deep green
grass.

Folk-might followed presently, and she stayed not again, nor turned, nor
beheld him; he recked not if she had, for then would he have come up
with her and hailed her, and he knew that she was no foolish maiden to
start at the sight of a man who was the friend of her Folk.

So they went their ways till she came to the strand of the water-meadow
brook aforesaid, and she went through the little ripples of the shallow
without staying, and on through the tall deep grass of the meadow
beyond, to where they met the brook again; for it swept round the meadow
in a wide curve, and turned back toward itself; so it was some half
furlong over from water to water.

She stood a while on the brink of the brook here, which was brim-full
and nigh running into the grass, because there was a dam just below the
place; and Folk-might drew nigher to her under cover of the
thorn-bushes, and looked at the place about her and beyond her.  The
meadow beyond stream was very fair and flowery, but not right great; for
it was bounded by a grove of ancient chestnut trees, that went on and on
toward the southern cliffs of the Dale:  in front of the chestnut wood
stood a broken row of black-thorn bushes, now growing green and losing
their blossom, and he could see betwixt them that there was a grassy
bank running along, as if there had once been a turf-wall and ditch
round about the chestnut trees.  For indeed this was the old place of
tryst between Gold-mane and the Bride, whereof the tale hath told
before.

The Bride stayed scarce longer than gave him time to note all this; but
he deemed that she was weeping, though he could not rightly see her
face; for her shoulders heaved, and she hung her face adown and put up
her hands to it.  But now she went a little higher up the stream, where
the water was shallower, and waded the stream and went up over the
meadow, still weeping, as he deemed, and went between the black-thorn
bushes, and sat her down on the grassy bank with her back to the
chestnut trees.

Folk-might was ashamed to have seen her weeping, and was half-minded to
turn him back again at once; but love constrained him, and he said to
himself, 'Where shall I see her again privily if I pass by this time and
place?'  So he waited a little till he deemed she might have mastered
the passion of tears, and then came forth from his bush, and went down
to the water and crossed it, and went quietly over the meadow straight
towards her.  But he was not half-way across, when she lifted up her
face from between her hands and beheld the man coming.  She neither
started nor rose up; but straightened herself as she sat, and looked
right into Folk-might's eyes as he drew near, though the tears were not
dry on her cheeks.

Now he stood before her, and said:  'Hail to the Daughter of a mighty
House!  Mayst thou live happy!'

She answered:  'Hail to thee also, Guest of our Folk!  Hast thou been
wandering about our meadows, and happened on me perchance?'

'Nay,' he said; 'I saw thee come forth from the House of the Steer, and
I followed thee hither.'

She reddened a little, and knit her brow, and said:

'Thou wilt have something to say to me?'

'I have much to say to thee,' he said; 'yet it was sweet to me to behold
thee, even if I might not speak with thee.'

She looked on him with her deep simple eyes, and neither reddened again,
nor seemed wroth; then she said:

'Speak what thou hast in thine heart, and I will hearken without anger
whatsoever it may be; even if thou hast but to tell me of the passing
folly of a mighty man, which in a month or two he will not remember for
sorrow or for joy.  Sit here beside me, and tell me thy thought.'

So he sat him adown and said:  'Yea, I have much to say to thee, but it
is hard to me to say it.  But this I will say:  to-day and yesterday
make the third time I have seen thee.  The first time thou wert happy
and calm, and no shadow of trouble was on thee; the second time thine
happy days were waning, though thou scarce knewest it; but to-day and
yesterday thou art constrained by the bonds of grief, and wouldest
loosen them if thou mightest.'

She said:  'What meanest thou?  How knowest thou this?  How may a
stranger partake in my joy and my sorrow?'

He said:  'As for yesterday, all the people might see thy grief and know
it.  But when I beheld thee the first time, I saw thee that thou wert
more fair and lovely than all other women; and when I was away from
thee, the thought of thee and thine image were with me, and I might not
put them away; and oft at such and such a time I wondered and said to
myself, what is she doing now? though god wot I was dealing with tangles
and troubles and rough deeds enough.  But the second time I beheld thee,
when I had looked to have great joy in the sight of thee, my heart was
smitten with a pang of grief; for I saw thee hanging on the words and
the looks of another man, who was light-minded toward thee, and that
thou wert troubled with the anguish of doubt and fear.  And he knew it
not, nor saw it, though I saw it.'

Her face grew troubled, and the tearful passion stirred within her. But
she held it aback, and said, as anyone might have said it:

'How wert thou in the Dale, mighty man?  We saw thee not.'

He said:  'I came hither hidden in other semblance than mine own. But
meddle not therewith; it availeth nought.  Let me say this, and do thou
hearken to it.  I saw thee yesterday in the street, and thou wert as the
ghost of thine old gladness; although belike thou hast striven with
sorrow; for I see thee with a sword by thy side, and we have been told
that thou, O fairest of women, hast given thyself to the Warrior to be
his damsel.'

'Yea,' she said, 'that is sooth.'

He went on:  'But the face which thou bearedst yesterday against thy
will, amidst all the people, that was because thou hadst seen my sister
the Sun-beam for the first time, and Face-of-god with her, hand clinging
to hand, lip longing for lip, desire unsatisfied, but glad with all
hope.'

She laid hand upon hand in the lap of her gown, and looked down, and her
voice trembled as she said:

'Doth it avail to talk of this?'

He said:  'I know not:  it may avail; for I am grieved, and shall be
whilst thou art grieved; and it is my wont to strive with my griefs till
I amend them.'

She turned to him with kind eyes and said:

'O mighty man, canst thou clear away the tangle which besetteth the soul
of her whose hope hath bewrayed her?  Canst thou make hope grow up in
her heart?  Friend, I will tell thee that when I wed, I shall wed for
the sake of the kindred, hoping for no joy therein.  Yea, or if by some
chance the desire of man came again into my heart, I should strive with
it to rid myself of it, for I should know of it that it was but a
wasting folly, that should but beguile me, and wound me, and depart,
leaving me empty of joy and heedless of life.'

He shook his head and said:  'Even so thou deemest now; but one day it
shall be otherwise.  Or dost thou love thy sorrow?  I tell thee, as it
wears thee and wears thee, thou shalt hate it, and strive to shake it
off.'

'Nay, nay,' she said; 'I love it not; for not only it grieveth me, but
also it beateth me down and belittleth me.'

'Good is that,' said he.  'I know how strong thine heart is.  Now, wilt
thou take mine hand, which is verily the hand of thy friend, and
remember what I have told thee of my grief which cannot be sundered from
thine?  Shall we not talk more concerning this?  For surely I shall soon
see thee again, and often; since the Warrior, who loveth me belike,
leadeth thee into fellowship with me.  Yea, I tell thee, O friend, that
in that fellowship shalt thou find both the seed of hope, and the sun of
desire that shall quicken it.'

Therewith he arose and stood before her, and held out to her his hand
all hardened with the sword-hilt, and she took it, and stood up facing
him, and said:

'This much will I tell thee, O friend; that what I have said to thee
this hour, I thought not to have said to any man; or to talk with a man
of the grief that weareth me, or to suffer him to see my tears; and
marvellous I deem it of thee, for all thy might, that thou hast drawn
this speech from out of me, and left me neither angry nor ashamed, in
spite of these tears; and thou whom I have known not, though thou
knewest me!

'But now it were best that thou depart, and get thee home to the House
of the Face, where I was once so frequent; for I wot that thou hast much
to do; and as thou sayest, it will be in warfare that I shall see thee. 
Now I thank thee for thy words and the thought thou hast had of me, and
the pain which thou hast taken to heal my hurt: I thank thee, I thank
thee, for as grievous as it is to show one's hurts even to a friend.'

He said:  'O Bride, I thank thee for hearkening to my tale; and one day
shall I thank thee much more.  Mayest thou fare well in the Field and
amidst the Folk!'

Therewith he kissed her hand, and turned away, and went across the
meadow and the stream, glad at heart and blithe with everyone; for
kindness grew in him as gladness grew.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII. Of the Folk-Mote of the Dalesmen, the
Shepherd-Folk, and the Woodland Carles: the Banner of the Wolf
Displayed](rotm38.md)

</div>
