<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](rotm52)  [Next](rotm54.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f52"></span>

CHAPTER LII. OF THE NEW BEGINNING OF GOOD DAYS IN SILVER-DALE

On the third day there was high-tide and great joy amongst all men from
end to end of the Dale; and the delivered thralls were feasted and made
much of by the kindreds, so that they scarce knew how to believe their
own five senses that told them the good tidings.

For none strove to grieve them and torment them; what they would, that
did they, and they had all things plenteously; since for all was there
enough and to spare of goods stored up for the Dusky Men, as corn and
wine and oil and spices, and raiment and silver.  Horses were there
also, and neat and sheep and swine in abundance.  Withal there was the
good and dear land; the waxing corn on the acres; the blossoming vines
on the hillside; and about the orchards and alongside the ways, the
plum-trees and cherry-trees and pear-trees that had cast their blossom
and were overhung with little young fruit; and the fair apple-trees
a-blossoming, and the chestnuts spreading their boughs from their
twisted trunks over the green grass.  And there was the goodly pasture
for the horses and the neat, and the thymy hill-grass for the sheep; and
beyond it all, the thicket of the great wood, with its unfailing store
of goodly timber of ash and oak and holly and yoke-elm.  There need no
man lack unless man compelled him, and all was rich enough and wide
enough for the waxing of a very great folk.

Now, therefore, men betook them to what was their own before the coming
of the Dusky Men; and though at first many of the delivered thrall-folk
feasted somewhat above measure, and though there were some of them who
were not very brisk at working on the earth for their livelihood; yet
were the most part of them quick of wit and deft of hand, and they
mostly fell to presently at their cunning, both of husbandry and
handicraft.  Moreover, they had great love of the kindreds, and
especially of the Woodlanders, and strove to do all things that might
pleasure them.  And as for those who were dull and listless because of
their many torments of the last ten years, they would at least fetch and
carry willingly for them of the kindreds; and these last grudged them
not meat and raiment and house-room, even if they wrought but little for
it, because they called to mind the evil days of their thralldom, and
bethought them how few are men's days upon the earth.

Thus all things throve in Silver-dale, and the days wore on toward the
summer, and the Yule-tide rest beyond it, and the years beyond and far
beyond the winning of Silver-dale.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIII. Of the Word Which Hall-ward of the Steer had for
Folk-might](rotm54.md)

</div>
