<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rotm57)  [Next](rotm59) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f57"></span>

CHAPTER LVII. HOW THE HOST CAME HOME AGAIN

It was fourteen days before they came to Rose-dale; for they had much
baggage with them, and they had no mind to weary themselves, and the
wood was nothing loathsome to them, whereas the weather was fair and
bright for the more part.  They fell in with no mishap by the way. But a
score and three of runaways joined themselves to the Host, having
watched their goings and wotting that they were not foemen. Of these,
some had heard of the overthrow of the Dusky Men in Silver-dale, and
others not.  The Burgdalers received them all, for it seemed to them no
great matter for a score or so of new-comers to the Dale.

But when the Host was come to Rose-dale, they found it fair arid lovely;
and there they met with those of their folk who had gone with Dallach. 
But Dallach welcomed the kindreds with great joy, and bade them abide;
for he said that they had the less need to hasten, since he had sent
messengers into Burgdale to tell men there of the tidings.  Albeit they
were mostly loth to tarry; yet when he lay hard on them not to depart as
men on the morrow of a gild-feast, they abode there three days, and were
as well guested as might be, and on their departure they were laden with
gifts from the wealth of Rose-dale by Dallach and his folk.

Before they went their ways Dallach spake with Face-of-god and the
chiefs of the Dalesmen, and said:

'Ye have given me much from the time when ye found me in the wood a
naked wastrel; yet now I would ask you a gift to lay on the top of all
that ye have given me.'

Said Face-of-god:  'Name the gift, and thou shalt have it; for we deem
thee our friend.'

'I am no less,' said Dallach, 'as in time to come I may perchance be
able to show you.  But now I am asking you to suffer a score or two of
your men to abide here with me this summer, till I see how this folk
new-born again is like to deal with me.  For pleasure and a fair life
have become so strange to them, that they scarce know what to do with
them, or how to live; and unless all is to go awry, I must needs command
and forbid; and though belike they love me, yet they fear me not; so
that when my commandment pleaseth them, they do as I bid, and when it
pleaseth them not, they do contrary to my bidding; for it hath got into
their minds that I shall in no case lift a hand against them, which
indeed is the very sooth.  But your folk they fear as warriors of the
world, who have slain the Dusky Men in the Market-place of Silver-stead;
and they are of alien blood to them, men who will do as their friend
biddeth (think our folk) against them who are neither friends or foes. 
With such help I shall be well holpen.'

In such wise spake Dallach; and Face-of-god and the chiefs said that so
it should be, if men could be found willing to abide in Rose-dale for a
while.  And when the matter was put abroad, there was no lack of such
men amongst the younger warriors, who had noted that the dale was fair
amongst dales and its women fairer yet amongst women.

So two score and ten of the Burgdale men abode in Rose-dale, no one of
whom was of more than twenty and five winters.  Forsooth divers of them
set up house in Rose-dale, and never came back to Burgdale, save as
guests.  For a half score were wedded in Rose-dale before the year's
ending; and seven more, who had also taken to them wives of the
goodliest of the Rose-dale women, betook them the next spring to the
Burg of the Runaways, and there built them a stead, and drew a garth
about it, and dug and sowed the banks of the river, which they called
Inglebourne.  And as years passed, this same stead throve exceedingly,
and men resorted thither both from Rose-dale and Burgdale; for it was a
pleasant place; and the land, when it was cured, was sweet and good, and
the wood thereabout was full of deer of all kinds.  So their stead was
called Inglebourne after the stream; and in latter days it became a very
goodly habitation of men.

Moreover, some of the once-enthralled folk of Rose-dale, when they knew
that men of their kindred from Silver-dale were going home with the men
of Burgdale to dwell in the Dale, prayed hard to go along with them; for
they looked on the Burgdalers as if they were new Gods of the Earth. 
The Burgdale chiefs would not gainsay these men either, but took with
them three score and ten from Rose-dale, men and women, and promised
them dwelling and livelihood in Burgdale.

So now with good hearts the Host of Burgdale turned their faces toward
their well-beloved Dale; and they made good diligence, so that in three
days' time they were come anigh the edge of the woodland wilderness. 
Thither in the even-tide, as they were making ready for their last
supper and bed in the wood, came three men and two women of their folk,
who had been abiding their coming ever since they had had the tidings of
Silver-dale and the battles from Dallach.  Great was the joy of these
messengers as they went from company to company of the warriors, and saw
the familiar faces of their friends, and heard their wonted voices
telling all the story of battle and slaughter.  And for their part the
men of the Host feasted these stay-at-homes, and made much of them.  But
one of them, a man of the House of the Face, left the Host a little
after nightfall, and bore back to Burgstead at once the tidings of the
coming home of the Host. Albeit since Dallach's tidings of victory had
come to the Dale, the dwellers in the steads of the country-side had
left Burgstead and gone home to their own houses; so that there was no
great multitude abiding in the Thorp.

So early on the morrow was the Host astir; but ere they came to
Wildlake's Way, the Shepherd-folk turned aside westward to go home,
after they had bidden farewell to their friends and fellows of the Dale;
for their souls longed for the sheepcotes in the winding valleys under
the long grey downs; and the garths where the last year's ricks
shouldered up against the old stone gables, and where the daws were busy
in the tall unfrequent ash-trees; and the green flowery meadows adown
along the bright streams, where the crowfoot and the paigles were
blooming now, and the harebells were in flower about the thorn-bushes at
the down's foot, whence went the savour of their blossom over sheep-walk
and water-meadow.

So these went their ways with many kind words; and two hours afterwards
all the rest of the Host stood on the level ground of the Portway; but
presently were the ranks of war disordered and broken up by the joy of
the women and children, as they fell to drawing goodman or brother or
lover out of the throng to the way that led speediest to their
homesteads and halls.  For the War-leader would not hold the Host
together any longer, but suffered each man to go to his home, deeming
that the men of Burgstead, and chiefly they of the Face and the Steer,
would suffice for a company if any need were, and they would be easily
gathered to meet any hap.

So now the men of the Middle and Lower Dale made for their houses by the
road and the lanes and the meadows, and the men of the Upper Dale and
Burgstead went their ways along the Portway toward their halls, with the
throng of women and children that had come out to meet them. And now men
came home when it was yet early, and the long day lay before them; and
it was, as it were, made giddy and cumbered with the exceeding joy of
return, and the thought of the day when the fear of death and sundering
had been ever in their hearts.  For these new hours were full of the
kissing and embracing of lovers, and the sweetness of renewed delight in
beholding the fair bodies so sorely desired, and hearkening the soft
wheedling of longed-for voices. There were the cups of friends beneath
the chestnut trees, and the talk of the deeds of the fighting-men, and
of the heavy days of the home-abiders; many a tale told oft and o'er
again.  There was the singing of old songs and of new, and the beholding
the well-loved nook of the pleasant places, which death might well have
made nought for them; and they were sweet with the fear of that which
was past, and in their pleasantness was fresh promise for the days to
come.

So amid their joyance came evening and nightfall; and though folk were
weary with the fulness of delight, yet now for many their weariness led
them to the chamber of love before the rest of deep night came to them
to make them strong for the happy life to be begun again on the morrow.

House by house they feasted, and few were the lovers that sat not
together that even.  But Face-of-god and the Sun-beam parted at the door
of the House of the Face; for needs must she go with her new folk to the
House of the Steer, and needs must Face-of-god be amongst his own folk
in that hour of high-tide, and sit beside his father beneath the image
of the God with the ray-begirt head.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVIII. How The Maiden Ward was Held in Burgdale](rotm59)

</div>
