<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rotm43)  [Next](rotm45) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f43"></span>

CHAPTER XLIII. FACE-OF-GOD LOOKETH ON SILVER-DALE: THE BOWMEN'S BATTLE

There then they rested, as folk wearied with the toilsome journey, when
they had set sure watches round about their campment; and they ate
quietly what meat they had with them, and so gat them to sleep in the
wood on the eve of battle.

But not all slept; for the two captains went about amongst the
companies, Folk-might to the east, Face-of-god to the west, to look to
the watches, and to see that all was ordered duly.  Also the Sun-beam
slept not, but she lay beside Bow-may at the foot of an oak-tree; she
watched Face-of-god as he went away amidst the men of the Host, and
watched and waked abiding his returning footsteps.

The night was well worn by then he came back to his place in the
vanward, and on his way back he passed through the folk of the Steer
laid along on the grass, all save those of the watch, and the light of
the moon high aloft was mingled with the light of the earliest dawn; and
as it happed he looked down, and lo! close to his feet the face of the
Bride as she lay beside her grand-sire, her head pillowed on a bundle of
bracken.  She was sleeping soundly like a child who has been playing all
day, and whose sleep has come to him unsought and happily.  Her hands
were laid together by her side; her cheek was as fair and clear as it
was wont to be at her best; her face looked calm and happy, and a lock
of her dark-red hair strayed from her uncovered head over her breast and
lay across her wrists, so peacefully she slept.

Face-of-god turned his eyes from her at once, and went by swiftly, and
came to his own company.  The Sun-beam saw him coming, and rose
straightway to her feet from beside Bow-may, who lay fast asleep, and
she held out her hands to him; and he took them and kissed them, and he
cast his arms about her and kissed her mouth and her face, and she his
in likewise; and she said:

'O Gold-mane, if this were but the morrow of to-morrow!  Yet shall all
be well; shall it not?'

Her voice was low, but it waked Bow-may, who sat up at once broad awake,
after the manner of a hunter of the waste ever ready for the next thing
to betide, and moreover the Sun-beam had been in her thoughts these two
days, and she feared for her, lest she should be slain or maimed.  Now
she smiled on the Sun-beam and said:

'What is it?  Does thy mind forebode evil?  That needeth not.  I tell
thee it is not so ill for us of the sword to be in Silver-dale. Thrice
have I been there since the Overthrow, and never more than a half-score
in company, and yet am I whole to-day.'

'Yea, sister,' said Face-of-god, 'but in past times ye did your deed and
then fled away; but now we come to abide here, and this night is the
last of lurking.'

'Ah,' she said, 'a little way from this I saw such things that we had
good will to abide here longer, few as we were, but that we feared to be
taken alive.'

'What things were these?' said Face-of-god.

'Nay,' she said, 'I will not tell thee now; but mayhap in the lighted
winter feast-hall, when the kindred are so nigh us and about us that
they seem to us as if they were all the world, I may tell it thee; or
mayhap I never shall.'

Said the Sun-beam, smiling:  'Thou wilt ever be talking, Bow-may. Now
let the War-leader depart, for he will have much to do.'

And she was well at ease that she had seen Face-of-god again; but he
said:

'Nay, not so much; all is well-nigh done; in an hour it will be broad
day, and two hours thereafter shall the Banner be displayed on the edge
of Silver-dale.'

The cheek of the Sun-beam flushed, and paled again, as she said: 'Yea,
we shall stand even as our Fathers stood on the day when, coming from
off the waste, they beheld it, and knew it would be theirs.  Ah me! how
have I longed for this morn.  But now--Tell me, Gold-mane, dost thou
deem that I am afraid?  And I whom thou hast deemed to be a God.'

Quoth Bow-may:  'Thou shalt deem her twice a God ere noon-tide, brother
Gold-mane.  But come now! the hour of deadly battle is at hand, and we
may not laugh that away; and therefore I bid thee remember, Gold-mane,
how thou didst promise to kiss me once more on the verge of deadly
battle.'

Therewith she stood up before him, and he tarried not, but kind and
smiling took her face between his two hands and kissed her lips, and she
cast her arms about him and kissed him, and then sank down on the grass
again, and turned from him, and laid her face amongst the grass and the
bracken, and they could see that she was weeping, and her body was
shaken with sobs.  But the Sun-beam knelt down to her, and caressed her
with her hand, and spake kind words to her softly, while Face-of-god
went his ways to meet Folk-might.

Now was the dawn fading into full daylight; and between dawn and sunrise
were all men stirring; for the watch had waked the hundred-leaders, and
they the leaders of scores and half-scores, and they the whole folk; and
they sat quietly in the wood and made no noise.

In the night the watch of the Sickle had fallen in with a thrall who had
stolen up from the Dale to set gins for hares, and now in the early
morning they brought him to the War-leader.  He was even such a man as
those with whom Face-of-god had fallen in before, neither better nor
worse than most of them:  he was sore afraid at first, but by then he
was come to the captains he understood that he had happened upon
friends; but he was dull of comprehension and slow of speech.  Albeit
Folk-might gathered from him that the Dusky Men had some inkling of the
onslaught; for he said that they had been gathering together in the
marketplace of Silver-stead, and would do so again soon.  Moreover, the
captains deemed from his speech that those new tribes had come to hand
sooner than was looked for, and were even now in the Dale.  Folk-might
smiled as one who is not best pleased when he heard these tidings; but
Face-of-god was glad to hear thereof; for what he loathed most was that
the war should drag out in hunting of scattered bands of the foe. 
Herewith came Dallach to them as they talked (for Face-of-god had sent
for him), and he fell to questioning the man further; by whose answers
it seemed that many men also had come into the Dale from Rose-dale, so
that they of the kindreds were like to have their hands full.  Lastly
Dallach drew from the thrall that it was on that very morning that the
great Folk-mote of the Dusky Men should be holden in the market-place of
the Stead, which was right great, and about it were the biggest of the
houses wherein the men of the kindred had once dwelt.

So when they had made an end of questioning the thrall, and had given
him meat and drink, they asked him if he would take weapons in his hand
and lead them on the ways into the Dale, bidding him look about the wood
and note how great and mighty an host they were.  And the carle yeasaid
this, after staring about him a while, and they gave him spear and
shield, and he went with the vanward as a way-leader.

Again presently came a watch of the Shepherds, and they had found a man
and a woman dead and stark naked hanging to the boughs of a great
oak-tree deep in the wood.  This men knew for some vengeance of the
Dusky Men, for it was clear to see that these poor people had been
sorely tormented before they were slain.  Also the same watch had
stumbled on the dead body of an old woman, clad in rags, lying amongst
the rank grass about a little flow; she was exceeding lean and
hunger-starved, and in her hand was a frog which she had half eaten. 
And Dallach, when he heard of this, said that it was the wont of the
Dusky Men to slay their thralls when they were past work, or to drive
them into the wilderness to die.

Lastly came a watch from the men of the Face, having with them two more
thralls, lusty young men; these they had come upon in company of their
master, who had brought them up into the wood to shoot him a buck, and
therefore they bare bows and arrows.  The watch had slain the master
straightway while the thralls stood looking on.  They were much afraid
of the weaponed men, but answered to the questioning much readier than
the first man; for they were household thralls, and better fed and clad
than he, who was but a toiler in the fields. They yeasaid all his tale,
and said moreover that the Folk-mote of the Dusky Men should be holden
in the market-place that forenoon, and that most of the warriors should
be there, both the new-comers and the Rose-dale lords, and that without
doubt they should be under arms.

To these men also they gave a good sword and a helm each, and bade them
be brisk with their bows, and they said yea to marching with the Host;
and indeed they feared nothing so much as being left behind; for if they
fell into the hands of the Dusky Men, and their master missing, they
should first be questioned with torments, and then slain in the evillest
manner.

Now whereas things had thus betid, and that they knew thus much of their
foemen, Face-of-god called all the chieftains together, and they sat on
the green grass and held counsel amongst them, and to one and all it
seemed good that they should suffer the Dusky Men to gather together
before they meddled with them, and then fall upon them in such order and
such time as should seem good to the captains watching how things went;
and this would be easy, whereas they were all lying in the wood in the
same order as they would stand in battle-array if they were all drawn up
together on the brow of the hill.  Albeit Face-of-god deemed it good,
after he had heard all that they who had been in the Stead could tell
him thereof, that the Shepherd-Folk, who were more than three long
hundreds, and they of the Steer, the Bridge, and the Bull, four hundreds
in all, should take their places eastward of the Woodlanders who had led
the vanward.

Straightway the word was borne to these men, and the shift was made: so
that presently the Woodlanders were amidmost of the Host, and had with
them on their right hands the Men of the Steer, the Bridge, and the
Bull, and beyond them the Shepherd-Folk.  But on their left hand lay the
Men of the Vine, then they of the Sickle, and lastly the Men of the
Face, and these three kindreds were over five hundreds of warriors:  as
for the Men of the Wolf, they abode at first with those companies which
they had led through the wastes, though this was changed afterwards.

All this being done, Face-of-god gave out that all men should break
their fast in peace and leisure; and while men were at their meat,
Folk-might spake to Face-of-god and said:  'Come, brother, for I would
show thee a goodly thing; and thou, Dallach, come with us.'

Then he brought them by paths in the wood till Face-of-god saw the sky
shine white between the tree-boles, and in a little while they were come
well-nigh out of the thicket, and then they went warily; for before them
was nought but the slopes of Wood-dale, going down steeply into
Silver-dale, with nought to hinder the sight of it, save here and there
bushes or scattered trees; and so fair and lovely it was that
Face-of-god could scarce forbear to cry out.  He saw that it was only at
the upper or eastern end, where the mountains of the Waste went round
about it, that the Dale was narrow; it soon widened out toward the west,
and for the most part was encompassed by no such straight-sided a wall
as was Burgdale, but by sloping hills and bents, mostly indeed somewhat
higher and steeper than the pass wherein they were, but such as men
could well climb if they had a mind to, and there were any end to their
journey.  The Dale went due west a good way, and then winded about to
the southwest, and so was hidden from them thereaway by the bents that
lay on their left hand. As it was wider, so it was not so plain a ground
as was Burgdale, but rose in knolls and little hills here and there.  A
river greater than the Weltering Water wound about amongst the said
mounds; and along the side of it out in the open dale were many goodly
houses and homesteads of stone.  The knolls were mostly covered over
with vines, and there were goodly and great trees in groves and clumps,
chiefly oak and sweet chestnut and linden; many were the orchards, now
in blossom, about the homesteads; the pastures of the neat and horses
spread out bright green up from the water-side, and deeper green showed
the acres of the wheat on the lower slopes of the knolls, and in wide
fields away from the river.

Just below the pitch of the hill whereon they were, lay Silver-stead,
the town of the Dale.  Hitherto it had been an unfenced place; but
Folk-might pointed to where on the western side a new white wall was
rising, and on which, young as the day yet was, men were busy laying the
stones and spreading the mortar.  Fair seemed that town to Face-of-god: 
the houses were all builded of stone, and some of the biggest were
roofed with lead, which also as well as silver was dug out of the
mountains at the eastern end of the Dale.  The market-place was clear to
see from where they stood, though there were houses on all sides of it,
so wide it was.  From their standing-place it was but three furlongs to
this heart of Silver-dale; and Face-of-god could see brightly-clad men
moving about in it already.  High above their heads he beheld two great
clots of scarlet and yellow raised on poles and pitched in front of a
great stone-built hall roofed with lead, which stood amidmost of the
west end of the Place, and betwixt those poles he saw on a mound with
long slopes at its sides somewhat of white stone, and amidmost of the
whole Place a great stack of faggot-wood built up four-square.  Those
red and yellow things on the poles he deemed would be the banners of the
murder-carles; and Folk-might told him that even so it was, and that
they were but big bunches of strips of woollen cloth, much like to great
ragmops, save that the rags were larger and longer:  no other token of
war, said Folk-might, did those folk carry, save a crookbladed sword,
smeared with man's blood, and bigger than any man might wield in battle.

'Art thou far-seeing, War-leader?' quoth he.  'What canst thou see in
the market-place?'

Said Face-of-god:  'Far-seeing am I above most men, and I see in the
Place a man in scarlet standing by the banner, which is pitched in front
of the great stone hall, near to the mound with the white stone on it;
and meseemeth he beareth a great horn in his hand.'

Said Folk-might:  'Yea, and that stone hall was our Mote-house when we
were lords of the Dale, and thence it was that they who are now thralls
of the Dusky Men sent to them their message and token of yielding.  And
as for that white stone, it is the altar of their god; for they have but
one, and he is that same crook-bladed sword.  And now that I look, I see
a great stack of wood amidmost the market-place, and well I know what
that betokeneth.'

'Lo you!' said Face-of-god, 'the man with the horn is gone up on to the
altar-mound, and meseemeth he is setting the little end of the horn to
his mouth.'

'Hearken then!' said Folk-might.  And in a moment came the hoarse
tuneless sound of the horn down the wind towards them; and Folk-might
said:

'I deem I should know what that blast meaneth; and now is it time that
the Host drew nigher to set them in array behind these very trees.  But
if ye will, War-leader, we will abide here and watch the ways of the
foemen, and send Dallach with the word to the Host; also I would have
thee suffer me to bid hither at once two score and ten of the best of
the bowmen of our folk and the Woodlanders, and Wood-wise to lead them,
for he knoweth well the land hereabout, and what is good to do.'

'It is good,' said Face-of-god.  'Be speedy, Dallach!'

So Dallach departed, running lightly, and the two chiefs abode there;
and the horn in Silver-stead blew at whiles for a little, and then
stayed; and Folk-might said:

'Lo you! they come flockmeal to the Mote-stead; the Place will be filled
ere long.'

Said Face-of-god:  'Will they make offerings to their god at the
hallowing in of their Folk-mote?  Where then are the slaughter-beasts?'

'They shall not long be lacking,' said Folk-might.  'See you it is
getting thronged about the altar and the Mote-house.'

Now there were four ways into the Market-place of Silver-stead turned
toward the four airts, and the midmost of the kindreds' battle looked
right down the southern one, which went up to the wood, but stopped
there in a mere woodland path, and the more part of the town lay north
and west of this way, albeit there was a way from the east also.  But
the hill-side just below the two captains lay two furlongs west of this
southern way; and it went down softly till it was gotten quite near to
the backs of the houses on the south side of the Market-place, and was
sprinkled scantly with bushes and trees as aforesaid; but at last were
there more bushes, which well-nigh made a hedge across it, reaching from
the side of the southern way; and a foot or two beyond these bushes the
ground fell by a steep and broken bent down to the level of the
Market-place, and betwixt that fringe of bushes and the backs of the
houses on the south side of the Place was less it maybe than a full
furlong:  but the southern road aforesaid went down softly into the
Market-place, since it had been fashioned so by men.

Now the two chiefs heard a loud blast of horns come up from the town,
and lo! a great crowd of men wending their ways down the road from the
north, and they came into the market-place with spears and other weapons
tossing in the air, and amidst of these men, who seemed to be all of the
warriors, they saw as they drew nigher some two score and ten of men
clad in long raiment of yellow and scarlet, with tall spiring hats of
strange fashion on their heads, and in their hands long staves with
great blades like scythes done on to them; and again, in the midst of
these yellow and red glaive-bearers, in the very heart of the throng
were some score of naked folk, they deemed both men and women, but were
not sure, so close was the throng; nor could they see if they were
utterly naked.

'Lo you, brother!' quoth Folk-might, 'said I not that the beasts for the
hewing should not tarry?  Yonder naked folk are even they:  and ye may
well deem that they are the thralls of the Dusky Men; and meseemeth by
the whiteness of their skins they be of the best of them.  For these
felons, it is like, look to winning great plenty of thralls in Burgdale,
and so set the less store on them they have, and may expend them
freely.'

As he spake they heard the sound of men marching in the wood behind
them, and they turned about and saw that there was come Wood-wise, and
with him upwards of two score and ten of the bowmen of the Woodlanders
and the Wolf--huntsmen, cragsmen, and scourers of the Waste; men who
could shoot the chaffinch on the twig a hundred yards aloof; who could
make a hiding-place of the bennets of the wayside grass, or the stem of
the slender birch-tree.  With these must needs be Bow-may, who was the
closest shooter of all the kindreds.

So then Wood-wise told the War-leader that Dallach had given the word to
the Host, and that all men were astir and would be there presently in
their ordered companies; and Face-of-god spake to Folk-might, and said: 
'Chief of the Wolf, wilt thou not give command to these bowmen, and set
them to the work; for thou wottest thereof.'

'Yea, that will I,' said Folk-might, and turned to Wood-wise, and said: 
'Wood-wise, get ye down the slope, and loose on these felons, who have a
murder on hand, if so be ye have a chance to do it wisely. But in any
case come ye all back; for all shall be needed yet to-day. So flee if
they pursue, for ye shall have us to flee to.  Now be ye wary, nor let
the curse of the Wolf and the Face lie on your slothfulness.'

Wood-wise did but nod his head and lift his hand to his fellows, who set
off after him down the slope without more tarrying.  They went very
warily, as if they were hunting a quarry which would flee from them; and
they crept amongst the grass and stones from bush to bush like serpents,
and so, unseen by the Dusky Men, who indeed were busied over their own
matters, they came to the fringe of bushes above the broken ground
aforesaid, and there they took their stand, and before them below those
steep banks was but the space at the back of the houses.  As to the
houses, as aforesaid, they were not so high as elsewhere about the
Market-place; and at the end of a long low hall there was a gap between
its gable and the next house, whereby they had a clear sight of the
Place about the god's altar and the banners, and the great hall of
Silver-dale, with the double stair that went up to the door thereof.

There then they made them ready, and Wood-wise set men to watch that
none should come sidelong on them unawares; their bows were bent and
their quivers open, and they were eager for the fray.

Thus they beheld the Market-place from their cover, and saw that those
folk who were to be hewn to the god were now standing facing the altar
in a half-ring, and behind them in another half-ring the glaive-bearers
who had brought them thither stood glaive in hand ready to hew them down
when the token should be given; and these were indeed the priests of the
god.

There was clear space round about these poor slaughter-thralls, so that
the bowmen could see them well, and they told up a score of them, half
men, half women, and they were all stark naked save for wreaths of
flowers about their middles and their necks; and they had shackles of
lead about their wrists; which same lead should be taken out of the fire
wherein they should be burned, and from the shape it should take after
it had passed through the fire would the priests foretell the luck of
the deed to be done.

It was clear to be seen from thence that Folk-might was right when he
said that these slaughter-thralls were of the best of the house-thralls
and bed-mates of the Dusky Men, and that these felons were open-handed
to their god, and would not cheat him, or withhold from him the best and
most delicate of all they had.

Now spake Wood-wise to those about him:  'It is sure that Folk-might
would have us give these poor thralls a chance, and that we must loose
upon the felons who would hew them down; and if we are to come back
again, we can go no nigher.  What sayest thou, Bow-may?  Is it nigh
enough?  Can aught be done?'

'Yea, yea,' she said, 'nigh enough it is; but let Gold-ring be with me
and half a score of the very best, whether they be of our folk or the
Woodlanders, men who cannot miss such a mark; and when we have loosed,
then let all loose, and stay not till our shot be spent. Haste, now
haste! time presseth; for if the Host showeth on the brow of the hill,
these felons will hew down their slaughter-beasts before they turn on
their foemen.  Let the grey-goose wing speed trouble and confusion
amongst them.'

But ere she had done her words Wood-wise had got to speaking quietly
with the Woodlanders; and Bears-bane, who was amidst them, chose out
eight of the best of his folk, men who doubted nothing of hitting
whatever they could see in the Market-place; and they took their stand
for shooting, and with them besides Bow-may were two women and four men
of the Wolf, and Gold-ring withal, a carle of fifty winters, long, lean,
and wiry, a fell shooter if ever anyone were.

So all these notched their shafts and laid them on the yew, and each had
between the two last fingers of the shaft-hand another shaft ready, and
a half score more stuck into the ground before him.

Now giveth Wood-wise the word to these sixteen as to which of the felons
with the glaives they shall each one aim at; and he saith withal in a
soft voice:  'Help cometh from the Hill; soon shall battle be joined in
Silver-dale.'

Thus stand they watching Bow-may and Gold-ring till they draw home the
notches; and amidst their waiting the glaive-bearing felons fall
a-singing a harsh and ugly hymn to their crooked-sword god, and the
Market-stead is thronged endlong and overthwart with the tribes of the
Dusky Men.  There now standeth Bow-may far-sighted and keen-eyed, her
face as pale as a linen sleeve, an awful smile on her glittering eyes
and close-set lips, and she feeling the twisted string of the red yew
and the polished sides of the notch, while the yelling song of the Dusky
priests quavers now and ends with a wild shrill cry, and she noteth the
midmost of the priests beginning to handle his weapon:  then swift and
steady she draweth home the notches, while the yew bow standeth still as
the oak-bole ere the summer storm ariseth, and the twang of the sixteen
strings maketh but one fell sound as the feathered bane of men goeth on
its way.

There was silence for a moment of time in the Market of Silver-stead, as
if the bolt of the Gods had fallen there; and then arose a huge wordless
yell from those about the altar, and one of the priests who was left
hove up his glaive two-handed to smite the naked slaughter-thralls; but
or ever the stroke fell, Bow-may's second shaft was through his throat,
and he rolled over amidst his dead fellows; and the other fifteen had
loosed with her, and then even as they could Wood-wise and the others of
their company; and all they notched and loosed without tarrying, and no
shout, no word came from their lips, only the twanging strings spake for
them; for they deemed the minutes that hurried by were worth much joy of
their lives to be.  And few indeed were the passing minutes ere the dead
men lay in heaps about the Altar of the Crooked Sword, and the wounded
men wallowed amidst them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV. Of the Onslaught of the Men of the Steer, the
Bridge, and the Bull](rotm45)

</div>
