<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rotm12)  [Next](rotm14) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f12"></span>

CHAPTER XII. STONE-FACE TELLETH CONCERNING THE WOOD-WIGHTS

Early on the morrow Gold-mane arose and clad himself and went
out-a-doors and over the trodden snow on to the bridge over the
Weltering Water, and there betook himself into one of the coins of
safety built over the up-stream piles; there he leaned against the wall
and turned his face to the Thorp, and fell to pondering on his case. 
And first he thought about his oath, and how that he had sworn to wed
the Mountain Woman, although his kindred and her kindred should gainsay
him, yea and herself also.  Great seemed that oath to him, yet at that
moment he wished he had made it greater, and made all the kindred, yea
and the Bride herself, sure of the meaning of the words of it:  and he
deemed himself a dastard that he had not done so. Then he looked round
him and beheld the winter, and he fell into mere longing that the spring
were come and the token from the Mountain. Things seemed too hard for
him to deal with, and he between a mighty folk and two wayward women;
and he went nigh to wish that he had taken his father's offer and gone
down to the Cities; and even had he met his bane:  well were that!  And,
as young folk will, he set to work making a picture of his deeds there,
had he been there.  He showed himself the stricken fight in the plain,
and the press, and the struggle, and the breaking of the serried band,
and himself amidst the ring of foemen doing most valiantly, and falling
there at last, his shield o'er-heavy with the weight of foemen's spears
for a man to uphold it.  Then the victory of his folk and the
lamentation and praise over the slain man of the Mountain Dales, and the
burial of the valiant warrior, the praising weeping folk meeting him at
the City-gate, laid stark and cold in his arms on the gold-hung
garlanded bier.

There ended his dream, and he laughed aloud and said:  'I am a fool! All
this were good and sweet if I should see it myself; and forsooth that is
how I am thinking of it, as if I still alive should see myself dead and
famous!'

Then he turned a little and looked at the houses of the Thorp lying dark
about the snowy ways under the starlit heavens of the winter morning: 
dark they were indeed and grey, save where here and there the
half-burned Yule-fire reddened the windows of a hall, or where, as in
one place, the candle of some early waker shone white in a chamber
window.  There was scarce a man astir, he deemed, and no sound reached
him save the crowing of the cocks muffled by their houses, and a faint
sound of beasts in the byres.

Thus he stood a while, his thoughts wandering now, till presently he
heard footsteps coming his way down the street and turned toward them,
and lo it was the old man Stone-face.  He had seen Gold-mane go out, and
had risen and followed him that he might talk with him apart.  Gold-mane
greeted him kindly, though, sooth to say, he was but half content to see
him; since he doubted, what was verily the case, that his foster-father
would give him many words, counselling him to refrain from going to the
wood, and this was loathsome to him; but he spake and said:

'Meseems, father, that the eastern sky is brightening toward dawn.'

'Yea,' quoth Stone-face.

'It will be light in an hour,' said Face-of-god.

'Even so,' said Stone-face.

'And a fair day for the morrow of Yule,' said the swain.

'Yea,' said Stone-face, 'and what wilt thou do with the fair day? Wilt
thou to the wood?'

'Maybe, father,' said Gold-mane; 'Hall-face and some of the swains are
talking of elks up the fells which may be trapped in the drifts, and if
they go a-hunting them, I may go in their company.'

'Ah, son,' quoth Stone-face, 'thou wilt look to see other kind of beasts
than elks.  Things may ye fall in with there who may not be impounded in
the snow like to elks, but can go light-foot on the top of the soft
drift from one place to another.'

Said Gold-mane:  'Father, fear me not; I shall either refrain me from
the wood, or if I go, I shall go to hunt the wood-deer with other
hunters.  But since thou hast come to me, tell me more about the wood,
for thy tales thereof are fair.'

'Yea,' said Stone-face, 'fair tales of foul things, as oft it befalleth
in the world.  Hearken now! if thou deemest that what thou seekest shall
come readier to thine hand because of the winter and the snow, thou
errest.  For the wights that waylay the bodies and souls of the mighty
in the wild-wood heed such matters nothing; yea and at Yule-tide are
they most abroad, and most armed for the fray. Even such an one have I
seen time agone, when the snow was deep and the wind was rough; and it
was in the likeness of a woman clad in such raiment as the Bride bore
last night, and she trod the snow light-foot in thin raiment where it
would scarce bear the skids of a deft snow-runner.  Even so she stood
before me; the icy wind blew her raiment round about her, and drifted
the hair from her garlanded head toward me, and she as fair and fresh as
in the midsummer days.  Up the fell she fared, sweetest of all things to
look on, and beckoned on me to follow; on me, the Warrior, the
Stout-heart; and I followed, and between us grief was born; but I it was
that fostered that child and not she.  Always when she would be, was she
merry and lovely; and even so is she now, for she is of those that be
long-lived.  And I wot that thou hast seen even such an one!'

'Tell me more of thy tales, foster-father,' said Gold-mane, 'and fear
not for me!'

'Ah, son,' he said, 'mayst thou have no such tales to tell to those that
shall be young when thou art old.  Yet hearken!  We sat in the hall
together and there was no third; and methought that the birds sang and
the flowers bloomed, and sweet was their savour, though it was
midwinter.  A rose-wreath was on her head; grapes were on the board, and
fair unwrinkled summer apples on the day that we feasted together.  When
was the feast? sayst thou.  Long ago.  What was the hall, thou sayest,
wherein ye feasted?  I know not if it were on the earth or under it, or
if we rode the clouds that even.  But on the morrow what was there but
the stark wood and the drift of the snow, and the iron wind howling
through the branches, and a lonely man, a wanderer rising from the
ground.  A wanderer through the wood and up the fell, and up the high
mountain, and up and up to the edges of the ice-river and the green
caves of the ice-hills.  A wanderer in spring, in summer, autumn and
winter, with an empty heart and a burning never-satisfied desire; who
hath seen in the uncouth places many an evil unmanly shape, many a foul
hag and changing ugly semblance; who hath suffered hunger and thirst and
wounding and fever, and hath seen many things, but hath never again seen
that fair woman, or that lovely feast-hall.

'All praise and honour to the House of the Face, and the bounteous
valiant men thereof! and the like praise and honour to the fair women
whom they wed of the valiant and goodly House of the Steer!'

'Even so say I,' quoth Gold-mane calmly; 'but now wend we aback to the
House, for it is morning indeed, and folk will be stirring there.'

So they turned from the bridge together; and Stone-face was kind and
fatherly, and was telling his foster-son many wise things concerning the
life of a chieftain, and the giving-out of dooms and the gathering for
battle; to all which talk Face-of-god seemed to hearken gladly, but
indeed hearkened not at all; for verily his eyes were beholding that
snowy waste, and the fair woman upon it; even such an one as Stone-face
had told of.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. They Fare to the Hunting of the Elk](rotm14)

</div>
