<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](rotm22)  [Next](rotm24.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Roots of the Mountains*, by William Morris, \[1889\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f22"></span>

CHAPTER XXII. FACE-OF-GOD COMETH HOME TO BURGSTEAD

But Face-of-god with Bow-may and Wood-wise fared over the waste, going
at first alongside the cliffs of the Shivering Flood, and then
afterwards turning somewhat to the west.  They soon had to climb a very
high and steep bent going up to a mountain-neck; and the way over the
neck was rough indeed when they were on it, and they toiled out of it
into a barren valley, and out of the valley again on to a rough neck;
and such-like their journey the day long, for they were going athwart
all those great dykes that went from the ice-mountains toward the lower
dales like the outspread fingers of a hand or the roots of a great
tree.  And the ice-mountains they had on their left hands and whiles at
their backs.

They went very warily, with their bows bended and spear in hand, but saw
no man, good or bad, and but few living things.  At noon they rested in
a valley where was a stream, but no grass, nought but stones and sand;
but where they were at least sheltered from the wind, which was mostly
very great in these high wastes; and there Bow-may drew meat and wine
from a wallet she bore, and they ate and drank, and were merry enough;
and Bow-may said:

'I would I were going all the way with thee, Gold-mane; for I long sore
to let my eyes rest a while on the land where I shall one day live.'

'Yea,' said Face-of-god, 'art thou minded to dwell there?  We shall be
glad of that.'

'Whither are thy wits straying?' said she; 'whether I am minded to it or
not, I shall dwell there.'

And Wood-wise nodded a yea to her.  But Face-of-god said:

'Good will be thy dwelling; but wherefore must it be so?'

Then Wood-wise laughed and said:  'I shall tell thee in fewer words than
she will, and time presses now:  Wood-father and Wood-mother, and I and
my two brethren and this woman have ever been about and anigh the
Sun-beam; and we deem that war and other troubles have made us of closer
kin to her than we were born, whether ye call it brotherhood or what
not, and never shall we sunder from her in life or in death.  So when
thou goest to Burgdale with her, there shall we be.'

Then was Face-of-god glad when he found that they deemed his wedding so
settled and sure; but Wood-wise fell to making ready for the road. And
Face-of-god said to him:

'Tell me one thing, Wood-wise; that whoop that thou gavest forth when we
were at handy-strokes e'en now--is it but a cry of thine own or is it of
thy Folk, and shall I hear it again?'

'Thou may'st look to hear it many a time,' said Wood-wise, 'for it is
the cry of the Wolf.  Seldom indeed hath battle been joined where men of
our blood are, but that cry is given forth.  Come now, to the road!'

So they went their ways and the road worsened upon them, and toilsome
was the climbing up steep bents and the scaling of doubtful paths in the
cliff-sides, so that the journey, though the distance of it were not so
long to the fowl flying, was much eked out for them, and it was not till
near nightfall that they came on the ghyll of the Weltering Water some
six miles above Burgstead.  Forsooth Wood-wise said that the way might
be made less toilsome though far longer by turning back eastward a
little past the vale where they had rested at midday; and that seemed
good to Gold-mane, in case they should be wending hereafter in a great
company between Burgdale and Shadowy Vale.

But now those two went with Face-of-god down a path in the side of the
cliff whereby him-seemed he had gone before; and they came down into the
ghyll and sat down together on a stone by the water-side, and
Face-of-god spake to them kindly, for he deemed them good and trusty
faring-fellows.

'Bow-may,' said he, 'thou saidst a while ago that thou wouldst be fain
to look on Burgdale; and indeed it is fair and lovely, and ye may soon
be in it if ye will.  Ye shall both be more than welcome to the house of
my father, and heartily I bid you thither.  For night is on us, and the
way back is long and toilsome and beset with peril. Sister Bow-may, thou
wottest that it would be a sore grief to me if thou camest to any harm,
and thou also, fellow Wood-wise.  Daylight is a good faring-fellow over
the waste.'

Said Bow-may:  'Thou art kind, Gold-mane, and that is thy wont, I know;
and fain were I to-night of the candles in thine hall.  But we may not
tarry; for thou wottest how busy we be at home; and Sun-beam needeth me,
if it were only to make her sure that no Dusky Man is bearing off thine
head by its lovely locks.  Neither shall we journey in the mirk night;
for look you, the moon yonder.'

'Well,' said Face-of-god, 'parting is ill at the best, and I would I
could give you twain a gift, and especially to thee, my sister Bow-may.'

Said Wood-wise:  'Thou may'st well do that; or at least promise the
gift; and that is all one as if we held it in our hands.'

'Yea,' said Bow-may, 'Wood-wise and I have been thinking in one way
belike; and I was at point to ask a gift of thee.'

'What is it?' said Gold-mane.  'Surely it is thine, if it were but a
guerdon for thy good shooting.'

She laughed and handled the skirts of his hauberk as she said:

'Show us the dint in thine helm that the steel axe made this morning.'

'There is no such great dint,' said he; 'my father forged that helm, and
his work is better than good.'

'Yea,' said Bow-may, 'and might I have hauberk and helm of his
handiwork, and Wood-wise a good sword of the same, then were I a glad
woman, and this man a happy carle.'

Said Gold-mane:  'I am well pleased at thine asking, and so shall
Iron-face be when he heareth of thine archery; and how that Hall-face
were now his only son but for thy close shooting.  But now must I to the
way; for my heart tells me that there may have been tidings in Burgstead
this while I have been aloof.'

So they rose all three, and Bow-may said:

'Thou art a kind brother, and soon shall we meet again; and that will be
well.'

Then he put his hands on her shoulders and kissed both her cheeks; and
he kissed Wood-wise, and turned and went his ways, threading the stony
tangle about the Weltering Water, which was now at middle height, and
running clear and strong; so turning once he beheld Wood-wise and
Bow-may climbing the path up the side of the ghyll, and Bow-may turned
to him also and waved her bow as token of farewell.  Then he went upon
his way, which was rough enough to follow by night, though the moon was
shining brightly high aloft.  Yet as he knew his road he made but little
of it all, and in somewhat more than an hour and a half was come out of
the pass into the broken ground at the head of the Dale, and began to
make his way speedily under the bright moonlight toward the Gate, still
going close by the water.  But as he went he heard of a sudden cries and
rumour not far from him, unwonted in that place, where none dwelt, and
where the only folk he might look to see were those who cast an angle
into the pools and eddies of the Water.  Moreover, he saw about the
place whence came the cries torches moving swiftly hither and thither;
so that he looked to hear of new tidings, and stayed his feet and looked
keenly about him on every side; and just then, between his rough path
and the shimmer of the dancing moonlit water, he saw the moon smite on
something gleaming; so, as quietly as he could, he got his target on his
arm, and shortened his spear in his right hand, and then turned sharply
toward that gleam.  Even therewith up sprang a man on his right hand,
and then another in front of him just betwixt him and the water; an axe
gleamed bright in the moon, and he caught a great stroke on his target,
and therewith drave his left shoulder straight forward, so that the man
before him fell over into the water with a mighty splash; for they were
at the very edge of the deepest eddy of the Water.  Then he spun round
on his heel, heeding not that another stroke had fallen on his right
shoulder, yet ill-aimed, and not with the full edge, so that it ran down
his byrny and rent it not.  So he sent the thrust of his spear crashing
through the face and skull of the smiter, and looked not to him as he
fell, but stood still, brandishing his spear and crying out, 'For the
Burg and the Face! For the Burg and the Face!'

No other foe came against him, but like to the echo of his cry rose a
clear shout not far aloof, 'For the Face, for the Face!  For the Burg
and the Face!'  He muttered, 'So ends the day as it begun,' and shouted
loud again, 'For the Burg and the Face!'  And in a minute more came
breaking forth from the stone-heaps into the moonlit space before the
water the tall shapes of the men of Burgstead, the red torchlight and
the moonlight flashing back from their war-gear and weapons; for every
man had his sword or spear in hand.

Hall-face was the first of them, and he threw his arms about his brother
and said:  'Well met, Gold-mane, though thou comest amongst us like
Stone-fist of the Mountain.  Art thou hurt?  With whom hast thou dealt? 
Where be they?  Whence comest thou?'

'Nay, I am not hurt,' said Face-of-god.  'Stint thy questions then, till
thou hast told me whom thou seekest with spear and sword and candle.'

'Two felons were they,' said Hall-face, 'even such as ye saw lying dead
at Wood-grey's the other day.'

'Then may ye sheathe your swords and go home,' said Gold-mane, 'for one
lieth at the bottom of the eddy, and the other, thy feet are well-nigh
treading on him, Hall-face.'

Then arose a rumour of praise and victory, and they brought the torches
nigh and looked at the fallen man, and found that he was stark dead; so
they even let him lie there till the morrow, and all turned about toward
the Thorp; and many looked on Face-of-god and wondered concerning him,
whence he was and what had befallen him. Indeed, they would have asked
him thereof, but could not get at him to ask; but whoso could, went as
nigh to Hall-face and him as they might, to hearken to the talk between
the brothers.  So as they went along Hall-face did verily ask him whence
he came: 'For was it not so,' said he, 'that thou didst enter into the
wood seeking some adventure early in the morning the day before
yesterday?'

'Sooth is that,' said Face-of-god, 'and I came to Shadowy Vale, and
thence am I come this morning.'

Said Hall-face:  'I know not Shadowy Vale, nor doth any of us.  This is
a new word.  How say ye, friends, doth any man here know of Shadowy
Vale?'

They all said, 'Nay.'

Then said Hall-face:  'Hast thou been amongst mere ghosts and marvels,
brother, or cometh this tale of thy minstrelsy?'

'For all your words,' said Gold-mane, 'to that Vale have I been; and, to
speak shortly (for I desire to have your tale, and am waiting for it), I
will tell thee that I found there no marvels or strange wights, but a
folk of valiant men; a folk small in numbers, but great of heart; a folk
come, as we be, from the Fathers and the Gods.  And this, moreover, is
to be said of them, that they are the foes of these felons of whom ye
were chasing these twain.  And these same Dusky Men of Silver-dale would
slay them every man if they might; and if we look not to it they will
soon be doing the same by us; for they are many, and as venomous as
adders, as fierce as bears, and as foul as swine.  But these valiant
men, who bear on their banner the image of the Wolf, should be our
fellows in arms, and they have good will thereto; and they shall show us
the way to Silver-dale by blind paths, so that we may fall upon these
felons while they dwell there tormenting the poor people of the land,
and thus may we destroy them as lads a hornet's nest.  Or else the days
shall be hard for us.'

The men who hung about them drank in his words greedily.  But Hall-face
was silent a little while, and then he said:  'Brother Gold-mane, these
be great tidings.  Time was when we might have deemed them but a
minstrel's tale; for Silver-dale we know not, of which thou speakest so
glibly, nor the Dusky Men, any more than the Shadowy Vale.  Howbeit,
things have befallen these two last days so strange and new, that
putting them together with the murder at Wood-grey's, and thy words
which seem somewhat wild, it may well seem to us that tidings unlooked
for are coming our way.'

'Come, then,' said Face-of-god, 'give me what thou hast in thy scrip,
and trust me, I shall not jeer at thy tale.'

Said Hall-face:  'I also will be short with the tale; and that the more,
as meseemeth it is not yet done, and that thou thyself shalt share in
the ending of it.  It was the day before yesterday, that is the day when
thou departedst into the woods on that adventure whereof thou shalt one
day tell me more, wilt thou not?'

'Yea, in good time,' said Face-of-god.

'Well,' quoth Hall-face, 'we went into the woods that day and in the
morning, but after sunrise, to the number of a score:  we looked to meet
a bear and a she-bear with cubs in a certain place; for one of the
Woodlanders, a keen hunter, had told us of their lair.  Also we were
wishful to slay some of the wild-swine, the yearlings, if we might. 
Therefore, though we had no helms or shields or coats of fence, we had
bowshot a plenty, and good store of casting-weapons, besides our
wood-knives and an axe or so; and some of us, of whom I was one, bore
our battle-swords, as we are wont ever to do, be the foe beast or man.

'Thus armed we went up Wildlake's Way and came to Carlstead, where
half-a-score Woodlanders joined themselves to us, so that we became a
band.  We went up the half-cleared places past Carlstead for a mile, and
then turned east into the wood, and went I know not how far, for the
Woodlanders led us by crooked paths, but two hours wore away in our
going, till we came to the place where they looked to find the bears. 
It is a place that may well be noted, for it is unlike the wood round
about.  There is a close thicket some two furlongs about of thorn and
briar and ill-grown ash and oak and other trees, planted by the birds
belike; and it stands as it were in an island amidst of a wide-spreading
woodlawn of fine turf, set about in the most goodly fashion with great
tall straight-boled oak-trees, that seem to have been planted of set
purpose by man's hand.  Yea, dost thou know the place?'

'Methinks I do,' said Gold-mane, 'and I seem to have heard the
Woodlanders give it a name and call it Boars-bait.'

'That may be,' said Hall-face.  'Well, there we were, the dogs and the
men, and we drew nigh the thicket and beset it, and doubted not to find
prey therein:  but when we would set the dogs at the thicket to enter
it, they were uneasy, and would not take up the slot, but growled and
turned about this way and that, so that we deemed that they winded some
fierce beast at our flanks or backs.

'Even so it was, and fierce enough and deadly was the beast; for
suddenly we heard bow-strings twang, and shafts came flying; and
Iron-shield of the Upper Dale, who was close beside me, leapt up into
the air and fell down dead with an arrow through his back.  Then I
bethought me in the twinkling of an eye, and I cried out, "The foe are
on us! take the cover of the tree-boles and be wary!  For the Burg and
the Face!  For the Burg and the Face!"

'So we scattered and covered ourselves with the oak-boles, but besides
Iron-shield, who was slain outright, two goodmen were sorely hurt, to
wit Bald-face, a man of our house, and Stonyford of the Lower Dale.

'I looked from behind my tree-bole, a great one; and far off down the
glades I saw men moving, clad in gay raiment; but nearer to me, not a
hundred yards from my cover, I saw an arm clad in scarlet come out from
behind a tree-bole, so I loosed at it, and missed not; for straight
there tottered out from behind the tree one of those dusky foul-favoured
men like to those that were slain by Wood-grey.  I had another shaft
ready notched, so I loosed and set the shaft in his throat, and he fell.

'Straightway was a yelling and howling about us like the cries of
scalded curs, and the oak-wood swarmed thick with these felons rushing
on us; for it seems that the man whom I had slain was a chief amongst
them, or we judged so by his goodly raiment.

'Methought then our last day was come.  What could we do but run
together again after we had loosed at a venture, and so withstand them
sword and spear in hand?  Some fell beneath our shot, but not many, for
they came on very swiftly.

'So they fell on us; but for all their fierceness and their numbers they
might not break our array, and we slew four and hurt many by
sword-hewing and spear-casting and push of spear; and five of us were
hurt and one slain by their dart-casting.  So they drew off from us a
little, and strove to spread out and fall to shooting at us again; but
this we would not suffer, but pushed on as they fell back, keeping as
close together as we might for the trees.  For we said that we would all
die together if needs must; and verily the stour was hard.

'Yet hearken!  In that nick of time rose up a strange cry not far from
us, Ha! ha! ha! ha!  How-ow-ow! ending like the howl of a wolf, and then
another and another and another, till the whole wood rang again.

'At first we deemed that here were come fresh foemen, and that we were
undone indeed; but when they heard it, the foe-men before us faltered
and gave way, and at last turned their backs and fled, and we followed,
keeping well together still:  thereby the more part of these men escaped
us, for they fled wildly here and there from those who bore that cry
with them; so we knew that our work was being done for us; therefore we
stood, and saw tall men clad in sheep-brown weed running through the
glades pursuing those felons and smiting them down, till both fleers and
pursuers passed out of our sight like men in a dream, or as when ye roll
up a pictured cloth to lay it in the coffer.

'But to Stone-face's mind those brown-clad men were the Wights of the
Wood that be of the Fathers' blood, and our very friends; and when some
of us would yet have gone forward and foregathered with them, and
followed the chase along with them, Stone-face gainsaid it, bidding us
not to run into the arms of a second death, when we had but just escaped
from the first.  Sooth to say, moreover, we had divers hurt men that
needed looking to.

'So what with one thing, what with another, we turned back:  but
War-cliff's brother, a tall man, had felled two of those felons with an
oak sapling which he had torn from the thicket; but he had not slain
them, and by now they were just awakening from their swoon, and were
sitting up looking round them with fierce rolling eyes, expecting the
stroke, for Raven of Longscree was standing over them with a naked
war-sword in his hand.  But now that our blood was cool, we were loth to
slay them as they lay in our hands; so we bound them and brought them
away with us; and our own dead we carried also on such biers as we might
lightly make there, and with them three that were so grievously hurt
that they might not go afoot, these we left at Carlstead:  they were
Tardy the Son of the Untamed, and Swan of Bull-meadow, both of the Lower
Dale, and a Woodlander, Undoomed to wit. But the dead were Iron-shield
aforesaid, and Wool-sark, and the Hewer, a Woodlander.

'So came we sadly at eventide to Burgstead with the two dead Burgdalers,
and the captive felons, and the wounded of us that might go afoot; and
ye may judge that they of Burgdale and our father deemed these tidings
great enough, and wotted not what next should befall.  Stone-face would
have had those two felons slain there and then; for no true tale could
we get out of them, nor indeed any word at all.  But the Alderman would
not have it so; and he deemed they might serve our turn as hostages if
any of our folk should be taken: for one and all we deemed, and still
deem, that war is on us and that new folk have gathered on our skirts.

'So the captives were shut up in the red out-bower of our house; and our
father was minded that thou mightest tell us somewhat of them when thou
wert come home.  But about dusk to-day the word went that they had
broken out and gotten them weapons and fled up the Dale; and so it was.

'But to-morrow morning will a Gate-thing be holden, and there it will be
looked for of thee that thou tell us a true tale of thy goings. For it
is deemed, and it is my deeming especially, that thou may'st tell us
more of these men than thou hast yet told us.  Is it not so?'

'Yea, surely,' said Gold-mane, 'I can make as many words as ye will
about it; yet when all is said, it will come to much the same tale as I
have already told thee.  Yet belike, if ye are minded to take up the
sword to defend you, I may tell you in what wise to lay hold on the
hilts.'

'And that is well,' said Hall-face, 'and no less do I look for of thee. 
But lo! here are we come to the Gate of the Burg that abideth battle.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. Talk in the Hall of the House of the Face](rotm24.md)

</div>
