[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](inc00)  [Next](inc02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Invitation to the New Church*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1771\], tr. by
John Whitehead \[1914\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Invitation to the New Church

<span class="margnote"><span id="1.">1.</span></span>

That in Christ Jesus Man is God, and God Man, appears evidently from the
Lord's words to His Father: All Thine are Mine, and all Mine are Thine
(John 17:10). From the expression "all Mine are Thine," it is evident
that the Man is God; and from the expression, "all Thine are Mine," that
God is Man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="2.">2.</span></span>

During man's regeneration, the light of heaven is instilled into natural
light, and at the same time the heat of heaven; these two constitute, as
it were, the new soul, through which man is formed by the Lord. This
light and heat are instilled through the higher mind, which is called
the spiritual mind. By virtue of this instilling, or insertion, man
becomes a new creature, and becomes more enlightened and more
intelligent in matters of the church, and consequently in the reading of
the Word. This also is the new understanding and the new will.
Afterwards the man is led by the Lord through the above light and
through the above heat, and from natural becomes spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3.">3.</span></span>

There is a still higher or more interior light and heat, which is called
celestial. This is inserted and instilled into the former spiritual. The
angels of the third heaven who are called celestial, are in this light
and heat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4.">4.</span></span>

This insertion may be explained by a comparison; namely, by the grafting
and inoculation of trees; where the grafted slips receive \[the sap\]
interiorly in themselves, according to their form, etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5.">5.</span></span>

It is to be clearly shown that without the Lord's Advent, no man could
have been regenerated, and hence saved; and that this is meant by "the
Lamb taking away the sins of the world." This may be evident from the
state of the spiritual world before the Lord's Coming; which was such
that not a single truth of faith, nor any good of charity, could pass
from the Lord to man. (This is to be illustrated by the influx of truth
and good into evil spirits, into the back part of their heads, etc.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="6.">6.</span></span>

Miracles close the internal man, and deprive man of all that free will,
through which and in which man is regenerated. Free will really belongs
to the internal man; and when this is closed up, the man becomes
external and natural; and such a man does not see any spiritual truth.
Miracles also are like veils and bars lest anything might enter. This
bar, or this obstruction, however, is gradually broken, and \[then\] all
truths become dispersed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7.">7.</span></span>

It is said by the church at this day, following Paul, that faith enters
through the hearing of the Word; and some add to this, through a certain
meditation from the Word. This, however, is to be understood thus, that
truths ought to be drawn from the Word, and that man ought to live
according to them. In this case, the man approaches the Lord, who is the
Word, and the Truth, and receives faith; for each and all truths are
from the Word, which is spiritual light. Thus faith is acquired; because
faith belongs to truth, and truth belongs to faith; and nothing ought to
be believed except the truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8.">8.</span></span>

That there are numberless evils interiorly in man; yea, that there are
numberless evils in every lust. Every lust of which man becomes
conscious, is a mass and a heap of many things. These things the man
does not see, but only the one mass. When, therefore, the man by
repentance removes this, the Lord, who sees the interior and inmost
things of man, removes them. Unless, therefore, a man approaches the
Lord, he labors in vain to render himself free from sin. The case herein
is as with those things which were written in a Relation concerning
turtles \[see True Christian Religion 462\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="9.">9.</span></span>

That a man who has altogether confirmed himself in the faith and
doctrine of the present church, makes no account of repentance, of the
law of the Decalogue, and of works and charity. For he can say, "I
cannot do goods from myself; they are contained in faith, whence they
come forth of their own accord; I can only know them," and so forth.
This is the source of the naturalism which prevails at the present time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10.">10.</span></span>

By the "fulness of time" is signified consummation and desolation;
because "time" signifies the state of the church (see Rev. 10:6, and
Ezek. 30:3). The same also is signified by "Time, times, and half a
time" (see Rev. 12:14; Dan. 7:25; 12:7). The times in the world are
spring, summer, autumn; the fullness of these times is winter. The times
as to light are morning, noon, evening; and their fullness is the night,
etc., etc. This is meant by the Lord's coming in "the fullness of the
time," or of "times"; that is, when there is no longer any truth of
faith, and good of charity left. (Concerning "the fullness of the time,"
see Rom. 11:12, 25; Gal. 4:4; and especially, Eph. 1:9, 10; Gen. 15:16.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="11.">11.</span></span>

That the Lord's love is present with those who are in faith in Him. This
may be clearly seen from this circumstance, that place cannot be
predicated of love, nor of faith; for both are spiritual. That the Lord
Himself is present appears from this consideration, that spiritual love
also is not confined to place. It was not in my own case, whenever I was
in the spiritual idea. In a word, presence in the spiritual world is
according to love. Wherefore, \[the Lord\] is omnipresent; He does not
move about; He is in place, but not through place; He is thus in space
and in what is extended, but not through space, and through what is
extended.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12.">12.</span></span>

The desolation of the truth of the church may be compared with
consummations on the earth; heat, namely, and all the above \[times or
seasons\] are consummated by winter, and then spring \[comes\]; and
light on earth is consummated by the night, when the morning comes.
Wherefore, the Lord in Revelation said to those under the altar (Rev.
6:9-11). \[See quotation.\] A number of passages are to be quoted from
Revelation, showing that the church has been laid waste, even to its
ultimate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13.">13.</span></span>

That at the present day nothing is known concerning the union of soul
and body, is proved by the hypotheses of the learned concerning the
soul; especially by that of Descartes and others, \[who maintain\] that
the soul is a substance separated from the body, in some place or other;
when yet the soul is the inmost man; consequently, is the man from the
head to the foot. Thence it is, according to the ancients, that the soul
is in the whole, and in every part thereof; and that in whatever part
the soul does not dwell inmostly, there man has no life. From this union
it is, that all things of the soul belong to the body, and all things of
the body belong to the soul; as the Lord said concerning His Father,
that all His things are the Father's, and that all things of the Father
are His (John 17:10). Thence it is that the Lord is God, even as to the
flesh (Rom. 9:5; Col. 2:9); and that \[He said\], "the Father is in Me,"
and "I am in the Father" \[John 14:10, 11\]. Thus they are one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="14.">14.</span></span>

The human mind is of three degrees, which are the celestial, spiritual,
and natural. In the first degree is the soul, in the second, is the
spirit or the mind, and in the third, is the body. It is the same thing,
whether we say that a man's mind is of three degrees, or whether we say
that the man himself is. For that of the body which is in principles
thus where its first is, is called mind. The remaining parts are derived
thence, and are continuations. What is the mind, if it is only to the
head, except something that is separated or divorced, in which the mind
does not exist through continuation? Let autopsy settle this: The
origins of the fibers are the glands of the so-called cortical
substance; thence proceed the fibers; and after they are bundled
together into nerves, they descend and pass through the whole body,
weaving it together and constructing it. The celestial degree, in which
is the soul, that is, the inmost man, is a semblance of love; the
spiritual degree, in which is the mind, that is, the spirit, which is
the mediate man, is a semblance of wisdom from love; and the third
degree, in which is the body, which is the ultimate man, is the
containant of both; without this third degree, the two higher degrees
would not subsist. These things can be further demonstrated from the
three heavens, the celestial, spiritual, and natural-where such men are.
Wherefore the angels of the higher heavens are invisible to the angels
of the lower heavens, if the latter approach the former from their own
heavens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="15.">15.</span></span>

Thence it may be seen in light that as a tree exists from its seed, so
also the body exists through the soul. Hence also it is that the tree
derives its quality from the seed. From this, however, it follows that
inasmuch as the soul of Christ was from the Divine essence, His body
also must be derived thence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="16.">16.</span></span>

All theologians, when preaching, know nothing of the falsities of their
religion. For they preach that God is one; that the Saviour ought to be
adored; that man, therefore, ought to believe in the Word and in
preachings; that he ought to exercise charity, and practise repentance,
so as to desist from evils. While preaching thus, they remember nothing
concerning three Gods, concerning their mystical faith, concerning
impotence in spiritual matters, and concerning all the remaining dogmas.
But let them know, that the falsities which they have imbibed in the
schools, are clinging to them interiorly; and other things are merely in
the mouth; and that after death they come into the interior things of
the spirit; wherefore, these falsities ought by all means to be rooted
out. Then also the things that are merely in the mouth, are as the beard
on the chin, which afterwards, as is usually the case, is cut off, and
he becomes beardless.

<span class="margnote"><span id="17.">17.</span></span>

When orthodoxy enters and explains all those things which priests preach
from the Word concerning faith that we ought to believe in God,
concerning charity towards the neighbor, conversion, repentance, and the
life of piety and spiritual life, they fall as it were into a bucket;
then they are overthrown, as when one destroys a dwelling or a house,
even so that nothing but ruins remain. The preachers say that these
things are not true, unless you believe thus. What does charity,
repentance, etc., effect? The very Word then falls, and so forth. It is
as if someone undermines a wall, by digging ditches under it. All things
are overthrown.

<span class="margnote"><span id="18.">18.</span></span>

Bring an example, where someone preaches devoutly on the above subjects
from the Word; and when orthodoxy is brought to bear upon his preaching,
you will see that what I saw and declared, is true. (The example will
illustrate this. . . .) Thus they affirm, and then deny, if orthodoxy is
in the internal man, and the subjects that are preached are in the
external man. In this case that which then remains in the external man
is regarded as of no account and becomes like froth. It is swept away,
like an earthquake, or like a ship broken below by water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="19.">19.</span></span>

An example, also, may be brought from genuine orthodoxy on the subject
of faith, charity, and free will. From this example will appear plainly
the absurdity of \[false orthodoxy\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="20.">20.</span></span>

That the spiritual things of heaven flow into the whole man, and that
\[natural things\] flow in through the world, is confirmed in light
thus: that spiritual and natural things flow in conjointly, but that the
evil man inverts the two. That which is within he places outwardly in
his mind; and that which is outmost he places within; so that the world
is above heaven, that is, heaven below the world. But the devout and
good man receives both in the order in which they flow in; the spiritual
things which flow in through heaven, he places in the mind above, and
the natural things which flow in through the world, he places below.
This man stands on his feet erect; but the former is, as it were,
inverted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="21.">21.</span></span>

The whole of theology at the present day is nothing but the Divine
omnipotence. It is said: (1) That God gives faith where and to whom He
pleases. (2) That He remits sins. (3) That He regenerates. (4) That He
sanctifies. (5) That He imputes and saves. (6) That He will raise the
dead bodies from the graves; that He will cause the skeletons to be
alive, and will put into them their former souls. (7) That He will
destroy the world, with the sun, the stars, the planets, the earths, and
will create it anew. (8) Since omnipotence is everything, and since it
constitutes the order which is God, and which is from God, in the whole
world, it follows that the man of the church can imagine whatever he
pleases; that he can raise himself beyond the ethers, that is, above
reason; and that, wherever he pleases, he can go counter to reason, and
say that "reason is to be held under obedience to our faith. For is not
God omnipotent? And who can, and who dares to reason in opposition to
His omnipotence?" Such are all things of faith at this day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="22.">22.</span></span>

That man cannot discover a single Divine truth, except by approaching
the Lord immediately, is due to this, that the Lord alone is the Word,
and that He is the Light and the Truth itself; and man does not become
spiritual except from the Lord alone, but remains natural; and the
natural man, in spiritual things, sees everything in inverted order;
that this is so, is known from Paul. This is the reason why not a single
truth has remained in the church, so that now is the consummation, the
desolation, the decision, and the fullness \[of time\]. But still
because the Lord is not dead, therefore, according to Daniel, there
still remains "a root in the earth"; while, according to Revelation,
"man indeed is willing to die, but yet he cannot." That which "remains"
is the faculty of being able to understand the truth, and of being able
to will good. This is "the root that remains."

<span class="margnote"><span id="23.">23.</span></span>

The students of modern orthodoxy object, that faith, charity, good
works, repentance, remission of sins, etc., cannot be given with a man,
before he has received the Holy Spirit. But, as has been shown, the Holy
Spirit is the Divine which proceeds from the Lord; and the Lord is
perpetually present with every man, the evil as well as the good.
Without His presence, no one can live; and the Lord constantly acts,
urges, and strives to be received; wherefore, the presence of the Holy
Spirit is perpetual. For the sake of confirmation, this was proved in
the spiritual world, in the case of a certain devil, by the removal from
him of the Lord's presence. And the devil lay dead, exactly like a
corpse. Thousands from among the spirits and the clergy saw this, and
were thunderstruck. From the Lord's perpetual presence, man has the
faculty of thinking, understanding, and willing. These faculties are
solely from the influx of life from the Lord. Both Melancthon and Luther
were present, and they could not open their lips.

<span class="margnote"><span id="24.">24.</span></span>

The only cause why the Reformation was effected, was that the Word which
lay buried, might be restored to the world. For many centuries it had
been in the world, but at last it was entombed by the Roman Catholics,
and not a single truth of the church could then be laid open from it.
The Lord thus could not become known, but the Pope was worshipped as
God, in the Lord's place. But after the Word had been drawn forth out of
its tomb, the Lord could be made known, truth could be derived from it,
and conjunction with heaven could be given. For this purpose the Lord
raised up simultaneously so many men who contended. He raised up Sweden,
Denmark, Holland, England that they might receive; and lest \[the Word\]
should be blotted out in Germany through the Pope, He raised up Gustavus
Adolphus, who stood for the Reformation, and rose up against \[the
Pope\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="25.">25.</span></span>

Unless the present little work is added to the preceding work, the
church cannot be healed. For it would be a mere palliative cure; a wound
in which the corrupt matter remains, and which vitiates the neighboring
parts. Orthodoxy is this corrupt matter itself, and the doctrine of the
New Church indeed brings a healing, but only exteriorly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="26.">26.</span></span>

The origins of all errors in the church have been this: that they have
believed that man lives from himself, or from his own life, and that
life has been created in him; when yet man is only an organ of life, and
is kept in the middle between heaven and hell, and thus in equilibrium
or free will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="27.">27.</span></span>

No one is able to see the desolation of truth in the church, before
truths from the Word come into light. What heretic, indeed, knows
otherwise than that all that he has are truths? Everyone can swear to
his own. He is in deceptive light arising from confirmations. In such a
light is the natural man, when the spiritual man illumines it. Yea the
naturalistic atheist can swear that there is no God; and that the
existence of God is a mere vain imagination of the common people;
wherefore, at heart he scoffs at the doctors of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="28.">28.</span></span>

It is known in the church, that the church is the Body of Christ; but
how this is has not been known hitherto. Hence it is that the whole
heaven is as one man before the Lord; and this man is distinguished into
societies, each of which has reference to one member, or organ and
viscus in man. In this man or body, the Lord is the soul or life. For
the Lord inspires men; and when He is present, He is present through the
heavens, as the soul is present through its body. The same is the case
with the church on earth; for this is the external man. Wherefore,
everyone through death is gathered to his own in that body, etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="29.">29.</span></span>

The things which are stated in the sequel are not miracles, but they are
testimonies that I have been introduced by the Lord into the spiritual
world for the sake of the ends which . . . The causes why no miracles
are done at the present time . . . (Further, from the Lord's words in
Matt. 24.) Concerning the miracles of Anthony of Padua, and of most of
those who are worshipped as saints; of whose miracles the monasteries
are full. Of the miracles of Paris, concerning which there are two
volumes in quarto.

<span class="margnote"><span id="30.">30.</span></span>

That the Lord would come in the fullness of time and judge, is meant by
His words in Matthew: When the Son of man shall come in His glory, and
all the holy angels with Him, He shall sit on the throne of His glory;
and there shall be gathered before Him all nations; and He shall
separate them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the sheep
from the he-goats (Matt. 25:31-32). This coming of the Lord is meant by
the following words concerning Jesus Christ, in the Apostles' Creed: He
ascended into the heavens, He sitteth at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty; from thence He shall come to judge the living and the
dead. And also by these words concerning the Lord Jesus Christ in the
Nicene Creed: He ascended into the heavens, and sitteth on the right
hand of the Father; and He shall come again in glory to judge the living
and the dead; of whose kingdom there shall be no end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="31.">31.</span></span>

And also in the Athanasian Creed: He ascended into the heavens; He
sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from whence He
shall come to judge the living and the dead. . . . And they shall give
account for their own deeds. And they that have done good shall enter
into eternal life; and they that have done evil into eternal fire.
(Formula Concordiae \[Leipsic, 1756\], pp. 1, 2, 4.) Besides, the
articles of Schmalkalden teach the same thing as the Apostles', the
Nicene, and the Athanasian creeds, namely: Jesus Christ ascended into
the heavens, He sitteth on the right hand of God, He shall come to judge
the living and the dead. Luther in his Lesser Catechism (p. 371) teaches
the same thing (Augsburg Confession, pp. 10, 14); and our Catechism
\[the one used in Sweden\] teaches the same (p. 303). From the Augsburg
Confession we quote in like manner: He ascended into the heavens, that
He might sit on the right hand of the Father, and reign forever, and
rule over all creatures. The same Christ will openly come again to judge
the living and the dead, according to the Apostles' Creed (Augsburg
Confession, p. 10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="32.">32.</span></span>

That the Lord will not come to judgment, to destroy heaven and earth,
appears from many passages in the Word, where His coming is treated of;
as for instance where it is said in Luke: When the Son of man cometh,
shall He find faith on the earth? (Luke 18:8). Besides many more
passages which are quoted in True Christian Religion (n. 765); further,
that He will not come to destroy the visible heaven and the habitable
earth (ibid., n. 768 seq.); but to separate the evil from the good
(ibid., n. 772 seq.); and many more passages besides. The same also is
declared in the Credal Faith which is inserted in every Book of Psalms
in the whole Christian world, where the Apostles' Creed only is set
forth. The same is introduced thence into the Psalms. By the "living,"
in the above places, are meant those who are in charity and faith, and
who by the Lord are called "sheep"; but by the "dead" are meant those
who are not in charity and faith, and who by the Lord are called
"he-goats." (Add here Rev. 11:18; and 20:12.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="33.">33.</span></span>

Title:- THE CONSUMMATION OF THE AGE, AND THE ABOMINATION OF THE
DESOLATION THEN. There is to be adduced what the Lord says, (1)
Concerning the "abomination of the desolation"; (2) What He says \[of
vastation\]; (3) What the Lord says concerning the "affliction"; (4)
That "no flesh can be saved"; (5) Concerning the "darkening of the sun
and moon"; (6) The things which are declared in Revelation: Behold, I am
He that liveth, and was dead; and behold I am He that liveth unto the
ages of the ages (Rev. 1:18; also 2:8; and 5:6). And again, what the
Lord said in John: The night cometh when no man can work (John 9:4). In
that night there shall be two men in one bed (Luke 17:34). Further, what
the Lord said in John (21:18), concerning Peter; also, what Paul said
concerning the last times (1 Tim. 4:1-3; 2 Tim. 3:1-7; 4:3, 4). There
shall be explained what the Lord says (Matt. 24:27), that this took
place on the day of the Last Judgment; also, what He says (Matt.
24:30-31). That this actually has taken place, see True Christian
Religion, n. 791.

<span class="margnote"><span id="34.">34.</span></span>

The Lord's Coming is according to order in this respect, that the spring
does not come until after the winter; nor the morning, until after the
night; that the travailing woman has comfort and joy, only after pain;
that states of comfort are after temptations; and that there is genuine
life after undergoing death; even as the Lord says, "Unless the grain .
. . die," etc. (John 12:24). The Lord exhibited the type of this order,
when He suffered Himself to be crucified and to die, and when afterwards
He rose again; this type signifies the state of the church. . . . The
above also is involved in the image which appeared to Nebuchadnezzar,
where the Stone at last became a great Rock; it is further involved in
the four beasts that came out of the sea; and in what is related there
concerning that fearful nation (which is to be explained). It is
likewise involved in the four ages known to the ancients, the golden,
silver, brazen, and iron ages; further, in the ages through which every
man passes, from infancy to old age; then is the end of the life of the
body, and then comes the life of the spirit, which is the life of all
those who have lived well. The same also is involved in the heaven which
has first to pass away (Rev. 21:1, 2). The case with the church is the
same.

<span class="margnote"><span id="35.">35.</span></span>

The keys of the kingdom of the heavens were given to Peter, because he
represented the Lord as to the Divine Truth; and this is what is meant
by "a rock," throughout the whole of the Sacred Scripture. On this
account \[it is said\], "On this rock," that is, on this Divine Truth,
"I will build My church," namely, on this that the Lord is "THE SON OF
THE LIVING GOD." It shall be shown from the Word, that such is the
signification of a "rock." (The "rock" is spoken of in the Word \[in the
following passages\]: Exod. 17:6; 33:21, 22; Num. 20:8-11; Deut. 8:15;
32:4-37; 1 Sam. 2:2; 2 Sam. 22:2, 3, 32, 47; 23:3; Ps. 18:2, 31, 46;
28:1; 31:2, 3; 40:2; 42:9; 62:2, 7; 78:16, 20, 35; 89:26; 92:15; 94:22;
95:1; 105:41; Isa. 2:10; 22:16; 42:11; 51:1; 1 Cor. 10:4.) The "fissures
of the rock" mean falsified truths (Rev. 6:15, 16; Isa. 21:19; Jer.
16:16; Song of Sol. 2:14; Isa. 48:21; Jer. 23:29; 49:16; Obad. verse 3;
besides in the Evangelists). In this wise also some of the Fathers
explained this passage (see Formula Concordiae, p. 345).

<span class="margnote"><span id="36.">36.</span></span>

When the Son alone became Man, and not the whole Trinity, was not then
the Divine Essence which is a one and an indivisible trine, separated,
that is, disunited or divided?

<span class="margnote"><span id="37.">37.</span></span>

That the whole of the Lord's Prayer, from beginning to end, has respect
to this time; that is, to the time when God, the Father will be
worshipped in the Human Form. This appears when this prayer is rightly
explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="38.">38.</span></span>

That the churches after the times of the Apostles fell away into so many
heresies, and that at the present day there are none other than false
churches, is because they have not approached the Lord, when yet the
Lord is the Word, and the very Light which enlighteneth the whole world.
And yet for them it is as impossible to see one single genuine truth
from the Word, except what is encompassed with and steeped in falsities,
and coheres with falsities, as it is to sail to the Pleiades, or to dig
out the gold which is in the center of the earth. Wherefore, in order
that true Christian religion might be manifested, it was absolutely
necessary that someone should be introduced into the spiritual world,
and derive from the mouth of the Lord genuine truths out of the Word.
The Lord cannot enlighten anyone with His light, unless He is approached
immediately, and acknowledged as the God of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="39.">39.</span></span>

That miracles are not done at this day, is on account of the reasons
which are stated in True Christian Religion (n. 501); wherefore, the
Lord said that they would seduce (Matt. 24:24). Again, what is more
common with the Roman Catholics than filling the tombs of the saints,
and the walls of monasteries with miracles? How many plates of gold and
silver are there not in the tomb of Anthony of Padua? How many are there
not where the three wise men are said to be buried? And how many are
there not at Prague? And in other places? What else than illusions can
be derived thence? The fact that I converse in the spiritual world with
angels and spirits, that I have described the states of heaven and hell,
and the life after death; and further, the fact that there has been
disclosed to me the spiritual sense of the Word - besides many other
things - is worth more than all these miracles. Such communication, as
far as I know, has not been granted by the Lord to anyone before. These
are evidences that this has been granted for the sake of the New Church,
which is the crown of all the churches, and which will endure forever.
Being in the spiritual world, seeing the wonderful things of heaven, and
the miserable things of hell; and being there in the very light of the
Lord in which are the angels, surpasses all miracles. Evidences that I
am there, may be seen in abundance in my books.

<span class="margnote"><span id="40.">40.</span></span>

The sole cause why the church has immersed itself into so many
falsities, that not a single truth has remained in it, and why it is
like a ship that has suffered shipwreck, of which the top of the mast
only protrudes, is this: that hitherto they have not approached the Lord
immediately; and so long as the Lord is not approached immediately, not
a single truth can appear in its own light. The reason of this is, that
the Lord is the Word, that is, the all of Divine truth in the Word, and
that He alone is the Light which enlighteneth all, as He Himself
teaches; and further, that every truth of the Word shines from no other
source, than from the Lord alone. This light is what is meant by the
spiritual; when, therefore, this light is not present, there is nothing
spiritual in man's understanding, but what is merely natural; and all
things which contain the spiritual, the natural man sees only
invertedly; he sees falsity instead of the truth. On reading the Word,
therefore, he bends all things towards his own falsities, and thus
falsifies truths; and he takes delight in them. For the natural human
mind is in such things as belong to the world and to self; it is
delighted solely by such things; wherefore, unless in the above things
there is spiritual light, the natural man transfers them to those things
which belong to the world and to self, and he puts these in the first
place. He thus not only shuns spiritual things, and hides them away, but
he also scoffs at them. Faith is spiritual from no other source, that
is, it cannot be called spiritual, except from the truths which it
contains, and thus by virtue of light from the Lord. Unless faith is
from this source, it is natural faith which does not conjoin, and which
is not saving.

<span class="margnote"><span id="41.">41.</span></span>

That in the spiritual world no one knows another from his name only, but
from the idea of his quality. This idea causes that the other becomes
present and is known. Thus, and not otherwise, parents are known by
their children; children by their parents; and relations, connections by
marriage, and friends, by their relations, connections, and friends. In
like manner the learned are known from their writings, and from the
reputation of their learning; great men and rulers by the fame of their
deeds; in like manner kings, emperors, and popes. All are known by these
things alone. It was granted to me to converse with such; but with
others it is not possible. A spirit himself also is nothing else than
his own quality; on this account everyone in that world drops his
baptismal name, and the name of his family, and is named according to
his quality. Hence it is that "name" in the Word does not signify name,
but quality. As the Lord says in Revelation: Thou hast a few names in
Sardis (Rev. 3:4); and again: I know thee by name (Exod. 33:7). Besides,
a thousand other places, where "name" is mentioned. From all this, then,
it appears, that no one has the Lord present with himself, unless he
knows His quality. This quality the truths of the Word make manifest;
for, as many truths as there are in the Word, there are just so many
mirrors and ideas of the Lord; for He is the Word itself and He is the
Truth itself, as He Himself says. Qualities are of two kinds: one kind
belongs to the knowledge concerning the Lord Himself, that He is the God
of heaven and earth, the Son of God the Father, One with the Father,
that all things of the Father are in Him, in a word, that He is the
Human of God the Father. The other kind belongs to the knowledges of
those things that proceed from Him; and the things that proceed from
Him, are Himself; as, for instance, those things which He teaches
concerning charity, freedom, will, repentance, regeneration, the
sacraments, and very many other things. These things also make up the
idea of the Lord, because they are from Him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="42.">42.</span></span>

It is an arcanum from the spiritual world, that he who does not approach
the Lord directly and immediately with the idea concerning Him, presence
is not effected, and still less can he become a recipient of any
communication. It is as if someone stands at the side, and appears in
the dark. In like manner, no one can converse with another, unless he
looks directly at him; communication is then granted when each
reciprocally looks at the other. Thus, and not otherwise, do ideas enter
into another; and if at the same time there is love, conjunction is
effected. If anyone, therefore, approaches the Father immediately, He
stands as it were at the side; and hence is unable to grant and to
impart redemption; that is, He is unable to regenerate, and afterwards
to save him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="43.">43.</span></span>

The manifestation of the Lord in Person, and the introduction by the
Lord into the spiritual world, both as to sight and as to hearing and
speech, surpasses all miracles; for we do not read anywhere in history
that such interaction with angels and spirits has been granted from the
creation of the world. For I am daily with angels there, even as I am in
the world with men; and now for twenty-seven years. Evidences of this
interaction are the books which I have published concerning Heaven and
Hell, and also the Relations in my last work entitled True Christian
Religion; further, what has been stated there concerning Luther,
Melancthon, Calvin, and concerning the inhabitants of many kingdoms;
besides, the various evidences which are known in the world, and many
other evidences besides which are not known. Say, who has ever before
known anything concerning heaven and hell? Who has known anything
concerning man's state after death? Who has known anything concerning
spirits and angels, etc., etc.?

<span class="margnote"><span id="44.">44.</span></span>

In addition to these most manifest evidences, there is the fact that the
spiritual sense of the Word has been disclosed by the Lord through me;
which has never before been revealed since the Word was written with the
sons of Israel; and this sense is the very sanctuary of the Word; the
Lord Himself is in this sense with His Divine, and in the natural sense
with His Human. Not a single iota in this sense can be opened except by
the Lord alone. This surpasses all the revelations that have hitherto
been made since the creation of the world. Through this revelation a
communication has been opened between men and the angels of heaven, and
the conjunction of the two worlds has been effected; because when man is
in the natural sense the angels are in the spiritual sense. See what has
been written concerning this sense in the chapter on the Sacred
Scripture \[in True Christian Religion\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="45.">45.</span></span>

The correspondences by which the Word as to each and all of its parts
has been written, possess such power and strength, that it may be called
the power and strength of the Divine Omnipotence; for through these
correspondences the natural acts conjointly with the spiritual, and the
spiritual with the natural; thus the all of heaven with the all of the
world. Thence it is that the two sacraments are correspondences of
spiritual with natural things; thence is their strength and power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="46.">46.</span></span>

What are miracles over against these things? Miracles are not done at
this day, because they seduce men, and make them natural. They close the
interiors of their minds, wherein faith ought to be rooted; wherefore
mere falsities proceed thence (see Matt. 24:24). What did the miracles
effect which were done in Egypt with the sons of Israel? What did those
miracles effect which were done before them in the desert? What those
miracles when they entered into the land of Canaan? What the miracles
which were wrought by Elijah and Elisha? What those which the Lord
Himself wrought? Was anyone ever made spiritual by their means? What has
been the use of miracles among the Roman Catholics? and of those of
Anthony at Padua? and of the three wise men at Cologne? And what has
been the use of the countless miracles in the monasteries, whose walls
are fitted with pictures, plates, and gifts? Has anyone ever been made
spiritual thereby? Have they not become natural thereby, so that there
is scarcely any truth of the Word among them, but only the external
things of worship, which have their origin from men and traditions?

<span class="margnote"><span id="47.">47.</span></span>

That in Christ God is Man, and Man God, is confirmed three times in the
Formula Concordiae; and also in the Athanasian Creed, where it treats of
the "assumption of the Human into God;" from the Word (Rom. 14:11;
Coloss. 2:9; 1 John 5:20, 21), as well as by the declaration of the Lord
Himself, that "the Father and Himself are one;" that "the Father is in
Him, and He in the Father;" that "all things of the Father are His;"
that "He has Life in Himself;" that "He is the God of heaven and earth";
etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="48.">48.</span></span>

The soul is the inmost man, and thence according to the ancients it is
in the whole and in every part of the body, because the beginning of
life resides in the soul; that part of the body in which the soul does
not inmostly reside, does not live. Wherefore there is a reciprocal
union; and hence the body acts from the soul, but not the soul through
the body. Whatever proceeds from God partakes of the human form, because
God is Himself the Man; this is especially the case with the soul, which
is the first of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="49.">49.</span></span>

Nothing is more common in the whole heaven and in the whole world, than
for one thing to be within another; thus there is an inmost, a middle,
and an outmost; and these three intercommunicate, and the power of the
middle and outmost are derived from the inmost. That there are three
things, one within the other, appears from each and all things in the
human body. Around the brain there are three tunics, which are called
the dura mater, the pia mater, and the arachnoid; and over these is the
skull. Around the whole body there are tunics, one within the other,
which taken all together are called the skin. Around each artery and
vein there are three tunics; likewise around each muscle and fiber; in
like manner around all the rest which are there. In the vegetable
kingdom the case is the same. How these parts intercommunicate, and how
the inmost enters the middle, and the middle the ultimate, is shown by
anatomy, etc. Thence it follows that the same is the case with light;
that spiritual light which in its essence is truth, is interiorly in
natural light; likewise that spiritual heat which in its essence is
love, is in natural heat. By natural heat is meant natural love, because
that love becomes warm; and this is clothed with the heat of the blood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="50.">50.</span></span>

All things which people speak concerning the Holy Spirit fall to the
ground, as soon as it is believed that man is not life, but only an
organ of life; and thus that God is constantly in man, and that He
strives, acts, and urges that those things which belong to religion, and
consequently those which belong to the church, to heaven and salvation,
shall be received. Therefore it is wrong to say that the Holy Spirit is
given, or that it is lost. For the Holy Spirit is nothing else than the
Divine which proceeds out of the Lord from the Father, and this Divine
causes a man's life, and also his understanding and his love; and the
presence of this Divine is perpetual. Without the presence of the Lord
or the Holy Spirit, man would be nothing but a kind of beast; yea he
would not have any more life, than salt, a stone, or a stock. The reason
of this is, that man is not born with instinct, like a beast; wherefore
a pullet one day old knows the order of its life better than an infant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51-100](inc02.md)
