[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms07)  [Next](jms09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

### 6

### THE POWERS OF GOOD

#### DEPUTY ANGELS

THE characteristic and distinguishing feature of medieval Jewish magic
was the function which it assigned to the angels, the agents of God. The
magical use of angels was of course predicated upon the assumption that
the world is very thickly populated with them, and that they play a
unique rôle in nature. The figures vary from a mere few hundred thousand
all the way up to 496,000 myriads—and these are only partial
estimates.[1](jms27.htm#an_6_1.md) We may readily believe this when we
learn that every single thing on earth, animate or inanimate, from man
through all of creation, birds and beasts, trees and brooks, even to the
last blade of grass, owns its angelic representative above. This is the
heart of the angel-lore. Houses and cities, winds and seasons, months
and hours and days, each star above, each speck of dust underfoot, no
thing in nature or in fancy exists independently of its *memuneh*, its
heavenly "deputy" ([literally](errata.htm#1.md), "appointed
one").[2](jms27.htm#an_6_2.md) These "deputies" are the agents through whom
the universe operates[3](jms27.htm#an_6_3.md)—in fact, the activities that
go on in the world are nothing more than reflections of their acts. "It
is a well-known 'mystery' that no nation is destroyed until its
celestial 'prince' has first fallen." This belief was coupled with the
conception of astrology that each man is accompanied by a star which
governs his existence, so that we have sometimes the cumbersome
duplication, the angel, or "deputy" of a man's star, both charged with
guiding and guarding him, the ultimate responsibility residing with the
angel. "Every affair in which a man is engaged here on earth is first
indicated up above by the angel of his star."[4](jms27.htm#an_6_4.md)

These angels are both representatives and defenders of their earthly
charges in the heavenly courts, as well as motivators of action below.
The "deputy angels" of birds or animals or men who have been wrongly
dealt with plead their cause before God and see just punishment meted
out to the malefactors. Similarly, the angels who

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

preside over "places, stones and wood" are held responsible if a man
stumbles and falls because of them. "When the time comes for a righteous
man to die, the deputy of the star which is ruling at the moment begs
that he may not die just then, for that deputy will be held accountable
for his death." If a man's prayers are to be answered, the angel of his
star must have first offered them directly before the Throne of Glory.
In like manner, good fortune in business results from the intervention
of a man's deputy angel, who "enters men's hearts" and induces them to
deal with him to his advantage. One must consider the habits of the
"deputies" as well as of the demons in rebuilding a house, and be
careful not to alter the position of doors and windows, else the wrath
of both will descend upon his head. "This is one of those things which,
though very similar to the forbidden 'ways of the Amorite,' is
nevertheless permitted," we are assured by a thirteenth-century source.
A later writer used this warning to account for the fear of inhabiting
new homes.[5](jms27.htm#an_6_5.md)

This idea constitutes the main theoretical basis of medieval Jewish
magic. Ubiquitous and all-powerful, the "deputy angels" were the perfect
medium through which the sorcerer, when he had acquired the requisite
secret knowledge and skill, could influence man and nature to obey him.
His charms and operations were intended to bring under his sway the
particular "deputies" who could effect his will at the moment. "There
are incantations which work on water but not on land, and others,
intended for the deputies who preside over the land which have no effect
on water." The long lists in such a work as *Sefer Raziel* are proof of
the arduous training that the novice in magic must undergo if he would
learn how to direct all the *memunim* of air, wind, date, time, place,
etc., which control a situation at a given moment. Further, since a
deputy's province is prescribed by his very nature, the sorcerer must
know how to substitute another, better suited to his designs, and thus
effect a change in nature itself.[6](jms27.htm#an_6_6.md)

We have some detailed, if sometimes not too clear, explanations of just
how this "deputy" magic worked. In the case of a man who by an
incantation had succeeded in discovering the identity and whereabouts of
a thief, we are informed, the *memuneh* who had been invoked disclosed
them not by appearing in person to convey the information, but by
concentrating on the facts and "mingling" his thought with the thought
of the magician. If the identity of the thief was known, but the
hiding-place of the booty was not, then it

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

might be discovered more directly by invoking the thief's "deputy." The
familiar device of fashioning an image of one's enemy out of wax, or of
drawing his portrait on a wall, and by piercing it with pins or nails
causing him to suffer in a corresponding part of his body, operated
along similar lines. The magician's "deputy" transmitted the blow to the
victim's angel, who in turn inflicted it upon his human charge;
sometimes a third intermediary was introduced into the process, the
"deputy" of the image or picture. Desired dreams were induced by the
angel in charge of such dreams who had been invoked for this purpose.
And so on through the entire repertoire of magic devices, all were
consummated through the intermediacy of the angels, or "deputies," who
were subjected to the sorcerer's will by his magic
art.[7](jms27.htm#an_6_7.md)

This system was a singular translation of Platonic idealism into the
theosophical lingo of the early *Kabbalah*, though to call it a "system"
is to dignify it with an order and logic it made no claim to possess. It
took shape through incidental attempts to rationalize on a single plane
the effects of nature and magic, on the basis of those philosophical and
mystical concepts which were current in medieval Jewish thought; one
might say in thirteenth-century German-Jewish thought, for it was during
this century and in this locale that the conception was elaborated and
attained its greatest popularity. *Sefer Ḥasidim* and the works of
Eleazar of Worms display the influence of this doctrine on almost every
page. The unparalleled luxuriousness of invention that characterized
thirteenth-century Jewish angelology, sired by this theory, seems at
first glance to have been a striking departure from traditional Jewish
belief. But a brief review of the development of Jewish angel-lore
discloses its thoroughly orthodox mystical antecedents.

Scripture knew the angels as ministers in the celestial court, serving
and glorifying God, occasionally acting as messengers and agents to
perform His will on earth. The writer of the late book of Daniel was the
first to individualize angels and to endow them with names and titles.
In the Talmudic period the Biblical angelology was elaborated and
enriched in three directions: angelic ministration was frequently
inferred in Biblical narratives which made no mention of it, thus
broadening the concept of angels as intermediaries between man and God;
the personality of the angels was more clearly delineated through an
effort to describe them, to name the more important ones, and to accord
them peculiar spheres of influence,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

so that we have "princes" of fire, of hail, of rain, of night, of the
sea, of healing, and so on; and finally they were appointed man's
guardians to accompany him through his daily routine. The Essenes were
said to have possessed an especially well-developed angel-lore, and the
Enoch literature, reflecting Gnostic sources, had much to say concerning
them, and implied their control of nature, man, and the
future.[8](jms27.htm#an_6_8.md) These two founts of mystical doctrine,
while never formally admitted into Jewish thought and in fact frowned
upon by rabbinic authorities, exercised a profound influence upon the
extramural activities of the mystics. Their expanding doctrine was in no
sense systematically organized during this period, and it remained in a
fluid, uncoordinated state throughout its succeeding development. But
the early literature contained ample seed for a rich later growth, which
it experienced in the Geonic period, when a highly esoteric doctrine
grew up, portions of which found literary expression in such works as
the *Hechalot*, *Otiot de R. Akiba*, parts of *Sefer Raziel*, etc.

Along with this elaboration of angelology went its practical corollary,
the utilization of angels in magic. The Talmud, though speaking often of
angelic apparitions, knew nothing of the conjuration of angels as
distinguished from the conjuration of demons. At most, there appears to
have existed during the Talmudic period the practice of calling upon, or
praying to the angels, as intermediaries before God, to intercede in a
crisis.[9](jms27.htm#an_6_9.md) Even Geonic mysticism was reserved on this
point, but evidently during this later period, which saw so marked a
development of angelology, the Talmudic prayer had been transformed into
a magical invocation, as the *Aramaic Incantation Texts*, published by
Montgomery, and such a work as the *Sword of Moses*, edited by Gaster,
indicate. This was the foundation upon which thirteenth-century
German-Jewish mysticism built an imposing structure of angel-magic. The
earliest reference to angelic "deputies" that I have encountered in
rabbinic sources occurs in the late *Midrash* to
Psalms,[10](jms27.htm#an_6_10.md) composed probably during the tenth
century in Southern Italy. This work undoubtedly embodied much older
material, but the absence of this concept in the Talmudic literature,
and the fact that eastern Jewish mysticism entered Europe through the
south of Italy at about this time, stamp it as a product of Geonic
mystical speculation. The expansion of the *memuneh* doctrine in
Germany, where it was introduced by the Kalonymides, into a veritable
theosophy, embracing and crowning all the elements of earlier Jewish
angelology, was the historically logical consequence

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

of the Geonic development. But its emergence and popularization during
the thirteenth century must be seen as one phase of the generally
heightened superstitious atmosphere of contemporary Europe. The
Gnostic-Manichæan heresies that had plagued the Church since the tenth
century had sown widely and deeply in Christian circles the seed of
ancient mystical lore. Jewish thought could not have been unaffected by
such a heightening of mystical sensitiveness in such close proximity;
the more so because it was already acquainted with a closely related
doctrine. The wave that broke over Christian society inundated the
Jewish community as well.

#### ATTRIBUTES AND FUNCTIONS

Despite this rich angelology northern Jewry raised few questions as to
the origin of the angels, the elements of which they are constituted,
their outward appearance—they were simply there, in the heaven above,
clustered about the throne of glory, or all about one on earth,
performing their heaven-ordained tasks, and no questions asked. The
furthest that Eleazar of Worms would go in describing them was to say
that they are "tenuous substance, as unsubstantial as the wind, which
cannot be seen."[11](jms27.htm#an_6_11.md)

This conception, however, created certain difficulties of a metaphysical
and practical nature. If the angels are pure spirit, how can they be
said to achieve the material effects which tradition ascribed to them,
and magic demanded of them? Maimonides, the consistent and indomitable
rationalist, denied altogether the possibility of the physical
apparition of angels as well as the objective reality of the effects
attributed to angel-magic, and dismissed them as self-delusion or
optical illusions. So uncompromising a view, however, found few
adherents. The Spanish philosophers *Naḥmanides* and Judah Halevi
acknowledged the reality of angelic apparitions, but stipulated that
they required a special perspicuity of vision on the part of the
beholders. In the north of Europe even this last condition was excluded:
angels possess the power to assume human (and animal) forms, and to
appear in the society of man as completely physical beings, on a par
with himself. In fact such transformations were common occurrences, the
"prince of a man's star" frequently adopting the shape of his human
charge and descending from on high to tread the earth. And if one
demands an explanation of the process by which the transmutation of
spirit into matter occurs, the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

answer is quite simple: "This is the great 'mystery' by which the holy
angels appear on earth as men, or as other creatures, in accordance with
God's will or by their own desire: they take some earth from beneath the
heavenly pile, clothe themselves in a clod of this earth, and descend to
eat and drink with men."[12](jms27.htm#an_6_12.md)

One characteristic of the angels, in particular, merits attention both
because of the frequency with which it was mentioned, and because of its
practical consequences for religious and magical rites. Petitions were
often addressed to heaven by way of the intervening angels. God,
omniscient, comprehends all tongues, but the official language of the
celestial court is Hebrew, and unfortunately the angels are monolingual
(or, it may be, if they do have knowledge of foreign languages they
choose to ignore communications addressed in them.) This principle was
advanced in the Talmud, and since Aramaic was the spoken language of the
people, the warning against praying in Aramaic was made especially
emphatic. Only in the sickroom might one employ other tongues than
Hebrew, for there the *Shechina*, the Presence of God, was believed to
hover over the head of the invalid, and received the prayer directly.

This belief persisted in the Middle Ages and was utilized to explain, if
weakly, the Aramaic prayers that are to be found in the ritual, and in
particular, certain Aramaic lines in the *Kaddish:* they were couched in
this language so that they might be unintelligible to the angels, for
their contents were such as might annoy them, or arouse their envy of
the superlative piety of the Jews. It was this belief too that made
necessary the bestowal of a Hebrew name upon every Jew, in addition to
his secular name, and the use exclusively of the Hebrew name in the
course of a religious rite, for the angels certainly could not be
expected to recognize an individual by any other. Even in the grave this
principle still obtained. The Kabbalistic doctrine of *Ḥibbut ha-Kever*,
which was familiar in Northern Europe, envisaged a three-day period,
immediately succeeding burial, of interrogations and beatings by the
angel of death, during which the deceased must identify himself by his
Hebrew name. Woe betide him if it had slipped his
memory![13](jms27.htm#an_6_13.md)

Of course, this idea met with frequent objections, and the retort of
certain medieval commentators to the original statement in the Talmud
should have permanently demolished it: "You say that even the thought
hidden in a man's heart they know, and yet the Aramaic language is
beyond their comprehension!"[14](jms27.htm#an_6_14.md) But the sarcasm

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

made hardly a dent in the popularity of the notion, and the angels as
linguists remained in bad repute. This conception was not limited,
however, to the sphere of ritual. In the practice of medieval Jewish
magic it assumed more than academic importance. The literature was
sometimes written in the vernacular, the directions being given in
Aramaic or in Yiddish, but the charm itself, the magical command, when
intended for angelic ears, appeared usually in Hebrew. However
unorthodox in principle, magic is perhaps the most tradition-bound of
cultural forms. The Jewish sorcerer, no matter how far he may have
wandered at times from the spirit of official Judaism, could not free
himself from those orthodox traditions that bore directly on his
technique. If in fifteenth- and sixteenth-century manuscripts the order
appears occasionally reversed, the incantations proper being couched in
Yiddish, these usually bear the earmarks of direct transference from the
German.

Individual angels with peculiarly angelic functions and forms, of a
sort, entered intimately into the life of the medieval Jew. The ancient
norms remained fixed, except that angels appeared much more frequently
in the pages of medieval authors. Their prime function was still the
adoration and service of God, but that service brought them into more
frequent contact with men.[15](jms27.htm#an_6_15.md) "The angels are the
messengers of God; He impresses His will upon them and sends them forth
to do His bidding," wrote Eleazar of Worms, and he explained that this
work keeps them constantly occupied, for so many new tasks continually
await them that they must rush to complete the present one. They can do
nothing of their own will, he said, but act only upon God's command—a
view which, while true to the traditional belief, cannot be reconciled
with the part the angels were forced to play in medieval magic, for this
implied a considerable degree of independence of God's will. Much closer
to the prevailing opinion was the statement found in a Geonic responsum:
"There are many acts which angels can perform of their own accord,
without a special order from above. Therefore amulets are written and
names spoken, to aid the angels in these matters." But when they are
acting as messengers of the Lord, they carry out only one mandate at a
time. Many of them have specific functions or fields of activity, and
the orders which fall within their scope are of course assigned to
them.[16](jms27.htm#an_6_16.md)

God's will opens up to them His entire domain. Medieval Jews believed in
an especially vigilant Providence which presided over

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the most intimate and minute details of human life, and which operated
through the angels. They carried out the celestial orders and often
appeared in human or animal form to exact the required punishment for
transgressions of God's law, or, by "mingling" their thought with his,
led man to make decisions which might run counter to his previously
expressed intentions, and to perform acts out of keeping with his
character and will."

Viewed in this light the angels were the mechanism through which God
maintained a close contact with His universe. But these angelic
intermediaries could carry messages both ways, and the ancient practice
of calling upon the angels rather than God directly in prayer became
very widespread during this period. Indeed, the whole force of the
mystical movement which stressed the secret values hidden in the letters
and the words of the liturgy was directed toward bringing into rapport
the angels who could most effectively reach the ear of the heavenly
court. Finally, the position of the angels in heaven made accessible to
them the founts of mystic lore; they were the source of that secret
wisdom to which the mystic aspired. To them he turned for inspiration,
and if his piety and learning—and sometimes his skill in magic—warranted
it, his quest was not unrewarded. The book *Raziel* is supposed to have
been transmitted to Adam by the angel of that name; Eleazar of Worms,
who, incidentally, had a hand in the concoction of that work, boasted of
his intimacy with various angels; a few centuries later we learn of a
Kabbalist, Samson of Ostropol by name, who "was visited daily by an
angel who taught him the mysteries of the Torah." Many a great mystic
was reputed to have sat at the feet of such celestial
mentors.[18](jms27.htm#an_6_18.md)

Yet we learn little more concerning individual angels than their names
and their functions; our authors were not interested in the angel but in
his availability for magical ends. Occasionally some information culled
from the mystical tradition is passed on, but with an air of pedantic
scholarship. Metatron, the demiurge of classical Jewish mysticism, was
important only because his name is the mathematical equivalent of
*Shaddai*, one of God's names. Sandalfon is "taller than his comrades by
a distance of five hundred years," it is true, but his significance lay
in his intimate attendance upon the person of God
Himself.[19](jms27.htm#an_6_19.md) Dumah, who presides over the realm of
the dead, the angels of destruction, others familiar from Talmudic times
make their appearance. The Angel of Death retains his especial rôle in
human affairs. The archangels still people the pages of

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

medieval mystical lore, but their association with the planets obscures
whatever individual characters they may have formerly possessed. The
Name has swallowed up the Angel.

The position which the angel-deputy occupied in mystical speculation and
magical practice made of medieval Jewish angelology so ambiguous and
uncertain a field as to present peculiar problems of definition. In
theory, of course, the *memunim* were angels, and as such inherited all
the angelic attributes of form and character and function which had been
delineated in the ancient literature. In fact, however, it may be
questioned whether they were anything more to the medieval Jew than the
mere names which served to identify them.

To set them to work the magician must know just which angels were
involved in a specific set of conditions—which meant, in effect, that he
must know the *names* of these angels, for the name was the controlling
factor. The proliferation of angelic *names*, which accompanied the
practice of medieval Jewish magic, tended to obscure the angelic
personality, so that in the end the name itself became the prime
consideration. Already during the Geonic period, writes Montgomery, "The
angels came to be but plays on roots, invocations of the attributes or
activities of deity, so that finally angel was merely synonymous with
charm."[20](jms27.htm#an_6_20.md) The angel was the theory which explained
the practice. The practice itself raises the question: when is an angel
more than a mere name? It would be extravagant to assert that the
endless procession of angelic names with which *Sefer Raziel*, for
example, regales us had any real relation to the angels themselves, or
that it evoked in its medieval readers visions of definite creatures. So
far as these unnumbered hosts, often so fantastically denominated, were
concerned, the impression gained from a study of the literature is that
we are really dealing here with a dual category. The one comprised the
true angels as tradition painted them, the other, a vast multitude of
mystical names, designated as angels and in theory accepted as such—an
angelic host in suspension, so to speak, capable of being precipitated
into its individual angelic components—but actually significant only for
the mystical powers inherent in the name itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. “In the Name of . . .”](jms09.md)
