[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms08)  [Next](jms10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

### 7

### "IN THE NAME OF . . ."

#### THE POTENCY OF THE NAME

OUTSTANDING among those beliefs that are universally characteristic of
the religion of superstition is the conviction that "a man's name is the
essence of his being" (one Hebrew text says "a man's name is his person"
and another, "his name is his soul") . This doctrine elevated the
process of naming a child into one of major importance. The name carried
with it all the associations it had accumulated in history, and stamped
the character of its earlier owners upon its new bearer, so that the
choice of a name was fraught with grave responsibility. But the desire
to bless a child with a richly endowed name was balanced by the fear
that the soul of its previous owner would be transported into the body
of the infant—a fear which stood in the way of naming children after
living parents or after any living persons, and thus robbing them of
their soul and their life. This dread led indeed in some cases to a
superstitious refusal to adopt the name even of a dead ancestor, since
this would oblige the soul to forsake its heavenly abode and re-enter
the realm of the living. It must have been this line of reasoning—if
reason it is—that prompted Judah the Pious to provide in his testament
that "none of his descendants shall be called by his name, Judah, or by
his father's name, Samuel." Such a far-fetched extension of the
superstition, however, was rare; the usual procedure was to name
children after ancestors.

It was often observed that his name is the mainspring not only of a
person's character, but also of his fate. Certain names bring good
fortune, others, bad; the "heavenly decrees" that are associated with
them determine which. One can discover the latent import of a name only
by a close study of the lives of individuals who have borne it. It would
be the height of rashness to saddle a youngster with a name whose owners
have been unfortunate, or have died young, or have been murdered. The
name that caused the misfortune

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

would bring bad luck with it. For the same reason a widow or widower
should not marry a person with the same name as the deceased mate. "Nor
is all this to be regarded as silly superstition," we are solemnly
assured; the writer testified to its truth from his own wide experience.

Confronted with two individuals of the same name, the spirits were as
likely as not to choose the wrong one upon whom to lavish their
unwelcome attentions. An angel executing a decree of sickness or death
might visit it upon the first who answered to the designated name. Such
things happened, as several anecdotes attest. The superstition against
naming a child after a living person was consequently strengthened, and
with it an avoidance of duplicating names in one family. A marriage in
which the bride or groom bore the name of one of the in-laws, or which
united two families owning a name in common, was discountenanced as
imprudent indeed. Nor should several families with a common name reside
in one dwelling. In such cases the spirits would be absolutely at a loss
to distinguish the one from the other. People went so far as to avoid
entering the home of a sick person who bore their name; should it be the
moment assigned for the death stroke the hale might be assaulted in
place of the ill. Yet, however solicitously these precautions were
observed, it was not without some misgivings about their respectability.
The same writer who protested that they were by no means "superstitions"
offered a half-apology for advancing them: "Although one should not
believe in superstitions," he wrote, to recall a previously quoted
remark, "yet it is best to be heedful of them." Well, "heedful" his
readers were, whether they believed or not.[1](jms28.htm#an_7_1.md)

The essential character of things and of men resides in their names.
Therefore to know a name is to be privy to the secret of its owner's
being, and master of his fate. The members of many primitive tribes have
two names, one for public use, the other jealously concealed, known only
to the man who bears it. Even the immediate members of the family never
learn what it is; if an enemy should discover it, its bearer's life is
forfeit. In highest antiquity and in our own day, among the most
primitive and the most civilized peoples, the occult power that inheres
in the name is recognized, and the name itself is known to be a mighty
and awesome force in the hands of the magician.[2](jms28.htm#an_7_2.md)

To know the name of a man is to exercise power over him alone; to know
the name of a higher, supernatural being is to dominate

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

the entire province over which that being presides. The more such names
a magician has garnered, the greater the number of spirits that are
subject to his call and command. This simple theory is at the bottom of
the magic which operates through the mystical names and words that are
believed to control the forces which in turn control our world. The
spirits guarded their names as jealously as ever did a primitive tribe.
"Tell me, I pray thee, thy name," Jacob demanded of the angel with whom
he had wrestled, but the angel parried the question and his name
remained his secret, lest Jacob invoke him in a magical incantation and
he be obliged to obey.[3](jms28.htm#an_7_3.md) But a vast mystic lore of
angel-names was inherited by medieval Jews, and expanded by them, so
that many were initiated into these mysteries, and possessed the power
to invoke the spirits. Higher than all, however, stands God—and the
names of God which Jewish ingenuity invented (or discovered?) placed in
the hands of the Jewish magician unlimited powers to manipulate God's
world.

This belief was the source of considerable theological uneasiness, as we
may well imagine. Its foremost adherents, namely Germanic Jewry, pious
and God-fearing, found it difficult to square the undoubted powers which
the Name accorded with the omnipotence of God, who Himself appeared to
be subordinated to His name by this doctrine. All that they could do, in
the effort to reconcile theology with superstition, was to evade the
problem by asserting at the same time the power of the Name and the
power of God. "One may not say that the invocation of God's Name obliges
Him to do the will of the invoker, that God Himself is coerced by the
recital of His Name; but the Name itself is invested with the power to
fulfill the desire of the man who utters it."[4](jms28.htm#an_7_4.md) The
Name possesses an autonomous potency. And with this the theologians were
obliged to content themselves.

#### ABRACADABRA

A characteristic feature of the evolution of magic has been its easy
passage from the invocation of celestial beings to the manipulation of
mere names, or words. Even though medieval Jewry insisted that it called
upon the names of definite supernatural beings, it is obvious that this
was nothing more than a polite bow in the direction of theological
scruple. And just as in the magic that flourished on

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

the periphery of other religions, so in Jewish magic, nominalism of this
sort made room for the magic word, as well as the name.

Certain words come to assume occult virtues by reason of the tradition
that has developed about them, or because of their fancied descent from
the potent charms of ancient times or foreign peoples. As we have had
occasion to note, magic is the most conservative of disciplines—like the
law it clings to archaic forms long after they have lost currency. But
its conservatism is not inspired by intellectual inertia. The very
nature of magic demands a strict adherence to the original form of the
magical name or word, for its potency lies hidden within its syllables,
within its very consonants and vowels —the slightest alteration may
empty the word of all its magic content. Inevitably, however, in the
process of oral transmission of so secret a lore, and in its later
literary transmission by all too fallible scribes, the word undergoes
changes. In fact, since in time these words become unintelligible to the
heirs of the tradition, often ignorant of their original sense and
tongue, a process of mutilation sets in, which makes them altogether
exotic and meaningless. Besides, we must give due weight to "the mystery
which is thrown about magic rites; 'the wizards that squeak and gibber'
(Is. 8:19) are universal; the Babylonian priest generally whispered his
formulas; the solemn parts of Christian rites have likewise tended to
inaudible pronunciation. There exists a tendency toward intentional
obscuration of the formulas, which by psychological necessity would tend
to even greater corruption."[5](jms28.htm#an_7_5.md) The peculiar logic of
magic makes a virtue of this process: the more barbaric the word the
more potent it is likely to be. "So little is it necessary that the
magic word possess any intelligible sense that most often it is
considered efficacious in the degree that it is strange and meaningless,
and words from foreign, incomprehensible tongues, in particular, are
preferred."[6](jms28.htm#an_7_6.md) Rashi, in the eleventh century, proved
his familiarity with this phenomenon when he wrote: "The sorcerer
whispers his charms, and doesn't understand what they are or what they
mean, but . . . the desired effect is produced only by such
incantations."[7](jms28.htm#an_7_7.md) The repertoire of the Cherokee
medicine man comprises mostly archaic expressions that have conveyed no
meaning for centuries; many aborigines in India, as do Tibetan and
Chinese Buddhists, regard the ancient Sanskrit prayers, which are wholly
unintelligible to them, as much more potent than their own. The
"abracadabra"[7a](jms28.htm#an_7_7a.md) of the modern stage magician
reflects a phenomenon familiar to us all.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

This same process occurred in Jewish magic, and the incantations of the
Middle Ages are replete with startlingly outlandish words that look and
sound as though they had been filched from the vocabulary of a
stuttering visitor from some distant planet. "But magic is in its
purpose a scientific exercise, and we must suppose that in general
something intelligible was once expressed by the now unintelligible
term. Much of the later nonsense was the survival of phrases of the lost
tongue in which the charms had their rise." Sometimes, underneath the
accretions and mutilations of centuries, the original Latin or Greek
word may peer dimly forth; sometimes by dint of a vast erudition and a
vaster ingenuity, the scholar can chisel off a letter here and there,
hammer on new ones, and with an inflection all his own, announce to a
breathless world the etymology of such a term. To tell the truth, the
game is a hazardous one, for scholars rarely agree, and the result is
hardly worth the labor—except to a scholar. These words are important to
the magician just because they are what they are and as they are.
Restore their original form, so that the meaning is plain, and even the
boldest magician would be ashamed to conjure with them.

In Jewish magic the natural infiltration of strange words and names was
furthered by a significant element in the mystical tradition. The
Pythagorean concept of the creative power of numbers and letters was
known in *Tannaitic* times; the famous *Amora* Rab (about 200 C.E.) said
of Bezalel that "he knew how to combine the letters by which heaven and
earth were created."[8](jms28.htm#an_7_8.md) The Geonic mystic lore made
much of this doctrine, and in the *Sefer Yeẓirah* it was elevated into
one of the pillars of the *Kabbalah*. It was especially popular in the
German *Kabbalah* of the thirteenth century which above all insisted
upon the mysterious powers inherent in the letters of the Hebrew
alphabet and developed a fine art of combining and recombining these
letters to evoke from them their highest potency. Itself the source of
many new magical words and names, this exercise made it all the easier
for foreign words to find a place in the magical vocabulary.

The distinction between the word and the name, however, is academic so
far as Jewish magic was concerned. Among most peoples it is real
enough—the name belongs to some supernatural personage, the word is
significant in and for itself. If a process of assimilation occurs at
all, it is the name that is swallowed up by the word. Jewish magic was
too sophisticated (I think we may consider

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

this a mark of sophistication, for belief in the efficacy of a word *per
se* seems to be the more primitive and naïve attitude) to accord any
weight to words—*all had become names* by the Middle Ages, and earlier.
Behind each word—though in our wisdom we may be able to discern its
humble origin—a celestial power was posited. Sometimes the apotheosis of
the word achieved the height of extravagance, as we shall have occasion
to see later; *Hocus Pocus*, for example, was a Prince on high—or two
Princes, to be exact. The literature of Jewish magic was predominantly
an anthology of magical names. In practice the point was of no
importance, word or name, the magician's taste was catholic; in theory
Jewish magic insisted on excluding the word as such from its purview.

The invocation of these names was the commonest feature of medieval
Jewish magic. Incantations most often consisted of a name, or a series
of names, with or without an accompanying action. An element of danger
was recognized in the indiscriminate handling of such powerful
forces—like charges of dynamite, they could destroy the unwary magician.
"Wherever God's name is uttered improperly there death stalks." The
practitioner was repeatedly warned to prepare himself conscientiously
for his rites: to purify himself in body and soul with ritual
cleansings, by abstention from women and from unclean things, by
following a restricted diet, and even fasting, over a period of days.
"If a man who is about to utter holy names does not properly sanctify
himself beforehand, not only will he fail in his efforts, but he must
expect to suffer for his presumption." "Names may be taught only to
pious scholars and sages, who will not misuse them." One must not even
dare utter holy names aloud; it sufficed to "meditate on them in one's
heart."[9](jms28.htm#an_7_9.md) But fear of the names, however marked, did
not prevent their frequent use, as our literature amply demonstrates.

The powers that were ascribed to the names were limitless. Nothing in
nature or in man's fancy lay beyond their reach. To select only a few of
the feats attributed to them: Judah the Pious was said to have caused a
window to close about the neck of a malefactor, imprisoning him in a
magic vise; the same Judah imparted all his mystical learning to a pupil
by having him lick up certain names that the teacher had outlined in the
sand; names were used to kill and to resurrect; and most wonderful of
all, by means of a name "the heart of man may be turned to fear the
Lord, so that even the most wicked may become
righteous"![10](jms28.htm#an_7_10.md)

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

#### THE GOLEM

The greatest feat to which the magician aspired was that of creation.
Discussing this subject in the pages of the Talmud, R. Papa observed
that the creative power of magic covered only gross and massive objects
and creatures, such as the camel, but not fine and delicate things, and
R. Eliezer maintained that the demons, to whom the magician owes this
power, can create nothing smaller than a barley-corn. This was the
standard limitation imposed on sorcerers by medieval writers, though, as
the *Gemara* explained: "The demons cannot actually create even large
beings, but merely assemble already created but unused primeval
matter."[11](jms28.htm#an_7_11.md) Thus the ultimate act of genesis was
reserved for God alone. It was nowhere suggested that human life could
be created by ordinary magical means.

But the Talmud recognized also a second method of creation, which
required the application of the "Laws of Creation," probably an oral
collection of mystical traditions relating to the original creation of
the universe. The kind of magic comprised in these "Laws of Creation"
was the only one that was "permitted *ab initio*." By means of it, "if
the righteous so desired they could create a universe. Raba created a
man and sent him to R. Zeira, who conversed with him but he could not
answer; so he exclaimed, 'You are created by magic, return to your
dust!' Rabbis Ḥanina and Oshaya used to sit every Friday and occupy
themselves with the Book \[read: Laws\] of Creation and create a
three-year-old calf which they ate." For a description of this method we
must rely on the tradition preserved by the commentators; Rashi wrote,
"They used to combine the letters of the Name by which the universe was
created; this is not to be considered forbidden magic, for the works of
God were brought into being through His holy Name." The Talmudic *Laws
of Creation* (unrelated to the later mystical *Book of Creation*)
appear, then, to have been an exposition of the familiar name-magic, the
foremost constituent of medieval Jewish practice, but in consonance with
the difficulty and the prodigiousness of its object, a very exalted and
esoteric department. Medieval Jews, like their Christian contemporaries,
were avid of the power to create human life, and believed implicitly in
man's ability to do so. William of Auvergne (thirteenth century) wrote,
"Men have tried to produce, and thought that they succeeded in producing
human life in other ways than by

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the usual generative process," but the methods pursued by non-Jews were
less subtle than the one proposed by the Talmud. For example, a
fourteenth-century Christian writer cited the Arab Rasis (tenth century)
on generating a human being by putting an unnamed substance in a vase
filled with horse manure, for three days.[12](jms28.htm#an_7_12.md)

The thirteenth-century German *Ḥasidim* (Pietists and Mystics) were
especially intrigued by this problem. From them comes the use of the
word *golem* (literally, shapeless or lifeless matter) to designate a
homunculus created by the magical invocation of names, and the entire
cycle of *golem* legends may be traced back to their interest. The
earliest individual about whom such a fable was woven appears to have
been R. Samuel, father of Judah the Pious, who was said to have
constructed such a homunculus which accompanied him on his travels and
served him, but which could not speak. Joseph Delmedigo informs us, in
1625, that "many legends of this sort are current, particularly in
Germany," and we may well believe him. Among the better-known of these
legends is the one connected with the name of Elijah of Chelm (middle
sixteenth century) which developed during the seventeenth century. He
was reputed to have created a *golem* from clay by means of the *Sefer
Yeẓirah*, inscribing the name of God upon its forehead, and thus giving
it life, but withholding the power of speech. When the creature attained
giant size and strength, the Rabbi, appalled by its destructive
potentialities, tore the life-giving name from its forehead and it
crumbled into dust. These legends of the *golem* were transferred, not
before the eighteenth century, to R. Judah Löw b. Bezalel, without any
historical basis. The remains of the Frankenstein monster which he is
supposed to have brought into being arc said still to be among the
debris in the attic of Prague's *Altneuschule*.[13](jms28.htm#an_7_13.md)

At least one mystic, the greatest of them all in Germany, Eleazar of
Worms, had the daring to record the formula, which occurs again later in
several versions. The formidable nature of the project is apparent from
the merest glance at the twenty-three folio columns which the very
involved combinations of letters occupy. The image was to be made of
"virgin soil, from a mountainous place where no man has ever dug
before," and the incantation, which comprised "the alphabets of the 221
gates," must be recited over every single organ individually. A further
detail, often noted, was the incision upon the forehead of the name of
God, or of the word *emet* ("truth"). The destruction of this creature
was effected by removing

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

that name, by erasing the initial letter of *emet*, leaving *met*
("dead"), or by reversing the creative combinations, for, as R. Jacob b.
Shalom, who came to Barcelona from Germany in 1325, remarked, the law of
destruction is nothing more than a reversal of the law of
creation.[14](jms28.htm#an_7_14.md)

Yet, while not doubting its possibility, medieval Jews were in general
skeptical of their own ability to imbue dead matter with life, and
modestly confessed that manipulation of names of such a high order was
beyond them. A thirteenth-century writer scornfully castigated those who
proposed to duplicate the feat of Ḥanina and Oshaya with the taunt that
"they themselves are dumb calves." In 1615 Zalman Ẓevi of Aufenhausen
published his reply (*Jüdischer Theriak*) to the animadversions of the
apostate Samuel Friedrich Brenz (in his book Schlangenbalg) against the
Jews on this score. Zalman Ẓevi wrote wittily, "The renegade said that
there are those among the Jews who take a lump of clay, fashion it into
the figure of a man, and whisper incantations and spells, whereupon the
figure lives and moves. In the reply which I wrote for the Christians I
made the turncoat look ridiculous, for I said there that he himself must
be fashioned from just such kneaded lumps of clay and loam, without any
sense or intelligence, and that his father must have been just such a
wonder worker, for as he writes, we call such an image a homer *golem*
\[an unshaped, raw mass of material\], which may be rendered 'a
monstrous ass' \[a really good pun\], which I say is a perfect
description of him. I myself have never seen such a performance, but
some of the Talmudic sages possessed the power to do this, by means of
the *Book of Creation*. . . . We German Jews have lost this mystical
tradition, but in Palestine there are still to be found some men who can
perform great wonders through the *Kabbalah*. Our fools \[another pun on
the word *golem*\] are not created out of clay, but come from their
mothers’ wombs."[15](jms28.htm#an_7_15.md) His heavy sarcasm, though
prompted by apologetic motives, expressed the general Jewish attitude on
the subject—it can be done, but no longer by us.

#### THE EVOLUTION OF NAME-MAGIC

"The invocation of angelic names in Jewish magic may be regarded as in
part the parallel to the pagan invocation of many deities, and in part
as invocation of the infinite (personified) phases

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

and energies of the one God. Both Jewish and pagan magic agreed in
requiring the accumulation of as many names of the deity or demon as
possible, for fear lest no one name exhaust the potentiality of the
spiritual being conjured." Here we have a natural development in magic
fostered by religious belief and by logical necessity. But it is
possible to trace with some degree of certainty various extraneous
influences which also contributed to such a development within Judaism.

The culture of ancient Israel reflected preponderantly the influence of
the two civilizations that dominated the ancient world:
Babylonia-Assyria and Egypt. In both the invocation of names of gods,
and the multiplication of these names to ensure greater magical efficacy
was well known and widely practiced. In the multiplicity of the gods of
these lands (in Egypt "there were gods for every month, every day of the
month, and every hour of the day"), and in such a phenomenon as the
fifty names of Marduk, we must seek the source of the ever-expanding
Jewish angelology and the aggregation of divine epithets to be found
already in the Old Testament.

The use of barbarous syllables and words, however, was rare in
Babylonian magic, and its entrance into the Jewish magical science must
be traced to Egypt. "In Egyptian magic, even if the exorcisers did not
understand the language from which the Name was borrowed, they
considered it necessary to retain it in its primitive form, as another
word would not have the same virtue. The author of the treatise on the
Egyptian mysteries attributed to Jamblichus maintains that the barbarous
names taken from the dialects of Egypt and Assyria have a mysterious and
ineffable virtue on account of the great antiquity of these languages.
The use of such unintelligible words can be traced in Egypt to a very
great antiquity." Hellenistic magic, the lineal descendant of the
sorcery of ancient Egypt, displayed this phenomenon prominently, and
thence it was reflected to Jewish sorcery. This accounts for the
comparatively late emergence of such word-magic in Judaism. It is the
Talmud which first "illustrates the use of these *barbarica
onomata*."[16](jms28.htm#an_7_16.md)

We have then, a fusion of these various streams at about the beginning
of our era, the ancient Babylonian and Egyptian coming together in early
Talmudic times, with the accumulated deposits washed down from their
passage through Hellenism and the Jewish past. This is reflected not
within Judaism alone, but in the more or

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

less common culture of the entire Eastern Mediterranean basin.
Gnosticism, the Greek magical papyri, early Christian mysticism, all
display a striking efflorescence of this eclectic magic at the same
time: a vast expansion of mystic nomenclature, and the prominence of
bizarre terms. Origen believed that there is power in the words
themselves, "as is to be seen from the fact that when translated into
another language they lose their operative
force."[17](jms28.htm#an_7_17.md)

The magic of the Talmud depended largely upon the potency inherent in
the form of the incantation, that is, in the word, and upon the magical
action, for its most striking effects, and in consequence we find the
barbaric word coming to occupy an important place. The invocation of
names,[18](jms28.htm#an_7_18.md) and in particular of angelic names, came
distinctly and prominently to the fore only in the post-Talmudic period.
The Aramaic texts published by Montgomery and others represent an
intermediary stage in the process; while incomparably richer than in the
Talmudic literature, the angelic nomenclature of these inscriptions was
not yet so elaborate as we find it in later Geonic and medieval works.
By the eleventh century the practice of invoking names had become so
widespread that the good people of Kairowan (North Africa) felt impelled
to write to Hai Gaon, head of the academy at Pumbedita, Babylonia, to
ask his opinion on the momentous question, "whether it is true that
there are countless names by means of which the adept can perform
miraculous deeds, such as making himself invisible to highwaymen, or
taking them captive?" His reply proved unsatisfactory, and again they
wrote, telling him they had heard from Palestinian and Italian Jews,
"learned and trustworthy men, that they had themselves seen magicians
write names upon reeds and olive-leaves, which they cast before robbers
and thus prevented their passage, or, having written such names upon new
sherds, threw them into a raging sea and mollified it, or threw them
before a man to bring about his sudden death." This time Hai Gaon
replied at length; the upshot of his responsum was that the natural
order of the universe cannot be altered by any such means. "A fool
believes everything!" he warned his interrogators. But his skepticism
did not win many converts. He himself mentioned a series of works in his
letter, which marked the highest development of this doctrine during the
Geonic period, and proved the futility of his strictures against it. One
of these works, the *Hechalot*, devotes considerable space to expounding
these names, while another, *The Sword of Moses*, discovered and
published by

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gaster, consists
almost entirely of mystical and barbarous names and prescriptions for
their application. The Geonic period shows clearly, also, signs of that
eclecticism which characterized Hellenistic sorcery; Montgomery remarks
of his early post-Talmudic incantations that "what appears like a good
Jewish text at times admits a pagan deity into its celestial
hierarchy—somewhat as the medieval Church came to canonize the
Buddha."[19](jms28.htm#an_7_19.md)

This was the background of thirteenth-century Jewish name-magic, which
improved upon its antecedents by multiplying the number of names, both
of God and of the angels, available to the enterprising sorcerer, and
succeeded in introducing into Judaism a host of pagan and Christian
deities and terms, often in most confused and unrecognizable forms, and
therefore all the more serviceable to the magician. Medieval
Christendom, under the influence of the same Gnostic and Hellenistic
tendencies, was equally well acquainted with the virtues and effects of
name-invocation. The Hebrew names of God and of the angels, employed in
the Greek papyri, proved especially popular, undoubtedly because of
their strangeness. "Then there was the Notory Art," wrote Lea,
describing the types of magic that came under the ban of the
Inquisition, "communicated by God to Solomon, and transmitted through
Apollonius of Tyana, which taught the power of the Names and Words of
God, and operated through prayers and formulas consisting of unknown
polysyllables, by which all knowledge, memory, eloquence, and virtue can
be obtained in the space of a month . . . which Roger Bacon pronounces
to be one of the figments of the magicians, but Thomas Aquinas and
Ciruelo prove that it operates solely through the devil." During the
early years of the Carlovingian dynasty the Church succeeded in
suppressing a Bishop Adalbert "who taught the invocation of the angels
Uriel, Raguel, Tubuel, Inias, Tubuas, Sabaoc, and Simiel." By the
twelfth century manuscript works were in circulation in Northern Europe
which "abound in characters and in incantations which consist either of
seemingly meaningless vowels or of Biblical phrases and allusions," and
in 1323 a monk was seized in Paris for possessing such a book. Despite
the hostility of the Church the so-called Notory Art grew steadily in
popularity during the later Middle Ages. It never achieved, however, the
independent exuberance and creativeness of its Jewish counterpart,
though it came in time to reflect it as a result of the introduction of
the *Kabbalah* into Christian circles.[20](jms28.htm#an_7_20.md)

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

#### THE NAMES OF GOD

Of all the names employed in magic, those associated directly with the
person of the deity were accorded first place in the hierarchy of
magical terms. Instinct with the very essence of omnipotence, they were
surrounded from early times with an aura of superlative sanctity and
awe. Already before the beginning of our era the Tetragrammaton had
become the "Ineffable Name," too sacred for expression, uttered only
once a year by the High Priest; a substitute took its place in popular
usage.[21](jms28.htm#an_7_21.md) During Talmudic times the number of
"Ineffable" names grew; we hear of 12- and 42- and 72-letter names,
which might be taught only to a select company of
ultra-worthies.[22](jms28.htm#an_7_22.md) Succeeding centuries witnessed
the discovery of names of 8, 10, 14, 16, 18, 21, 22, 32, and 60 letters
or syllables,[23](jms28.htm#an_7_23.md) hedged around with a vast,
well-nigh impenetrable mystic rigmarole which purported to unfold the
esoteric significance and power of these names, all of which were
supposed to derive, by a more or less devious route, from the original
4-letter name.[24](jms28.htm#an_7_24.md)

Important as this secret lore was to the mystic, the pragmatic interest
of the magician focused his attention upon the names themselves; though
the Kabbalist insisted that a thorough grounding in theory was a
prerequisite to the utilization of these names,[25](jms28.htm#an_7_25.md)
the magician was prepared to take the names and leave the theory to the
scholars. For he knew that "the name of God creates and destroys
worlds,"[26](jms28.htm#an_7_26.md) and his preoccupation was to acquire
knowledge of *all* the names, and to set them to work for wholly
practical, if more human, ends. Nor was he deterred by bitter diatribes
against "those ignorant and impious ones" who dabble in *Kabbalah* with
no firm comprehension of its deeper significance.

There was another category of names of God in use at an early time—the
names and the attributes of God which appear in the Bible. Their virtues
were known during the Talmudic period to Jew and Gentile, and we find
them employed in Jewish, Gnostic and Hellenistic incantations; in the
Middle Ages they remained favorites of Jewish and Christian adepts in
the mystic lore. The list of ten such names drawn up by Isidore of
Seville (seventh century), which was in general agreement with Jewish
tradition, was frequently copied and commented on by later Christian
writers; despite the hazards of transliteration and transmission they
remain recognizable: El, Eloe, Sabbaoth, Zelioz or Ramathel, Eyel,
Adonay, Ya,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tetragrammaton,
Saday, and Eloym.[27](jms28.htm#an_7_27.md) Another name in common usage
was the *Ehyeh Asher Ehyeh* ("I Am That I Am") which was revealed to
Moses at the burning bush. These appellations were often employed in the
charms, but they did not rank so high in mystical potency as the others.

First among the names, both in time and in occult power, was the
four-lettered <span class="smallcaps">yhvh</span>, the original name of
God. Its powers were ascribed also to a wide range of variations upon
it, from the particles <span class="smallcaps">yah</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">yahu</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">hu</span>,[28](jms28.htm#an_7_28.md) etc., to the twelve
forms which it could assume by the transposition of its letters: <span
class="smallcaps">yhhv</span>, <span class="smallcaps">yvhh</span>,
<span class="smallcaps">hvhy</span>, etc. The particle <span
class="smallcaps">yah</span> in particular occurs constantly in the
magical texts. The mystics went to great pains to prove that these
surrogates for the Tetragrammaton were its exact equivalents in every
respect, though their evidence is mainly of a formal nature. As we have
seen, even the term Tetragrammaton assumed the power of the name itself.
Not satisfied with the possibilities thus provided, the vowel points,
too, were altered and transposed in order to create new variations of
the Great Name, and such forms as <span
class="smallcaps">yahavaha</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">yehavha</span>, <span class="smallcaps">yahvah</span>,
<span class="smallcaps">yeheveh</span>, etc., were added to the
magician's portfolio. This practice was adopted in connection with all
the names, for, as it is explained, "The consonants are the 'body' of
the name, the vowels its 'garments,' and the body takes the form of the
garments which clothe it . . . therefore the vowel is really the more
important element, and the vocalization, which marks the transition from
potentiality to actuality, determines the specific virtues of the holy
names," i.e., their powers and even the times when they are especially
potent.[29](jms28.htm#an_7_29.md) The uncertainty that prevailed concerning
the vocalization of these names, and the varying traditions concerning
their pronunciation, made for a certain freedom in their use, and opened
the way to an expansion of the possibilities afforded by any one name.
But the powers of all the variations derived directly from the original
name which constituted their base.

Of the multi-lettered names I shall discuss here only those of 22, 42,
and 72 elements, which are the only ones that possess any constancy of
form and content in our literature.[30](jms28.htm#an_7_30.md) The others
were the product of individual ingenuity, and made no lasting impression
upon the practice of Jewish magic. All men felt free, granted the
requisite skill and training, to extend the traditional magical
nomenclature for private use by the application of the approved
methods.[31](jms28.htm#an_7_31.md) But these three names (in addition to
the Tetragrammaton) were

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

the foundation-stones of the magical structure; no self-respecting
magician could afford to disregard them.

The name of 12 letters, mentioned in the Talmud, was a dead-letter in
post-Talmudic times. It was unknown to the mystics, and although a
tradition appears to have persisted relating it to the Priestly
Benediction (Nu. 6:24-26), and some efforts were made to reconstruct
it,[32](jms28.htm#an_7_32.md) it played no part in Jewish magic. Its place,
however, was taken by two new names, of 14 and 22 letters, the first of
which was comparatively little used. It consisted of the words ‏‎, from
the *Shema‘*, and by means of *Temurah* (described in Appendix I), it
appeared as ‏‎. Though recognized as a legitimate name of
God,[33](jms28.htm#an_7_33.md) and occasionally employed in incantations
and amulets, its primary use was as an inscription on the back of the
*mezuzah*.

The name of 22, however, is another matter, more interesting and
puzzling—and much more important for the magician. Its debut was made in
*Sefer Raziel*,[34](jms28.htm#an_7_34.md) which, while largely ascribed to
Eleazar of Worms, drew extensively upon Geonic mystic sources. It is
therefore likely that the name is older than the book which introduced
it to a larger Jewish public. More than this we cannot say concerning
its age. It achieved a wide popularity very rapidly, was employed in
many invocations and charms as an especially potent name, and in the
seventeenth century it was introduced into the ritual of the synagogue,
in a prayer which was attached to the reading of the Priestly
Benediction.

The respect with which it was regarded was undoubtedly merited by its
bizarre composition:

‏אנקתם פסתמ פספסים דיונסים‎,

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Anaktam Pastam
Paspasim Dionsim* (the vocalization is doubtful, but it was probably
read something like this) and by the fact that the Hebrew alphabet,
itself invested with mysterious potencies, likewise contains 22 letters.
*Sefer Raziel* offers no interpretation of this name. It bears no
discernible relation to anything in the Hebrew or Aramaic tongues.
Despite the hazardousness of seeking to trace such terms back to foreign
origins, efforts along this line have been made, with the usual success
and unanimity. By dint of emendations and distortions such classical
deities as the Greek Anaxos and the Zoroastrian Anahita, Hephaestos,
Pistus, Poseidon, Priapus, and Dionysos have been variously discerned
hidden behind

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

these disguises.[3](jms28.htm#an_7_3.md)" The Greek gods masquerading in
pious Jewish garb!

These scholars have gone too far afield in their zeal to discover the
progenitors of this strange name. Its source may be sooner sought right
at home, in Jewish tradition, which offers a clew that they have
overlooked. Some scholars[36](jms28.htm#an_7_36.md) have, indeed, derived
this name from Jewish origins, pointing in particular to the acrostic of
the initial letters of certain prayers in the liturgy, which spell it
out. These prayers, however, were composed *post eventum* and display
the inventiveness of late writers rather than the original source of the
name. The seventeenth-century compiler of a Kabbalistic prayer-book,
Nathan Hanover, who first introduced this name into the liturgy, was the
author of a series of such acrostic prayers (based not only on the
22-letter name, but also on those of 42 and 72 letters), and also
engaged upon a scholarly venture of his own in breaking down these terms
into Hebrew words which he more or less obscurely related to Biblical
passages. But these exercises are even less rewarding than those of the
classicists; a cursory inspection shears them of any degree of
plausibility.

Nathan Hanover, however, in inserting this name into the prayers in
conjunction with the Priestly Benediction showed himself responsive to
the most persistent tradition relating to it. The Blessing had long
occupied an important place in mystical speculation, primarily because
it was believed that during the existence of the temple the priests,
while uttering it, had "swallowed" a secret divine name. The first
appearance of the 22-letter name was made in association with that
Benediction; two of the four instances of its occurrence in *Sefer
Raziel* place them both together. Their relationship is rendered much
more intimate by illuminating comments in two works which are especially
close to the mystical tradition. One[37](jms28.htm#an_7_37.md) informs us
that "the name of 22, which is Anaktam, etc., is derived from five words
which comprise 22 letters, namely, ‏יאר יהוה יברכך יהוה וישמרך‎ 1 "; and
the other is equally specific: "The name of 22 comes from the Priestly
Blessing, according to the Kabbalistic tradition, by means of many
'alphabets.'" Knowing as we do the infinite possibilities opened up by
the methods of transposition and substitution of letters in transforming
divine names, and the popularity of such methods in Jewish mysticism,
there is no reason to doubt the veracity of these writers. Not only do
the total number of letters in the five words of the Blessing, and in
the name, correspond,

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

but there is an exact correspondence between the words and the component
parts of the name. Both *Sefer Raziel* and Nathan of Hanover insist on
reading the last term of the name as two words. We have then this
parallel:

‏יברכך יהוי וישמרך יאר יהוה‎  
‏אנקתם פסתס פספסים דיו נסיס‎.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The famous Safed
Kabbalist, Moses Cordovero (sixteenth century), has indeed left us a
table of alphabetical permutations explaining in detail the derivation
of this name from the Benediction.[38](jms28.htm#an_7_38.md)

The name of 42 letters was known to Hai Gaon, who did not hesitate to
indicate clearly just what it was, though he did not give it in full. He
wrote, "Although the consonants of this name are well known, its proper
vocalization is not rendered by tradition. Some pronounce its first part
*Abgitaẓ*, and others *Abigtaẓ*, and the last part is sometimes read
*Shakvaẓit*, and sometimes *Shekuẓit*, but there is no definite
proof."[39](jms28.htm#an_7_39.md) His doubt concerning its proper reading
is, to my mind, an indication of its antiquity; in a language such as
Hebrew, written without vowel signs, the consonants are the constant
element, while the vowels would tend to shift and change in the course
of centuries of transmission, especially when, as in this case, the
secrecy that surrounded the process and its oral nature tended to
perpetuate individual variations. If it had been a comparatively recent
creation such confusion would not yet have arisen, for the prime
consideration in handing on such terms was to safeguard their form and
pronunciation, and thus to conserve their potency. The medieval texts
which give this name in full omit the vowel signs, and we can no longer
reconstruct it as spoken; the variations in vocalization, which
continued to be handed down by word of mouth, must have increased as
time went on, so that in fact the name was employed in many versions.
Limiting ourselves, then, to the consonants, the name of 42 was composed
as follows:

‏אדגיתץ קרעשטן נגדיכש בטרצתג חקדטנע יגלפזק שקוצית‎

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Great virtues were
attributed not only to the name in full, but also to its constituent
parts, by the application of the allegorical or mystical rules of
interpretation. For example, the fifth term "equals, by *Gematria*, the
angel *Gzrel* \[both add up to 241\]; by uttering the name one invokes
this angel to countermand any evil decree \[*gezerah*\]

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

that has been issued against one in heaven"; the second, which may be
read as two Hebrew words signifying "rend Satan," "is good for one who
has gone mad or has been attacked by an evil spirit or demon; this name
is to be written upon an amulet and hung around the neck of the victim,
who will be cured by it." The parts of the name assumed the dignity and
power of names in their own right. Some went even further and employed
each letter as the basis of a separate name so that this one name became
forty-two.[40](jms28.htm#an_7_40.md)

It has been generally assumed that this name was derived from the
acrostic of a prayer beginning *Ana Bekoaḥ*, ascribed to a rabbi of the
second century, Neḥunya ben HaKana.[41](jms28.htm#an_7_41.md) While it is
highly improbable that this prayer was the source of the name, or that
it dates back to the second century, this theory constitutes a
recognition of the antiquity of the name. It no doubt represented the
same sort of enterprise as was exemplified by Nathan of Hanover's
efforts with the 22-letter name. The medieval mystics, however,
possessed a tradition according to which this name is derived from the
first forty-two letters in the Bible. This statement occurs several
times and was accepted even by the famous Talmudist of the twelfth
century, Rabbenu Jacob Tam.[42](jms28.htm#an_7_42.md) There is no reason to
doubt the truth of this report.

The "holy and awesome" name of 72—this time it is not letters, but
syllables or triads—is the most powerful
(*Raziel*[43](jms28.htm#an_7_43.md) goes so far as to suggest that no magic
can be effectively consummated without its aid) and at the same time the
least mysterious of these artificially created names. Its composition
was well-known in Geonic times, though the pronunciation of its elements
was in doubt, and the renowned exegete, Rashi, felt no hesitation in
disclosing its make-up.[44](jms28.htm#an_7_44.md) The method adopted to
construct this name was simplicity itself; perhaps the theory was that
after a series of thoroughly mystifying terms, the analytical powers of
the student would be too numb to penetrate this one. At any rate it is
based on the three verses of Exodus, 14:19-21, each of which contains 72
letters, and was made up by joining the first letter of verse 19, the
last letter of 20, and the first of 21, to form its first triad; the
second letter of 19, the penultimate of 20, and the second of 21, to
make the second triad, and so on until we have 72 three-letter terms
comprising all the letters of these verses.

At first glance one might be tempted to pooh-pooh so obvious a
performance, and the power attributed to its product—it seems to

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

lack the most elementary attribute of a wonder-working name—mystery,
strangeness. But we must remember that, leaving aside the mechanics of
its construction, the name as employed was strange enough to satisfy
even the most exacting:

<span id="img_09600"></span> ![](img/09600.jpg)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And, in the end,
belief in the occult forces that resided in these names was the
consequence of a hoary mystical tradition, which, in this case,
encrusted the name so thickly that none but the most skeptical could
have had the temerity to laugh it off. Rashi traced the tradition
concerning this name, and its mystical employment, back to Talmudic
times, and the tradition itself had it that this was the name which
Moses learned at the burning bush and which he utilized to split the Red
Sea before the fleeing children of Israel, and that at a later time the
High Priest uttered it in the temple when he blessed the people.
Granting the effect of such a teaching upon the receptive mind of the
mystic, it is not difficult to understand how it could be believed that
"whoever pronounces this name against a demon, it will vanish; at a
conflagration, it will be quenched; over an invalid, he will be healed;
against impure thoughts, they will be expelled; if it is directed
against an enemy, he will die, and if it is uttered before a ruler, his
favor will be won," and so on and on, realizing all those dreams of
omnipotence that have tantalized men from the beginning of days. "But
whoever pronounces this name while he is in a state of uncleanness and
impurity will surely be struck dead."[45](jms28.htm#an_7_45.md)

The printed text of *Sefer Raziel*, which gives this name of 72 in full,
omits the vowels; a manuscript version of this work which I have
examined, in including the vowels, proves that the same confusion
existed concerning the pronunciation of this name as of the
others.[46](jms28.htm#an_7_46.md) After concluding the text of the name,
the scribe appended a note to the effect that "there is another
tradition of vocalization of the particles of this name, and I studied
it carefully in connection with the text of the Biblical verses, but I
found the one I give the better." A later student of this manuscript did
not agree with him,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

however, and jotted down in the margins many variant vocalizations which
he considered preferable.

The component parts of this name, too, were accorded special powers, and
here also there seems to have been a considerable difference of opinion.
The printed *Sefer Raziel*, for instance, divided the name into ten
parts, nine containing seven triads each, the tenth comprising the last
nine. The first part "has the power to conquer evil and to drive off
evil spirits" and is therefore a prime remedy for serious ailments; the
second is good for acquiring wisdom, and for protection against demons
and the evil eye; the fourth will protect travellers; the fifth sharpens
the mind and makes one a good student; the sixth is good for divination;
the eighth ensures a favorable response to one's prayers, etc. The
manuscript version, on the other hand, broke up the name arbitrarily
into fourteen sections, ranging from three to nine triads, and
distributed individual powers as follows: the first "causes love to
enter one's heart and anger and hatred to depart," the second is "for
enmity," the third is "for intelligence," the fourth can "silence those
who speak evil," the fifth is "to find favor before a king or ruler,"
the seventh is "to make peace between disputants," the tenth "eliminates
distance so that one may be miraculously transferred from one place to
another," the eleventh is "to kill one's enemies," the fourteenth is to
be used "against a demon, or to uproot a man from his city, or for any
difficult enterprise."[47](jms28.htm#an_7_47.md) Evidently this name was so
powerful that any combination of its parts might be utilized to achieve
a given purpose; the magicians apparently adjusted these combinations to
suit their ends.

This observation applies to all the magical names of God; though in
particular cases they were prescribed or employed for specific effects,
in general we cannot assign a definite sphere to any of them. The
magicians exercised great freedom of choice, selecting in a given case
the name or names which they believed to possess the greater power, and
determining their use by the specific request or magical act which
accompanied the utterance of the names.

#### ANGEL NAMES

While the names of God in themselves were effective for the prescribed
ends, often it was through specific angels that the given task was
carried out. In employing the great name of 72, says *Sefer
Raziel*,[48](jms28.htm#an_7_48.md) the incantation must run in this wise:
"I command

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

you, Ḥaniel and Ḥasdiel and Ẓadkiel, by this name, to do thus and thus";
in other words, the name of God places within the magician's hands the
power which God Himself exercises over His servitors. To know the names
of the angels who are immediately concerned expedites matters. In fact,
the intermediate powers represented by the angels are most often
sufficient for the magician's purpose.

The angels, of course, are legion, and, in the practice of magic, the
more that are set to work, the merrier. There are "seventy names of
angels which are good for protection against all sorts of dangers" (the
figure seventy occurs often, as for instance, the seventy attributes of
God, the seventy names of Metatron, etc.); a typical incantation opens
with fifty-six angelic names, and contains twenty-one more besides.
Often, names of angels and of God are lumped together in one charm in
grand profusion. An incantation which includes eighty-three angel names
employs also, for good measure, the name <span
class="smallcaps">yhvh</span>, repeated three times unaltered, and again
in eight of its twelve possible transposed forms, and the names of 42,
of 72, and of 22. This prodigality of names to effect a single end owns
a hoary precedent in the Geonic and Hellenistic magical literatures. At
times, the magician's confidence was centered upon a single name, but
one name alone seemed hardly potent enough, so he repeated that name:
reciting "Uriel" 242 times is guaranteed to improve the memory!—that
word at least will probably never after be forgotten. Most often,
however, the magician's patience was not so long, and he contented
himself with a mere mouthful of names, a good-sized one, that
is.[49](jms28.htm#an_7_49.md)

The names that appear most frequently are those of the three archangels,
Michael, Gabriel and Raphael, often mentioned in Talmudic literature.
They were called upon to perform every sort of function imaginable,
usually in conjunction with lesser assistants. An old tradition, dating
back at least to Geonic times, had it that there are seven archangels,
each of whom is associated with a planet: those already mentioned, and
Aniel, Kafẓiel, Ẓadkiel, Samael (occasionally Ḥasdiel and Barkiel are
substituted for two of the others) . The archangels are also brought
into connection with the signs of the Zodiac.[50](jms28.htm#an_7_50.md)

These angels were inherited, by and large, from preceding centuries. A
much larger group was called into being to perform specific functions.
Their names were usually concocted of a root indicating the function,
and a theophorous suffix, usually "el." So we

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

meet Shamriel, a guardian angel; Mefatḥiel, the "opener" of doors (the
thieves’ favorite); Ḥasdiel, Ḥaniel, Raḥmiel, angels of "benevolence,"
"grace" and "mercy"; Zachriel, who rules over "memory"; Morael, the
angel of "awe" or "fear" who rules the month of Elul, preceding the New
Year and the Day of Atonement; Paḥadron, the angel of "terror" who
governs the month Tishri, in which these holidays fall; Naḥaliel, who
presides over "streams," etc. Frequently the root term seems to have
been chosen at random, having no apparent relation to the function of
the angel as given, though it is likely that at the time of the creation
of such names the word employed was intended to indicate the angelic
character. Such are some of the names of angels assigned to the months:
Ẓafniel, Amriel, Pniel, Bezachriel, Romiel, Barkiel, etc. Again we have
angelic names composed in this manner whose first parts are hardly
distinguishable as Hebrew roots at all: Daghiel, Duhael, Puel, Simusiel.
The possibilities of this method were limited only by the resources of
the Hebrew language, and if they were not exhausted it was only because
so many other means of creating names were open to the mystic.

The products of these methods (*Gematria*, *Notarikon*, and *Temurah*)
are only rarely recognizable as such. Sometimes, as with a name like
*Ẓmrchd*, which is made up of the final letters of the first five verses
of Genesis, we may hear the machinery creaking; usually one cannot tell
whether they have been "legitimately" arrived at, or whether they are
nothing more than random jumbles of letters which serve the purpose
equally well. We must take them "as is," no questions asked; the attempt
to discover some meaning in them, interesting as it may prove, is
essentially beside the point—these terms possessed significance because
they were "names" and not because they "meant something." Schwab's work,
*Vocabulaire de l’Angélologie*, which dissects some thousands, often
fails to be convincing when it attacks such bizarre names, and in the
end adds little to our understanding of the psychology of magic by its
rationalistic approach. What sense, for instance, can possibly be made
of the names whose bearers are assigned by *Sefer Raziel* to supervise
the months: *Arinaor*, *T‘azbun*, *Lrbg*, *Arbgdor*, *Tḥrgar*,
*Tshndrnis?* The ease with which they become something else a few pages
further on shows that they cannot have meant much, if anything, to the
compiler of that work. And then, which version shall we accept for
analysis, the first, or the second: *Didnaor*, *T‘achnu*, *Ylrng*,
*Antgnod*,

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Tuḥrgr?* The
effort to decipher them is pointless. "Names" are "names," and that is
their sole explanation, so far as their rôle in magic is concerned. And
since each of these month-angels is accompanied by his special retinue
of 36, or 43, or 65 angels, as the case may be (*Sefer Raziel* is not
chary with the figures), and there are countless angels presiding over
every feature of our natural universe, and there are seven heavens, each
with its "chief" and his "host," all bearing magical names, where is the
end of such an etymological enterprise?[51](jms28.htm#an_7_51.md)

#### BORROWED NAMES

Some of the names in use clearly betray a non-Jewish origin, but in
their Hebraized form they were unrecognizable to the medieval Jews who
were altogether unacquainted with the mythology and the languages of the
Græco-Roman and Christian worlds from which they came. In the opinion of
one scholar, "It is possible to construct, out of the names that appear
in *Sefer Raziel* alone—allowing for the processes of reconstruction
that were applied in this field—an entire pantheon of gods of the most
diverse peoples." As we have seen, the names of various Greek gods have
been suggested as the sources of the 22-letter name. While this
interpretation appears doubtful, other names are clearly identifiable.
Aphrodite put in an appearance as one of the angels of the planet Venus,
appropriately enough, and Hermes was one of the guardians of the
sun.[52](jms28.htm#an_7_52.md) Despite the view of Blau that there is not
"a single reliable instance" of the occurrence in Hebrew of the name
Abraxas (the original form was Abrasax), famous in the annals of magic,
it does make its appearance quite unmistakably in Jewish documents in
both forms. Montgomery and Myrhman have discovered it in post-Talmudic
incantation texts, Gaster has found it in the Geonic *Sword of Moses*,
it occurs at least once in Raziel, and I have come across it again in a
sixteenth-century text of an amulet published by
Grunwald.[33](jms28.htm#an_7_33.md)

We have noted the appearance of "Tetragrammaton" as one of the names of
God; it occurred fairly frequently in the Hebrew charms. Similarly,
other Christian forms made their way into Jewish exorcisms unrecognized:
‏אַלואי שבאוטּ‎, a literal transliteration of Eloë Sabaot, masqueraded
as two legitimate names of God alongside the Hebrew originals, though
occasionally a keen-eyed reader had the wit to see through the
deception, and jotted down on the margin of

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

a manuscript the caution, "this should read ‏אלהי צבאות‎." "Alpha" is
another word which assumed godlike proportions in the
charms.[54](jms28.htm#an_7_54.md)

One prescription suggests that when a man feels that he is being
overcome by the powers of evil, they may be dispelled by the utterance
of the name Pipi; again, written on a shelled hard-boiled egg and
consumed, it is warranted to "open the heart" to wisdom and learning.
Pipi—the name itself is intriguing, but even more so is its tortuous
etymological career. Before the beginning of our era Hellenistic Jews
had adopted the custom of substituting a *yod* for the *vav* in the
Tetragrammaton, making it ?yη?yη. "In the older manuscripts of the
Septuagint the Tetragrammaton was retained in Hebrew letters. In Greek
circles these Hebrew letters, *yod he yod he*, were not recognized as
such, but read as the Greek letters, πιπι."[55](jms28.htm#an_7_55.md) Thus
Pipi became a magic name, and is to be found in Greek incantations.
Jewish tradition, having borrowed this name from the Greeks, rendered it
back into Hebrew—the Ineffable Name restored to its original tongue, but
in how altered a form!

Three widely used angel-names, first prescribed by The Alphabet of Ben
Sira[56](jms28.htm#an_7_56.md) as a potent prophylactic against the
depredations of the demon Lilit, and since accepted as a specific, have
aroused much interest and speculation. They are spelled *Snvi*,
*Snsnvi*, *Smnglf* (sometimes *Snmglf*), and were probably read Sanvi,
Sansanvi, Semangelaf. Schwab illustrates the inadequacy of his approach
by describing the first two as onomatopoeic simulations of the
twittering of birds (because these names are often accompanied by crude
bird-like figures in amulets); the third he reads lamely as "poison
découvert" (*sam niglaf*) . Gaster, on the other hand, regards them as
Hebraizations of three names of saints which played a similar rôle in
Slavic legends of the child-snatching witch. The first was originally
Anos, or according to Caster's later revision of his opinion, Syno-doros
or Sisyno-doros; the second, Saint Sisynie; the third, Satanael. To
reach this conclusion the famous folklorist was obliged not only to
emend the Hebrew forms of these names, but also to derive their
originals from several versions of the legend belonging to different
East-European peoples and languages, and from a figure who played a
prime rôle in third-century Manichæism (which Gaster considered to be
the ultimate source of the legend). The Jews, then, are to have drawn
these three names from diverse sources, any one of which could have
provided them with three effective terms,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

combined them for this special use, and so altered them as to require a
feat of the imagination and of scholarship to discern their origins.
Here we have the two extremes of etymological enterprise; the result of
neither can be said to inspire much confidence. Gaster himself was quite
well aware of the ultimate folly of such efforts; "nothing is more
fallacious than to try etymologies of proper names," he wrote in another
connection.

Another illustration of the difficulties encountered in determining the
origins of mystical names is provided by the discussion that has
centered about a well-known charm against forgetfulness, which is
recited at the close of the Sabbath and on other occasions, with
appropriate magical rites. It runs in this wise: "I conjure you, Poteh
(or Purah), prince of forgetting, to remove my stupidity from me and to
throw it onto the hills and the high places, by the holy names, by the
name of Armas, Arimas, Armimimas, Ansis, Yaël, Petaḥel." (Another
version gives these names as: Arimas, Abrimas, Armimas, Asiel, Ansiel,
Ansipiel, Patḥiel, Patḥa.) Certain scholars have distinguished here the
corrupted forms of three names: Patḥiel, the "opener," Ansiel, the
"constrainer," names fashioned along orthodox lines, and a certain
Armimas, who may be Hermes or Ormuzd, according to one view, or Arminius
or Remus, following another. Greek, Zoroastrian, Teuton, or Latin—the
range of possibilities is certainly wide enough! As to Poteh, or Purah,
the dispute is just as lively, the suggestions even more ingenious, and
the results even less convincing. I may add that this incantation was
also recited by a child when it first entered school, with the
additional tenfold repetition of: Negef, Segef, Agaf, names which were
ascribed to the "angels of destruction."[57](jms28.htm#an_7_57.md)

There are instances of entire phrases and sentences from the Latin and
the Greek, transposed into Hebrew and employed as a series of names.
Most often, of course, it is no longer possible to recompose the
original passage, though its origin may be fairly obvious; occasionally
one may reread the words as they were once pronounced. A charm
guaranteed to heal a split tree contains two sets of "names" which
Grunwald has read, quite plausibly, as "patriæ pax corona evocatur Dei"
and "ut arcus offensionum submotus est, ita cave
emovere."[58](jms28.htm#an_7_58.md) Indeed, Güdemann has very ingeniously
and convincingly reconstructed an entire paragraph in Latin out of a
fifteenth-century German-Jewish manuscript. He surmises—and this is the
only possible explanation—that this magical formula, composed by

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christians, was
transposed into Hebrew characters, probably by Italian Jews, and was
then adopted by German Jews, who, not understanding the language, took
it to be a collection of mystical names and so employed it. This
manuscript is particularly rich in such transliterations. One of the
incantations in it, incidentally, contains the names "Akos Pakos," the
earliest literary occurrence of the terms which, with slight
orthographic variations, have become the hallmark of pseudo-magic in a
dozen European tongues—our Hocus Pocus. It is known in European
literatures only since the beginning of the seventeenth century. The
origin of the term is uncertain—it has been claimed as of both Jewish
and Christian derivation—but whatever its origin there is no doubt that
it has been preserved for us by German Jews.[50](jms28.htm#an_7_50.md)

A love charm has it that if three names, which have been read as the
Greek words *ieros laos filos*, are written with ink on one's left hand
"when you see the one you desire he will love
you."[60](jms28.htm#an_7_60.md) And, to cap the story, a "name of
interpretation," employed by a preacher to gain special inspiration for
his homily, is made up of terms which are probably Greek in origin, and
among them may be recognized, of all things, the names of "Maria" and
the "Parakletos," Jesus of Nazareth himself![61](jms28.htm#an_7_61.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. The Bible In Magic](jms10.md)
