[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms06)  [Next](jms08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### 5

### THE SPIRITS OF THE DEAD

THE ties that bind man to his home and his associates are insoluble—even
death cannot part them. Long after the body has departed this life, the
spirit still frequents its ancient haunts, maintaining a shadowy
connection with the world it knew and loved. This is the conception of
death that has prevailed since man first had ideas on the subject, and
it persists to this day more or less overtly. Among Jews it was never
completely ousted by the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. After
all, according to the prevailing polypsychism of the Middle Ages, man is
possessed of several spirits: the soul, or *neshamah*, ascending to its
Maker, leaves behind the *nefesh* and the *ruaḥ*, which are quite
capable of performing the semi-terrestrial functions which tradition
assigned to them. The neshamah departs for heaven as soon as the body is
interred; the *nefesh* wanders forlornly back and forth between its
former home and the grave during the week after burial and then also
departs, but not for good—its longing for the body that formerly housed
it brings it back to the grave many times, until after a year or so it
is completely weaned away; the *ruaḥ* never forsakes its corporeal
shell, even in death, but forever remains with the body. This scheme
often broke down because the three terms were used interchangeably, so
that it is uncertain whether the reference is to the "soul" in heaven,
or the "spirit" on earth, but this much is abundantly clear: a spirit
continues to inhabit the earth long after the body has moldered in the
grave, and comes into frequent contact with the
living.[1](jms26.htm#an_5_1.md)

Countless anecdotes and traditions bear testimony to the belief in the
continuance of some form of spirit life on earth. Medieval Jewish
literature does not lack its share of ghost stories. From them we may
deduce that the spirits foregather nightly by the light of the
moon—according to Eleazar of Worms, the spirit is like a flame, and
"this is why flickering lights are to be seen in a cemetery at
night"—they converse with one another, or pursue their studies,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

very much as they did in this life. Occasionally a spirit council is
called to adjudge disputes between the latest arrivals and older members
of the company. On New Moon and *Hoshanah Rabbah* (the seventh day of
the festival of Tabernacles), and probably on other nights as well, they
congregate in prayer meetings, when they bespeak the well-being of the
living. Some nights they gather in the synagogue, where, clothed in
ghostly prayer-shawls, they conduct their own weird service. Once a man
who fell asleep in a synagogue and was locked in by the sexton awoke to
find himself in the midst of such a spirit congregation; to his
amazement he discerned the forms of two men who were still among the
living. Sure enough, within a few days these two passed away. Just prior
to the attack on the community of Mainz during the First Crusade two men
testified that they had listened in on such a ghostly service; their
experience was interpreted by the congregation as a token of impending
doom. The custom of knocking on the synagogue door before entering in
the morning was probably intended to warn the spirit worshipers that it
was time to leave.

Occasionally there are reports of encounters with less fortunate
spirits—those who had been doomed to expiate worldly sins by various
forms of penance. One such relates that a man who was traveling alone on
a moon-lit night espied a long column of carts, drawn by men, while
others sat in them. When they drew near he questioned them and learned
that they were spirits of the dead, and that this was their punishment;
when the cart-drawers grew tired, they got in and the others took hold
of the shafts. *Sefer Ḥasidim* contains a score of such weird tales. Nor
was it unknown for spirits to put in an appearance among the living
during the daytime. An undertaker in Worms, coming to the synagogue one
morning, recognized on the steps of the building a man whom he had
recently buried. To his astonished queries the ghost replied that he had
been transported to Paradise in reward for his pious life on earth; his
visit home was merely to apprise his friends of his good fortune. The
wreath of leaves that he wore, he explained, was made of herbs from the
Garden of Eden, and was intended "to neutralize the foul odor of this
world." He could afford to be disdainful of the world he had left
behind![2](jms26.htm#an_5_2.md)

A frequent source of spirit intrusion upon the living is to be discerned
in the notion that "the spirits retain their bodily forms," and
apparently they retain too their former ideas of propriety and modesty.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At any rate, they
confront the living, usually in dreams, with complaints about their
mistreatment by living beings, especially when the grave has been
tampered with. More commonly, however, the plaint concerns, of all
things, dress! A girl whose father had been too poor to provide her with
a shroud could not come out into the open to foregather with the other
spirits, and begged that her nakedness be clothed; another spirit, who
had been buried with the sleeve of his shroud torn, said "he was ashamed
before the others, who had whole garments, while his were torn." Visits
of this nature were repeated until the grave was opened and the defect
remedied.'

Similarly, the associations made in life are continued beyond the grave.
The spirit likes to find itself among friends, or at least among others
of its own station and character. The desire of Jacob to be buried with
his ancestors (Gen. 47:30) was explained in this way, and so was the
common injunction not to inter a wicked man among the righteous, nor
even a "confirmed sinner" alongside a "moderate sinner," "for
undoubtedly the righteous derive pleasure from a good neighbor even
after death." Nor are quarrels extinguished by death: "two enemies
should not be buried near one another, for they enjoy no rest together."
Spirits who find themselves in uncongenial company may be counted on to
plague the living in retaliation for this bad turn. In the event that
one enemy precedes the other to the grave, the one left behind is in for
an uncomfortable time, for spirits have long memories. "One should be
very careful," counseled *Sefer Ḥasidim*, "that a dying man have no
ground to distrust him, for the deceased will certainly seek revenge."
It was already the custom in Talmudic times to beg pardon of the dead,
in the presence of ten men at the grave, for any wrong done him, and
this practice persisted throughout the Middle Ages. Better far to
confess and be absolved than to face the wrath of his
spirit.[4](jms26.htm#an_5_4.md)

The Talmud discussed at length the question whether the dead are
conscious of events that transpire among the living, and in raising the
issue indicated that there was a strong positive sentiment on this
point. In the Middle Ages it was no longer an issue. Nothing is hidden
from the spirits, though naturally they are most interested in matters
that affect themselves. When a man decided to make a musical instrument
out of the remainder of some wood that had been used for a coffin, the
spirit of the deceased warned him in a dream to refrain, and when he
persisted caused him to fall seriously ill, until his son smashed the
offending instrument at the grave of

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

the perturbed spirit and left the pieces there; only then was his
father's health restored. The dead are quite aware of everything that is
said here on earth; laudatory or derogatory remarks concerning them are
promptly rewarded or punished. Because of the alertness of the spirits
to human actions, pious deeds performed on their behalf, such as prayer,
charity, ascetic practices, lighting candles, have a double utility
besides their purely ritual significance—they serve to improve the lot
of the soul in the realm to which it has been transported, and they give
"pleasure" to the spirit. Nor do they go unrewarded. The spirit, in its
turn, "prays for the well-being of the living." Even activities not
directly intended for the benefit of the dead, but reflecting credit
upon them, delight their spirits, as when a son "pursues the way of the
*Torah* and the commandments and does what is right and
good."[6](jms26.htm#an_5_6.md)

Obviously the spirits can help as well as harm the living. They have
more or less direct access to the heavenly fount of justice, and by
their intercession can avert an evil decree or produce a beneficial one.
Here apparently it is the "soul" that is operative rather than the more
terrestrial "spirit." Tradition has it that the righteous are granted
one request when they reach heaven, but popular practice accorded them
much more influence than that. In early times, and indeed until this
very day in the Orient, a common method of winning favor in heaven was
to make a pilgrimage to the grave of a saint or a sage, and to transmit
one's request through him. An observant visitor to the tomb of Simon bar
Yoḥai, for instance, at Meron, Palestine, will discern a host of written
entreaties for the saint's aid heaped about his sepulchre. However,
saint worship was never a part of Judaism and in medieval Europe even
this custom fell altogether into desuetude.

None the less the ancient practice of visiting the cemetery to entreat
the good offices of deceased relatives or scholars persisted. According
to Judah the Pious, "one should not visit a grave twice in one day, but
should unburden himself in a single session, and not return until the
morrow." In addition to such individual visits, there grew up the custom
of the entire congregation repairing to the cemetery annually on several
occasions, such as the seven "rain-fasts," and on *Tisha‘ B’ab*, the
anniversary of the destruction of the temple, and on the eves of New
Year and the Day of Atonement, "that the dead may beseech mercy on our
behalf." At least one of the reports displays a liberalism which echoes
the catholicity of the custom, for

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "when there is no
Jewish cemetery at hand," we are informed, "we go to a Christian
cemetery." Many rabbis were disturbed by such goings-on. Unable to halt
so deeply entrenched a usage, they tried at least to refine the spirit
of the act. "One should not concentrate his attention on the dead who
lie there," they wrote, "but should direct his prayer for mercy to God
Himself, because of the merit of the righteous dwellers in the dust."
The implied criticism is ample testimony concerning the popular
interpretation of these rites.[6](jms26.htm#an_5_6.md)

The spirits of the dead can be useful to the living in other ways, too.
The future is an open book to the denizens of the supernatural realm,
and like the demons and the angels, the deceased can by eavesdropping
pick up the latest decisions of the court on high; "they flit through
the universe to hear what has been decreed." Then they report back to
intimates on earth, in dreams or in personal appearances. Sometimes this
is in fulfillment of a compact entered into while still among the
living. But in general the spirit-world is chary of its secrets and can
be induced to reveal them only by magical means. As with demons and
angels, mystical invocations and occult rites are effective in forcing
the dead to obey the magician's will. The art of necromancy is a
specialized function of sorcery.[7](jms26.htm#an_5_7.md)

But the deceased were also inevitably regarded with a sense of dread.
For all their usually beneficent attitude toward the living, they were
still members of the unknown and uncanny spirit world, possessed of
illimitable power—power for ill as well as for good. Witness the spirits
of evil men which are assimilated to the demonic ranks, and become
implacable enemies of humankind! It was best, at any rate, to keep on
their good side, to seek their forgiveness, to obey their commands, to
pray for their repose. Quite a few instances were related of the
punishment visited upon foolhardy people; because of disobedience some
fell ill and even died. One who neglected the precaution of expiating
his sin toward a dead enemy saw him in a dream and heard the rhetorical
question, "Do you imagine that the dead have no power to do harm?"
Before he could gather his wits for a reply the spirit itself supplied
the answer: it seized him by the "sinew of the thigh-vein" and wrenched
it sharply. Nor was it only a dream. Forever after he suffered intense
pain in that spot. Thus it would seem that dream contacts with the dead
are quite real. Therefore one must beware not to accept anything from a
spirit in a dream, or to kiss him; even more one should not kiss a
corpse, or in a paroxysm of grief grasp the hand of the deceased and
wildly pray

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

that one may accompany him to the grave. This would be virtually "to
bring death on oneself."

Sometimes the spirits invite the living to come along with them; to
consent is tantamount to sealing one's death warrant. A person who has
received such a grim invitation must repair to the grave of his would-be
host and, having shed his shoes, must lie down on the mound and cry out
three times, 'By the will of God, and by my own will, I do not intend to
go along with you or with any other deceased. Do not come after me, or
after any of my beloved, you or your emissary, for my desire is to live
in this world and not in the other." In the event that a spirit has
threatened a living man, it is advisable to exorcise the dead in this
manner: "With the consent of the celestial and earthly tribunals I
conjure you in the name of the God of heaven and of earth, and by all
the holy Names, that you desist from pursuing any human, whether man or
woman, adult or child, near or far, and that you do them no harm with
your body or your spirit or your soul. Your body must lie in its grave
until resurrection, your soul must rest in that place where it belongs.
I command this upon you with a curse and with an oath, now and forever."
Any sensible spirit who understands the force of such a spell will
thenceforth leave the living in peace.[8](jms26.htm#an_5_8.md)

A curious conceit which was barely mentioned in the Talmudic literature
came to have considerable significance in later times. In order to
emphasize the sanctity and the importance of the Sabbath the early
rabbis had pictured the day of rest as invading even *Gehinnom*, the
realm in which the wicked expiate their sins. On the Sabbath its fires
are banked, its tortures suspended, the spirits who are serving time
there released to roam the earth. Even the souls of the wicked enjoy a
weekly day of peace and respite! But when at eventide the angel Dumah,
who has charge over them, herds them back to another week of torment
they must obey his summons, however reluctantly.

Out of this fable succeeding ages erected an imposing structure of
superstition. During the Middle Ages the belief that the spirits of the
wicked are at large on the Sabbath played a most important part in the
popular apprehension of the dead. While a degree of compassion was
evidenced in the frequent admonitions (first uttered in Geonic times) to
draw out the final Sabbath prayers so that the sinners might gain a few
more moments of freedom, for they do not return to *Gehinnom* until the
service is concluded, the prevailing

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

note was one of dread. More than once the opinion was expressed that the
evil spirits who, according to the Talmud, people the shadows on Friday
nights, are none other than these souls of the wicked. They were known
even to invade the synagogue. The *Maḥzor Vitry* offered a unique
explanation of the special prayers introduced on Friday nights to
prolong the service so that tardy worshipers might catch up with the
congregation; the usual excuse was that it might be dangerous for them
to go home alone, but according to this work, the danger lay instead in
their being left alone in the synagogue at a time when, on this one
night of freedom, the spirits might decide to visit the house of
worship. But the greatest fear centered about those moments at the end
of the day when the spirits were being driven back to their penance.
There was the ever-present possibility that some might evade the angel's
vigilance—if only for a short while—and vent their spleen upon innocent,
unsuspecting humans. The Talmud had specified Tuesday and Friday nights
as the occasions on which the demons were most to be feared; a later
addendum included "the expiration of the Sabbath."[9](jms26.htm#an_5_9.md)

The consequences of this belief and the dread it aroused were various.
Several protective selections were inserted in the concluding service of
the Sabbath, most prominent among them being Ps. 91, "the anti-demonic
psalm." The *Habdalah* ritual, which marked the beginning of the new
week, had long included as one of its features the smelling of pungent
spices. It became customary to offer as an explanation of this rite the
above legend; "when the Sabbath is over the fires of *Gehinnom* are
rekindled and emit a fearful stench; we therefore smell these spices so
that they may protect us from the foul odor of Hell." (Another common
explanation was that the spices strengthened the body against the
departure of the "additional soul" which inhabited it on the Sabbath.)
The widely observed abstention from any form of labor on Saturday
evening was due to the fear of these spirits. Israel Isserlein told a
gruesome story to excuse his own meticulous care to refrain from
activity. A scribe once got busy with his work as soon as the Sabbath
was out; after he had stopped for the night "there came one who
completed the book for him," but when the stranger tan out of parchment
he stripped the skin off the poor scribe's back and continued his
scribbling on it. The implication of the story is
obvious.[10](jms26.htm#an_5_10.md)

Another curious offshoot of this belief, the history of which is too
tortuous to go into here in detail, was the notion that one who drank

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

water or ate any food toward twilight on the Sabbath was "robbing his
dead." Briefly, the original source of this idea was traced to a late
Midrashic statement that each day at eventide Dumah releases the spirits
in his charge—and now it is not only the spirits of the wicked, but all
the dead during their first year after decease, before they have been
assigned to permanent abodes—to gambol in the fields, to eat the fruit
hanging on the trees and drink the water in the streams. "Therefore,
whoever drinks water at twilight robs his dead." During the Middle Ages,
in Germany and Northern France (in Provence, Spain, Italy and England
the practice was unknown), this statement was associated with the idea
of the Sabbath-rest of the spirits, and it became obligatory to refrain
from consuming water or foodstuffs only on the Sabbath toward evening.
In some places this prohibition was observed by everyone, but in most it
was limited to those who had lost a near relative within the year. Still
a further variation upon this motif transferred the prohibition to
Friday evening, the explanation given being that the souls of the
wicked, immediately on their release, plunge into the streams to cool
off.

It seems more than probable that this last version contains the clew to
the whole business. The story about "robbing the dead" is certainly too
strained to account for the entire complex. Evidently two distinct
elements are fused here; the one, fear of swallowing anything that might
have been contaminated by spirits at the two critical moments, the
beginning and the conclusion of the day of rest; the other, the
Midrashic fable, which was so twisted as to fit the superstition. The
only feature of the custom that derives from the second element is the
provision that it is limited to mourners, but it is significant that the
earlier sources speak of it as being observed by everyone, and that
water from streams and wells in particular was avoided. Dread of the
spirits, rather than compassion for the deceased, undeniably informs
this usage.[11](jms26.htm#an_5_11.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. The Powers of Good](jms08.md)
