[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms04)  [Next](jms06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### 3

### THE POWERS OF EVIL

#### THE MIDDLE WORLD

THE basis of Jewish magic lay the belief in a vast, teeming "middle
world," a world neither of the flesh nor altogether and exclusively of
the spirit. Demons and angels, to be counted only in myriads, populated
that world; through their intermediacy the powers of magic were brought
into operation. The most frequently employed terms for magic were
*hashba‘at malachim* and *hashba‘at shedim*, invocation and conjuration
of angels and demons. The peculiar rôle of the angels, heavenly
counterparts of all earthly phenomena, as well as the direct servants
and emissaries of God, closest to His ear, rendered powerful indeed the
man who possessed the secret of bending them to his will. The demons, on
the other hand, invested with all the fearsome potencies that a still
primitive, animistic folk-imagination could conjure up, were equally
capable of making the fame and fortune of those who could exert a magic
power over them.

Talmudic Jewry owned a highly elaborated demonology, distinguishing
between classes and even individuals, with a wealth of detail concerning
the nature and pursuits of the evil spirits. Its elements grew naturally
out of the fertile popular imagination, convinced as it was of the
reality of the spirit world, and fortified by a rich tradition drawn
largely from the folklores of Egypt and Babylon and Persia. This lore
served a dual need: it conveyed the power of control, and at the same
time of self-protection. But the rabbis were generally opposed to
demon-magic, and though they were not so severe with it as with
sympathetic magic (some of the most distinguished Talmudic authorities
themselves had recourse to it at times), they frequently expressed their
strong disapproval. Even in the Middle Ages a few rabbis were ready to
permit it, but the ancient strictures against a method which is
"forbidden but not punishable

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

by death" had taken effect. The intensification of the religious spirit
that had proceeded through the intervening centuries produced a feeling
that the demons had no proper place within Judaism, though they could
not be ousted and the widespread fear of them persisted. Traffic with
the "spirits of uncleanness," as they were often called, was repugnant
to the Jew, who regarded them as inimical not alone to mankind, but to
the pursuit of the religious life. The great development of name-magic,
on the other hand, crowded out the earlier form. Invocation of demons,
therefore, occupied a very minor position in medieval Jewish magic. The
demons were employed almost exclusively in divination.

Jewish demonology, consequently, experienced little inner development
during the Middle Ages, but clung closely to its early forms, and new
departures were mainly borrowings from French and German sources, which
in itself is an indication that the estimation of demons in magic had
depreciated. Interest in the evil spirits centered mainly about their
malevolent nature and implacable enmity toward man, and hence about the
need and the best methods of protection against them.

Hardly a murmur of doubt do we hear of the existence and reality of the
evil spirits. The Talmudic literature, both the *Aggadic* folklore and
the *Halacha*, accepted their presence as
axiomatic.[1](jms24.htm#an_3_1.md) We may readily understand then, how it
is that in the Middle Ages a people fed on this literature no longer
questioned. The *Kabbalah*, indeed, accorded the demons an integral rôle
in a cosmic design in which the right and the left are the opposing
currents of pure and impure powers filling the world and dividing it
between the Holy One and His Adversary. In all of medieval Jewry there
were few who raised their voices against this superstition. Some
Karaites vigorously repudiated such beliefs, and characterized them as
"merely human imaginings." Maimonides and Ibn Ezra took a similarly
strong stand. But these were citizens of southern, Mohammedan lands. Not
a word to this effect do we hear in the north of Europe. Our literature
takes them as much for granted as did the Talmudic. Certain works,
especially from the school of Judah the Pious, reveal their activities
on almost every page. Rashi repeated the Midrashic comment that "every
living thing" represented in the ark included even the
demons.[2](jms24.htm#an_3_2.md)

If we are to believe Moses of Tachau,[3](jms24.htm#an_3_3.md) Ibn Ezra paid
dearly for

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

his hardihood in denying the existence of demons. "Ibn Ezra wrote in his
book," he says, "'Of a surety there are no demons in the world!' .Verily
he erred in this matter, for they were ever at his side . . . and indeed
they proved their existence to at him. I have heard from the people of
*Iglant* \[England?\], where he died, that once when he was travelling
through a forest he came upon a large band of black dogs who glared at
him balefully; undoubtedly these were demons. When he had finally passed
through their midst he fell seriously ill, and eventually he died of
that illness." This incident was apparently evidence enough for R.
Moses, though we may question whether, if it occurred, it sufficed to
convince the doughty Ibn Ezra.

Menasseh b. Israel, writing in the middle of the seventeenth century,
summed up the thought of the Middle Ages when, after demonstrating to
his own satisfaction that demons do exist, by calling into service
proofs on the threefold basis of tradition, reason, and the senses, he
cited a long list of appropriate passages from Jewish literature, and
concluded, "The opinion of all Jewish authorities is that the Biblical
references to spirits are to be taken literally." He lightly brushed
aside the Maimonidean strictures against such superstitions with the
familiar objection that their author had been "seduced" by the
philosopher's predilection for the testimony of reason and experience,
to the damage of his piety and faith in revelation.[4](jms24.htm#an_3_4.md)
Menasseh b. Israel was expressing not his own opinion but the judgment
of Jewish folk-belief.

#### TERMINOLOGY

It may not be amiss if before we proceed to a consideration of the
features of this demonology, we devote a few lines to the nomenclature
employed in our literature. The terms most frequently met with are those
made familiar in the ancient literature of the Jews: *mazzik*, from a
root which means "to damage, destroy"; *shed*, an obscure word which
occurs in the Bible in the plural,[5](jms24.htm#an_3_5.md) and which in the
Talmudic literature acquired the exclusive sense of "demon"; and *ruaḥ*,
"spirit," often *ruaḥ ra‘ah*, "evil spirit."[6](jms24.htm#an_3_6.md) These
words were not at all differentiated in our period, though a rather
academic attempt was at times made to distinguish among them on the
basis of Talmudic statements. In general, however, these three terms

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

were used indiscriminately in a generic sense, and were often employed
interchangeably in a single paragraph. An effort at schematization,
which produced a list of ten categories of demons to balance a similar
angelic list, introduced seven additional terms, which found little
place in the general literature. One of them, however, *lilin*, regarded
as the plural of Lilit, "night-demons," used in the Talmud, occurs
fairly often, sometimes as *liliot*.[7](jms24.htm#an_3_7.md)

I may also mention here the *malache ḥabbala*, "angels (or demons) of
destruction," who made their initial appearance in the Talmud, and who
were not absent from the medieval scene. Their names end with the letter
*peh*, we are informed. The fact that the titles of the daily synagogue
services, the eighteen benedictions, the prayer *Yoẓer Or*, and the
grace after meals do not contain this letter, was cited as proof that
prayer serves as a protection against these destroying
angels.[8](jms24.htm#an_3_8.md)

The Lurianic *Kabbalah* brought into common currency an old but little
used term, *kelippah*, originally "scale, husk, skin"; occurring in the
earlier mystical works and in the *Zohar*, this word rarely appeared in
our literature. Its Lurianic popularization, reflected in the writings
of the famous Polish mystic, Isaiah Horowitz (1555-1630), marked the
beginning of a new development in Jewish demonology which is outside the
scope of this study.

These traditional terms were used only to designate the general
phenomenon. It is of interest to inquire why none of them acquired a
specialized sense in our period, to single out those differentiated
demonic types which people the folklore of all nations. The explanation
is not far to seek. The Hebrew of the Bible and the prayers, while
familiar to most Jews, was not the vernacular; nor did the Talmud, which
so strongly colored Jewish life, provide Jewry with a spoken tongue.
Words lifted from these sources entered into the everyday language of
the people, to be sure, but their very antiquity and traditional
meanings made it difficult to squeeze them into new molds. They sufficed
as generic terms, but to designate the specific, the differentiated, the
peculiarly contemporary, the Jews turned to the vernacular for their
nomenclature. Specialized types of demons were not wanting in medieval
Jewish folklore, but they appeared under their non-Hebraic names, words
borrowed from the German and the French. This interesting subject,
shedding so much light upon the question of non-Jewish influence on
Jewish belief and superstition, will be presently considered.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

#### THE GENESIS OF DEMONS

The number of demons in the world was prodigious. One Christian census
estimated them as somewhat more than one for each person on earth. Our
sources spurn such conservative figures; their number is uncountable,
the simple unit employed in referring to them is no smaller than the
myriad.[9](jms24.htm#an_3_9.md)

The question of the origin of this demonic horde naturally agitated the
medieval mind. It was of especial interest to the Jews, for in a world
altogether fashioned *ex nihilo* by the Creator of all things, the
demons alone have no recorded birthday; the first chapter of Genesis is
silent concerning them. Talmudic tradition, however, provided the clew
which was followed in the Middle Ages. On the first Sabbath eve, at
twilight, as God was putting the finishing touches to His great work of
creation, He turned His hand to the construction of these beings, who,
though included in the plan of things as they were to be, might well be
left for last. He had not progressed beyond the fashioning of their
souls, however, when the hastening Sabbath overtook Him, and He was
obliged to cease His labors to sanctify the first day of rest. So it is
that the demons have no bodies, but are constituted wholly of
spirit.[10](jms24.htm#an_3_10.md)

But this explanation did not suffice to still all doubts, and a medieval
rabbi,[11](jms24.htm#an_3_11.md) during the course of a disputation with a
renegade Jew, appended an interesting codicil to this theme. There
remained yet another category, unaccounted for by the rabbinic theory
and known to Jews under their non-Jewish names (R. Jeḥiel, our
disputant, mentioned specifically the *lutin* and the *fae*), which
possessed both soul and body. These obviously required something more
than the traditional explanation. This R. Jeḥiel provided. He utilized a
rabbinic legend to the effect that during the 130 years after the
expulsion from Eden, when Adam was parted from Eve, he had relations
with female demons who bore him demonic offspring, to account for this
corporeal group which the Talmudic rabbis didn't know. The spirits whom
we know as the *lutins* and *faes* are the children of Adam by this
unnatural union, said R. Jeḥiel.

We read also of still another demonic category, whose members were
created afresh daily out of the ranks of the most recent tenants of the
grave. It is not altogether correct to hold, as some students have, that
in the popular conception the spirits of the dead roamed the world as
specters and vampires, recruits to the demonic armies.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On the contrary,
the spirits of the dead were believed to remain in close contact with
the living, retaining their old interests, and often performing signal
service for their relatives and friends who still inhabited this earth
in the flesh. Provocation, it is true, might stir them up to strike back
at their enemies. But in general the dead were not regarded as
malevolent; rather were they seen as wistful, harmless shades haunting
the graves which shelter their bones. The spirits of the *wicked*,
however, do become *bona fide* demons, and it is these that constantly
replenish the demonic ranks. So vicious were they believed to be that
special warnings were posted against them; wounds which they inflict can
be cured by no human means, but their healing rests in the hands of God
alone.[12](jms24.htm#an_3_12.md)

I may add that the idea, so frequently encountered in Christian
writings, that the demons are the gods of the heathen, is to be found in
medieval Jewish works as well.[13](jms24.htm#an_3_13.md) But it played no
part in the popular belief.

It should be noted, finally, that in all this the demons, evil as they
were, remained the creatures of God, subject to His will and respectful
of His divinity, and actually subservient to the
angels.[14](jms24.htm#an_3_14.md) We have here no dualism; even the
Kabbalistic mysticism which divided the universe between two opposing
forces of good and evil, did not oust God from His position of
overlordship. The German mystics, immersed in a deep piety peculiar to
themselves, did not for a moment countenance any such heresy, and
nowhere in the literature of Northern Europe do we find a suggestion of
the autonomy of the demon world.

#### ATTRIBUTES AND FUNCTIONS

In what guise were these demons visualized? Altogether invisible to men,
though the more acute sensitivity of animals responded to their
presence,[15](jms24.htm#an_3_15.md) it is not to be wondered at that the
prevalent conception was as vague and undefined as these creatures
themselves.

The rabbis of the Talmud had long since postulated certain demonic
attributes which remained constant during the Middle Ages. "The demons,
in accordance with their origin, are between angels and men. They have
wings like the former, and move about from one end of the earth to the
other, and know what will come to pass; but, like the latter, they eat
and drink, propagate their kind, and die." "They see but are themselves
invisible." In consequence

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

of their lack of bodies they cast no shadow.' These characteristics,
whose Talmudic authority permitted no questioning, were the constant
features of the medieval conception. A few new details were added but
they were not, I am afraid, of much help in making the evil spirits more
readily recognizable.

Rashi, for one, attempted a degree of differentiation on the basis of
several Talmudic remarks. Among the "various kinds of demons
(*mazzikin*)," he wrote, "*shedim* have human forms, and eat and drink,
like men; spirits (*ruḥin*) are completely disembodied and formless;
*lilin*, which are possessed of human forms, also have wings." The
rabbinic view, which was applied generally to the entire demon world,
presented difficulties to the logical mind. A fifteenth-century
authority essayed an explanation of how it was that these creatures of
spirit could simulate man in certain respects. Their eating and drinking
is, according to him, nothing more than a licking or lapping up of fire,
water, air, and slime. Their decease, again, is not to be understood in
our mortal sense; "when they dry up \[from lack of these sustaining
substances\] they return to their primordial state; this is the manner
of their death." But our author's ingenuity gave out in the matter of
propagation; here he was forced to accord them physical shapes: "When
they copulate they are possessed of bodies, but they will not unite in
the presence of a third demon, or of man."[17](jms24.htm#an_3_17.md)

There is little more to be said about the appearance of these evil
spirits. One source attributed to their non-existent heads—hair! "Male
demons have hair on their heads, but the females have none. This is why
Boaz placed his hand on Ruth's head \[when he awoke to find her at his
feet\]. When he discovered that she had hair \[he knew that this was no
demon\] and asked, 'Who art thou?'" Demons, however, may temporarily
assume physical shapes. There is in the folklore of the Middle Ages, as
indeed of all times and all places, no definite and impassable line of
demarcation between the worlds of man, of beast, and of spirit. Angels
and demons may become men and animals, men may be transformed into cats
or wolves or hares. We have already beheld the spirits embodied in the
skins of dogs; Boaz apprehended a demon taking woman's shape. A medieval
legend relates that a demon which had laid plans to enter the body of a
certain pious rabbi transformed itself into a hair, which the rabbi was
expected to swallow with his food.[18](jms24.htm#an_3_18.md) Their stock of
disguises was infinite. Many of the demons we encounter

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

in medieval literature have conveniently masked themselves in human or
animal bodies, so that they may make their appearance in the flesh. The
test by hair is the only clew we are afforded against their evil
designs, and even here half the demon world is immune.

Like the angels, the demons have especial posts and functions; when, for
instance, a man has suffered an attack at the hands of one, he and his
family must forever avoid the place where the attack occurred, for the
demon is posted there awaiting another opportunity. Nor should one
imprison the demons, who are everywhere, by shutting the doors and
windows of a house tightly. Their paths of ingress and egress are
prescribed, along with their functions, and to impede their freedom of
movement is to invite their displeasure. Far wiser is it to pierce a
small hole in door or window and thus enable them to move about
freely.[19](jms24.htm#an_3_19.md)

Demons frequented uninhabited places, deserts and forests and fields, as
well as unclean places. Privies especially were believed to be haunted
and the Talmud prescribed special incantations invoking the protection
of guardian angels in these places. This prescription was frequently
repeated by medieval authorities, but there is evidence that the dread
attached to privies had worn off, and the incantations, if recited, had
degenerated into mere formal vestiges of a traditional usage. The
explanation was that the privies of Talmudic times were located outside
of the villages, in the fields, whereas medieval privies were closer to
home, within the settled area.[20](jms24.htm#an_3_20.md)

The connection between demons and uncleanness was made to serve
important hygienic ends. Evil spirits, sometimes called "spirits of
uncleanness," and once identified by the name *bat melech*, rest upon
unwashed hands, contaminate foods handled with them, and endanger the
lives of those who eat such food. Seven occasions which require a ritual
washing of the hands (which destroys or dislodges the demons) were
enumerated; most important among these was upon arising in the morning,
for the night creates a special susceptibility to spirit contamination.
Even on *Yom Kippur* when no ablutions might be performed, the hands
must be washed in the morning. Touching the eyes, ears, nose and mouth
with unwashed hands spells trouble; no doubt it was feared that the evil
spirits would enter the body through these orifices. (*Plus ça change
plus c’est la meme chose;* if, in speaking of infection, our vocabulary
is more "scientific," the sense remains the same.) The demon of
uncleanness, entering the eyes, could cause one's glance to have a
devastating effect upon the innocent passer-by; it might even be

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

responsible for the loss of one's memory, and ultimately complete loss
of mind.[21](jms24.htm#an_3_21.md)

Humans who established their homes on a spot already preempted by
spirits were in a parlous way. The demons are jealous of their property
rights and their privacy, and resent intrusions. Once a group of Jews,
who had settled in a previously unoccupied place in Hungary, noticed
that their death-rate had suddenly risen markedly. They fasted and
prayed but to no avail. One day the head of the community met a large
band whose leader sat astride a lion, using a snake for a bridle. He
realized at once that these were no ordinary men, but demons. Their
chief demanded the immediate removal of the trespassing Jews, for his
spirit followers had previously selected that spot for a meeting-place.
Needless to say they obeyed with alacrity, and their death-rate became
normal once more. This incident explains why certain houses are very
unlucky for their inhabitants, one after another dying off for no
apparent cause. The only remedy in such a case is to move far away,
where the demons who have been provoked by the intrusion cannot get at
them. Pious deeds, fasting, prayer, usually so effective, are of no
help.[22](jms24.htm#an_3_22.md)

The best plan, of course, is to observe proper caution before
establishing oneself in a new home. One should not erect a house on
unoccupied land; but if he does he should certainly not construct it of
stone (for a stone house has an air of stability and permanence that is
sure to irritate the demons) . Even a house of wood is suspect under
these circumstances. If the new house is on the site of an old one the
builder must be careful to place the windows and doors in the same
positions they formerly occupied, for the local demons whose habits have
become fixed, are bound not to be enamored of the innovations. Finally,
it is wise not to move into a new house at all, but to sell it if one
can. If this proves unfeasible, it must be left uninhabited for a time,
or some skeptical friend must be prevailed upon to occupy it. People
were actually paid to live in new houses![23](jms24.htm#an_3_23.md)

The general rule was that bad luck clings to a place or a person or a
family—because once the spirits have chosen them for their special prey
they cannot be shaken off. A house or a city in which children die
young, a family that has been frequently bereaved, a woman whose
husbands do not survive, all must be avoided like the pest. To
illustrate the strength of this belief in the tenacity of misfortune I
may cite this tale: A woman who had become barren came

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

to Judah the Pious for counsel; the mystic should succeed where medicine
was powerless! He told her that nothing would help, except that she be
forgotten like a corpse moldering in the earth. To carry out his
prescription he had her children place her in a grave and then had armed
men, hired for this purpose, make a sudden attack upon them so that they
were frightened and ran away, completely forgetting their mother. She
arose out of the grave, newborn, and in short order proved the efficacy
of the remedy. The symbolic interment and rebirth freed her from the
misfortune that was her lot in what had now become her previous
existence.[24](jms24.htm#an_3_24.md)

Demons consort in the shade of trees, and in shadows cast by the moon.
In fact, children who are moon-struck display symptoms that point
definitely to the demonic source of their illness: their alternating
chills and fevers are due directly to the fact that the demons who
inhabit moon-shadows are compounded of fire and hail. *Sefer Ḥasidim*
reports that upon a certain tree there were to be noticed drops somewhat
like candle-drippings. When a man wished to cut this tree down he was
warned by a sage, "Beware that you do not bring about your own death!
Don't even shake that tree! For if you anger them they will certainly do
you harm. In this tree the liliot foregather." Nut trees in particular
were to be shunned as the meeting-places of the
spirits.[25](jms24.htm#an_3_25.md)

A special connection exists also between the storm-winds, tempests,
whirlwinds, and the evil spirits. The home of all is in the north, which
indeed is the source of all evil.[26](jms24.htm#an_3_26.md) One writer even
domiciled the demons in Norway, which to him was the farthest edge of
the north.[27](jms24.htm#an_3_27.md) This almost universal belief in the
close relation between demons and storms was expressed in the idea that
thunder and lightning are the bolts which the demons, aligned in two
hostile camps, discharge against one another during a storm. Certain men
are peculiarly susceptible to harm from these bolts, and can be healed
only by magic.[28](jms24.htm#an_3_28.md)

#### "JEWISH" DEMONS

Our discussion, devoted thus far to the general aspects of medieval
Jewish demonology, does not exhaust the subject. Certain demonic types
stood out from the undifferentiated mass, and to these we must turn our
attention before we may consider the picture complete.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

Among "Jewish" demons and spirits, that is, the vast horde which the
Middle Ages inherited with the Talmudic tradition, there are few indeed
that possess any individuality, any definitely distinguishing
characteristics. Those few who in Talmudic times were sufficiently
personalized to be accorded the distinction of a name, naturally
survived into the Middle Ages, but in attenuated form. The tendency was
to repeat the Talmudic characterizations, but with a mechanical air, as
though rehearsing a lesson rather than describing a living, terrifyingly
contemporaneous phenomenon. We do not find in the field of demonology
that exuberance of invention which characterized medieval Jewish
angelology—the reasons being, as I have suggested, that the magical
utility of demons had depreciated, while a full-blown non-Jewish folk
demonology lay ready at hand to be assimilated into Jewish folk-belief.
Satan himself, king of the underworld, though he made frequent
appearances in the moralizing literature of the period, possessed none
of the vividness, the immediacy of his Christian counterpart. He was
little more than a word, a shade whose impress on life was real enough,
but whom one could hardly hope to identify from the vague, colorless
comments about his person and activity. Quite probably he stood out more
clearly in the popular conception than in the literature (he was not a
personage of theological import, as in medieval Christianity); but that
conception did not impress itself so deeply on the folk-mind as to find
its way into the literature as well. Satan in medieval Jewish thought
was little more than an allegory, whose moral was the prevalence of
sin.[29](jms24.htm#an_3_29.md)

The tendency to push into the background those demons that are named in
the Talmud, to deny them an important rôle in the contemporary demon
world, is demonstrated by the comparatively few references to them, and
by the nature of these comments. The demon Shibbeta, for example, who
strangles people, and especially children who eat food touched by
unwashed hands—not one of those "spirits of uncleanness" already
mentioned, but an individualized spirit which rests upon foods and is
dispelled only by washing the hands prior to the handling of the
foods—this demon no longer frightened medieval Jewry. "The reason why
people no longer observe the precaution of washing before feeding their
children is that this evil spirit is not to be found in these lands."
This attitude was applied to many of the Talmudic superstitions which
lacked the element of contemporaneity. As a later writer naïvely put it:
the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

explanation of the neglect on the part of late authorities of many of
the early superstitions is that "the nature of man has changed since
those early days." He adduced as proof that "there are many things
against which the *Gemara* warns us as being fraught with great danger
\[from the demons\], but we have never seen nor heard of anyone who
suffered harm from disregarding the Talmudic warnings." It was not that
the belief in demons was weakening; rather, a host of modern spirits had
displaced the ancient ones.[30](jms24.htm#an_3_30.md)

Keteb Meriri, which according to the Talmud is most harmful at noon, and
especially during the hot summer months, undoubtedly a personification
of the sun's heat, made his momentary appearance during the Middle Ages.
*Sefer Ḥasidim* reports that a group of children on their way to school
one noon were suddenly confronted with this demon; all but two died, the
fortunate ones surviving only after a severe illness. Even more
evanescent is the rôle of Ashmedai, the "king of demons," and of Igrat,
the Talmudic "queen of demons," and her mother Maḥlat. These and others
appear only as names standing out momentarily from the midst of a horde
of unidentified spirits.[31](jms24.htm#an_3_31.md)

Alone among the spirits known through Jewish tradition, Lilit retained
her position during the Middle Ages, if indeed she did not strengthen it
by virtue of the closer definition of her activities. Originally a
wind-spirit, derived from the Assyrian *lilitu*, with long disheveled
hair, and wings, during Talmudic times the confusion of her name with
the word *layil*, "night," transformed her into a night spirit who
attacks those who sleep alone. Laylah appears also as the angel of
night, and of conception. Out of the assimilation to one another of
these two concepts grew the view that prevailed during the Middle Ages.
Though Lilit and the popularly derived plurals, the *lilin*, and the
*liliot*, appeared often in nondescript form, merely as another term for
demons, as when we are told that the liliot assemble in certain trees,
the *lilits* proper possessed two outstanding characteristics in
medieval folklore which gave them distinct personality: they attacked
new-born children and their mothers, and they seduced men in their
sleep. As a result of the legend of Adam's relations with Lilit,
although this function was by no means exclusively theirs, the *lilits*
were most frequently singled out as the demons who embrace sleeping men
and cause them to have the nocturnal emissions which are the seed of a
hybrid progeny.[32](jms24.htm#an_3_32.md)

It was in her first rôle, however, that Lilit terrorized medieval

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jewry. As the
demon whose special prey is lying-in women and their babes, it was found
necessary to adopt an extensive series of protective measures against
her. The line of development of this type of Lilit from the rabbinic
concept is not altogether clear. We seem to have here a union of the
night demon with the spirit that presides over pregnancy, influenced no
doubt by the character of the Babylonian Lamaššu, and the *lamiae* and
*striga* of Greek and Roman folklore. While it is incorrect to assume
that this type of demon was an invention of post-Talmudic Judaism, there
can be no question that, its sources reaching far back into the past not
only of Jewish folk-belief, but of that of neighboring peoples as well,
the fully rounded concept is not met with before the Geonic period, when
it made its appearance in Aramaic incantations of about the seventh
century and in the *Alphabet of Ben Sira*, a work composed in Persia or
Arabia some time before the year 1000. It is in this region that one
might expect to find traces of old Babylonian beliefs, as well as the
*ghoul* of the Arabian desert, influencing Jewish folklore. In Europe
the persistence in various forms of the *lamia* and *striga* in the
local non-Jewish superstition served to preserve and accentuate this
feature of the Lilit concept.

According to the earliest Jewish literary version of the legend, Lilit,
Adam's first wife, left him after a quarrel; in response to his plea God
dispatched three angels to bring her back, but she refused to return, in
consequence of which one hundred of her children were doomed to die
daily. "Let me be!" she commanded the angels, when they overtook her. "I
was created only to weaken children, boys during their first eight days
\[i.e., until circumcision\], girls until their twentieth day" \[perhaps
a reminiscence of an earlier initiatory rite for girls\]. Elijah Levita
in referring to this legend wrote, "I am loath to quote it at length,
for I don't believe it at all." But his co-religionists did not share
his skepticism, as he himself admitted when he proceeded to describe a
popular measure of protection against Lilit: "This is a common practice
among us German Jews," he confessed.[33](jms24.htm#an_3_33.md)

#### "FOREIGN" DEMONS

It constitutes a rather significant commentary upon the close cultural
relations prevailing between medieval Jewry and its neighbors, that the
Franco-German names of so many spirits were assimilated

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

into Jewish folklore. Since our literary sources are the product of the
intellectual and spiritual leaders of the times, whose scholarship and
official position must have served to accentuate their natural
predilection for the traditional ways and beliefs of the Jewish past,
the easy and unquestioned acceptance of these non-Jewish elements is
indicative of the hold they must have gained upon the popular
imagination. By the eleventh and twelfth centuries some of them had
already become part of the Jewish demonology. But the occurrence of
French, German and Latin names and terms became especially notable only
in the thirteenth century. There can be no doubt that the rise in Jewish
superstition generally, and especially in the belief in demons in this
period, was a reflex of the spirit of the times.

Most often mentioned were the *estrie*, the *broxa*, the *mare*, and the
*werwolf*.[34](jms24.htm#an_3_34.md) The transliteration into Hebrew of
these names is often confusing, and the description of these creatures
even more confused, but it is not difficult to recognize in them their
non-Jewish prototypes. So intimately had they entered into Jewish
folklore that it was possible for some writers to identify them with
those original demons whose souls were created on the eve of the
Sabbath, when the press of time left them in a bodyless condition.
According to one source, *estrie*, *mare*, and *werwolf* are to be
included in this category; others, however, would exclude the mare,
which possesses both body and soul.[35](jms24.htm#an_3_35.md)

It is difficult to determine whether the *estrie* was regarded as a true
demon, or as a witch; it was described, sometimes in the same source, as
both. Included among the incorporeal spirits, it was none the less also
a woman, a flesh-and-blood member of the community. In either guise her
character was that of the vampire, whose particular prey was little
children, though she did not disdain at times to include grown-ups in
her diet.[36](jms24.htm#an_3_36.md) The sense of these passages appears to
be that she is an evil spirit who adopts woman's form and spends her
life among men, the more readily to satisfy her gory appetites. The
equation of the *estrie* with the *broxa* leads one to believe that she
was best known in her human form.

The *estrie* had the faculty of changing her shape as she willed, and of
returning to her original demonic state when she flew about at night. A
certain woman, who, it transpired, was an *estrie*, fell ill and was
attended during the night by two women. When one of these fell asleep
the patient suddenly arose from her bed, flung her

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

hair wildly about her head, and made efforts to fly and to suck blood
from the sleeping woman. The other attendant cried out in terror and
aroused her companion; between the two of them they subdued the
demon-witch and got her back into bed. "If she had succeeded in killing
this woman she would have preserved her life, but since her effort was
thwarted she died." These creatures sustained themselves on a diet of
human blood, which preserved their lives when they were desperately ill.
If an *estrie* was wounded by a human being, or was seen by him (in her
demonic state), she must die unless she could procure and consume some
of his bread and salt. A man who was attacked by an *estrie* in the
shape of a cat and beat her off, was approached by the witch the next
day and asked for some of his bread and salt. When he was innocently
about to grant her request an old man intervened and scolded him sharply
for his generosity. "If you enable her to remain alive, she will only
harm other men." If the precentor, during services, offers up a prayer
for the health of a sick woman who is known to be a vampire, the
congregation must not respond with an "Amen!" When a *broxa* or an
*estrie* is being buried, one should notice whether or not her mouth is
open; if it is, this is a sure sign that she will continue her vampirish
activities for another year. Her mouth must be stopped up with earth,
and she will be rendered harmless.[37](jms24.htm#an_3_37.md)

According to one source the mares are creatures which consort in forests
in groups of nine, for if there were ten of them Satan would seize the
tenth one; they do no harm to humans. The more authentic version,
however, is that the *mare* is a being which rests upon man while he
sleeps and deprives him of the power of speech by grasping his tongue
and lips and choking off his breath, so that he cries out fitfully. It
is the *mare* which is responsible for nightmares (here we have the word
incorporated in our own speech and folklore); in French the phenomenon
is known as the *cauche-mare*.[38](jms24.htm#an_3_38.md)

The werwolf is a sorcerer, or a demon which inhabits the earth in man's
form, but which at will assumes the shape of a wolf and attacks and
consumes men. Like his feminine counterpart, the *estrie*, he requires
human blood in his diet—another version of the
vampire.[39](jms24.htm#an_3_39.md)

We read of other familiar spirits as well.[40](jms24.htm#an_3_40.md) The
*kobold* makes its appearance in a thirteenth-century manuscript, a
demonic homunculus which mimics and echoes man's voice in order to
bewilder him, and which is used by ventriloquists. Another work of the
same century

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

tells of a "tiny demon called a *wichtchen*."[41](jms24.htm#an_3_41.md) The
spirits which dwell in waste places and attack men who are up alone at
night were naturalized in Northern France and renamed
*faes*.[42](jms24.htm#an_3_42.md) "Many of these are to be found among us,"
lamented one pious rabbi, referring specifically to the *faes* and their
associates the *lutins* (or the *nuitons*[43](jms24.htm#an_3_43).md), the
hobgoblins which play such a prominent rôle in French folklore; nor was
their German counterpart, the *alp* (elf)
missing.[44](jms24.htm#an_3_44.md) The watersprite, the
*nixe*,[45](jms24.htm#an_3_45.md) and her sisters, the
sirens,[46](jms24.htm#an_3_46.md) also put in an appearance. Genii were the
familiars of witches and sorcerers, and the dragon became a demon with
unusual attributes.[47](jms24.htm#an_3_47.md) A blow struck by a man can
have no effect upon the dragon; only a child from his own loins can
wound him. When he is within a man's house he is harmless, but no sooner
does he depart than the house goes up in flames. Thunder and lightning
he dreads, and if he can he flees from them into a human habitation,
where he is safe. Once a dragon cohabited with a princess who bore him a
son. He confessed that he feared none but his own child. When the boy
was grown to man's estate he was induced by the king to kill his
dragon-father, and taking him unawares one night smote him a mortal
blow. The demon begged that the blow be repeated, for strangely enough,
one wound could kill him, but a second would save his life. His son,
however, refused him this courtesy, and the dragon promptly expired, a
consummation which proved rather embarrassing, for his body swelled
until it had to be cut up into bits and carted off in a great number of
wagons.

The familiar name for the Sabbath-loaf among German Jews, *Barches* or
*Berches*, and the distinctive, plaited appearance of the bread, have
led some scholars to suggest that we have here a Jewish version of an
ancient pagan practice. The Teutonic goddess of fertility, Berchta or
Perchta, was worshiped by the women with rites which included offering
their hair to her. In time this ceremony became obsolete and was
replaced by a symbolic offering of the hair in the shape of a loaf
representing the intertwined braids, the *Perchis*- or *Berchisbrod*.
This is the word, and the practice, which Jewish ceremonial, curiously,
has preserved in the loaf prepared especially for the Sabbath, say these
scholars. Both the name and the shape are distinctive of German-Jewish
usage. Yet even if this theory should be correct (other scholars have
vigorously denied that there is any relationship with the goddess, and
the issue is still —and will probably remain—moot) we should not be
justified in

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

concluding that the Perchta cult had found a place in Jewish ritual and
belief. At most, all we can read into the Berches is an odd assimilation
and survival of a long meaningless word.[48](jms24.htm#an_3_48.md)

A chance remark in a thirteenth-century code leads us to perhaps the
most interesting item in this catalogue. Jewish practice required that
before entering the ritual bath all obstructions on the body, such as
jewelry, which might prevent contact of the water with the skin, must be
removed. The question arose whether a man or woman whose hair is badly
matted must cut off this impediment to complete contact before bathing.
"My opinion," our source states, "is that we should not require people
to cut their hair when it is tangled and matted like felt, a condition
called in German ‏יילק״ש‎, and in French ‏פלטרי״ד‎, for this disarray is
caused by a demon, and we consider it to be courting mortal danger to
shear such hair." The terms are obscure. A later authority, quoting this
first one, comments, "‏ולקר״ט‎ \[probably another transliteration of the
word represented by ‏פלטרו״ד‎\] is what we call ‏היל״א לוק״א‎." The
riddle is solved! These last words are the German Holle-locke, of which
‏יילק״ש‎ (spelled also in the first ‏היילק״ש‎) is no doubt a variant;
‏פלטרי״ד‎ must be the French *feltre*, *feutre*, our
"felt."[49](jms24.htm#an_3_49.md) The belief that in the night demons
entangle the manes of beasts and the hair of humans is very widespread;
we may recall Shakespeare's lines:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

                        This is that very Mab  
That plats the manes of horses in the night;  
And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,  
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes.

</div>

Who was this Holle after whom the elf-lock was named? Among the ancient
Teutons Holle, or Holda, or Hulda, appeared as an ugly old witch, with
long, matted hair and protruding teeth. In medieval Germany she had
developed into the demon-witch who gobbles up children. She was held
responsible for entangling hair at night; "er ist mit der Holle
gefahren" was said of one whose hair was disheveled and knotted.
Corresponding with *Holle-locke* is the term
*Hollenzopf*.[50](jms24.htm#an_3_50.md)

The lady made her way into Jewish life in her other rôle as well. It is
reported that as early as the fourteenth century the ceremony called
Hollekreisch was widely observed in Jewish circles in Germany. The
Jewish boy receives his Hebrew name on the occasion of

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

his circumcision; the girl child usually upon the first Sabbath after
birth. Since the earliest days of the dispersion, however, Jews have
also borne names drawn from the nomenclature of the people in whose
midst they reside—names we may term secular or vulgar as distinguished
from the Hebrew, the classical name. These secular cognomens usually
correspond in one way or another to the Hebrew, whether as colloquial
forms or translations, or related only by sound or appearance. The
ceremony of the Hollekreisch, which marked the bestowal of its secular
name upon the child, comprised these features: the baby (or the cradle
containing the baby) was lifted into the air three times, usually by the
children especially invited for the occasion, and each time the name was
shouted out by the guests in unison. Often this shouting followed a
formula. In modern times such formulas as "Hollekreisch! What shall this
child's name be?" with the appropriate response, or "Holle! Holle! This
child's name shall be . . . ," have been employed. In the seventeenth
century the custom of Hollekreisch was observed in naming boys and girls
only in South Germany, while in Austria, Bohemia, Moravia and Poland it
was not used for boys at all, and only rarely for girls.

The earliest writer to speak of this custom, Moses Minz (fifteenth
century), explained the term as a combination of a Hebrew and a German
word—*ḥol*, "profane, secular," and *kreischen*, "to shout, call
out"—which would render it "the ceremony of calling out the secular
name." This explanation was accepted and repeated in the later
references to the practice. A modern writer has derived the first part
of the term from the call "Holla!" But it is unlikely that these
explanations even approach the truth. As we have seen, Holle was the
demon-witch who attacked infants; in this respect she provided a close
parallel to the familiar Lilit. The further correspondences between the
two: their connection with the night; the distinguishing physical
feature, long hair, which they had in common; their propensity to attack
prior to the naming of the child; all of these made the identification
of the two a natural one. Shouting the child's name, which is mentioned
in all the references to the ceremony, and tossing the infant in the air
three times, were devices intended to drive off the demon Holle, and her
fellows, just as in the *Wachnacht* ceremony on the night before the
circumcision measures were taken to ward off attacks by Lilit. So close
a parallel to Jewish belief and practice as that embodied in the
Hollekreisch could

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

have found no difficulty in winning a wide popularity among
Jews.[51](jms24.htm#an_3_51.md)

We are not yet ready to dismiss our unsavory friend Holle-Hulda. We must
follow her devious course in Jewish folklore one step farther, though
here we shall leave her playing a more attractive rôle. In a
thirteenth-century manuscript there appears an invocation, in Middle
High German written in Hebrew characters, to this self-same lady, Hulda,
this time the goddess of love. In this passage there is a reference to
Hulda's *hof*, which is nothing else than the famous Venusberg of the
*Tannhäusersage*. "Der Venusberg ist Frau Hollen Hofhaltung, erst im 15.
16. Jahrhundert scheint man aus ihr Frau Venus zu machen," wrote Grimm.
Ugly, cruel Holle becomes the lover's goddess, Venus! And thus she
appears in a fifteenth-century Hebrew-Yiddish love-receipt: "Secure an
egg laid on a Thursday by a jet-black hen which has never laid an egg
before, and on the same day, after sunset, bury it at a crossroads.
Leave it there three days; then dig it up after sunset, sell it and
purchase with the proceeds a mirror, which you must bury in the same
spot in the evening 'in Frau Venus namen,' and say 'allhie begrab ich
diesen spiegel in der Libe, die Frau Venus zu dem Dannhäuser hat.' Sleep
on that spot three nights, then remove the mirror, and whoever looks
into it will love you!"[52](jms24.htm#an_3_52.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Man and the Demons](jms06.md)
