[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms03)  [Next](jms05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

### 2

### THE TRUTH BEHIND THE LEGEND

#### JEWISH MAGIC

THE LEGEND of the Jew as sorcerer supreme was of Gentile making,
fashioned after the latest pattern of the up-to-date thaumaturge, but
like most ready-made fables it fitted the truth none too closely. For if
Jews were not the malefic sorcerers that Christian animosity made them
out to be, they still possessed an ancient and honorable tradition of
magic which had been solicitously nourished until in the Middle Ages it
reached its highest stage of development. Sheltered from Christian eyes
by secrecy and the impenetrable wall of a strange tongue and an even
stranger mystical vocabulary and method peculiar to itself, there
flourished in Jewish circles a magic lore as extensive and potent as any
known to the non-Jewish world, yet markedly different in character and
technique.

The Biblical allusions to the practice of magic indicate a widespread
acquaintance with its manifold forms at an early time, but this can
hardly be called "Jewish" magic. It was merely a reflection of the
superstitions of the Canaanites, re-inforced by importations from
Babylonia and Egypt. Even the Talmudic period, reaching to about 500
C.E., did not yet produce a distinctive amalgamation of the various
strands of tradition that led into it, duplicating in large measure the
eclecticism of Hellenistic-Gnostic magic, which it itself influenced.
Thus we find ensconced in the Hebrew lore beliefs and practices
emanating from the entire Mediterranean world: representatives of
ancient Babylon and Egypt nestled against Græco-Roman specimens, newer
Egyptian developments, entering by way of the Hellenistic recension,
hobnobbing with the latest Chaldaic doctrine, as exemplified in the
Babylonian *Gemara*. Not until the Geonic age, which succeeded the
Talmudic, do we find the beginnings of a definitely Jewish magic. It was
in this period that Jewish mysticism, influenced to a considerable
degree by Gnostic thought,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

took shape, though its origin undoubtedly goes back to the earlier
period.

"Theosophy has always evinced a strong affinity for magic," wrote Prof.
George Foot Moore. Searching out the secret springs of the universe, the
mystic brings to light awesome and puissant truths, which his more
practical and brazen confidants feel promptly impelled to profane for
their own greater glory and might. Geonic mysticism opened the portals
to a higher wisdom—and a more potent magic. Combined with the older
eclectic lore this evolving theurgy bloomed luxuriantly in the Germanic
lands, whither its most secret mysteries were transported and
incautiously revealed to the gaze of initiate and tyro alike. This magic
may properly be denominated "Jewish"; for all its more or less
assimilated foreign elements, and its general similarity to the
Gnostic-Jewish system imperfectly known to non-Jews as the *Ars
Notoria*, it remained distinctive in its basic emphases. To be sure the
details of magical practice are too hoary and universal to admit of
fundamental modification. Only in its general tone, the impression left
by the whole, can a system of magic be distinguished from others; its
details are the *lingua franca* of superstition. In this sense we may
characterize medieval Jewish magic as distinctively "Jewish." Its
fundamentals were indigenous. But the intensification of superstition
among non-Jews that accompanied the attack of the Church upon sorcery
was not without its influence in bringing to fruition the latent
potentialities of this Jewish mystical-magical lore. "Wie es sich
christelt so jüdelt es sich auch." German-Jewish magic attained its
richest proportions in the thirteenth century, with the school of Judah
the Pious. At the same time many beliefs and practices, as well as
technical terms, were assimilated from French and German folklore,
making a strong impression without, however, affecting the essential
quality of the Jewish doctrine.[1](jms23.htm#an_2_1)

#### THE MAGICIAN

Who was the Jewish magician? What sort of person engaged in this
profession, if profession it was? We can do no better, to gain our first
impression of the craft, than to inquire into the character of its
practitioners.

The orthodox picture of the sorcerer discloses some malevolent, dark
creature, shunning the ways of men, haunting the black hours

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

of the night, poring over his foul brews and his infernal paraphernalia,
consorting with weird, frightful spirits, forever plotting mischief and
destruction. Or the night-riding witch, associate and consort of demons,
reveling in lewd satanic orgies, blighting man and beast and herb with
her evil glance and her fiendish spells, cannibalistic murderess of
innocent infants. Such are the conceptions that our western literature
and tradition have popularized. The late medieval witch-craze, fostered
by the heresy-hunting Inquisition, helped to fasten this picture upon
the popular imagination, so that the word inevitably conjures up the
image.

Though there is not a single unequivocal report of a professional Jewish
sorcerer or witch, thus defined, in Jewish or Christian records, we may
safely assume that some Jews did not hesitate to emulate the accepted
model. The sources indicate that Jews were at least acquainted with
methods of inducing disease and death, of arousing and killing passion,
of forcing people to do their bidding, of employing demons for
divinatory and other purposes. The belief existed, among Jews as among
Christians, that sorcerers possessed the power of altering their shapes
and roaming the woods and alleys in the form of wolves, or hares, or
donkeys, or cats, and of transforming their victims into animals. We
find accounts of the magician's power to project his soul to far-distant
places, there to perform an errand, and then return to his comatose
body. The common medieval beliefs that magicians (and their bewitched
victims) may be recognized by the fixed, immovable stare of their
eyeballs, and that their power remains with them only so long as their
feet are in contact with the ground, are to be found in Jewish writings
as well. Indeed, one Jewish author suggested without a smile that for
this reason the only way to deal with sorcerers is to "suspend them
between heaven and earth"![2](jms23.htm#an_2_2)

The popular notion of the witch, which was in the making as early as the
eleventh century, is likewise reflected in the Jewish sources, but the
use of such terms as *lamie*, *broxa* and *estrie* to describe the witch
and her activities indicates the non-Jewish origin of the concept. We
read in thirteenth-century works of witches with disheveled hair who fly
about at night, who feed on the blood and flesh of infants and adults,
who are accompanied and aided by demon familiars, who assume animal
forms to carry out their nefarious designs. A story in *Sefer Ḥasidim*
is a replica of dozens found in non-Jewish works: a man was attacked by
a cat which he fought off;

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

the next day a woman appeared, badly wounded, and asked him for bread
and salt to save her life. In 1456 the German, Johann Hartlieb, told a
similar tale of a cat which attacked a child and was driven off and
stabbed by the child's father; a woman was later found with a wound in
the same place. Jacob Sprenger related as a recent occurrence in a town
in the diocese of Strasbourg, that a laborer, attacked by three enormous
cats, beat them off with a stick, and was subsequently arrested on a
charge of brutally beating three ladies of the best families in town.
Menaḥem Ẓiyuni, in his commentary on the Bible written in 1430,
displayed his knowledge of the full-blown witch doctrine: "There are men
and women," he wrote, "who possess demonic attributes; they smear their
bodies with a secret oil . . . and instantly fly off like the eagle over
seas and rivers and forests and brooks, but they must return home before
sunrise; their flight follows a predefined course from which they cannot
deviate. Anyone who trespasses upon their meeting place is likely to
suffer grave harm. . . . They transform themselves into various animals,
and into cats." These are typical details of the medieval witch-cults.
Menasseh b. Israel favored the explanation that witches can change their
forms because Satan, whom they worship, "fashions around their bodies
the simulated forms of animals . . . the proof lies in the fact that
when the paws of a pseudo-wolf are amputated the witch or magician
appears minus hands and feet." His comment that "it is well known that
all sorcerers and witches make a compact with the demons and deliver
their souls over to them" is the leit-motif of medieval
sorcery.[3](jms23.htm#an_2_3)

Though these ideas, taken over bodily from Christian superstition, occur
from time to time in Jewish works, most writers make it clear that they
have not Jews in mind when they advance them. "There are men and women"
who do these things, but not Jews specifically. Yet some writers were
prepared to admit that Jews, too, might be engaged in such activities.
If the precentor prays for a sick witch, one should not respond "Amen";
if certain women are suspected of cannibalism a warning of the
punishment that will be meted out for such crimes should be pronounced
*when they are present in the synagogue;* when an *estrie* who has eaten
children is being buried one should observe whether her mouth is open,
for if it is she will persist in her vampirish pursuits for another year
unless it is stopped up with earth. These remarks imply that Jewish
communities suspected the presence of witches in their
midst.[4](jms23.htm#an_2_4)

But a study of the Hebrew sources, and of the factors that influenced

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the development of Christian magic, creates the conviction that this
picture of the witch and the sorcerer was an exotic graft on the main
stem of Jewish tradition, that the Jewish magician was of another sort
altogether. For one thing, the literature paints Jewish magic and its
practitioners in totally different colors. But even more telling is the
fact that the peculiar characteristics attributed to European magic
effectively prevented the enrolment of the Jew in its service, while the
availability of an equally potent yet respectable Jewish technique
rendered it unnecessary to turn elsewhere.

Jews were *ab initio* excluded from the medieval fraternity of sorcerers
and witches because these were commonly branded as members of heretical
anti-Christian sects. In their organized form the witch-cults employed
various blasphemous burlesques of Church rites in their own ritual,
blasphemies to which sorcerers were also addicted, and which in
themselves were accredited with magical potency. These could have no
meaning for Jews. Further, medieval witchcraft and sorcery were based
upon a perverted worship of Satan, according to popular belief, and
individual warlocks were supposed consciously to accept the suzerainty
of the Power of Evil and to operate through an appeal to his aid. Jewish
magic, to the contrary, functioned within the framework of the Jewish
religion, which naturally excluded any such association, real or
fancied, with the arch-opponent of God. This reputed central feature of
European magic, from which it derived its special character, was
entirely foreign to the Jewish mentality, not only on theological
grounds, but even more on folkloristic, for the figure of Satan as a
distinct personality was very faint, almost non-existent, in Jewish
folklore. The entire literature does not disclose a single instance of a
magical act which depended upon submission to the devil himself, or his
intercession, for its execution.

The primary principle of medieval Jewish magic was an implicit reliance
upon the Powers of Good, which were invoked by calling upon their names,
the holy Names of God and His angels. This simple dependence upon names
for every variety of effect obviated resort to all the other magical
acts with which the non-Jewish tradition has familiarized us. The
magician who could produce wonders by the mere utterance of a few words
had no need of the devious "business" of his non-Jewish colleague. It
was the absence of the satanic element and the use of these names, that
is, the employment of God's celestial servants, which stamped Jewish
magic with

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

a generally far from malevolent character, for the angels could not be
expected to carry out evil commands and thus contravene the essential
purpose for which their good Lord had created them. And it was this
principle, too, which kept Jewish magic securely within the bounds of
the religion, and prevented it from assuming the rôle of an
anti-religion, as its Christian counterpart did. Magic was proscribed by
the Church, and hunted down by the Inquisition, not because it was
magic, but because it made a mockery of the Christian faith, and became
a powerful anti-Christian force. It was a rival of the Church, with its
own peculiar doctrine and ritual. Jewish magic during this period never
strayed from the fold, observing closely the tenets of the faith, merely
extending and elaborating certain accepted principles, so that, as we
shall see, the magician remained a pious and God-fearing Jew.

There were, of course, deviations from the general rule. Demons as well
as angels were sometimes called upon to do the Jewish sorcerer's will,
both were ordered to do harm, and presumably obeyed, and many of the
devices employed universally in magic were used by Jews along with the
evocation of spirits. But these were deviations and not the customary
procedure, and their infrequency and subordinacy tend to prove the
strength of the rule. The deep impression which the *Kabbalah* made upon
later Christian magic is indicative of the distinctive character of the
Jewish theory and praxis, for it was recognized and touted as a novel
and profound departure from earlier methods.

Now to revert to our original question: Who was the Jewish magician?
According to ancient Jewish tradition, which was heartily seconded in
the Middle Ages, women are inordinately prone to the pursuit of the
magical arts.[5](jms23.htm#an_2_5) Yet, however true this dictum may
once have been, their activity in magic proper was now narrowly
restricted by virtue of the esoteric and learned base of that magic.

Man asserted his supremacy by relegating to himself, along with all the
other prized pursuits of this life, the big-game of magic. Knowledge of
the names, through which Jewish magic worked, was inaccessible to women,
for it required not only a thorough training in Hebrew and Aramaic,
which most of them lacked, but also a deep immersion in mystical lore,
from which they were barred.

Evidently what the authorities had in mind was that women were the
spearpoint of the forces of superstition, that it was they who
propagated the bizarre notions upon which the popular imagination

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

fed, that they were the fountainhead of all those household recipes and
remedies and whispered charms with which medieval Jewry was plagued—or
saved. In this respect they were undoubtedly correct, for learned rabbis
did not hesitate to sit at the feet of ancient crones when a pain in the
eyes or head gave them no rest, and many of the prescriptions retailed
by the popular literature make a bow of acknowledgment to womankind. We
must regard women, then, as the folk-magicians, healers of wounds,
prescribers of love-potions, but in no sense "witches." Jewish women
never attained an importance in magic at all commensurate with the
prominence of their sisters in the witch-cults.

Nor was Jewish magic the exclusive skill of the "magician"—it is
hazardous to assert even that there were such people as magicians, by
profession. One may define the Jewish magician as a scholar by vocation,
a practitioner of the mystical-magical arts by avocation. Every mystic,
properly trained, could practice magic as a side-line. Indeed, the
dangers of invoking the spirits without an adequate education in
mysticism were frequently stressed, and the possessor of esoteric
traditions and writings was sternly counselled to keep them hidden from
the common glance, lest they be misused, and to pass them on only to a
select circle.[6](jms23.htm#an_2_6)

Early mystical and magical lore was successfully guarded by a limited
oral transmission. The secret lore of the German school, founded by the
Kalonymides, who removed to the Rhineland from Lucca in the tenth
century, was first written down in the thirteenth by the followers of
Judah the Pious, among whom Eleazar of Worms was outstanding both for
his prolific pen and the depth of his learning. Jewish life had turned
more and more inward, as relations with the Christian world grew more
difficult, and intensive study of the Talmud had become almost its sole
intellectual pursuit. The result was that religious emotion, stifled by
an exclusive emphasis upon hair-splitting technicalities in
interpretation and observance of the law, finally burst its casuistical
bonds, as has so often happened, and sought a free and ecstatic outlet
in the luscious green fields of theosophy. This inner need was the prime
incentive for the popularization of mystical doctrine that began at this
time, concurrently in Germany and in Spain. But the German *Kabbalah*
never attained the theoretical depth of its Spanish counterpart, nor did
it exert so much influence.

A word about the Kabbalah and its relation to the subject-matter

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

of this book: Properly used the term denotes the vast theosophical
system elaborated in Southern Europe during the Middle Ages on the basis
of ancient tradition. The so-called German Kabbalah, essentially a
*Ḥasidic* or "pietist" doctrine, had intrinsically little relation to
this system, being rather a short-lived excursion from the main line,
and in the brief space of a century it was overwhelmed and lost in the
intricacies of the greater doctrine. Two broad types of Kabbalah have
been distinguished in Jewish tradition, the "theoretical" (*Kabbalah
‘Iyunit*), which is *the Kabbalah*, and the "practical" (*Kabbalah
Ma‘asit*), which is really a misnomer, for the magical practice that it
denoted had little enough to do with *Kabbalah*, even in its purest
form, the invocation of names, and moved farther and farther away as it
embodied a hodge-podge of ancient and medieval, Jewish and foreign
elements. While Kabbalists themselves limited the term to
name-invocation, in popular usage it was generic for the entire corpus
of Jewish magic.[7](jms23.htm#an_2_7)

"The Germans, lacking in philosophical training, exerted all the greater
influence on the practical Kabbalah, as well as on ecstatic mysticism."
Their school stressed the inner significance and higher mystical values
of Hebrew words and letters—going to the extent of counting the words in
the prayer-book so that none might fall out or be altered—and the rôle
of *Kavvanah*, a profound concentration upon these inner values, in
bringing to fruition their mystical promise.[8](jms23.htm#an_2_8) Here
we have the heart of the teaching concerning magical names, which, while
adumbrated in the Talmud and developed in the Geonic period, reached its
choicest and richest flowering in the doctrines of this school. What was
put in writing became the common property of all who could read—and many
who did not understand professed to be able to perform miraculous deeds
by the bald repetition of what was written. The common fate of
popularizations befell this mystical learning: the would-be experts
flourished, oblivious of the bitter censure of the truly learned. So we
may say that every Jew whose desire led him thither essayed a little
magic in a small way. But it was generally recognized that only a minor
portion of the mystical lore had found its way into books; much of it
still remained private, jealously guarded property. The keepers of this
treasure were the great magicians of the Middle Ages, in the public
imagination at least, not because they were magicians, which is an
unavoidable paradox, but because they were the supreme masters of the
learning of which magic was an incidental offshoot. This

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

is why such figures as Samuel, father of Judah the Pious, Judah himself,
Eleazar of Worms, Eliezer b. Nathan of Mainz, heirs of the Kalonymide
lore, and even such non-mystics as Rashi and his grandson R. Tam, Yeḥiel
of Paris and his pupil Meir of Rothenburg, renowned for their Talmudic
scholarship, stand out in the legends as the greatest miracle workers of
the period.[9](jms23.htm#an_2_9)

#### FORBIDDEN AND PERMITTED

It is this paradox, and the generally legalistic approach to the
subject, which make medieval Jewish discussions of magic so
unprofitable. The medieval writers sought to hew close to the Talmudic
line, and adhered to the rabbinic classification at a time when it was
essentially obsolete. As a result the generic terms usually applied to
the magic arts, *kishshuf* and *laḥash*, occur in a dual sense,
sometimes to record the condemnatory verdict of the ancient law books,
and again to designate the less reprehensible contemporary forms. The
purpose of the medieval observations on the magic arts, we must bear in
mind, was not to describe them, but to determine the degree of guilt
attached to them, in accordance with Talmudic law. In conformity with
the usual legal propensity for rehearsing precedents, the Talmudic
definitions and distinctions were usually repeated verbatim, shedding
little or no light upon the current varieties and forms.

The Bible had pronounced an unqualified condemnation of sorcery. The
Talmud, while maintaining this fundamental attitude, pursued its
customary function of clarifying and classifying Jewish law, and so
broke up the all-inclusive category of sorcery into several divisions,
establishing varying degrees of guilt. Two main types of forbidden magic
were distinguished: that which produces a discernible, material effect,
by means of "the performance of an act," and that which only creates the
illusion of such an act or its effect (*aḥizat ‘ainayim*, "capturing the
eyesight"); or, as a further observation defined them, the one operates
without the aid of demons, the other requires their assistance. The
practitioner of the first type merits the Biblical penalty of death; the
second is forbidden but not so punishable. Still a third kind of magic,
"permitted from the start," involved the use of "the Laws of Creation,"
a term which was later interpreted to signify the mystical names of God
and the angels.[10](jms23.htm#an_2_10)

So stated, the distinction between the first two is far from clear

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

and precise, and was hardly understood by the medieval writers. As
Eliezer of Metz wrote, "I questioned my teachers about this but they
gave me no satisfactory reply." They spoke often of a forbidden "magic"
in the narrow and technical Talmudic sense of the performance of an act,
"taking hold of a thing and manipulating it," or the performance of
"enchantments." Yet this proscribed "magic" did not include the other
forms: the "invocation of angels," the "invocation of demons," and the
"employment of names," which they regarded as distinct divisions, at the
least more acceptable, and by some, expressly permitted and even
employed. About the permissibility of employing names and angels there
was no question, for the Talmud had legalized their use, but the
invocation of demons was generally considered less praiseworthy. Jeroḥam
b. Meshullam wrote: "The codifiers differ with regard to
demon-invocation. Ramah \[Meir b. Todros Halevi Abulafia\] wrote that it
should be categorized as forbidden 'magic' and some of the other jurists
agree with him but still others consider it permissible as in nowise
belonging to the category of 'magic' acts." R. Eliezer of Metz held that
"invoking the demons to do one's will is permitted from the outset, for
what difference is there between invoking demons or angels? . . . An
action may not be characterized as 'magic' unless it consists of taking
hold of a thing and manipulating it, that is, if it is the performance
of a deed, or an incantation that does not include an invocation of
spirits, but invoking demons is permitted *ab
initio*."[11](jms23.htm#an_2_11) It is evident that medieval authorities
regarded the category of "magic" as altogether distinct and different
from the others, and correctly so, but I know of only one clear-cut
statement of the principle of difference, by Moses Isserles. The
counterfeit type of magic also appeared often in the
discussions.[12](jms23.htm#an_2_12) It provided a convenient dodge to
get around the legal difficulties and cast a halo of respectability
about the current forms, whose effects were described as not real at all
but entirely illusory. But this road, too, was not quite smooth, for the
Talmudic explanation that illusory magic is the work of demons arose to
crowd angel-and name-magic off the right-of-way. In short, the Talmudic
classification plagued the efforts of medieval codifiers to bring the
law into relation with contemporary procedures. Yet, from a practical
standpoint, they succeeded in effectively excluding from the proscribed
magic" all the forms current among Jews.[13](jms23.htm#an_2_13)

Moses Isserles brings us closer to an understanding of what the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

forbidden "magic" was. "The roots of the \[magical\] arts are three," he
wrote, "God, science, and nature. . . . From God comes . . . the power
to invoke the heavenly princes by means of the holy names; the
scientific root may be illustrated by astrology, by which a man can
foretell the future, make talismans, and subdue the spirits and the
powers of the stars and the like; on natural elements depends the
effectiveness of the various types of magic, all of which consist in
bringing out the inner nature of things, whereby an expert may perform
deeds strange in appearance. . . ." This classification is not
definitive, for Isserles failed to include the demonic "root" of magic;
his inclusion of astrology, however, which was well known in Talmudic
times but did not enter into the central discussions of magic, is
significant of the place of that science in particular and the
divinatory arts generally in medieval magic. But it is his last category
that interests us particularly here. The "inner nature of things" is one
way of describing the most primitive and widespread subject of magical
activity. It is universally believed that all things are endowed with
occult virtues and powers, that they possess mutually sympathetic or
antipathetic qualities, and that it is possible to "step up" magical
currents from the particular to the general, and down again from the
general to the particular, by the simple manipulation of natural
objects, which is the commonest form that magic takes. Frazer, studying
the practices of primitive peoples, classified them under two heads,
homoeopathic or imitative, and contagious; "both branches," he wrote,
"may conveniently be comprehended under the general name of sympathetic
magic, since both assume that things act on each other at a distance
through a secret sympathy." And again, "This belief in the sympathetic
influence exerted on each other by persons or things at a distance is of
the essence of magic."[14](jms23.htm#an_2_14)

It is characteristic of magic that with the advance of religious thought
and the recognition of a spirit world, it tends to move closer to
religion, and to depend increasingly upon the spirit forces of religion
for its effects. The rabbinic authorities set their face against all
practices that smacked of Israel's heathen origins, and prominent among
these was "the performance of an act" without resort to supernatural
aid, which was for them the forbidden "magic" to be punished by death.
Their opposition was not to magic generally, but to this particular
"idolatrous" form; the use of angels, names, and even demons, involving
an appeal to the supernatural and a recognition

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

of the supremacy of God, was admitted past the barrier on sufferance,
but the first type was rigorously excluded. It was this distinction
which the medieval writers sensed and voiced negatively, without fully
comprehending it, for the ancient bitter struggle against "idolatry" had
long since been won, and the distinction had lost its force. Medieval
Jewish magic depended almost entirely for its success upon the spirits
and names; sympathetic devices persisted, as we shall see, but their
rôle was regarded as secondary and incidental to that of their
theologically more acceptable successors. Here we have a striking
difference between Jewish and Christian magic in the Middle Ages. While
the latter frankly recognized and employed the occult forces inherent in
nature, recipes employing these forces slipped into Jewish practice by
the back door, so to speak, disguised as *bona fide* invocations of the
spirit world.

Now we can understand why such categories as good and bad, white and
black magic are foreign to Jewish thought. These distinctions are
concerned with the purpose of the magic act, while Jewish discussion
centered around the method, and the legal attitude toward it. I do not
mean, of course, that rabbis had no interest in the ends toward which
magic was pursued, that a "legal" technique could be used criminally
with their approbation. They often expressed disapproval of even the
legally recognized methods just because they might be harmfully applied,
and strenuously objected to placing mystical information in the hands of
people who were not to be trusted with it. But the scholarly and pious
character of the student of mysticism and the essentially religious
nature of Jewish magic ensured a minimum of misuse of this lore. There
was never any question that the immoral practice of magic was not
countenanced by Judaism and therefore the discussion could remain on a
legal plane. However, Jews were acquainted with this prevailing
non-Jewish classification, as is indicated by the effort of Menaḥem
Ẓiyuni and others to interpret the word necromancy: "'Nigromancia' is a
combination of two words, *nigar* \[Hebrew\], 'gathered together,
collected,' like water that has been stored up, and *mancia*, the name
of the incense that magicians burn to the demons; but I have heard
another explanation, that *nigre* means 'black,' and this is why the
Germans call it *Schwarzkunst*." As an example of *nigromancia* he cited
"those who offer up their sperm to the spirits or demons with
appropriate incantations."[15](jms23.htm#an_2_15)

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

#### "IT IS BEST TO BE HEEDFUL"

The popular attitude toward magic and superstition, leaving aside the
legalistic approach, recalls an incident that illustrates it perfectly.
A teacher of mine, out for a stroll, was suddenly confronted with a
black cat from which he shied away nervously. One of his students,
observing this, twitted him, "You're not really afraid of a black cat,
Professor!" "No," he replied indignantly, "of course I don't believe in
such nonsense. But there's no harm in being careful." He might have been
quoting *Sefer Ḥasidim:*[16](jms23.htm#an_2_16) "One should not believe
in superstitions, but still it is best to be heedful of them." This
qualified skepticism was the farthest advance toward the modern spirit
on the part of the religious authorities; the masses, if we may judge
from the innumerable superstitions that were cautiously honored, took
that qualification earnestly to heart.

The *Zeitgeist* overpowered even the most rationalistically inclined of
the rabbis. The Jewry of Southern Europe owned several daring spirits
who uncompromisingly stigmatized magic and superstition as "folly" and
"untruth," but in the Germanic lands none dared go so far, though a few
singled out one or another phase of magic for their contempt, or proved
themselves free of one or another [superstition](errata.htm#0) by their
actions. The authorities, whose religious convictions and position
obliged them to voice at least half-hearted disapproval, could do no
more than threaten the practitioners of magic with disaster. They would
be punished for their acts, whether by the spirits whom they had
momentarily enslaved, or by the wrath of God. According to some, it was
the prevalence of superstition and magic among the Jews that delayed the
redemption of Israel from exile. One opinion had it: "If you see a Jew
who apostatized neither because of love nor through compulsion, you may
know that he or his parents engaged in sorcery."[17](jms23.htm#an_2_17)
Sometimes the rabbis sought to counteract the influence of traditionally
received techniques by arguing that they were no longer applicable, "for
it is known that nature varies from place to place and from time to
time," or on the ground that the requisite skill had been lost. Often
they tried to soften the impact of superstitious practices by
re-interpretation, by injecting religious meaning into
them.[18](jms23.htm#an_2_18) But the validity of superstition and magic
was universally accepted, and the very rabbis who deprecated them were
often obliged to condone them also. Moreover no matter

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

how violently they condemned popular misapplication of mystical
teachings they were obliged to admit that the "permitted" categories of
magic, especially the invocation of godly and angelic names when
practiced by adepts whose learning and piety could not be doubted, were
in consonance with the religious tenets of Judaism and could not be
denied. It was this acknowledgment that underlay the fatal inconsistency
of religious opinion; the camel's nose once inside the tent, its entire
hulk could no longer be excluded. One can hardly blame the masses for
their unhesitating acceptance of the truth and power of magic. Whatever
faith in an all-powerful God may have taught them to the contrary, the
common people believed in the might of the magician and stood in awe of
him. "If anyone quarrels with a sorcerer he has brought his death on
himself."[19](jms23.htm#an_2_19) The addiction to superstition and magic
of the German pietists and mystics became a byword in the south of
Europe and scandalized more than one pious Spanish-Jewish
writer.[20](jms23.htm#an_2_20)

Yet we meet at the same time, recognition of a profound psychological
truth, far in advance of the spirit of the age: "Superstitions can harm
only those who heed them."[21](jms23.htm#an_2_21) It requires more
courage and skepticism than the Middle Ages could lay claim to (or than
we can boast even today, for that matter) to be free of the yoke that
superstition and magic saddle upon the credulous masses. The material
gathered in this book is the most telling evidence of the inadequacy of
mere proscription to countervail ignorance and the blind "will to
believe."

In the succeeding chapters we shall examine first the beliefs concerning
the spirit world (Chapters III-VI), which were fundamental to
superstition and magic, and the powers ascribed to what we may designate
as the magic word, namely, the names of God and the angels, and the word
of God enshrined in Scripture (Chapters VII-VIII), which were the most
potent tools of magic. Chapters IX-XIII contain a description of the
various elements that constituted the actual practice of magic,
including a discussion of medicine. The concluding chapters (XIV-XVI)
are devoted to an examination of the divinatory arts, among the most
popular of magical exercises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Powers of Evil](jms05)
