[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms02)  [Next](jms04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# JEWISH MAGIC AND SUPERSTITION

### 1

### THE LEGEND OF JEWISH SORCERY

THE anomalous position of the Jew in the modern world is but a
latter-day version of the fate that has dogged his footsteps ever since
he wandered forth among strange and hostile peoples. In no time and
place, however, was his status—and his plight—so manifestly unique as in
medieval Europe. The essence of that uniqueness lay in his ambiguous
relationship to the Christian society in which he led his precarious
existence, on the one hand influenced by all the objective forces which
molded his environment, on the other, shut off from that environment by
insurmountable walls of suspicion and animosity. His wilful persistence
in his religious and cultural "difference" from the intolerant Christian
civilization of the day, the dogmatic enmity fostered by the Church, his
minority status coupled with an effective economic competition with his
non-Jewish neighbors, all these combined to create an attitude of envy
and hatred. But these alone do not tell the whole story; we must admit a
further element into the psychological complex which determined the
attitude of Christian toward Jew—an element which today has lost its
force in the composition of anti-Semitism, but which in the Middle Ages
loomed very large. For it contributed the emotion of fear, even of
superstitious dread, in an age when superstition was the prevailing
faith not alone of the masses, but of many of their leaders as well.

Sorcery was a very real and terrifying phenomenon in those days, and
many medieval Christians looked upon the Jew as the magician *par
excellence*. The allegiance to Satan, attributed to Jews with an
insistence that almost drowned out its true implication, was not merely
a form of invective or rhetoric. Satan was the ultimate source of magic,
which operated only by his diabolic will and connivance. Christian
writers make it quite clear that this is the connection to which they
refer.[1](jms22.htm#an_1_1.md) Secular and religious authorities took
action time and again against the Jews expressly on this count, and the
Inquisition

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

occasionally availed itself of the charge to get around the restrictions
of ecclesiastical law which excluded the Jew from its legitimate hunting
grounds.[2](jms22.htm#an_1_2.md)

The masses also were quick to seize the opportunity afforded by this
accusation, and mass attacks upon the Jews frequently followed the
levelling of the charge. To cite but one instance: the most violent mob
assault upon Jews in England, which overwhelmed every major Jewish
community and took a tragic toll of martyrs, had its inception at the
coronation of Richard I in London on September 3, 1189. On that occasion
a Jewish delegation bearing gifts and pledges of allegiance was driven
from the palace, publicly accused of having come to cast their
enchantments over the newly crowned king, and was set upon by the crowd;
the outbreak spread rapidly through the city and the land, took more
than half a year to spend itself and left in its wake a trail of
horrible butcheries.[3](jms22.htm#an_1_3.md) Such manifestations, in
greater or lesser degree, were the usual concomitant of a like
accusation.

The striking feature of the Christian apprehension of Jewish sorcery is
that it adhered not to certain specific Jews, who had aroused it by
their actions, but rather to the entire people, en masse. Consequently
every innocent Jewish act which by its strangeness laid itself open to
suspicion was considered a diabolical device for working magic against
Christians. The custom of throwing a clod of earth behind one after a
funeral brought a charge of sorcery in Paris, in the early years of the
thirteenth century, which might have had dire consequences if a certain
Rabbi Moses b. Yeḥiel had not succeeded in persuading the king of its
utterly harmless character.[4](jms22.htm#an_1_4.md) The practice of washing
the hands on returning from the cemetery aroused the same suspicions of
sorcery and provoked some bloody scenes.

So onerous did these recurrent accusations become that the rabbis of the
Middle Ages found it necessary—forced to this step, no doubt, by Jewish
public opinion—to suspend some of these customs. In the case of the
clod-throwing, though "many were obliged to disregard the usage for fear
that the Gentiles would accuse them of sorcery," custom was proof
against fear. But in other instances fear triumphed. The mourning rites
of "binding the head" and "overturning the bed" lapsed during the Middle
Ages for this reason. In Talmudic times fear of the same accusation had
led Jewish authorities to excuse the head of the household from the rite
of "searching out the leaven"

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

on the eve of the Passover in places owned in common with a non-Jew;
during the Middle Ages there was a strong but unsuccessful agitation to
suspend this rite altogether, even indoors, "because we have Gentile
serving-girls in our homes" who might spread the alarm. In Provence,
however, the ritual cleansing of the public oven in preparation for
Passover baking was neglected "because of the Gentiles’ suspicion of
sorcery." When a fire broke out in a Jewish house its owner dared expect
little mercy from the mob, for he was a sorcerer seeking to destroy
Christendom, and his punishment was commonly simultaneous with his
crime. The rabbis of the time were therefore unusually tolerant about
violations of the prohibition to put out fires on the Sabbath and on the
Day of Atonement. At the slightest danger they set this prohibition
aside, "for this is a matter of life and death, since they accuse us and
persecute us." We read of a lamb, slaughtered in fulfillment of a ritual
obligation, which was cut up and buried secretly in sections, "so that
the matter may not become known and they say, 'it was done for magical
ends.'"[5](jms22.htm#an_1_5.md) To such measures were Jews driven by fear
of arousing the suspicions of their neighbors.

Jews were stoned as sorcerers. But it needs little knowledge of human
nature to believe that the very vice became a virtue when Christians
themselves had need of a little expert magic on the side. If Jews were
magicians, their every act a charm, then their magic devices could aid
as well as harm. R. Isaac b. Moses of Vienna, in the thirteenth century,
tells that once when he was in Regensburg over a holiday, "a Gentile who
had much power in the city fell dangerously ill, and ordered a Jew to
let him have some of his wine, or he would surely die; and I gave this
Jew permission to send him the wine (although it was a holiday) in order
to prevent trouble, though there were some who disagreed and forbade
this." Apparently Jewish wine possessed occult healing powers; perhaps
this Gentile had in mind wine that had been blessed by Jews. It would be
interesting to know how effective the cure was but R. Isaac carries his
anecdote no farther.

The *mezuzah* (a Biblical inscription attached to the doorpost) was also
an object of suspicion, and at the same time, of desire. That it was
regarded as a magical device by Christians we know, for a
fifteenth-century writer admonished his readers to affix a *mezuzah* to
their doors even when they occupied a house owned by a non-Jew, despite
the fact that the landlord might accuse them of sorcery. Indeed,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the Jews in the Rhineland had to cover over their *mezuzot*, for, as a
thirteenth-century writer complained, "the Christians, out of malice and
to annoy us, stick knives into the *mezuzah* openings and cut up the
parchment." Out of malice, no doubt—but the magical repute of the
*mezuzah* must have lent special force to their vindictiveness. Yet even
Christians in high places were not averse to using these magical
instruments themselves. Toward the end of the fourteenth century the
Bishop of Salzburg asked a Jew to give him a *mezuzah* to attach to the
gate of his castle, but the rabbinic authority to whom this Jew turned
for advice refused to countenance so outrageous a prostitution of a
distinctively religious symbol.[6](jms22.htm#an_1_6.md)

In the field of medicine in particular was the reputed Jewish magical
skill called upon to perform miracles. According to the popular view,
demons and magic were often responsible for disease, and medicine was
therefore the legitimate province of the sorcerer. Jewish physicians,
though by no means free from the general superstitious attitude, were
among the foremost representatives of a scientific medicine in the
Germanic lands. Their wide knowledge of languages, the availability of
Arabic-Greek medical works in Hebrew translation, their propensity for
travel and study abroad, their freedom from the Church-fostered
superstition of miraculous cures, relics, and the like, these often
conspired to make of them more effective practitioners than their
non-Jewish competitors. Paradoxically, their scientific training, such
as it was, made them superior magicians in the popular view, and every
triumph of medical science enhanced the Jew's reputation for sorcery.

This accounts for the popularity of Jewish doctors in Northern Europe
throughout this period, despite stringent Church prohibitions,
constantly reiterated by popes and synods (Vienna 1267, Basel 1434,
etc.), and the caveat of the clergy that these Jews would turn their
magic against their patients. But who would risk his life in the hands
of an inferior Christian physician for the sake of theological doctrine
when a powerful Jewish doctor-magician could be called in? In 1657, when
a Jewish doctor was given permission to practice in the city of Hall, in
Swabia, the clergy epitomized the medieval clerical position in a public
statement: "Es sei besser mit Christo gestorben, als per Juden-Dr. mit
dem Teufel gesund worden"! But this pious preference was reserved for
whole moments; when the issue was joined the ministrations of Satan were
not rejected. For those who are interested there are lists of Jewish
physicians practicing

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

in Northern Europe during the Middle Ages. We know of most of them only
because their names have been preserved in Christian documents,
recording their services to Christian rulers and prelates, their receipt
or loss of privileges, or the occasional tragic reward of their efforts.
For if the patient risked his life when he called in a Jewish doctor,
that doctor also risked his when he rolled up his sleeves and set to
work. If his ministrations were successful he was a magician and might
expect to be treated as such, with fear and respect, and active
animosity; if he failed, he was a magician, and could expect to be
called upon to pay promptly for his crime. The first Jewish physician we
hear of in the West was one Zedekiah, court physician to Emperor Charles
the Bald toward the end of the ninth century, magician, of course, as
well as—or because?—physician. He marked the type to the end: accused of
poisoning the Emperor in 877, he no doubt suffered the appropriate
punishment.[7](jms22.htm#an_1_7.md)

Another form which the charge of sorcery took was the recurrent
accusation against Jews during the Middle Ages of feeding poisons to
their enemies. Not alone were physicians accused of poisoning their
patients, but Jews in general were considered especially adept in this
art. In the Rhineland, in 1090, we learn of Jews dealing in various
drugs and salves, and since the exotic elements of the medieval
pharmacopoeia were imported from the East, we may surmise that during
this period such items were part of the regular stock in trade of Jewish
merchants. We hear rather often of Jewish trade in drugs, throughout the
Germanic lands. But drugs and poisons were almost synonymous terms to
the medieval mind—and to the equation we may add sorcery as well.
"Poisoning was for a long time closely associated with sorcery and
magic. Mysterious deaths might be attributed to the one or the other,
and both purported to employ occult and sensational forces of nature.
The same word was used in the Greek and in the Latin language for poison
and sorcery, for a drug and a philter or magical potion. The fact that
men actually were poisoned supported the belief in the possibility of
sorcery, and this belief in its turn stimulated excessive credulity in
poisons which were thought to act at a distance or after a long lapse of
time. . . . Popular credence was strong as to the possibility of
wholesale poisoning."[8](jms22.htm#an_1_8.md)

When, in 1550, the Polish king Sigismund Augustus demanded of Ivan IV
(the Terrible) that he admit Lithuanian Jews into Russia for business
purposes, by virtue of former commercial treaties between the two
countries, Ivan replied, "It is not convenient to allow

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jews to come with
their goods to Russia, since many evils result from them. For they
import poisonous herbs into our realms. . . ." Luther wrote, "If they
\[the Jews\] could kill us all, they would gladly do so, aye, and often
do it, especially those who profess to be physicians. They know all that
is known about medicine in Germany; they can give poison to a man of
which he will die in an hour, or in ten or twenty years; they thoroughly
understand this art." If there is high praise hidden in these words it
was wholly unintended. In 1267 Church councils at Breslau and Vienna
forbade Christians to purchase foodstuffs from Jews, for these were
likely to have been poisoned—a sample of the kind of legislation this
belief occasioned. In the middle years of the fourteenth century
thousands of Jews (and also lepers) were massacred, accused of having
plotted wholesale murder by poisoning wells. Such charges and mass
persecutions preceded, in fact, the Black Death, dating back, in France,
to 1320.[9](jms22.htm#an_1_9.md)

These accusations, general in character, stemmed logically from the view
of the Jew as sorcerer. They were accompanied by other charges, which
indicate that he was accredited with the more particular skills of
medieval sorcery. During the early Christian centuries the Church had
been rocked by the controversy over the doctrine of transubstantiation.
But the popular mind, thrusting subtleties to the wind, had driven
straight to the main point, accepting that dogma in its furthest
literalness. The rôle which the host, the body of Christ, played in
popular superstition and magic throughout the Middle Ages was already
evident as early as the fourth century; what more natural than that the
Jews, magicians and enemies of Christianity, should be charged with
utilizing the wafer of the Eucharist in their own diabolic schemes? The
absurdity of attributing to Jews an acceptance and utilization of this
most un-Jewish of dogmas never occurred to their accusers. The record is
replete with accounts of mutilations of the host by Jews—and, of course,
the attendant miracles and persecutions. But direct attack upon the body
of Jesus was apparently too simple and gross a procedure to satisfy the
crafty Jews, and they frequently resorted to a more recondite method of
wreaking their venom upon the Christians and their Lord. Annually, if we
are to believe the reports, they would fashion from wax an image of the
founder of Christianity, and by their magic art transmit through this
image to its model and his followers the pangs and tortures they visited
upon it.[10](jms22.htm#an_1_10.md)

This last is a form of the famous image magic known and used

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

universally. By sticking pins into, or burning, or otherwise mutilating
an image of one's enemy it is believed that he will be caused to
experience in his own body the effects of such action. Christians did
not hesitate to impute to their Jewish neighbors frequent resort to this
technique, not only, as we have seen, with respect to the body of
Christ, but of their Christian contemporaries as well. In 1066, for
example, the Jews of Treves were accused of having made a waxen image of
Bishop Eberhard, which, after having it baptized by a priest whom they
had bribed, they burned on a Sabbath (!); is it necessary to add that he
promptly fell ill and died?[11](jms22.htm#an_1_11.md)

Of all the charges against the Jewish people the one that has enjoyed
the hardiest tenacity and the utmost notoriety, and has produced the
direst consequences, is the ritual murder accusation. In its popular
version it foists upon Jewish ritual the requirement of Christian blood
at the Passover service. The subject of much study and infinitely more
polemics, its absurdity has been conclusively established, but the true
nature of the accusation has never been made sufficiently
clear.[12](jms22.htm#an_1_12.md) The legend as we know it has experienced
several redactions. In its pristine form it was the product of ancient
superstition—and of the idea of the Jew as sorcerer.

One of the most pervasive beliefs was in the great utility for medicinal
and magical purposes of the elements of the human body. Medieval magic
is full of recipes for putting to occult use human fat, human blood,
entrails, hands, fingers; medieval medicine utilized as one of its chief
medicaments the blood of man, preferably blood that had been freshly
drawn, or menstrual blood.[13](jms22.htm#an_1_13.md) The ritual murder
accusation was the result of these beliefs.

There is on record at least one accusation against a Jew, dating from
the thirteenth century, of despoiling a servant girl, whom he was said
to have drugged, of some flesh which he intended to put to a magical or
medicinal use. This was the motive which was believed to have prompted
many assumed ritual murders. One of the first medieval references to
this accusation, made by Thomas of Cantimpré early in that century,
attributed the need for Christian blood to the widespread Jewish
affliction of hemorrhages (some later accounts changed the malady to
hemorrhoids), which could be cured only by the application of this
blood. The Jews of Fulda (Hesse-Nassau), accused in 1235 of murdering
five children, are said to have confessed that they did so in order to
procure their blood for purposes of healing. Matthew Paris's
contemporary account of the alleged

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

crucifixion of Hugh of Lincoln by Jews in 1255 ascribed to them the
intention of using the boy's bowels for divination. To skip a century
and a half, in May, 1401, the city council of Freiburg (in Breisgau)
wrote to Duke Leopold requesting the total expulsion of the Jews from
their city, the foremost count against them being that they periodically
slaughtered a Christian child, for "all Jews require Christian blood for
the prolongation of their lives." The only Christian statement on the
ritual murder charge against the Jews of Tyrnau in 1494 explains their
need of this blood on several grounds: "Firstly: they \[the Jews\] were
convinced by the judgment of their ancestors that the blood of a
Christian was a good remedy for the alleviation of the wound of
circumcision. Secondly: they were of the opinion that this blood, put
into food, is very efficacious for the awakening of mutual love.
Thirdly: they had discovered, as men and women among them suffered
equally from menstruation, that the blood of a Christian is a specific
medicine for it, when drunk. Fourthly: that they had an ancient but
secret ordinance by which they are under obligation to shed Christian
blood in honor of God in daily sacrifices in some spot or other." As
late as the beginning of the eighteenth century it is reported that in
Poland and Germany tales were told and songs sung in the streets "how
the Jews have murdered a child, and sent the blood to one another in
quills for the use of their women in childbirth."

It is evident from these instances that the suspicion of magic was
behind the accusation of child murder. There is no mention of the
Passover, of kneading the blood into the unleavened cakes, or drinking
it at the *Seder* service, all of which are late refinements. The
records of the early accusations are meaningless unless viewed against
the background of medieval superstition. A modern writer who has made a
careful study of Christian magic and witchcraft, and who proves himself
as credulous and superstition-ridden as the period he examines,
expresses exactly the medieval view, which is his as well: Jews were
persecuted "not so much for the observance of Hebrew ceremonies, as is
often suggested and supposed, but for the practice of the dark and
hideous traditions of Hebrew magic. Closely connected with these ancient
sorceries are those ritual murders. . . . In many cases the evidence is
quite conclusive that the body, and especially the blood of the victim,
was used for magical purposes." Montague Summers, the writer of these
lines, believes this "evidence" implicitly! If a present-day Catholic
can so blindly accept the truth

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

of these accusations of the use of Christian blood by Jews for magical
purposes, how all-compelling this "evidence" must have been for his
medieval predecessors![14](jms22.htm#an_1_14.md)

Most of the charges levelled against the Jews fit into one or another of
these categories. The surprising thing is that the specific crimes of
sorcery of which Jews stood accused were in the end so limited in
nature. Or perhaps this is not so surprising when we consider that these
accusations derived not from observed acts of Jews, but from the general
picture of "sorcerer" which the Church crusade against sorcery and the
later witch-cults painted so vividly. Prior to the inception of the
Inquisition in the thirteenth century, excesses attributed to sorcery
had been punished by the secular authorities simply as criminal acts.
When the Church undertook to stamp out sorcery it branded its
practitioners as devil-worshiping
anti-Christians.[15](jms22.htm#an_1_15.md)

Sorcerers and witches, brought before the bar of the Inquisition, were
accused of, and confessed to, the adoration of Satan, the desecration of
the host and other consecrated objects, the sacrifice of infants,
cannibalism, the use of human ingredients, particularly blood and fat,
in their salves and potions, effecting the death of their enemies by
means of waxen images baptized in their names, poisonings, all the
details of what came to be a stereotyped catalogue of crimes. One cannot
fail to notice especially the constant recurrence of the charge of child
sacrifice in these trials, and the importance of human blood in the
witches’ ritual; these were apparently the most distinguishing elements
in the technique of the sorcerer and the witch, as disclosed to popular
view by the campaign of the Church. We need but recall the famous trial
in 1440 of the Marshal Gilles de Rais, aid and associate of Joan of Arc,
at which he was accused and convicted of murdering several hundred
children whose blood and bodies he employed for magical
purposes.[16](jms22.htm#an_1_16.md) It is these charges that determined the
character of the sorcery propaganda against the Jews.

The Middle Ages inherited a tradition of Jewish sorcery from the ancient
world. A host of popular magical works was attributed to Solomon and
other fabled Jewish masters. Juvenal's jibe that the Appian Way swarmed
with fortune-telling Jewesses who would "sell you any sort of dream at
cut prices" was the kind of information that was bound to make and
retain its impression, and bear a numerous progeny. Then too, it must be
borne in mind, medieval Christians never had more than a very imperfect
acquaintance with the language,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the religion, the customs of the Jews who made their home among them;
and what information concerning their Jewish neighbors they did possess
was as often as not incorrect and misleading. Jews, consequently,
remained an unknown and mysterious folk. Their very strangeness was a
suspicious element, and the weirdest legends about them found ready
currency among a people given to an easy credulity and the crassest
superstition. Nor did the mistrust and animosity which the entire
background of medieval Christendom fostered against the Jews serve to
lessen the effect of their strangeness.

It need hardly occasion surprise, then, that to this despised
anti-Christian nation (the crusade against heresy, inaugurated in the
thirteenth century, ascribed diabolic rites to some of the heretical
sects as well, and this, too, may have influenced the popular view),
already tarred with the tradition of magic, was attributed the entire
list of goetic practices publicized by the Church as the infallible
marks of sorcery. The accusations came in time to be part of a pattern
which repeated itself *ad infinitum*.

But if more varied charges did not enter the record, we may be certain
that they existed in the mind of the people. Clearly, if the Jews were
such skilful magicians, their art was not limited, they must be
acquainted with all the more usual devices to which the ordinary
sorcerer turned his hand. We have evidence, if meager, that this was
so—evidence which pathetically discloses the Jewish side of the matter.
Luther recounts an anecdote of a Jew who proffered to Count Albrecht of
Saxony an amulet which would make him immune to all weapons of attack.
Albrecht forced this Jew to take his own medicine: to test the efficacy
of the amulet he hung it about its donor's neck—and ran him through with
his sword!

A curious parallel to this tale indicates the tragic use to which this
reputation for sorcery could be put, and the tragic necessity which
prompted such a use. During the Chmielnicki pogroms of 1648-1649 a young
Jewish girl of the city of Nemirov was carried off by a Cossack.
Preferring a fate of her own choosing, she offered him a similar amulet.
"'If you have no faith in me,' she assured him, 'test it by shooting at
me. You cannot harm me.' Her credulous captor, not doubting her word,
fired straight at her and she fell dead, for the sanctification of the
Holy Name, and to preserve her purity. May God have mercy on her soul!"
concludes the pious chronicler of one of the bloodiest pages of Jewish
history.[17](jms22.htm#an_1_17.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Truth Behind The Legend](jms04.md)
