[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jms13)  [Next](jms15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0812218620/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Jewish Magic and Superstition*, by Joshua Trachtenberg, \[1939\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

### 12

### NATURE AND MAN

UNDERLYING the popular approach to medicine, and indeed, the entire body
of magical and semi-magical procedures, was an intriguing misconception
of the nature of the world and its inhabitants. Along with the idea of
spirit causation went a great number of odd and often grotesque notions.
While the Jewish material does not offer a complete picture of the
medieval view of nature, it provides us with enough individual
superstitions and conceits to suggest the outlines of that picture, and
to help us the better to appreciate some of the oddities of medical—and
magical—practice.

#### THE WONDERS OF NATURE

Heir to all the fantastic notions concerning the universe that were
current in the ancient world, with equal title to the wild and wonderful
tales that swept medieval Europe, it is a source of surprise not that
Jewish literature laid claim to these ideas and stories, but rather that
it made so little of them. Compared with the intense popular interest
that was focussed upon the curious and weird phenomena of nature in the
Europe they inhabited, the Jews may be said almost to have neglected the
subject altogether—allowing for the circumstance that Jewish writings,
with their juridical and exegetical orientation, did not fully reflect
the state of popular credulity. None the less the "facts" that may be
culled from them make strange reading enough.

The familiar fables of mythical lands and creatures are duly
represented. There are regions in which all of nature is masculine, and
others where only females thrive—and the explanation is profoundly
"scientific": matter is composed of the four elements, earth, fire,
water and air, upon the harmonious combination of which sex depends; the
unbalanced atmosphere of these lands is inimical to the subsistence of
one or the other sex. On the peak of a certain mountain

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

is a miraculous spring; whoever speaks after drinking its water
instantly falls dead. Or again, there exists a marvellous herb which
produces intense hunger; one who touches it must eat immediately or die.
And as to the creatures, the whole menagerie of monstrosities is on
view: men with dog-heads, horns or beaks, with the bodies or heads of
lions, or serpents, or oxen; two- and three-headed men, four-armed
men—one authority vouches for the fact that there are 365 varieties of
human monsters, though he makes no attempt to enumerate them. And of
course, there are the serpents that spit fire, the prodigiously hybrid
animals, and the fabulous phoenix, whose body shrinks to the size of an
egg on its thousandth birthday, and is then reborn for another
millennial lease on life. (Incidentally, the phoenix was often cited by
Church Fathers and rabbis as conclusive proof of the resurrection of the
dead.)[1](jms33.htm#an_12_1.md)

A legendary creature which stirred up quite a fuss in medieval
literature, both Jewish and non-Jewish, was the man-plant, the
mandragora root, often pictured in illuminations as a human form with
leaves growing out of its head, to which Shakespeare referred in *Romeo
and Juliet:*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

And shrieks like mandrakes’ torn out of the earth,  
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Franco-German
school of Talmud commentators adopted this prodigy to explain certain
obscure terms in that work and in the Bible. R. Samson of Sens (second
half of the twelfth century) cited R. Meir b. Kalonymos of Speyer as
authority for this description: "A sort of long string grows out of a
root in the ground, and to this string the animal called *yadu‘a* is
attached at its navel like a gourd or melon, but the *yadu‘a* has the
shape of a man in every particular, face, body, hands and feet. No one
can approach closer than the radius of the string, for it uproots and
destroys everything within its reach. One may capture it only by
shooting at the string until it breaks, whereupon the animal dies." This
account was followed by the later commentators.[2](jms33.htm#an_12_2.md)

With regard to the more normal members of the animal kingdom we may
glean a host of illuminating bits of information. The belief in
spontaneous generation was as firmly rooted among Jews as among
non-Jews. Mice, worms, insects are often the children of dust and mud
and filth; gnats and flies are fathered by the atmosphere; man's

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

sweat and body-heat produce some types of lice and worms, and a
carefully differentiated species of louse springs full-blown from his
head.

Most curious among the notions concerning spontaneous generation was the
fable of the "barnacle-goose" (*Branta leucopsis*), which was
universally accredited during the Middle Ages. It was believed that this
bird was generated from the barnacle, a shell-fish growing on a flexible
stem, and adhering to loose timber, bottoms of ships, etc., a
metamorphosis to which many writers allude, and which is solemnly
described in a good number of scientific works. This conception was
accompanied, in Jewish literature, by other theories as to its place of
origin: trees, from which the birds grow like fruit and hang by their
beaks until they fall off, rotting wood, brine, etc. The determination
of the true nature of this bird was of considerable ritual importance.
Was it fowl, or fish, or fruit? Was it forbidden or permitted as a food?
Did it require ritual slaughter or not? These questions were variously
answered in accordance with the version of its origin which the
authorities accepted. It is of interest that a similar problem agitated
Christian ecclesiastics—was it permissible to eat these birds during
Lent? Which again hinged on the issue as to whether they were fish or
fowl.

The fable was turned to good account against the "obstinate" Jews by
Church authorities. "Be wise at length, wretched Jew," wrote Gerald of
Wales (twelfth century), "be wise even though late! The first generation
of man from dust without male or female \[Adam\] and the second from the
male without the female \[Eve\] thou darest not deny in veneration of
thy law. The third alone from male and female, because it is usual, thou
approvest and affirmest with thy hard heart. But the fourth, in which
alone is salvation, from female without male—that, with obstinate
malice, thou detest-est to thy own destruction. Blush, wretch, blush,
and at least turn to nature! She is an argument for the faith, and for
our conviction procreates and produces every day animals without either
male or female." Jews needed no coaxing to accept the fable, but the
argument failed to move their "hard hearts" to confess the truth of the
Immaculate Conception.[3](jms33.htm#an_12_3.md)

Animals that copulate during the daytime never bear their young at
night. Ritually unclean animals which see at night, such as dogs, cats
and mice, have no vision at all until they are nine days old. On the
other hand, *kosher* animals, that is those which may be eaten,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

may be recognized by the fact that they cringe when a hand is passed
over them, while unclean animals do not. We read that "many times" fowl
are born and live without hearts, and that food remains in a dog's
stomach for three days, so that it can go that long unfed. In our
ignorance we may believe that dogs follow the scent of an animal upon
the ground, but a "true investigation" revealed that it is not the odor
but the breath of the animal upon the ground that the dog picks up; some
bright hares are aware of this and outwit the dogs by keeping their
snouts in the air as they race to their hiding-places. Certain
shell-fish, when cut into pieces and thrown back into the river, reunite
the severed parts of their body and nonchalantly swim away. Cows whose
udders are unprotected while they are at pasture are likely to be milked
by a species of leach (the French word *sangsue* is
used).[4](jms33.htm#an_12_4.md)

In an age when poisoning was an obsession, the following precaution was
in high repute: "When a man finds himself among suspected poisoners and
he is afraid they will tamper with his food or drink, he should procure
a knife with a handle of snake bone, and stick it into the table. If
there is any poison present the handle will quiver, for the snake is
full of venom, and like attracts like." Popes Clement V and John XXII
owned such knives, the handles being made of serpents’
horns.[6](jms33.htm#an_12_6.md)

#### FOLK BIOLOGY—PROCREATION

A detailed discussion of the singular physiology that passed for science
among the masses would make a full treatise. Here a brief presentation
of the popular ideas concerning procreation, always a favorite field of
speculation, will furnish a typical illustration of the sort of
biological knowledge with which the folk medicine operated.

It was widely believed that comestibles play an important part in the
procreative process, not alone by arousing passion, but also more
directly by "multiplying" or "decreasing the seed," and determining the
character of offspring. Spicy or heavy foods heat and thicken the blood,
which manufactures the sperm, according to this view, and thus increase
the flow of semen; they are thus conducive to a quick temper and wit in
children. Light or unseasoned foods cause the children to be dull-witted
and simple. In consequence foodstuffs were divided into two broad
categories, those which "chill" the body and therefore have a
deleterious effect upon the

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

procreative powers, and those which "heat" the body and awaken sexual
desire. In the first group are mentioned salt and salted fish, such as
herring, legumes, melons, etc.; in the second, spices, strong wines,
eggs, milk-foods, boiled lentils, roasted garlic, and a "five-finned
fish." The references to the sexual properties of foods usually imply
that most people are already sufficiently well-informed and need no
further instruction.

On the other hand, various devices for quenching passion, in addition to
the consumption of "chilling" foods, were known. The man who felt
himself being overwhelmed by an impure desire could conquer it by
"pressing his big toes firmly into the ground and resting the entire
weight of his body upon them without leaning against a wall; this will
banish all sensual thoughts." But "there is nothing that destroys
passion so effectively as cold water; sit in it until you have subdued
your desire," a sovereign and familiar remedy.[6](jms33.htm#an_12_6.md)

The ancient taboo against a menstruous woman persisted undiminished
throughout the Middle Ages. Great pains were taken to avoid the
slightest contact, even between man and wife. This policy was carried to
such extremes at times that the rabbis found it necessary to scold
"those who throw the key or coins into their wives' hands." Yet, it is
not to be wondered at that such inordinate measures were adopted, for
the whole traditional lore of Judaism served to emphasize and enhance
the taboo, threatening those who broke it with the direst consequences,
here and in the hereafter, for themselves and their children. The Talmud
contains a charm against snakebite which illustrates perfectly the
abhorrence with which the woman in menses was regarded; when a woman
meets a snake on the road, it is enough for her to announce "I am
menstruating" for the reptile to glide hastily away! There is even a
theory that the very atmosphere is polluted by the glance of a
menstruating woman, a theory which may be tested by a "true experiment":
"If a woman at the commencement of her period stares fixedly into a
bright metal mirror she will behold in it a drop of blood, for the demon
that is in her glance creates an evil influence in the air which adheres
to the mirror; verily she is like the viper that kills with its
glances." To have sexual relations with such a woman was not alone to
commit a mortal sin, but to jeopardize one's very health and
sanity.[7](jms33.htm#an_12_7.md)

Not all times were equally favorable for coition. It was believed that
children conceived during the first three days of the week would be born
on the Sabbath; therefore the "pious ones" exercised

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

restraint on these nights. But Friday night was the most propitious for
conception because the sacred associations of the Sabbath would
inevitably condition the child's character. The first half of the lunar
month was preferred above the second because the waxing moon shed a
beneficent influence upon offspring. A conception that occurs in the
middle of the night is the most promising; here the explanations
traverse a wide range from the purely mystical to the grossly material.
One view has it that during this time of the night the "forces of
uncleanness" are dormant; a second, that voices in the street are then
least likely to distract a man's thoughts to another woman, which would
have a very deleterious effect upon his child; still a third, that in
the first part of the night a man's system is overheated by the food he
has consumed, while toward morning it is too chilled. A reason to suit
every taste![8](jms33.htm#an_12_8.md)

The prohibition against cohabitation during the day or in an illuminated
place goes back to the Talmudic apprehension that the demons who are
driven off by light may also perversely be attracted by it. Therefore
the warning is advanced that one who stands naked before a burning lamp
at night will become epileptic, and children conceived before a light
will be similarly stricken, the Hebrew word for epileptic, *nichpeh*,
having the sense of "forced, or seized" by a demon. In consequence of
this dread elaborate precautions were taken to exclude all light from a
bedchamber at night. But the fear of epilepsy in children was restricted
to the influence of artificial lights; the light of the sun was believed
to produce white eruptions, the moon, scurfiness which finally develops
into leprosy, the stars, stammering. Undoubtedly such ideas were
originally advanced to enhance the virtue of sexual modesty, but the
threats they embodied were just as surely accepted as literally
true.[9](jms33.htm#an_12_9.md)

Of a similar nature were the fearful consequences believed to follow
abnormal and perverted methods of coitus, and impure thoughts at the
moment of conception. This last matter loomed especially large in all
considerations of the subject, for it was universally believed that the
parents’ state of mind was directly transmitted through the seed to the
infant, and intimately affected its character and its physique.
Therefore parents were sternly warned not to have relations when they
were on bad terms, and not to think of other individuals or of
unpleasant and unworthy things, but to fix their attentions upon holy
and pure thoughts which would have the best influence upon children.
Some of the later mystics went to

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

the absurd length of drawing up lists of appropriate subjects for
concentration on such occasions: the great and pious figures of Jewish
history. In short, "the embryo is formed in consonance with the thoughts
and emotions of the parents," and "the greatest part of infant mortality
is due to neglect of this principle." Indeed the delightful suggestion
was offered in all seriousness that "most bastards are bright because
the union of their parents is consummated in love and
joy"![10](jms33.htm#an_12_10.md)

There existed a strong conviction that things seen before and during
conception make so powerful an impression on the mind that their
characteristics are stamped upon the offspring. This is, of course, a
universal superstition. If, on the way home from the ritual bath to
which she repaired after her period (a procedure preliminary to
intercourse), "a woman encounters a dog, her child will have an ugly
dog-face, if she meets an ass, it will be stupid, if an ignorant lout,
it will be an ignoramus." "Anything she meets makes a vivid impression
on her and she thinks about it at the time of coition so that the child
is affected thereby. . . . Therefore she should return to the bath. . .
. But there are two exceptions to this rule. If she meets a horse, she
need not return to the bath, for even if she should think of it there
would be no harm, for a horse is of a happy disposition, and so she may
have a son whose heart will rejoice in the study of *Torah*. And if she
meets a scholar she need not go back and repeat her ablution. On the
contrary she should think about him all the time." To avoid the
possibility of inauspicious encounters many women chose to be led home
from the bath blindfolded "imagining meanwhile that a pious man was
coming to meet them."

Then, too, there was the well-worn fable of the white king and queen who
bore a black child, or conversely, the black parents and the white
infant, which cropped up frequently in classical and Talmudic
literature, and went the rounds during the Middle Ages; the explanation,
*bien entendu*, was that the mother's attention during intercourse was
focussed on a picture hanging on the wall. Which brings us to a point
that was often made: the mother's thoughts, and not the father's, exert
the decisive influence upon the child. The classic instance of this
superstition, of course, is the trick that Jacob played on his
father-in-law, Laban, when he set peeled rods in the watering-troughs so
that "the flocks conceived at the sight of the rods, and the flocks
brought forth streaked, speckled and spotted" (Gen.
30:37-39).[11](jms33.htm#an_12_11.md)

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

The Middle Ages were especially prolific of fertility potions, many of
them concocted of parts of animals which were noted for their fecundity.
Among these the hare and the fish were outstanding. Often, however, a
wholly magical treatment, such as the recital of Biblical verses, was
relied upon to cure barrenness. On the other hand, the Talmud mentions a
"root-drink" which could produce sterility, and preparations to induce
abortions were also known.

The problem of relieving the pains of childbirth found many solutions.
Besides the purely magical treatments, already discussed, there were
many folk remedies of a dubious character, *e.g.*, the suggestion that
the woman be fed mother's milk, the idea probably being that it may
transmit to her another woman's success in surmounting the ordeal.
Several prescriptions suggest primitive attempts at anesthesia; one such
requires that a strong frankincense be burned before the parturient
woman (but it must be in a "new clay bowl"); another, that she inhale
the smoke of burning felt. The effect of this last, however, is thus
naïvely described: "The woman will sneeze and expel her
infant"![12](jms33.htm#an_12_12.md)

There were several interesting theories concerning the factors that
determine the sex of the child. According to one, which owned Talmudic
warrant, the sperm is male, the egg-cell female; whichever makes its
entry second into the womb "subdues" the first and impresses its gender
upon the offspring. Consequently the parent whose emission is delayed
determines the child's sex. The same conclusion was also derived from a
contrary premise, namely, that the will of the parent who first
experiences an orgasm is paramount. This view, however, rather
unreasonably insists that all men desire girl children, and all women,
boys. Still a third opinion was based upon a remarkable anatomical
fable. Within the womb there are seven sacs, three at each side and one
in the center; if the spermatozoa enter those at the right, the child
will be a boy, the left sacs produce girls, and the middle one, children
who are sexless or hermaphroditic. Therefore the mother can control the
sex of her child by lying either on her right or left
side.[13](jms33.htm#an_12_13.md)

There were manifold infallible ways of discovering the sex of the child
prior to birth. The male lies face-down in the womb, the female face-up
(the corpse of a drowned man or woman floats in the same manner) . At
the instant when the child pushes its way into this world one can tell
its sex by noting the direction in which its head is turned. But most of
the prognostics did not necessitate

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

waiting until they were no longer needed. The desired information could
be obtained long before. Thus, if a pregnant woman drips some milk from
her breast upon a board or rock, if it spatters the child will be a boy,
otherwise, a girl; or, if the milk sinks in water, she will bear a girl,
and if it floats, a boy; if her loins ache, she is carrying a boy, but
if her belly pains, it is a girl; if she is quick about her housework
and her spinning, she will have a son, while if she is sluggish and can
barely get around, a daughter. The right- and left-motif was also
prominent. A right breast fuller than the left betokens a male heir; the
same is indicated if, on rising from her seat, a woman leans on her
right hand; but if she feels the fetus knocking against her left side,
it is a girl, and so on.

These signs were evidently drawn from non-Jewish folklore, for the
medieval literature abounds with parallels. It is noteworthy, though,
that the Jewish sources retail these investigations and experiments to
satisfy no mere curiosity, however justified the thirst for knowledge
may be in this case, but rather to meet a pious need. They are meant for
parents who reside a considerable distance from the nearest performer of
circumcisions. Should they wait until the child is born to determine
whether or not they require his services, it would be impossible to
initiate their son into the covenant at the prescribed time; therefore
science is pressed into the service of religion, and the summons can go
out, if the prognostication so indicates, long before the boy has opened
his eyes to the light of day.[14](jms33.htm#an_12_14.md)

This account may close with two interesting legends. The first, voicing
the prevalent belief in the possibility of impregnation without physical
contact, relates that the daughter of the prophet Jeremiah entered a hot
bath soon after her father had left it, and there received her father's
seed. The son of this unusual conception was named *Ben Zera‘*, "son of
seed," but when he grew older and came to understand the significance of
his name he was ashamed of it and changed it to Ben Sira, by which
pseudonym we know him as the author of *Ecclesiasticus*.

The second tale is of a young scholar of the town of Enns, in Austria,
who went off to a distant city to pursue his studies, leaving behind a
young wife. Eleven months after his departure she bore a child and
provided the good folk of the town with a tidy morsel of scandal. But
the graybeards got together and agreed that in view of her unquestioned
piety this event could not be regarded as suspicious, for a study of
ancient literature revealed that such a delayed

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

birth was not unheard of, though admittedly unusual. The arresting
feature of this story is that the scholar's name was *Shlumiel*, which
has become the colloquial epithet for all those bunglers whose
enterprises invariably go awry.[15](jms33.htm#an_12_15.md)

#### FORGETTING AND REMEMBERING

In a community in which learning was the most honored pursuit and a
retentive memory the most prized attribute, we must expect to find
superstition invading the precincts of scholarship itself. The Talmud
contains a list of actions which induce forgetfulness: "eating what has
been nibbled by a mouse or a cat, eating an animal's heart, eating
olives, drinking water in which someone has washed, placing one foot
over the other while washing them, and some add, using one's garments as
a pillow." There follows then a series of ten things which are "bad for
memorizing study."

There is ample evidence in the medieval writings that these admonitions
were scrupulously observed, though the first group seems to have made
the stronger impression. Thus we are informed that Meir of Rothenburg,
Maharil and Israel Isserlein, leading lights in their generations, very
carefully avoided sleeping on their clothes; Maharil, when on a journey,
would prefer a hard saddle under his head to a soft bundle of garments.
R. Meir went the Talmud one better and refrained from eating even the
hearts of birds. To this day pious Jews avoid passing between two women,
because the Talmudic passage warned that this is "bad for the memory."
(Fear of brushing against a menstruating woman also enters here.)
Another of these superstitions which is still widely observed is not to
read an inscription on a tombstone. A commentator observes, "I have seen
scrupulously pious men place a stone on the marker, with the explanation
that this destroys the ill-effect of reading the inscription." Wiping
one's hands on one's clothes, putting on two garments at a time, mending
clothes while one is naked, these acts were believed to exert a similar
debilitating effect upon the memory. An antidote for the last is to put
a splinter of wood in the mouth. The modern version among East-European
Jews, derived from German custom, is to keep a bit of thread in the
mouth while mending garments that are on the body. A related idea was
that drinking from narrow-necked flasks is bad for one's visual and
aural faculties.[16](jms33.htm#an_12_16.md)

The belief that there is an intimate connection between the

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

demons and the finger-nails has some obscure relation to another of
these superstitions, namely, that cutting the nails in the order of the
fingers causes loss of memory. The ancient Persians made much of the
dangers associated with the finger-nails and prescribed a specific order
of paring them; from them this belief came over to the Mohammedans and
Jews, but it was the latter who brought it and the memory into
conjunction. The proper manner of cutting the nails, as given by the
medieval writers, varies somewhat; the Zoroastrian order was accepted
for the left hand only. The commonest version is as follows: left hand,
4, 2, 5, 3, 1; right hand, 2, 4, 1, 3, 5. One of the earliest references
reads: "Left hand, begin with 4 and end with 1, right hand begin with 1
and end with 4. Paring any two nails in sequence causes forgetfulness."
But this source insists that the operation must begin with 1 or 4. "To
begin with 3 causes the death of one's children, with 5, poverty, with
2, a bad reputation." This superstition, however, was not universally
respected; Meir of Rothenburg, for one, had the temerity to disregard
it, as did the sixteenth-century mystic, Isaac
Luria.[17](jms33.htm#an_12_17.md)

Accompanying these superstitions were a good number of a reverse order,
to preserve and strengthen the memory. Prominent among them was the
above-mentioned invocation of the "Prince of Forgetting," Poteh or
Purah, uttered on Saturday evening after *Habdalah* and on other
appropriate occasions, such as the initial enrolment of a child in
school. Other incantations were also prescribed. Biblical verses
relating to the prophet Elijah were recited at the close of the Sabbath
for the same purpose; "mentioning his name at this time is good for the
memory and brings good luck during the week."

An interesting group of recipes is comprised under the name "small
Baladur" (also written "Balazur") . The plant Baladur (Anacardia) was
considered by the Moslems a potent memory strengthener and in this rôle
it appeared in Jewish medicinal literature also. In time, however, the
meaning of the term was forgotten, and all sorts of prescriptions came
to be denominated "the small Baladur." So widely accepted was this term
that in the end it was taken to be distinctively Jewish, and there was
even a current proverb, allegedly quoted from the Talmud: "Review,
review \[your studies\] and you'll have no need of Baladur." The word
seems to have penetrated German Jewry from the South fairly late, but
the recipes were probably known long before they were dignified with

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

this title. Among the simpler ones are the following: eat hazel nuts for
nine days, beginning with six and adding six more each day; eat pepper
seeds for nine days, beginning with one seed and doubling the dose until
it reaches 256 seeds on the ninth day, and each time, before you consume
them, recite Deut. 33:8-11 and Ps. 119:9-16; grind cloves, long peppers,
dates, ginger, galanga-root and Muscat nuts in equal quantities, beat
them with olive oil into a paste, and eat a little every morning before
breakfast. One may judge from the progressive complexity of these three
recipes the extent to which ingenuity multiplied ingredients and
mystification in others. But all, whatever their composition, were
equally touted as the original "Baladur."[18](jms33.htm#an_12_18.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. Medicine](jms15.md)
