[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_682) 
[Next](bh3_684) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:684

*Narrated Abaya bin Rifaa:*

My grandfather, Rafi bin Khadij said, "We were in the valley of
Dhul-Hulaifa of Tuhama in the company of the Prophet and had some camels
and sheep (of the booty). The people hurried (in slaughtering the
animals) and put their meat in the pots and started cooking. Allah's
Apostle came and ordered them to upset the pots, and distributed the
booty considering one camel as equal to ten sheep. One of the camels
fled and the people had only a few horses, so they got worried. (The
camel was chased and) a man slopped the camel by throwing an arrow at
it. Allah's Apostle said, 'Some of these animals are untamed like wild
animals, so if anyone of them went out of your control, then you should
treat it as you have done now.' " My grandfather said, "O Allah's
Apostle! We fear that we may meet our enemy tomorrow and we have no
knives, could we slaughter the animals with reeds?" The Prophet said,
"Yes, or you can use what would make blood flow (slaughter) and you can
eat what is slaughtered and the Name of Allah is mentioned at the time
of slaughtering. But don't use teeth or fingernails (in slaughtering). I
will tell you why, as for teeth, they are bones, and fingernails are
used by Ethiopians for slaughtering. (See Hadith 668)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:685: Anas: No doubt, the Prophet mortgaged his armor for barley
grams. Once I ...](bh3_684)
