[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_666) 
[Next](bh3_668) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:668

*Narrated 'Abaya bin Rafa'a bin Raft' bin Khadij:*

My grandfather said, "We were in the company of the Prophet at
Dhul-Hulaifa. The people felt hungry and captured some camels and sheep
(as booty). The Prophet was behind the people. They hurried and
slaughtered the animals and put their meat in pots and started cooking
it. (When the Prophet came) he ordered the pots to be upset and then he
distributed the animals (of the booty), regarding ten sheep as equal to
one camel. One of the camels fled and the people ran after it till they
were exhausted. At that time there were few horses. A man threw an arrow
at the camel, and Allah stopped the camel with it. The Prophet said,
"Some of these animals are like wild animals, so if you lose control
over one of these animals, treat it in this way (i.e. shoot it with an
arrow)." Before distributing them among the soldiers my grandfather
said, "We may meet the enemies in the future and have no knives; can we
slaughter the animals with reeds?" The Prophet said, "Use whatever
causes blood to flow, and eat the animals if the name of Allah has been
mentioned on slaughtering them. Do not slaughter with teeth or
fingernails and I will tell you why: It is because teeth are bones (i.e.
cannot cut properly) and fingernails are the tools used by the
Ethiopians (whom we should not imitate for they are infidels)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:669: Ibn 'Umar: The Prophet decreed that one should not eat two
dates together at a ...](bh3_668)
