[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_561) 
[Next](bh3_563) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:563

*Narrated Husain bin Ali:*

Ali bin Abi Talib said: "I got a she-camel as my share of the war booty
on the day (of the battle) of Badr, and Allah's Apostle gave me another
she-camel. I let both of them kneel at the door of one of the Ansar,
intending to carry Idhkhir on them to sell it and use its price for my
wedding banquet on marrying Fatima. A goldsmith from Bam Qainqa' was
with me. Hamza bin 'Abdul-Muttalib was in that house drinking wine and a
lady singer was reciting: "O Hamza! (Kill) the (two) fat old she camels
(and serve them to your guests)."

So Hamza took his sword and went towards the two she-camels and cut off
their humps and opened their flanks and took a part of their livers." (I
said to Ibn Shihab, "Did he take part of the humps?" He replied, "He cut
off their humps and carried them away.") 'Ali further said, "When I saw
that dreadful sight, I went to the Prophet and told him the news. The
Prophet came out in the company of Zaid bin Haritha who was with him
then, and I too went with them. He went to Hamza and spoke harshly to
him. Hamza looked up and said, 'Aren't you only the slaves of my
forefathers?' The Prophet retreated and went out. This incident happened
before the prohibition of drinking."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:564: Anas: The Prophet decided to grant a portion of (the
uncultivated land of) ...](bh3_563)
