[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_714) 
[Next](bh3_716) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:716

*Narrated Marwan and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:*

When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came to the Prophet and they
requested him to return their properties and captives. The Prophet stood
up and said to them, "I have other people with me in this matter (as you
see) and the most beloved statement to me is the true one; you may
choose either the properties or the prisoners as I have delayed their
distribution." The Prophet had waited for them for more than ten days
since his arrival from Ta'if. So, when it became evident to them that
the Prophet was not going to return them except one of the two, they
said, "We choose our prisoners." The Prophet got up amongst the people
and glorified and praised Allah as He deserved and said, "Then after,
these brethren of yours have come to us with repentance, and I see it
logical to return them the captives. So, whoever amongst you likes to do
that as a favor, then he can do it, and whoever of you likes to stick to
his share till we recompense him from the very first war booty which
Allah will give us, then he can do so (i.e. give up the present
captives)." The people unanimously said, "We do that (return the
captives) willingly." The Prophet said, "We do not know which of you has
agreed to it and which have not, so go back and let your leaders forward
us your decision." So, all the people then went back and discussed the
matter with their leaders who returned and informed the Prophet that all
the people had willingly given their consent to return the captives.
This is what has reached the Prophet, "I paid for my ransom and Aqil's
ransom."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:717: Ibn Aun: I wrote a letter to Nafi and Nafi wrote in reply
to my letter that the...](bh3_716)
