[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hvj000)  [Next](hvj002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRE8VG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu)*, tr. by William
N. Porter, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# INTRODUCTION

THE *Hyaku-nin-isshiu*, or 'Single Verses by a Hundred People', were
collected together in A.D. 1235 by Sadaiye Fujiwara, who included as his
own contribution verse No. 97. They are placed in approximately
chronological order, and range from about the year 670 to the year of
compilation. The Japanese devote themselves to poetry very much more
than we do; and there is hardly a home in Japan, however humble, where
these verses, or at least some of them, are not known. They are, and
have been for many years, used also in connexion with a game of cards,
in which the skill consists in fitting parts of the different verses
together.

Japanese poetry differs very largely from anything we are used to; it
has no rhyme or alliteration, and little, if any, rhythm, as we
understand it. The verses in this Collection are all what are called
*Tanka*, which was for many years the only form of verse known to the
Japanese. A *tanka* verse has five lines

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

and thirty-one syllables, arranged thus: 5-7-5-7-7 as this is an unusual
metre in our ears, I have adopted for the translation a five-lined verse
of 8-6-8-6-6 metre, with the second, fourth, and fifth lines rhyming, in
the hope of retaining at least some resemblance to the original form,
while making the sound more familiar to English readers.

I may perhaps insert here, as an example, the following well-known
*tanka* verse, which does not appear in the *Hyaku-nin-isshiu*
collection:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

  Idete inaba  
Nushinaki yado to  
  Narinu tomo  
  Nokiba no ume yo  
Haru wo wasuruna.

Though masterless my home appear,  
  When I have gone away,  
Oh plum tree growing by the caves,  
  Forget not to display  
  Thy buds in spring, I pray.

</div>

This was written by Sanetomo Minamoto on the morning of the day he was
murdered at Kamakura, as related in the note to verse No. 93.

It is necessarily impossible in a translation of this kind to adhere at
all literally to the text; more especially as Japanese poetry abounds in
all sorts of

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

puns, plays upon words, and alternative meanings, which cannot be
rendered into English. For example, a favourite device with Japanese
verse-writers is to introduce what Professor Chamberlain calls a
'pivot-word', which they consider adds an elegant touch to the
composition. An instance of this will be found in verse No. 16, where
the word *matsu*, though only appearing once, must be understood twice
with its two different meanings. It is almost as if we should say,
'Sympathy is what I *need*less to say I never get it.' Other
peculiarities of Japanese verse, as Professor Chamberlain points out,
are the 'pillow-word', or recognized conventional epithet (see verse No.
17), and the 'preface', where the first two or three lines appear to
have only the slightest connexion with the main idea, and simply serve
as an introduction (see verse No. 27).

The *Hyaku-nin-isshiu*, like all Japanese classical poetry, contains no
Chinese words, such as are so extensively introduced into the modern
spoken language; it consists of poetical ideas clothed in poetical
language, compressed within the regulation metre, embellished with
various elegant word-plays, and is absolutely free from any trace of
vulgarity. In the old days it was only the nobles, court officials, and
church

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

dignitaries, who wrote verses; or at all events only their verses have
been handed down to our time, and the lower classes were not supposed to
know anything at all about the art.

Thus, it is related that long ago Prince Ota Dokwan was hunting with his
retinue on the mountains; and, a storm of rain coming on, he stopped at
a mountain inn, to request the loan of a rain-coat; a girl came at his
call, and retired into the hut, coming back again in a few minutes
looking rather confused, and without saying a word she humbly presented
the Prince with a yamabuki blossom (a kind of yellow rose) on an
outstretched fan. The Prince, much incensed at being trifled with like
this, turned on his heel, and went off in high dudgeon; until one of his
attendants reminded him of a well-known verse, which runs:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

  Nanae yae  
Hana wa sake domo  
  Yamabuki no  
Mi no hitotsu dani  
Naka zo kanashiki.

The yamabuki blossom has  
  A wealth of petals gay ;  
But yet in spite of this, alas  
  I much regret to say,  
  No seed can it display.

</div>

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

The words as printed in the last couplet mean, 'I am very sorry that it
has not a single seed; but, if *mino* is taken as one word, it would
mean, 'I am very sorry that (the yamabuki, i.e. herself, the mountain
flower) has not any rain-coat'. And this was the maiden's delicate
apology. The Prince, we are told, was astonished to find such culture
and learning in a peasant girl!

Perhaps what strikes one most in connexion with the *Hyaku-nin-isshiu*
is the date when the verses were written; most of them were produced
before the time of the Norman Conquest, and one cannot but be struck
with the advanced state of art and culture in Japan at a time when
England was still in a very elementary stage of civilization.

The Collection, as will be seen, consists almost entirely of love-poems
and what I may call picture-poems, intended to bring before the mind's
eye some well-known scene in nature; and it is marvellous what effect
little thumbnail sketches are compressed within thirty-one syllables,
however crude and faulty the translation may be; for instance, verses
Nos. 79, 87, and 98. But the predominating feature, the undercurrent
that runs through them all, is a touch of pathos, which is
characteristic of the Japanese. It shows out

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

in the cherry blossoms which are doomed to fall, the dewdrops scattered
by the wind, the mournful cry of the wild deer on the mountains, the
dying crimson of the fallen maple leaves, the weird sadness of the
cuckoo singing in the moonlight, and the loneliness of the recluse in
the mountain wilds; while those verses which appear to be of a more
cheerful type are rather of the nature of the 'Japanese smile',
described by Lafcadio Hearn as a mask to hide the real feelings.

Some explanation is necessary as to the names of the writers of the
different verses. The Japanese custom is to place the family or clan
name first, followed by the preposition *no* (of), and then the rest of
the name; but, as this would be appreciated only by those who are
familiar with the language, the names have been transposed, and the
titles and ranks translated, as far as possible, into English. At the
same time the full name and title have also been given on the left band
page in their Japanese form; for many of these names, such as Yamabe no
Akahito, Abe no Nakamaro, Ono no Komachi, are so well known to Japanese
students that they would hardly be recognized in their transposed form.

A word may be added as to pronunciation, for the benefit of those who
are not familiar with Japanese;

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

every vowel in poetry must be sounded, there are no diphthongs, a long
vowel is lengthened out, as if it were two syllables, a final *n*, which
was originally *mu*, must be sounded as a full syllable, and a final
vowel is generally elided, if the following word begins with a vowel.
The continental sound is to be given to *a*, *e*, and *i*, and the
aspirate is sounded.

The illustrations have been reproduced from a native edition of the
*Hyaku-nin-isshiu*, which probably dates from the end of the eighteenth
century, and which has been kindly lent to me by Mr. F. V. Dickins,
C.B., to whom I am much indebted; as will be seen, they generally
illustrate the subject of the verse, but occasionally they appear to
represent the conditions under which the verse was written.

For most of the information contained in the notes the present
Translator is indebted to the researches of Professor B. H. Chamberlain,
F.R.G.S., Professor Clay MacCauley, and Mr. F. V. Dickins, C.B.; his
thanks are also due to Mr. S. Uchigasaki, for his kind assistance
towards the meaning of some of the more obscure passages. He makes no
claim that his verses have any merit as English poetry; nor, where there
is so much uncertainty among the Japanese themselves as to the real
meaning of some of these old verses, does he claim

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

that his translation is in all cases the correct one. In two or three
instances the original has been purposely toned down somewhat, to suit
English ideas. He has, however, tried to reproduce these Verses from Old
Japan in such a way, that a few of the many, who now are unfamiliar with
the subject, may feel sufficient interest in them to study a more
scholarly translation, such as that by Mr. F. V. Dickins, recently
published in the *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*, or Professor
MacCauley's literal translation, both of which are evidently the result
of hard labour and great care; and may thus learn to appreciate a branch
of Japanese art which has been far too much neglected up to the present.

W. N. P.

 

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

'Whatever Defects, as, I doubt not, there will be many, fall under the
Reader's Observation, I hope his Candour will incline him to make the
following Reflections: That the Works of *Orientals* contain many
Peculiarities, and that thro' Defect of Language few *European*
Translators can do them justice.'

WILLIAM COLLINS.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. The Emperor Tenchi: Tenchi Tennō](hvj002)
