[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fu03)  [Next](fu05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417919205/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

###### THE

### NARRATIVE OF HOEI-SHIN,

##### *WITH COMMENTS*

###### BY

### PROFESSOR CARL F. NEUMANN.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### CHAPTER I.

### KNOWLEDGE OF FOREIGN COUNTRIES AMONG THE CHINESE.

"To retain laws and customs according to the traditionary manner, and to
extend these laws and customs to other lands," was the precept of the
founders of the Celestial Empire, as well as of other civilised nations.
"But this extension," they added, "is not to be effected by the
oratorical powers of single messengers, nor through the force of armed
hordes. This renovation, as in every other sound organic growth which
forces itself from within, can only take place when the Outer
Barbarians, irresistibly compelled by the virtue and majesty of the Son
of Heaven, blush for their barbarism, voluntarily obey the image of the
Heavenly Father, and become men."

It will be readily understood that a race holding such opinions would
undertake no voyage of discovery, and attempt no conquests. Not a single
instance occurs daring the entire four thousand years of the history of
Eastern Asia, of an individual who had travelled in foreign lands for
the purpose of adding to his own information or that of others. The
journey of Lao-tse--the founder of the religion of the Taosse--

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

to the West appears to be a tale deliberately invented for the purpose
of connecting his doctrine of the Primitive and Infinite 'Wisdom with
that of "The Western Mountain of the Gods," or with Buddhism. The
campaigns beyond those limits which Nature has assigned to the Chinese
Empire, were undertaken merely through the impulse of self-preservation.
Men were compelled, in Central as in Eastern Asia, in Thibet as well as
on the banks of the Irawaddy, to anticipate the dangers and invasions
which, at a later period, threatened the freedom of the Central Empire,
and were frequently obliged to send ambassadors or spies into different
Asiatic or European countries to obtain information relating to their
situation and nature, as well as the condition of their inhabitants,
which could guide them in their subsequent warlike or diplomatic
relations with the enemies of the Empire.

This land, so blessed by Nature, attracted not only the barbarian
desirous of plunder, but also the merchant, since certain productions,
such as silk, tea, and true rhubarb, were found only there. The Chinese
Government as well as people, influenced by the precepts of their wise
men, received strangers graciously so long as they implicitly obeyed, or
in any manner evinced fear and submission, and returned the presents
which were offered according to Oriental custom with others of still
greater value. All the discoveries and experiences, all the knowledge
and information which they thus obtained in their peaceful or warlike
relations with foreign

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

nations, were generally recorded in the last division of the
"Year-Books" of their own chronicles, forming, in an historical point of
view, an inestimable treasure.

In the first century of our reckoning, the pride and vanity induced by
the Chinese social system were partly broken by the gradual progress of
Buddhism over all Eastern Asia. He who believed in the divine mission of
the son of the King of Kapilapura, must recognise every man as his
brother and equal by birth; yes, must strive--for the old Buddhistic
faith has this in common with the Christian religion--to extend the
joyful mission of salvation to all nations on earth, and, to attain this
end, must suffer, like the type of the God incarnate, all earthly pain
and persecution. So we find that a number of Buddhist monks and
preachers have at distant times wandered to all known and unknown parts
of the world, either to obtain information with regard to their distant
co-religionists, or to preach the doctrine of their Holy Trinity to
unbelievers. The official accounts which these missionaries rendered of
their travels, and of which we possess several entire, considered as
sources of information with regard to different lands and nations,
belong to the most instructive and important part of Chinese literature.
From these sources we have derived in a great degree that information
which we possess regarding North-eastern Asia and the Western Coasts of
America, during centuries which have been hitherto veiled in the deepest
obscurity.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

### CHINESE KNOWLEDGE OF LANDS AND NATIONS.

Pride and vanity form the basis upon which the Chinese built their
peculiar system of information regarding other lands and people. Around
"the Flower of the Centre," as their sages teach, dwell rude uncivilised
races, which are in reality animals, although they have externally human
forms. To these rough brutes they apply all manner of abusive epithets,
assigning to them the names of dogs, swine, devils, and savages,
according to the four points of the compass whence they came. The
occasional inquirers and writers of history among the Europeans who have
thought it worth their while to cast a glance upon the as yet fallow
fields of Eastern and Central Asiatic history, have blindly followed
this limited system, which rests upon the narrowest geographic limits,
so that races originally without connection were melted into one and the
same people; as, for instance, the numerous tribes of the Tartar family.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Identity of the Tartars and North American Indians;
or, the Road to America, and the People in it](fu05)
