[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fu09)  [Next](fu11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417919205/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

#### LETTER

###### FROM

### COLONEL BARCLAY KENNON

###### ON THE

##### NAVIGATION OF THE NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### NAVIGATION OF THE NORTH PACIFIC.

IT will naturally have occurred to the reader that the strongest proof
which can be alleged in favour of the journey of Hoei-shin and his
Buddhist predecessors to the Continent of North America is the
demonstration of the ease with which it could be performed. This has
indeed been largely shown by Professor Neumann, and I am happy in being
able to state that more recent researches have thrown additional light
on this very curious question. While writing the last pages of the
foregoing chapter, I was so fortunate as to meet in London with Colonel
Barclay Kennon, who is personally and practically familiar with every
step which Hoei-shin and his mysterious five predecessors must have
taken, he having been the navigating-officer in the North Pacific, China
Seas, and Behring's Straits, of the United States North Pacific
Surveying Expedition, 1853-56, Lieutenant John Rodgers commanding. This
gentleman was so kind as to take an interest in my work, and obligingly
communicated to me, in a letter which I subjoin, such facts as he could
recall in reference to Professor Neumann's verifications. I trust that
it

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

will not be out of place for me to state that Colonel Kennon, a graduate
of Annapolis Naval Academy, United States of America, was the first
person who ever made a cast of the lead for the first Transatlantic
cable, October 4, 1852, and in 1857 was, as Lieutenant of the United
States Navy, navigating-officer of the ship Niagara, by which the first
Atlantic cable was laid--although it cannot be denied that, as is the
case with too many beginnings, it came to grief. After the Civil War,
Lieutenant Kennon entered the Egyptian service as Colonel. He is the
inventor of the well-known Counterpoise Battery, for the protection of
artillery in coast defence, and was decorated by the Khedive for the
construction of a fort on this principle.

It should be borne in mind that, as regards the passage of the short
distances between Asia and America by the Aleutian chain, where one is
out of sight of land for a very short time, the vessels of North-eastern
Asia were formerly built for long voyages and oceanic navigation, and
actually did sail for weeks together out on the open sea; that the
compass was probably used by them before the fifth century, and that at
the present day Japanese vessels are still rigged in a much more
sea-going style than Chinese junks, and are consequently capable of
easier and more extended navigation.

The evidence offered in favour of the discovery of America by the
Chinese Buddhists of the fifth century is very limited, but it has every
characteristic of a serious State document, and of authentic history. It
is distinctly

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

recorded among the annals of the Empire. At the time these journeys were
undertaken, thousands of monks, inspired by the most fanatical zeal,
were extending their doctrines in every direction; and this they did
with such success, that though Buddhism has now been steadily declining
for many centuries, it still numbers more followers than Christianity,
or any other religion on the face of the earth, for they are literally
counted by hundreds of millions. And as their doctrines urged
propagandism, it would be almost a matter of wonder if some of the
missionaries of the faith had not found their way over an already
familiar route.

LETTER *from* COLONEL BARCLAY KENNON, *formerly of the United States
North Pacific Surveying Expedition*.

"LONDON, *April 3*, 1871.

"DEAR SIR,--As regards the possible passage at an early age of Chinese
to the North American Continent, I regret to say that I have devoted too
little thought to such a subject to be of use to you, beyond giving a
fair idea of the distances between point and point from China to Japan,
and thence, *via* the Kurile and Aleutian Islands, to the Western Coast
of America. I have at present unfortunately no map, chart, or notes to
guide me or refresh my memory, and so must depend solely upon it. Thus
far, however, it has not misled me in other respects, and it certainly
should not in this case, if it be considered that I was the
sailing-master of the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

surveying schooner which was specially appointed to follow, examine, and
map out this route.

"After leaving Shanghai direct for Japan, a vessel sights Alceste Island
when about 200 miles from the mouth of the Yang-tse-kiang, upon a branch
of which river, the Woo-sung, Shanghae is situated. From Alceste Island
to the Gotto Islands, which are directly upon the Japanese coast, and
two miles from its extreme western end, the distance is about 120 miles.
In making this trip, a fair wind, with 'plenty of it,' will very soon
take a vessel from point to point. The distance across from one point on
the Chinese coast is still shorter, or about 100 miles S.S.E. from the
Yang-tse-kiang. Many islands lie off this point, which, being lost sight
of at a distance of twenty or more miles, will materially diminish the
time for being in the open sea. In fact, no ordinary Chinese or Japanese
fisherman would hesitate to make these trifling voyages for so short a
time out of sight of land, and hundreds do make much more dangerous
ventures every day along the coast. From the Yangtse-kiang direct to the
coast of Korea the distance is less than a day's sail, or only eighteen
hours by coasting it, till we reach the Straits of Korea, when a few
hours take us over to the Straits of Krusenstern, separated by islands,
and thence direct to the Gotto Islands. Or we may sail for the island of
Oki, and cross the straits (which received in our survey, and on our
map, the name of Rodgers' Straits), which are from ten

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

to twenty miles wide, and thus reach the coast of Japan. In either case,
land is not long lost sight of, the open sea distances being very
trifling.

"Starting from Hong Kong Island, farther south, a run of thirty-six
hours takes us to the island of Formosa. To the eastward of it, and in
sight from each other, are the Madjico Sima Islands, and to the eastward
of them are visible those of Amakirima. In full view with these, again,
the southernmost of the Loo-choo Islands, dependencies of Japan, of
which Shapa is the capital, heaves in sight. Running north through this
group to the coast of Japan, one island is hardly below the horizon
before another makes its appearance, or in a very few hours, the last
being ii. sight when close to the south-west end of Niphon, the largest
of the Japanese Islands. These latter lie N.E. and S.W.; so that by
following either coast-line until the Kuriles are reached, land will
always be in sight. The Kurile Islands, stretching between the island of
Matsumai (the northernmost of the Japan group, and upon which Hakododi,
the chief port and town, is situated), and Cape Lapatka, the southern
extremity of Kamtschatka, are in sight from each other, excepting
possibly in the 'Boussole Passage,' which is forty or more miles in
width. A vessel in the centre of it will have the islands marking its
boundaries in sight; so that as soon as the voyager passes from one
land, he immediately perceives the other. Kamtschatka, once seen, is not
easily lost sight of, as its high mountains

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

are visible for more than a hundred miles. The highest peak, just north
of Avataka Bay, containing the harbour and remains of the town of
Petropaulski, is a volcano; and, if my memory does not mislead me, it is
more than 18,000 feet in height, the line of perpetual snow beginning
some distance below the crater, and terminating at a point some
thousands of feet above the sea-level. This line, of course, offers a
mark which can be seen farther out at sea than would a mountain of the
same height, if entirely covered up to its summit. Proceeding along this
coast to Cape Kronotski, which lies north of Petropaulski, the distance
to Behring's Island is about 150 miles--course, east. Fifteen miles only
from it is Copper Island, and about 150 miles south-west of it is Attou
Island, the most westerly of the Aleutian group, which is an almost
unbroken chain, connecting with the American Continent at the peninsula
of Aliaska.

Attou Island, situated in latitude 53° N., longitude 173° (in round
numbers), has the pretty little harbour of Tchitchagoff, which we
surveyed with much care, believing that it might prove useful at some
future day. Owing to the trouble and care with which this work was done,
the three islands standing off its entrance were named after the vessel,
*Cooper*; the captain, Gibson; and myself. It may not be out of place to
state, that the schooner *Fenimore Cooper* was originally a small New
York pilot-boat of seventy-five tons, and that for two years in these
stormy Northern Seas I

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

spent a happy life on board of, and sailed upwards of 40,000 miles in
her. After leaving New York she went to Africa, Java, China, Japan,
California, and back to Japan, where she finally 'laid her bones to
dry.'

"Next to Attou Island, and close to it, is Agattou and Semichi; and
before losing sight of either of them, Boulder Island, distant
forty-five miles from Agattou, heaves in sight. Kusha, the Island of the
Seven Mountains--all of which are volcanoes, either extinct or
active--and Amtchitka come next. These are the Krysi or Rat Islands.
Next to Amtchitka, in the Andranof group, is Tonago, volcanic, Adakh,
Atkha, and Ammnak, with other smaller islands between them, all in sight
one from the other. Adakh has a fair harbour for small vessels, but is
not inhabited. We were three weeks there. In Atkha there is a not
inconsiderable settlement, and good anchorage. Here we found a Greek
priest, whose wife, a Georgian, was really beautiful, as were their two
daughters. At this time the Russian War was at its height, and the
supplies of these poor people being exhausted, and themselves in great
distress, we found it a great pleasure to relieve them--particularly the
ladies, who were the first we had seen for many months. I need not say
how delighted they were to receive a good stock of sugar, coffee, tea,
medicines, and 'canned fruit.'

"Between Ammnak and Unalashka are, I believe, eight islands. This group
bears the name of the Fox

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Islands. The whole
chain, from Attou to Unalashka inclusive, is called the Aleutians, the
easternmost of which is very near the American mainland, or peninsula of
Aliaska. A few of these islands are inhabited, the people bearing a
strong resemblance to the Kuriles, who, in turn, are like the Nootka
Sound Indians, <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) whose country is on
the mainland to the eastward of the peninsula of Aliaska, but which may
actually be reached either in a vessel or *on foot* by following the
coast-line.

"You wish to know if I can adduce any proofs or probabilities that
during the great period from the fifth to the seventh centuries, when
the world was so abundantly busy in making converts to its several
religious, Buddhist priests passed by these islands. If they did, they
certainly could not have remained long in them, and must have hurried to
the more hospitable shores of America. For there is literally not a tree
on these islands--in fact, nothing resembling one, unless I except a few
very small bushes, the tallest not more than three feet high, with no
branches larger than a man's finger. From Aliaska a vessel could take
the roundabout course of following the coast-line to reach

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sitka; but a run
of three or four days would, with a good breeze, make the trip on a much
more direct course--and likewise a more sensible one--by running down
among the islands of the group in which Sitka is situated.

"From this place Vancouver's Island is soon reached; that is to say, in
three or four days, with land in sight nearly every hour of the time.
Oregon is but a few hours' sail after this; and by keeping in with the
land, any lubber of a navigator can *see* his way down the coast to Cape
Saint Lucas, the southern end of California, which is distant about 200
miles west of Mazatlan, Mexico. The prevailing winds are from the
northward, or from the north-westward, with a current (*Kuro-suvo*)
setting to the southward. Vessels bound down the coast, to the
southward, make the run quickly by keeping just outside the influence of
the land-breezes; while those bound up the coast should profit by them
by sailing near the land. A small vessel, being able to run close in,
could anchor when the sea-breezes set in during the day, but should lift
her anchor at night, to make her *northings* with those from the land.

"From what I have written, and from the result of the most accurate
scientific observation, it is evident that the voyage from China to
America can be made without being out of sight of land for more than a
few hours at any one time. To a landsman, unfamiliar with long voyages,
the mere idea of being 'alone on the wide, wide sea,' with nothing but
water visibly, even

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

for an hour, conveys a strange sense of desolation, of daring, and of
adventure. But in truth it is regarded as a mere trifle, not only by
regular seafaring men, but even by the rudest races in all parts of the
world; and I have no doubt that from the remotest ages, and on all
shores, fishermen in open boats, canoes, or even coracles, guided simply
by the stars and currents, have not hesitated to go far out of sight of
land. At the present day, natives of many of the South Pacific Islands
undertake, without a compass, and successfully, long voyages which
astonish even a regular Jack-tar; who is not often astonished at
anything. If this can be done by savages, it hardly seems possible that
the Asiatic-American voyage was not successfully performed by people of
advanced scientific culture, who had, it is generally believed, the
compass, and who from an early age were proficient in astronomy.

"But though this voyage from the oldest portion of the Old
World--historically speaking--to the newest portion of the New, eau be
made by remaining almost constantly in sight of land, I do not recommend
it; and I am sure that any man in any kind of a boat, who had sufficient
enterprise and patience to undertake it, would have easily found the
shorter route. But there is a still stronger argument for the voyage
across having been undertaken, in this, that Chinese sailors had long
been travelling in a route of which this was a mere continuation, and
that not a very difficult one. For, in reality, from Singapore in
Malacca to Batavia

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

in the island of Java, and to Shanghai in China, the trip is almost an
actual coasting one, the steamers nowadays running from point to point.
To a landsman it is doubtless pleasant to see fresh islands every day,
but a sailor greatly prefers the open sea, until he makes the land near
his port. From Hakododi, Japan, the arc of the great circle joining it
with San Francisco passes almost exactly beside the central island of
the Aleutians. This distance is about 4250 miles. One objection to the
route is this, the fogs about those islands being actually ten times
worse, in every way, than those of London, they are avoided as much as
possible by steering farther south, or rather by running more directly
to the east. I may mention in this relation, that I had a Kamtschatka
dog on board the schooner, and found him more useful as a "look-out"
than a shipload of sailors could have been, since they could have done
literally nothing, while the dog seemed strangely attracted towards the
land, and when *smelling* it, invariably stood with his head towards it,
barking aloud; so that we were more than once thereby warned of its too
close proximity.

"We have on our own coast, or that of the United States of North
America, the Gulf Stream, which, flowing off to the eastward, and
striking the shores of Europe, falls on them, and on those of Africa,
down to about the equator, then running west to the coast of South
America, passes its northern shores up through the Carribean Sea to
between Yucatan and Cuba, and

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

renews its course through the Straits of Florida, and again up our
coast. Now in the North Pacific there is another stream, called the
Kuro-suvo, or Japanese Current, which, passing up the south-east side of
the Japanese coast, flows off to the eastward until it reaches
California; then running down that coast, and that of Mexico and Central
America, to latitude 10° N. (more or less), meets the Peruvian or
Humboldt Current, when both bear away to the west and form the
*Northern* Equatorial Current, which, extending to the Ladrone Islands,
in latitude 18°, longitude 145°, turns towards the northernmost, of the
Lorchas Islands, and finally completes the circuit on the coast of
Japan. It is much like the Atlantic Gulf Stream in many particulars, and
its current is quite as strong in certain places, though the water in it
is not so warm. This current is of great utility to vessels bound to the
eastward, its counter-current being of course of corresponding advantage
to those sailing westward.

From what I know of the track across from Asia to America, and from what
I have seen of the Japanese and Chinese, I have no doubt whatever that
from very early times they occasionally visited our American shores.
Assuming that they took the route which I have described, they would
have been constantly in sight of land; and there is something in the
nature and appearance of the frequently-recurring islands which would
naturally tempt farther exploration, and lead them on. The weather is,
it is true, cold at Behring's Straits

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

even in summer, but not one-fourth so cold as at Matsumai, Japan, in
winter. A Japanese vessel, running up the Kamtschatka coast to the Bay
of St Lawrence in Siberia, would have, at the utmost, only a day's sail,
but probably less, to reach America; and by going that distance farther
north, her crew could see land across Behring's Straits through the
whole passage during the summer season, it being then free from ice,
with an open sea and a moderate degree of cold. Nothing is more likely
than that such visits were made by fur-hunters in former years; and as
so many foreign countries lay within such easy sailing distance, it is
probable that the Chinese and Japanese Governments--especially the
latter--issued edicts for the building of all vessels upon a model which
should very much limit their navigation, and confine them to short
cruises.

"Few would believe, who are familiar with the Portuguese of the present
day, or with their marine, that this people once supplied the
adventurous navigators who found their way to India by the way of the
Cape of Good Hope; and yet it is less than three hundred years since
Vasco di Gama made that famous cruise. He coasted, as the records of the
voyage show, and as the time spent would of itself prove; and it is
quite likely that Chinese and Japanese did the same thing until the
sterns of their vessels were 'stove in' by order of their Governments,
to restrict them to cruising nearer home.

"Columbus had a very different kind of work to do,

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

for during the long cruise of many weeks which he spent at sea, he saw
nothing whatever until the end of his journey. Two of his vessels were
much larger than the little schooner in which I sailed so many thousands
of miles, and the Japanese junks with which I am familiar were generally
five times larger, and with eight times the capacity of the little
*Fenimore Cooper*. There is certainly no reason why they could not keep
the sea as long as any other vessel. Columbus had 'caravels,' which were
more or less open, but this is not the case with the Japanese junks,
which are entirely closed.

"It is of some importance in this connection to observe, that when
surveying the coast of Japan in 1854, I found the Japanese charts to be
invariably very correct; their latitudes, which came directly from
observations of the heavenly bodies, being particularly so. Their
longitudes, of course, did not agree with ours, for we were ignorant of
their starting-point or primary meridian. The relative bearings and
distances of places one from the other, with the outlines of the coast,
were singularly accurate.

"The Japanese have doubtless very often made involuntary voyages of much
greater extent, and far more dangerous, than this from continent to
continent. In 1849, when I was in the Sandwich Islands, I learned that
an American whaler had picked up a Japanese junk about, 2300 miles
south-east of Japan, and had sent her people to China on board a passing
vessel, from which

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

country they doubtless found their way back to their home. And I can
distinctly remember that five years ago, and two years since also,
Japanese junks were found among the Aleutian Islands, having been
drifted thither by the Kuro-suvo Current, and impelled by westerly gales
of wind. One was picked up on Adakh, which is nearly half-way over to
San Francisco. Had these vessels been supplied with provisions, with
such a trip in view as that of crossing the Pacific, there was nothing
whatever to prevent their making it to and fro. In 1854 and 1855, when I
was last in Japan, I often saw both women and children on board junks in
which they had been to the Loo-choo Islands. Those I met with in the
latter islands seemed to be as much the habitual homes of their owners
and families as are the Chinese river-boats homes to those who inhabit
them. In China one sees many families which have for generations been
born and reared on board these little boats. And at present the actual
floating population on the Canton river alone is estimated at over a
million of souls.

"I have always regarded the Sandwich Islanders as cousins of the
Japanese. There is quite enough in the general appearance of the two
races to justify one in believing it. To me it seems as if some other
blood existed there, very largely mingled or alloyed with Japanese, and
the difference in manners, customs, religion, and other forms of
culture, is owing to the Japanese element being in the minority. But
supposing

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

them to have altogether descended from the Japanese, and this is far
from being improbable, <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) the few who
first landed there, and from whom the whole group was peopled, found, in
organising, voluntarily or involuntarily, a new form of government and
new institutions, no more necessity to copy after their old types than
did the early settlers of America in framing theirs. In fact, if they
were exiles, like the first settlers of Iceland and many other
countries, their natural impulse would be to avoid forming anything like
the tyranny from which they had fled or were banished. The Japanese have
always had a highly-organised religion, while the Sandwich Islanders had
as nearly none as was possible, and the melancholy history of their
degradation and decay under European culture seems to indicate that they
are incapable of receiving any. As to the difference or non-existence of
customs, we have only to go to any of the 'new countries' of the present
day to see that the so-called habits and peculiarities of mankind, which
once gave such interest to

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

elementary works on geography, are everywhere vanishing as guides to
help one in tracing the origin of races; in fact, if civilisation at the
present day, unlike the ancient, were net accompanied by the spirit of
antiquarian research, and a passion for recording all that it learns,
the past would soon vanish as regards all races without a written
history. The differences in the mode of life, and in many other things,
between the United States and England, are very marked. The Loo-chooese
also vary in many respects from the Japanese, although their islands are
in sight of each other, and the former are dependencies of the latter.
Napa-kiang, in Loo-choo, is built of stone, while all the large Japanese
cities are of wood. Again, the manner of dressing the hair varies
entirely in these provinces, a matter which, while small in itself,
constitutes a very serious difference in a race with which such trifles
are of almost radical importance. The Loo-chooese and Japanese are the
same people, but they build their houses differently, simply because one
country abounds in wood and the other in stone; and the difference in
the arrangement of the hair has doubtless been determined by some law of
climate, or caprice on the part of a ruler either in fashion or
politics--the two being in this country generally combined.

"The islands of the Pacific are remarkably alike, both as regards size
and general appearance; and as Oceanica is to the *leeward* of Japan,
and the resemblance between their respective populations has occurred

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

to every sailor who has been in the two countries, it is a very rational
conclusion that these places have been settled from the mainland by
mariners blown out of their course. Such mishaps occur every two or
three years at the present day, and such have occurred for hundreds, and
it may be for thousands, of years. The ancient and confirmed habit of
both Japanese and Chinese, of taking women to sea with them, or of
traders keeping their families on board, would fully account for the
population of these islands, even if they had been originally deserts.
We have only to suppose the same impulses and causes acting in the more
easily-travelled eastern direction, along the Aleutian chain, in seas
abounding with fish and easily navigable, to conjecture whether such
adventurers, voluntary or involuntary, ever reached America from Asia.
The mere resemblance of immense numbers of North American Indians to the
so-called Mongolian tribes is a sufficient answer to such a question.
Respectfully and truly yours,

"BARCLAY KENNON."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[70:1](fu10.htm#fr_54) I have verified by many
inquiries the assertion that there is a continuous line of likeness
between the natives from the North-west Coast of America to the Asiatic
Continent. "I find myself more and more inclined to believe," says John
D. Baldwin, in his "Ancient America," . . . . "that the wild Indians of
the north came originally from Asia, where the race to which they belong
seems still represented by the Koraks and Cookchees found in that part
of Asia which extends to Behring's Straits."--C. G. L.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[78:1](fu10.htm#fr_55) It is a well-established
fact, and one within my own observation, that the children of Irish
parents in America, even in the first generation, change materially from
the ancestral Celtic type. This is especially remarkable in the girls,
even when born and bred in the backwoods. The face becomes more oval,
and the eyes darker (when not Galwegian, or naturally dark), and softer
in expression. The pure, unmixed Pennsylvania German stock retain the
broad shoulders and heavy figure of their ancestors; but the hair is
generally much darker, and the eyes, which are often very beautiful,
are, as in the Irish instance, larger. The same holds good, but in a
less degree, I believe, of the children of English parents. The child of
"Boston people," born in New Orleans, often becomes in the first
generation a creole, pale, sallow, and with constantly cold hands.--C.
G. L.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Remarks on Colonel Kennon's Letter](fu11)
