[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fu12)  [Next](fu14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417919205/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

### AMERICAN ANTIQUITIES,

###### WITH THEIR

##### RELATIONS TO THE OLD WORLD.

##### THE DAKOTA LANGUAGE AND THE URAL-ALTAIC TONGUES-THE MOUND-BUILDERS--IMAGES OF BUDDHA.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

### CHAPTER X.

### AFFINITIES OF AMERICAN AND ASIATIC LANGUAGES.

A VAST amount of research and ingenuity has been employed in
establishing resemblances between the archaeological remains of Mexico
and those of Central America and Peru, and the temptation to transfer
many of the assumed proofs or arguments to these pages is naturally very
great. I have, however, resisted it, partly because this material is
accessible to all who are interested in the subject of the possible
origin of the American races, and partly because so much of it is
unscientific and fanciful, that a degree of discredit rests upon it.
Many remarkable facts exist; but in truth, they exist thus far, like the
record of Hoei-shin, rather as an incentive to further research than as
clearly-defined historical monuments. A remark recently made by Mr Hyde
Clarke, when officiating as chairman at a meeting of the Society of
Arts, <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) has, however, suggested to me
some investigations by a learned German, well known to me personally,
which I shall not scruple to reproduce, as they are

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

appropriate to the subject of an affinity between Old America and Asia.
Ou this occasion Mr Clarke said that the "subject was so vast, it was
impossible to deal thoroughly with it; but he might mention, that only
recently some of the monuments in the Indo-Chinese Peninsula--in
Cambodia and Pegu--had been found by himself to greatly resemble in form
those of Mexico and South America; and, at the same time, strong
affinities were discovered between the languages. He had just
discovered, also, that there was affinity between the Akkad form of the
earliest cuneiform inscriptions (which remained even now almost without
interpretation) and the Aymara, in Peru, thus--establishing one historic
chain from 'Babylon to the New World.' <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) New facts were constantly coming forward,
and they all tended to illustrate the same interesting and important
doctrine--the unity which there had always been in the human race, and
the way in which progress had been carried onwards from one generation
to another, for the building up of a system of civilisation which, when
properly applied, would contribute to the benefit of all."

It was the reference by Mr Clarke to the resemblance between American
and Asiatic languages which reminded me of some comments by the
distinguished linguist F. L. O. Roehrig, who, as the discoverer of a
group of

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

new tongues in Central Asia, and as the author of an "Essay on
Languages," to which was awarded the prize of the French Institute, is
entitled to respect, the more so as his views are quite free from
anything visionary or fanciful. In a monograph "On the Language of the
Dakota or Sioux Indians," published in 1872 at Washington, "from the
Report of the Smithsonian Institution," he speaks as follows:--

"So far as we know, the Dakota language, with several  cognate tongues,
constitutes a separate class or family among American-Indian languages.
But the question at present is, Whence does the Dakota, with its related
American tongues, came? From what trunk or parent stock is it derived?
Ethnologists are wont to point us to Asia as the most probable source of
the prehistorical immigration from the Old World. 'Hence,' they say,
'many, if not all, of our Indians must have come from Eastern or Middle
Asia; and in considering their respective tongues, one must still find
somewhere in that region some cognate, though perhaps very
remotely-related, set of languages, however much the affinity existing
between the Indian tongues and these may have gradually become obscured,
and in how many instances soever, through a succession of ages, the old
family features may have been impaired. But they further allow, of
course, that these changes may have taken place to such an extent that
this affinity cannot be easily recognised, and may be much, even
altogether, obliterated.

"When we consider the languages of the great Asiatic Continent, of its
upper and eastern portions more particularly, with a view of discovering
any remaining trace, however faint, of analogy with, or similarity to,
the Dakota tongue, what do we find? Very little; and the only group of
Asiatic languages in which we could possibly fancy we perceived any kind
of dim and vague resemblance, an occasional analogy, or other perhaps

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

merely casual coincidence with the Sioux or Dakota tongue, would
probably be the so-called 'Ural-Altaic' family. This group embraces a
very wide range, and is found scattered in manifold ramifications
through parts of Eastern, Northern, and Middle Asia, extending in some
of its more remote branches even to the heart of Europe, where the
Hungarian and the numerous tongues of the far-spread Finnish tribes
offer still the same characteristics, and an unmistakable impress of the
old Ural-Altaic relationship.

"In the following pages we shall present some isolated glimpses of such
resemblances, analogies, &c., with the Sioux language as strike us,
though we need not repeat that no conclusions whatever can be drawn from
them regarding any affinity, ever so remote, between the Ural-Altaic
languages and the Dakota tongue. This much, however, may perhaps be
admitted from what we have to say, that at least an *Asiatic origin* of
the Sioux or Dakota nation and their language may not be altogether an
impossibility.

"In the first place, we find that as in those Ural-Altaic languages, so
in a like manner in the Sioux or Dakota tongue, there exists that
remarkable syntactical structure of sentences which we might call a
constant inversion of the mode and order in which we are accustomed to
think. Thus, more or less, the people who speak those languages would
begin sentences or periods where we end ours, so that our thoughts would
really appear in their minds as inverted.

"Those Asiatic languages have, moreover, no prepositions, but only
*post*positions. So, likewise, has the Dakota tongue.

"The polysynthetic arrangement which prevails throughout the majority of
the American-Indian languages is less prominent, and decidedly less
intricate, in the Dakota tongue than in those of the other tribes of
this continent. But it may be safely asserted that the above-mentioned
languages of Asia also contain, at least, a similar polysynthetic
*tendency*, though merely in an incipient state, a rudimental or
partially-developed form.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus, for
instance, all the various modifications which the fundamental meaning of
a verb has to undergo, such as passive condition, causation, reflexive
action, mutuality, and the like, are embodied in the verb itself by
means of interposition, or a sort of intercalation of certain
characteristic syllables between the root and the grammatical endings of
such a verb, whereby a long-continued and united series, or catenation,
is often obtained, forming, apparently, one huge word. However, to
elucidate this further here would evidently lead us too far away from
our present subject and purpose. We only add that postpositions,
pronouns, as well as the interrogative particle, &c., are also commonly
blended into one with the nouns, by being inserted one after the other,
where several such expressions occur in the manner alluded to, the whole
being closed by the grammatical terminations, so as often to form words
of considerable length. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) May we not
feel authorised to infer from this some sort of approach, in however
feeble a degree, of those Asiatic languages--through this principle of
catenation--to the general polysynthetic system of the American tongues?

"We now proceed to a singular phenomenon, which we should like to
describe technically, as a sort of *reduplicatio intensitiva*. It exists
in the Mongolian and Turco-Tartar branches of the Ural-Altaic group, and
some vestiges of it we found, to our great surprise, also in the
language of our Sioux Indians. <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60)

"This reduplication is, in the above-mentioned Asiatic languages,
applied particularly to adjectives denoting colour and external
qualities, and it is just the same in the Dakota language. It consists
in prefixing to any given word its first syllable in the shape of a
reduplication, this syllable thus occurring twice--often adding to it
(as the case may be) a *p*, &c.

"The object--at least in the Asiatic languages alluded to

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

is to express thereby in many cases a higher degree or increase of the
quality. An example or two will make it clear. Thus we have, for
instance, in Mongolian, *khara*, which means black; and KHAp-*khara*,
with the meaning of very black, entirely black; *tsagan*, white,
TSAp-*tsagan*, entirely white, &c.; and in the Turkish and the so-called
Tartar (Tatar) dialects of Asiatic Russia, *kara*, black, and
KAp-*kara*, very black; *sary*, yellow, and SAp-*sary*, entirely yellow,
&c.

"Now in Dakota we find *sapa*, black, and with the reduplication
SAp-*sapa*. The reduplication here is, indeed, a reduplication of the
syllable *sa*, and not of *sap*, the word being *sa*-pa, and not
*sap*-a. The *p* in SAp-*sapa* is inserted after the reduplication of
the first syllable, just as we have seen in the above, *kara* and
KAp-*kara*, &c.

"In the Ural-Altaic languages *m* also is sometimes inserted after the
first syllable; for instance, in the Turkish *beyaz*, white, and
BEm-*beyaz*, very white, &.c. If we find, however, similar instances in
the Dakota language, such as *ćepa*, which means *fleshy* (one of the
external qualities to which this rule applies), and ćEM *ćepa*, &c., we
must consider that the letter *m* is in such cases merely a contraction,
and replaces, moreover, another labial letter (*p*) followed by a vowel,
particularly *a*. Thus, for instance, ćo*m* is a contraction for ćo*pa*,
ġa*m* for ġa*pa*, ḣa*m* for ḣa*pa*, ske*m* for ske*pa*, o*m* for o*pa*,
to*m* for to*pa*, &c. So is ć*em*, in our example, only an abridged form
of ce*pa*; hence *m* stands here for *p* or *pa*, and belongs
essentially *to the word itself*, while in those Asiatic languages the
*m* is *added* to the reduplication of the first syllable, like the
KA*p* in p-*kara*, &c. We have therefore to be very careful in our
conclusions.

"The simple doubling of the first syllable is also of frequent
occurrence in Dakota; for instance, *ġi*, brown, and *giġi* (same
meaning); *sni*, cold, and *snisni*; *ko*, quick, and *koko*, &c.

"There are also some very interesting examples to be found in the Dakota
language which strikingly remind us of a remarkable peculiarity
frequently met with in the Asiatic languages

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

above adverted to. It consists in the *antagonism* in *form*, as well as
in meaning, of certain words, according to the nature of their vowels so
that when such words contain what we may call the strong, full, or hard
vowels--viz., *a*, *o*, or *u* (in the Continental pronunciation)--they
generally denote strength, the male sex, affirmation, distance, &c.;
while the same words with the weak or soft vowels, *e*, *i*, the
consonantal skeleton, frame, or groundwork of the word remaining the
same--express weakness, the female sex, negation, proximity, and a whole
series of corresponding ideas.

"A few examples will demonstrate this. Thus, for instance, the idea of
father is expressed in Mantchoo (one of the Ural-Altaic languages) by
*a*m*a*, while mother is *e*m*e*. This gives, no doubt, but a very
incomplete idea of that peculiarity, but it will perhaps be sufficient
to explain in a measure what we found analogous in the Dakota language.
Instances of the kind are certainly of rare occurrence in the latter,
and we will content ourselves with giving here only a very few examples,
in which the above difference of signification is seen to exist, though
the significance of the respective vowels seems to be just the reverse,
which would in nowise invalidate the truth of the preceding statement,
since the same inconsistent alteration or anomaly frequently takes place
also in the family of Ural-Altaic languages.

"Thus we find in the Dakota or Sioux language, hEpaŋ, second son of a
family, and hApaŋ, second daughter of a family; ćIŋ, elder brother; ćuŋ,
elder sister; ciŋksi, son; ćuŋksi, daughter, &c. Also, the
demonstratives KOŋ, that, and KIŋ, this, the (the definite articles),
seem to come, in some respects, under this head.

"To investigate the grammatical structure of languages from a
comparative point of view, is, however, but one part of the work of the
philologist; the other equally essential part consists in the study of
the words themselves, the very material of which languages are made. We
do not as yet intend to touch on the question of Dakota wards and their
possible affinities, but reserve all that pertains to comparative
etymology for some other time

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The identity of
words in different languages, or simply their affinity, may be either
immediately recognised, or rendered evident by a regular process of
philological reasoning, especially when such words appear, as it were,
disguised, in consequence of certain alterations, due to time and to
various vicissitudes, whereby either the original vowels or the
consonants, or both, have become changed. Then, also, it frequently
happens that one and the same word, when compared in cognate languages,
may appear as different parts of speech, so that in one of them it may
exist as a noun, and in another only as a verb, &c. Moreover, the same
word may have become gradually modified in its original meaning, so that
it denotes, for instance, in one of the cognate languages, the *genus*,
and in another, merely the *species* of the same thing or idea. Or it
may also happen that when several synonymous expressions originally
existed in what we may call a mother language, they have become so
scattered in their descent, that only one of these words is found in a
certain one of the derived languages, while others again belong to other
cognate tongues, or even their dialects, exclusively.

"The foregoing is sufficient to account for the frequent failures in
establishing the relationship of certain languages in regard to the
affinity of all their *words*. On this occasion it will be enough to
mention in passing, as it were, one or two of the most frequently-used
words, such as the names of father and mother. In regard to these
familiar expressions, we again find a surprising coincidence between the
tongues of Upper Asia--or, more extensively viewed, the Ural-Altaic or
Tartar-Finnish stock of languages--and the Dakota.

"Father is in Dakota *ate*; in Turco-Tartar, *ata*; Mongolian and its
branches, *etsä*, *etsige*; in the Finnish languages we meet with the
forms *attje*, *atä*, &c.--they all having *at* = *et* as their radical
syllable. <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) Now as to mother, it is in
the Dakota

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

language *ina*; and in the Asiatic tongues just mentioned it is *ana*,
*aniya*, *ine*, *eniye*, &c.

"Again, we find in the Dakota or Sioux language *taŋin*, which means to
appear, to be visible, manifest, distinct, clear. Now we have also in
all the Tartar dialects *taŋ*, *tang*, which means first light; hence
dawn of the morning. <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) From it is
derived *tani*, which is the stem or radical part of verbs, meaning to
render manifest, to make known, to know; it also appears in the old
Tartar verb stems, *tang*-(*la*) meaning to understand; and in its
mutilated modern (and Western) form, *ang*-(*la*), without the initial
*t*, which has the same signification. We may mention still *mama*,
which, in Dakota, denotes the female breast. We might compare it with
the Tartar *meme*, which has the same meaning, if we had not also in
almost all European languages the word *mamma* (*mama*) with the very
same fundamental signification, the children of very many different
nations calling their mothers instinctively, as it were, by that name,
*mamma*, *mama*. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63)

"We may also assert that even in the *foundation* of words we find now
and then some slight analogy between certain characteristic findings in
the languages of Upper Asia and the Dakota tongue. Thus, for instance,
the termination for the *nomen agens*, which in the Dakota language is
*sa*, is in Tartar *tsi*, *si*, and *dchi*; Mongolian, *tchi*, &c. We
also find in Dakota the postposition *ta* (a constituent part of ek*ta*,
*in*, *at*), which is a locative particle, and corresponds in form to
the postpositions *ta* and *da*, and their several varieties and
modifications in the greater part of the Ural-Altaic family of
languages.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

The same remark applies in a measure to the Dakota postposition *e*,
which means to, toward, &c. By means of such post-positions the
declension of nouns is effected in the Ural-Altaic languages. The Dakota
cases of declension, if we can use this term, amount likewise to a very
rude sort of a *agglutination*, or rather simple adding of the
postpositions to the nouns. <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) There
can be here no question of a real inflection or declension, since there
is throughout only a kind of loose *ad*hesion, and nowhere what we might
call a true *co*hesion. The postpositions are in the written language
added to the nouns, without being conjoined to them in writing (except
the plural ending *pi*), as is also the case in the Mongolian language,
the Turco-Tartar dialects, and other tongues of this class.

"In pointing out these various resemblances of the Sioux language to
Asiatic tongues we in nowise mean to say that we are inclined to believe
in any affinity or remote relationship among them. At this early stage
of our researches it would be wholly preposterous to make any assertions
as to the question of affinity, &c. All that we intended to do was
simply to bring forward a few facts, from which, if they should be
further corroborated by a more frequent. recurrence of the phenomena
here touched upon, the reader might perhaps draw his own conclusions, at
least so far as a *very remote* Asiatic origin of the Dakota language is
concerned. Further investigations in the same direction might possibly
lead to more satisfactory results."

 

I am confident, that few readers will object to the length of this
citation, or to its character, since it certainly illustrates forcibly,
in several respects, the present condition of all our conjectures, or
knowledge, if I may so call it, of the early relations between America
and Asia. There is enough in it, as in the narrative of

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hoei-shin, to
amply warrant research, and to encourage labour in the direction pointed
out; but it would be in the highest degree rash and arrogant to assume,
on no better grounds than the two present, that America was settled by
the Mongolian race. Indeed, I cannot too warmly commend Mr Roehrig's
extreme caution in advancing his observations. Nevertheless, I think
that they indicate a most decided possibility of an Eastern origin; and
with regard to Hoei-shin, I believe there is good ground for
probability. And in all such cases, one discovery strengthens the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[99:1](fu13.htm#fr_57) April 15, 1874. *Vide*
Journal of the Society of Arts, April 17, 1874. It was in commenting on
a lecture on the "Symbolism of Oriental Ornament," delivered by William
Simson, F.R.G.S., that the remark in question was made.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[100:1](fu13.htm#fr_58) As I have not examined
this subject, I know nothing of these affinities. I quote Mr Clarke's
remarks on account of their general bearing on American languages, and
as an introduction to another writer. The existence of ancient
inscriptions in Peru Ps I believe, as yet doubtful.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[103:1](fu13.htm#fr_59) Such intercalations are,
in a measure, almost analogous to the usual insertion of the many
incidental clauses in lung Latin or German sentences, if we are allowed
that comparison.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[103:2](fu13.htm#fr_60) This *reduplicatio
intensitiva* is not uncommon in Hindustani.--C. G. L.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[106:1](fu13.htm#fr_61) This also exists in Old
German; *ätti* or *etti* being still used in Suabia for father.--C. G.
L.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[107:1](fu13.htm#fr_62) *Din* (day) Hindu;
Saxon, *dagian*; English, *dawn*.--C. G. L.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[107:2](fu13.htm#fr_63) e.g., *Mamma*, a breast
or pap, Latin, having also the weaning of "a child's word for mother."
*Ma*, or *mamma*, occurs in seven African languages; *ma* or *amma* in
nine non-Aryan languages of Europe and Asia; *ama* once in North
Australia; *hammah* in Lewis Murray Island; *mamma* once in Australia;
and *anama* among the Hudson's Bay Esquimaux. *Vide* Sir J. Lubbock's
"Origin of Civilisation."--C. G. L.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[108:1](fu13.htm#fr_64) Declension by means of
postpositions also occurs in the Gipsy or Rommany language.--C. G. L.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Mound-Builders and Mexicans](fu14)
