[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fu14)  [Next](fu16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417919205/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

### CHAPTER XII.

### IMAGES OF BUDDHA.

THE reader may recall that in the record of Hoei-shin he speaks
particularly of the images of Buddha, in connection with the holy
writings and religion of that great reformer, as having been taken to
America in the year 458 by his five predecessors. I mention this, that
in case any other inquirer may investigate this subject, he may pay
particular attention to the discovery of such images, or to possible
imitations of them, in America, and among its monuments. For to present
the sacred likeness of Buddha to the eyes of the world was held to be of
itself almost enough to convert unbelievers. To say that these images
were made by millions would be no exaggeration. When, in the year 955,
the Emperor She-tsung placed severe restrictions on the Buddhist
religion, more than 30,000 temples were destroyed, and a mint was
established for the purpose of converting such of the images, &c., as
were made of precious metals, copper or bronze, into money. Again, in
the persecution of 845, "the copper images and bells were melted down
and made into cash." It is

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

then probable, that wherever anything could be carried these
compactly-formed images were taken.

Professor Neumann speaks of Buddhist emissaries having penetrated to
Europe. It is not unlikely, and I am reminded of it by the fact that I
was very recently shown a Buddhistic image found in digging for the St
Pancras Railway above Midland Yard, about the month of December 1872. It
was discovered at a depth of fifteen feet, nine feet of which consisted
of loose soil or debris of a recent character, but the remaining six
feet were hard, solid earth. The character of the latter, and
comparisons with similar excavations, judged by the ages of coins found,
indicate a probability that the image may have been left where it was
discovered 1000 years ago, or more. I regret that it was impossible for
me to obtain this relic for some national museum or other institution,
and also that it had been broken, by being ignorantly used as a child's
toy, though it was quite perfect when first discovered. The man who dug
it up spoke of fragments of similar images having been found; but owing
to his ignorance, nothing whatever can be inferred as to whether they
were Buddhistic or not.

Images resembling the ordinary Buddha have been found in Mexico and
Central America, but they cannot be proved to be identical with it.
Their attitude is an extremely natural one for any man not encumbered
with tight nether garments to assume in a warns climate; indeed, it is
the ordinary sitting position of

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

all men who are not accustomed to chairs. At a grand ball given by the
Khedive at Cairo, in 1873, I saw several native gentlemen, after sitting
down on chairs, forgetfully draw their feet up under them, and sit in
precisely the manner of Buddha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Deguignes, Klaproth, And D’Eichthal](fu16)
