[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rtae04)  [Next](rtae06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027ISA32/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt*, by James Henry
Breasted, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGION AND THOUGHT IN ANCIENT EGYPT

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### LECTURE I

#### THE ORIGINS: NATURE AND THE STATE IN THEIR IMPRESSION ON RELIGION—EARLIEST SYSTEMS

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> recovery of the history of the nearer
Orient in the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphic and Babylonian
cuneiform brought with it many unexpected revelations, but none more
impressive than the length of the development disclosed. In Babylonia,
however, the constant influx of foreign population resulted in frequent
and violent interruption of the development of civilization. In Egypt,
on the other hand, the isolation of the lower Nile valley permitted a
development never seriously arrested by permanent immigrations for over
three thousand years. We find here an opportunity like that which the
zoologist is constantly seeking in what he calls "unbroken series," such
as that of the horse developing in several millions of years from a
creature little larger than a rabbit to our modern domestic horse. In
all the categories of human life: language, arts, government, society,
thought, religion—what you please—we may trace a development in Egypt
essentially undisturbed by outside forces, for a period far surpassing
in length any such development elsewhere preserved to us; and it is a
matter of not a little interest to observe what humankind becomes in the
course of five thousand years in such an Island of the Blest as Egypt;
to follow him from the flint knife and stone hammer in less than two
thousand years to the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

copper chisel and the amazing extent and accuracy of the Great Pyramid
masonry; from the wattle-hut to the sumptuous palace, gorgeous with
glazed tile, rich tapestries, and incrusted with gold; to follow all the
golden threads of his many-sided life, as it was interwoven at last into
a rich and noble fabric of civilization. In these lectures we are to
follow but one of these many threads, as its complicated involutions
wind hither and thither throughout the whole fabric.

There is no force in the life of ancient man the influence of which so
pervades all his activities as does that of the religious faculty. It is
at first but an endeavor in vague and childish fancies to explain and to
control the world about him; its fears become his hourly master, its
hopes are his constant mentor, its feasts are his calendar, and its
outward usages are to a large extent the education and the motive toward
the evolution of art, literature, and science. Life not only touches
religion at every point, but life, thought, and religion are
inextricably interfused in an intricate complex of impressions from
without and forces from within. How the world about him and the world
within him successively wrought and fashioned the religion of the
Egyptian for three thousand years is the theme of these studies.

As among all other early peoples, it was in his natural surroundings
that the Egyptian first saw his gods. The trees and springs, the stones
and hill-tops, the birds and beasts, were creatures like himself, or
possessed of strange and uncanny powers of which he was not master.
Nature thus makes the earliest impression upon the religious faculty,
the visible world is first explained in terms of religious forces, and
the earliest gods are the controlling forces of the material world. A
social or political realm,

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

or a domain of the spirit where the gods shall be supreme, is not yet
perceived. Such divinities as these were local, each known only to the
dwellers in a given locality. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

As the prehistoric principalities, after many centuries of internal
conflict, coalesced to form a united state, the first great national
organization of men in history (about 3400 B.C.), this imposing fabric
of the state made a profound impression upon religion, and the forms of
the state began to pass over into the world of the gods.

At the same time the voices within made themselves heard, and moral
values were discerned for the first time. Man's organized power without
and the power of the moral imperative within were thus both early forces
in shaping Egyptian religion. The moral mandate, indeed, was felt
earlier in Egypt than anywhere else. With the development of provincial
society in the Feudal Age there ensued a ferment of social forces, and
the demand for social justice early found expression in the conception
of a gracious and paternal kingship, maintaining high ideals of social
equity. The world of the gods, continuing in sensitive touch with the
political conditions of the nation, at once felt this influence, and
through the idealized kingship social justice passed over into the
character of the state god, enriching the ethical qualities which in
some degree had for probably a thousand years been imputed to him.

Thus far all was national. As the arena of thought and action widened
from national limits to a world of imperial scope, when the Egyptian
state expanded to embrace contiguous Asia and Africa, the forces of
imperial power consistently reacted upon the thought and religion

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of the empire. The national religion was forcibly supplanted by a
non-national, universal faith, and for the first time in history
monotheism dawned. Unlike the social developments of the Feudal Age,
this movement was exclusively political, artificial, and imposed upon
the people by official pressure from above. The monotheistic movement
also failed for lack of nationalism. The Mediterranean world was not yet
ripe for a world-religion. In the reversion to the old national gods,
much of the humane content of the monotheistic teaching survived, and
may be recognized in ideas which gained wide currency among the people.
In this process of popularization, the last great development in
Egyptian religion took place (1300–1100 B.C.), a development toward deep
personal confidence in the goodness and paternal solicitude of God,
resulting in a relation of spiritual communion with him. This earliest
known age of personal piety in a deep spiritual sense degenerated under
the influence of sacerdotalism into the exaggerated religiosity of
Græco-Roman days in Egypt.

Such is the imposing vista of development in the religion and thought of
Egypt, down which we may look, surveying as we do a period of three
thousand years or more. To sum up: what we shall endeavor to do is to
trace the progress of the Egyptian as both the world about him and the
world within him made their impression upon his thought and his
religion, disclosing to us, one after another, nature, the national
state, the inner life with its growing sense of moral obligation, the
social forces, the world state, the personal conviction of the presence
and goodness of God, triumphant sacerdotalism, scribal literalism, and
resulting decay—in short, all these in succession as felt by the
Egyptian with profound effect

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

upon his religion and his thought for three thousand years will
constitute the survey presented in these lectures.

The fact that a survey of exactly this character has not been undertaken
before should lend some interest to the task. The fact that objective
study of the great categories mentioned has ranged them chronologically
in their effect upon thought and religion in the order above outlined,
disclosing a religious development in the main points analogous with
that of the Hebrews, though with differences that might have been
expected, should also enhance the interest and importance of such a
reconstruction. Indeed one of the noticeable facts regarding the
religious and intellectual development of the Hebrews has been that the
Oriental world in which they moved has heretofore furnished us with no
wholly analogous process among kindred peoples.

It will be seen that such a study as we contemplate involves keeping in
the main channel and following the broad current, the general drift. It
will be impossible, not to say quite undesirable, to undertake an
account of all the Egyptian gods, or to study the material appurtenances
and outward usages of religion, like the ceremonies and equipment of the
cult, which were so elaborately developed in Egypt. Nor shall we follow
thought in all its relations to the various incipient sciences, but only
those main developments involved in the intimate interrelation between
thought and religion.

One characteristic of Egyptian thinking should be borne in mind from the
outset: it was always in graphic form. The Egyptian did not possess the
terminology for the expression of a system of abstract thought; neither
did he develop the capacity to create the necessary terminology as did
the Greek. He thought in concrete pictures,

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

he moved along tangible material channels, and the material world about
him furnished nearly all of the terms which he used. While this is
probably ultimately true of all terms in any early language, such terms
for the most part remained concrete for the Egyptian. We shall discern
the emergence of the earliest abstract term known in the history of
thought as moral ideas appear among the men of the Pyramid Age in the
first half of the third millennium B.C. Let us not, therefore, expect an
equipment of precise abstract terms, which we shall find as lacking as
the systems which might require them. We are indeed to watch processes
by which a nation like the Greeks might have developed such terms, but
as we contemplate the earliest developments in human thinking still
traceable in contemporary documents, we must expect the vagueness, the
crudities, and the limitations inevitable at so early a stage of human
development. As the earliest chapter in the intellectual history of man,
its introductory phases are, nevertheless, of more importance than their
intrinsic value as thought would otherwise possess, while the climax of
the development is vital with human interest and human appeal.

As we examine Egyptian religion in its earliest surviving documents, it
is evident that two great phenomena of nature had made the most profound
impression upon the Nile-dwellers and that the gods discerned in these
two phenomena dominated religious and intellectual development from the
earliest times. These are the sun and the Nile. In the Sun-god, Re,
Atum, Horus, Khepri, and in the Nile, Osiris, we find the great gods of
Egyptian life and thought, who almost from the beginning entered upon a
rivalry for the highest place in the religion of Egypt—a rivalry which
ceased only with the annihilation of Egyptian

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

religion at the close of the fifth century of the Christian era. He who
knows the essentials of the story of this long rivalry, will know the
main course of the history of Egyptian religion, not to say one of the
most important chapters in the history of the early East.

The all-enveloping glory and power of the Egyptian sun is the most
insistent fact in the Nile valley, even at the present day as the modern
tourist views him for the first time. The Egyptian saw him in different,
doubtless originally local forms. At Edfu he appeared as a falcon, for
the lofty flight of this bird, which seemed a very comrade of the sun,
had led the early fancy of the Nile peasant to believe that the sun must
be such a falcon, taking his daily flight across the heavens, and the
sun-disk with the outspread wings of the falcon became the commonest
symbol of Egyptian religion. As falcon he bore the name Hor (Horus or
Horos), or Harakhte, which means "Horus of the horizon." The latter with
three other Horuses formed the four Horuses of the eastern sky,
originally, doubtless, four different local Horuses. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) We find them

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

in the Pyramid Texts as "these four youths who sit on the east side of
the sky, these four youths with curly hair who sit in the shade of the
tower of Kati." <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md)

At Heliopolis the Sun-god appeared as an aged man tottering down the
west, while elsewhere they saw in him a winged beetle rising in the east
as Khepri. Less picturesque fancy discerned the material sun as Re, that
is the "sun." While these were early correlated they at first remained
distinct gods for the separate localities where they were worshipped.
Survivals of the distinction between the archaic local Sun-gods are
still to be found in the Pyramid Texts. Horus early became the son of
Re, but in the Pyramid Texts we may find the dead Pharaoh mounting "upon
his empty throne between the two great gods" (Re and Horus). <span
id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3.md) They ultimately coalesced, and their
identity is quite evident also in the same Pyramid Texts, where we find
the compound "Re-Atum" to indicate the identity. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4.md) The favorite picture of him discloses him
sailing across the celestial ocean in the sun-barque, of which there
were two, one for the morning and the other for the evening. There were
several ancient folk-tales of how he reached the sky when he was still
on earth. They prayed that the deceased Pharaoh might reach the sky in
the same way: "Give thou to this king Pepi (the Pharaoh) thy two fingers
which thou gavest to the maiden, the daughter of the Great God (Re),
when the sky was separated from the earth, and the gods ascended to the
sky, while thou wast a soul appearing in the bow of thy ship of seven
hundred and seventy cubits (length), which the gods of Buto built for
thee, which the eastern gods shaped for thee." <span
id="fr_5"></span>[4](#fn_5.md) This separation of

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

earth and sky had been accomplished by Shu the god of the atmosphere,
who afterward continued to support the sky as he stood with his feet on
earth. There, like Atlas shouldering the earth, he was fed by provisions
of the Sun-god brought by a falcon. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)

Long before all this, however, there had existed in the beginning only
primeval chaos, an ocean in which the Sun-god as Atum had appeared. At
one temple they said Ptah had shaped an egg out of which the Sun-god had
issued; at another it was affirmed that a lotus flower had grown out of
the water and in it the youthful Sun-god was concealed; at Heliopolis it
was believed that the Sun-god had appeared upon the ancient pyramidal
"Ben-stone in the Phœnix-hall in Heliopolis" as a Phœnix. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7.md) Every sanctuary sought to gain honor by
associating in some way with its own early history the appearance of the
Sun-god. Either by his own masculine power self-developed, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[3](#fn_8.md) or by a consort who appeared to him, the
Sun-god now begat Shu the Air-god, and Tefnut his wife. Of these two
were born Geb the Earth-god, and Nut the goddess of the sky, whose
children were the two brothers Osiris and Set, and the sisters Isis and
Nephthys.

In the remotest past it was with material functions that the Sun-god had
to do. In the earliest Sun-temples at Abusir, he appears as the source
of life and increase. Men said of him: "Thou hast driven away the storm,
and hast expelled the rain, and hast broken up the clouds." <span
id="fr_9"></span>[4](#fn_9.md) These were his enemies, and of course they
were likewise personified in the folk-myth, appearing in a tale in which
the Sun-god loses his eye at the hands of

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

his enemy. Similarly the waxing and waning of the moon, who was also an
eye of the Sun-god, gave rise to another version of the lost eye, which
in this case was brought back and restored to the Sun-god by his friend
Thoth the Moon-god. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) This "eye,"
termed the "Horus-eye," became one of the holiest symbols of Egyptian
religion, and was finally transferred to the Osirian faith, where it
played a prominent part. <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md)

As the Egyptian state developed and a uniformly organized nation under a
single king embraced and included all the once petty and local
principalities, the Sun-god became an ancient king who, like a Pharaoh,
had once ruled Egypt. Many folk-myths telling of his earthly rule arose,
but of these only fragments have survived, like that which narrates the
ingratitude of his human subjects, whom he was obliged to punish and
almost exterminate before he retired to the sky. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[3](#fn_12.md)

While the Egyptian still referred with pleasure to the incidents which
made up these primitive tales, and his religious literature to the end
was filled with allusions to these myths, nevertheless at the beginning
of the Pyramid Age he was already discerning the Sun-god in the exercise
of functions which lifted him far above such childish fancies and made
him the great arbiter and ruler of the Egyptian nation. While he was
supreme among the gods, and men said of him, "Thou passest the night in
the evening-barque, thou wakest in the morning-barque;

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

for thou art he who overlooks the gods; there is no god who overlooks
thee"; <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) he was likewise at the same
time supreme over the destinies of men.

This fundamental transition, the earliest known, transferred the
activities of the Sun-god from the realm of exclusively *material*
forces to the domain of human affairs. Already in the Pyramid Age his
supremacy in the affairs of Egypt was celebrated in the earliest
Sun-hymn which we possess. It sets forth the god's beneficent
maintenance and control of the land of Egypt, which is called the
"Horus-eye," that is the Sun-god's eye. The hymn is as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Hail to thee, Atum!  
 Hail to thee, Kheprer!  
 Who himself became (or 'self-generator').  
 Thou art high in this thy name of 'Height,'  
 Thou becomest (ḫpr) in this thy name of 'Beetle' (ḫprr).  
 Hail to thee, Horus-eye (Egypt),  
 Which he adorned with both his arms.

"He permits thee (Egypt) not to hearken to the westerners,  
 He permits thee not to hearken to the easterners,  
 He permits thee not to hearken to the southerners,  
 He permits thee not to hearken to the northerners,  
 He permits thee not to hearken to the dwellers in the midst of the
earth,  
 But thou hearkenest unto Horus.

"It is he who has adorned thee, It is he who has built thee,  
 It is he who has founded thee.  
 Thou doest for him everything that he says to thee  
 In every place where he goes.

</div>

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Thou carriest to him the fowl-bearing waters that are in thee;  
 Thou carriest to him the fowl-bearing waters that shall be in thee.  
 Thou carriest to him every tree that is in thee,  
 Thou carriest to him every tree that shall be in thee.  
 Thou carriest to him all food that is in thee,  
 Thou carriest to him all food that shall be in thee.  
 Thou carriest to him the gifts that are in thee,  
 Thou carriest to him the gifts that shall be in thee.  
 Thou carriest to him everything that is in thee,  
 Thou carriest to him everything that shall be in thee.  
 Thou bringest them to him,  
 To every place where his heart desires to be.

"The doors that are on thee stand fast like Inmutef, <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md)  
 They open not to the westerners,  
 They open not to the easterners,  
 They open not to the northerners,  
 They open not to the southerners,  
 They open not to the dwellers in the midst of the earth,  
 They open to Horus.  
 It was he who made them,  
 It was he who set them up,  
 It was he who saved them from every ill which Set did to them.  
 It was he who settled (grg) thee, In this thy name of 'Settlements'
(grg-wt).  
 It was he who went doing obeisance (nyny) after thee,  
 In this thy name of 'City' (nwt)  
 It was he who saved thee from every ill  
 Which Set did unto thee." <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15.md)

</div>

Similarly the Sun-god is the ally and protector of the king: "He settles
for him Upper Egypt, he settles for him Lower Egypt; he hacks up for him
the strongholds of Asia, he quells for him all the people, <span
id="fr_16"></span>[3](#fn_16.md) who were fashioned

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

under his fingers." <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) Such was his
prestige that by the twenty-ninth century his name appeared in the names
of the Gizeh kings, the builders of the second and third pyramids there,
Khafre and Menkure, and according to a folk-tale circulating a thousand
years later, Khufu the builder of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, and the
predecessor of the two kings just named, was warned by a wise man that
his line should be superseded by three sons of the Sun-god yet to be
born. As a matter of fact, in the middle of the next century, that is
about 2750 B.C., the line of Khufu, the Fourth Dynasty, was indeed
supplanted by a family of kings, who began to assume the title "Son of
Re," though the title was probably not unknown even earlier. This Fifth
Dynasty was devoted to the service of the Sun-god, and each king built a
vast sanctuary for his worship in connection with the royal residence,
on the margin of the western desert. Such a sanctuary possessed no
adytum, or holy-of-holies, but in its place there rose a massive masonry
obelisk towering to the sky. Like all obelisks, it was surmounted by a
pyramid, which formed the apex. The pyramid was, as we shall see, the
chief symbol of the Sun-god, and in his sanctuary at Heliopolis there
was a pyramidal stone in the holy place, of which that surmounting the
obelisk in the Fifth Dynasty sun-temples was perhaps a reproduction. It
is evident that the priests of Heliopolis had become so powerful that
they had succeeded in seating this Solar line of kings upon the throne
of the Pharaohs. From now on the state fiction was maintained that the
Pharaoh was the physical son of the Sun-god by an earthly mother, and in
later days we find the successive incidents of the Sun-god's terrestrial
amour sculptured

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

on the walls of the temples. It has been preserved in two buildings of
the Eighteenth Dynasty, the temple of Luxor and that of Der
el-Bahri. <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md)

The legend was so persistent that even Alexander the Great deferred to
the tradition, and made the long journey to the Oasis of Amon in the
western desert, that he might be recognized as the bodily son of the
Egyptian Sun-god; <span id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19.md) and the folk-tale
preserved in Pseudo-Callisthenes gave the legend currency as a popular
romance, which survived until a few centuries ago in Europe. It still
remains to be determined what influence the Solar Pharaoh may have had
upon the Solar apotheosis of the Cæsars, five hundred years later.

From the foundation of the Fifth Dynasty, in the twenty-eighth century
B.C., the position of the Sun-god then, as the father of the Pharaoh and
the great patron divinity of the state, was one of unrivalled splendor
and power. He was the great god of king and court. When King Neferirkere
is deeply afflicted at the sudden death of his grand vizier, who was
stricken down with disease at the king's side, the Pharaoh prays to
Re; <span id="fr_20"></span>[3](#fn_20.md) and the court-physician, when he
has received a gift from the king for his tomb, tells of it in his tomb
inscriptions with the words: "If ye love Re, ye shall praise every god
for Sahure's sake who did this for me." <span
id="fr_21"></span>[4](#fn_21.md)

The conception of the Sun-god as a former king of Egypt, as the father
of the reigning Pharaoh, and as the protector and leader of the nation,
still a kind of ideal king, resulted in the most important consequences
for

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

religion. The qualities of the earthly kingship of the Pharaoh were
easily transferred to Re. We can observe this even in externals. There
was a palace song with which the court was wont to waken the sovereign
five thousand years ago, or which was addressed to him in the morning as
he came forth from his chamber. It began:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Thou wakest in peace,  
 The king awakes in peace,  
 Thy wakening is in peace." <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)</span>

</div>

This song was early addressed to the Sun-god, <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23.md) and similarly the hymns to the royal
diadem as a divinity were addressed to other gods. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24.md) The whole earthly conception and
environment of the Egyptian Pharaoh were soon, as it were, the "stage
properties" with which Re was "made up" before the eyes of the
Nile-dweller. When later on, therefore, the conception of the human
kingship was developed and enriched under the transforming social forces
of the Feudal Age, these vital changes were soon reflected from the
character of the Pharaoh to that of the Sun-god. It was a fact of the
greatest value to religion, then, that the Sun-god became a kind of
celestial reflection of the earthly sovereign. This phenomenon is, of
course, merely a highly specialized example of the universal process by
which man has pictured to himself his god with the pigments of his
earthly experience. We shall later see how this process is closely
analogous to the developing idea of the Messianic king in Hebrew
thought.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

While there is no question whatever regarding the natural phenomenon of
which Re, Atum, Horus, and the rest were personifications, there has
been much uncertainty and discussion of the same question in connection
with Osiris. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md)

The oldest source, the Pyramid Texts, in combination with a few later
references, settles the question beyond any doubt. The clearest
statement of the nature of Osiris is that contained in the incident of
the finding of the dead god by his son Horus, as narrated in the Pyramid
Texts: "Horus comes, he recognizes his father in thee, youthful in thy
name of 'Fresh Water."' <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26.md) Equally
unequivocal are the words of King Ramses IV, who says to the god: "Thou
art indeed the Nile, great on the fields at the beginning of the
seasons; gods and men live by the moisture that is in thee." <span
id="fr_27"></span>[3](#fn_27.md)

Similarly in the Pyramid Texts, Osiris is elsewhere addressed: "Ho,
Osiris, the inundation comes, the overflow moves, Geb (the earth-god)
groans: 'I have sought thee in the field, I have smitten him who did
aught against thee . . . that thou mightest live and lift thyself
up.'" <span id="fr_28"></span>[4](#fn_28.md) Again when the dead king Unis
is identified with Osiris, it is said of him: "Unis comes hither
up-stream when the flood inundates. . . . Unis comes to his pools that
are in the region of the flood at the great inundation, to the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

place of peace, with green fields, that is in the horizon. Unis makes
the verdure to flourish in the two regions of the horizon"; <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md) or "it is Unis who inundates the
land." <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30.md)

Likewise the deceased king Pepi I is addressed as Osiris thus: "This thy
cavern, <span id="fr_31"></span>[3](#fn_31.md) is the broad hall of Osiris,
O King Pepi, which brings the wind and ⌈guides⌉ the north-wind. It
raises thee as Osiris, O King Pepi. The winepress god comes to thee
bearing wine-juice. . . . Those who behold the Nile tossing in waves
tremble. The marshes laugh, the shores are overflowed, the divine
offerings descend, men give praise and the heart of the gods
rejoices." <span id="fr_32"></span>[4](#fn_32.md) A priestly explanation in
the Pyramid Texts represents the inundation as of ceremonial origin,
Osiris as before being its source: "The lakes fill, the canals are
inundated, by the purification that came forth from Osiris"; <span
id="fr_33"></span>[5](#fn_33.md) or "Ho this Osiris, king Mernere! Thy
water, thy libation is the great inundation that came forth from thee"
(as Osiris). <span id="fr_34"></span>[6](#fn_34.md)

In a short hymn addressed to the departed king, Pepi II, as Osiris, we
should discern Osiris either in the life-giving waters or the soil of
Egypt which is laved by them. The birth of the god is thus described:
"The waters of life that are in the sky come; the waters of life that
are in the earth come. The sky burns for thee, the earth trembles for
thee, before the divine birth. The two mountains divide, the god
becomes, the god takes possession of his body. Behold this king Pepi,
his feet are kissed by the pure waters which arose through Atum, which
the phallus of Shu makes and the vulva of Tefnut causes to be.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They come to thee,
they bring to thee the pure waters from their father. They purify thee,
they cleanse thee, O Pepi. . . . The libation is poured out at the gate
of this king Pepi, the face of every god is washed. Thou washest thy
arms, O Osiris." <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md) As Osiris was
identified with the waters of earth and sky, he may even become the sea
and the ocean itself. We find him addressed thus: "Thou art great, thou
art green, in thy name of Great Green (Sea); lo, thou art round as the
Great Circle (Okeanos); lo, thou art turned about, thou art round as the
circle that encircles the Haunebu (Ægeans)." <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36.md) "Thou includest all things in thy embrace,
in thy name of 'Encircler of the Haunebu' (Ægeans)." <span
id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_37.md) Or again: "Thou hast encircled every god
in thy embrace, their lands and all their possessions. O Osiris . . .
thou art great, thou curvest about as the curve which encircles the
Haunebu." <span id="fr_38"></span>[4](#fn_38.md) Hence it is that Osiris is
depicted on the sarcophagus of Seti I, engulfed in waters and lying as
it were coiled, with head and heels meeting around a vacancy containing
the inscription: "It is Osiris, encircling the Nether-World." <span
id="fr_39"></span>[5](#fn_39.md) We may therefore understand another
passage of the Pyramid Texts, which says to Osiris: "Thou ferriest over
the lake to thy house the Great Green (sea)." <span
id="fr_40"></span>[6](#fn_40.md)

While the great fountains of water are thus identified with Osiris, it
is evidently a particular function of the waters with which he was
associated. It was water as a source of fertility, water as a
life-giving agency with which

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Osiris was
identified. It is water which brings life to the soil, and when the
inundation comes the Earth-god Geb says to Osiris: "The divine fluid
that is in thee cries out, thy heart lives, thy divine limbs move, thy
joints are loosed," in which we discern the water bringing life and
causing the resurrection of Osiris, the soil. In the same way in a
folk-tale thirteen or fourteen hundred years later than the Pyramid
Texts, the heart of a dead hero, who is really Osiris, is placed in
water, and when he has drunk the water containing his heart, he revives
and comes to life. <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md)

As we have seen in the last passage from the Pyramid Texts, Osiris is
closely associated with the soil likewise. This view of Osiris is
carried so far in a hymn of the twelfth century B.C. as to identify
Osiris, not only with the soil but even with the earth itself. The
beginning is lost, but we perceive that the dead Osiris is addressed as
one "with outspread arms, sleeping upon his side upon the sand, lord of
the soil, mummy with long phallus. . . . Re-Khepri shines on thy body,
when thou liest as Sokar, and he drives away the darkness which is upon
thee, that he may bring light to thy eyes. For a time he shines upon thy
body mourning for thee. . . . The soil is on thy arm, its corners are
upon thee as far as the four pillars of the sky. When thou movest, the
earth trembles. . . . As for thee, the Nile comes forth from the sweat
of thy hands. Thou spewest out the wind that is in thy throat into the
nostrils of men, and that whereon men live is divine. It is ⌈alike in⌉
thy nostrils, the tree and its verdure, reeds—plants, barley, wheat, and
the tree of life. When canals are dug, . . . houses and temples are
built, when monuments are transported and fields are cultivated, when

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

tomb-chapels and tombs are excavated, they rest on thee, it is thou who
makest them. They are on thy back, although they are more than can be
put into writing. \[Thy\] back hath not an empty place, for they all lie
on thy back; but \[thou sayest\] not, 'I am weighed down.' Thou art the
father and mother of men, they live on thy breath, they eat of the flesh
of thy body. The 'Primæval' is thy name." <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md)

The earlier views of the Pyramid Texts represent him as intimately
associated with vegetable life. We find him addressed thus: "O thou
whose ab-tree is green, which (or who) is upon his field; O thou opener
of the ukhikh-flower that (or who) is on his sycomore; O thou brightener
of regions who is on his palm; O thou lord of green fields." <span
id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43.md) Again it is said to him: "Thou art flooded
with the verdure with which the children of Geb (the Earth-god) were
flooded. . . . The am-tree serves thee, the nebes-tree bows its head to
thee." <span id="fr_44"></span>[3](#fn_44.md) In addition to his connection
with the wine-press god above, he is called "Lord of overflowing
wine." <span id="fr_45"></span>[4](#fn_45.md) Furthermore, as the
inundation began at the rising of Sothis, the star of Isis, sister of
Osiris, they said to him: "The beloved daughter, Sothis, makes thy
fruits (rnpwt) in this her name of 'Year' (rnpt)." <span
id="fr_46"></span>[5](#fn_46.md) These are the fruits on which Egypt lives;
when therefore the dead king is identified with Osiris, his birth is
called "his unblemished birth, whereby the Two Lands (Egypt) live," and
thereupon he comes as the messenger of Osiris announcing the prosperous
yield of the year. <span id="fr_47"></span>[6](#fn_47.md) In the earliest
versions of the Book of the Dead likewise, the deceased says of himself:
"I am

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Osiris, I have
come forth as thou (that is "being thou"), I have entered as thou . . .
the gods live as I, I live as the gods, I live as 'Grain,' <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) I grow as 'Grain.' . . . I am barley."
With these early statements we should compare the frequent
representations showing grain sprouting from the prostrate body of
Osiris, or a tree growing out of his tomb or his coffin, or the effigies
of the god as a mummy moulded of bruised corn and earth and buried with
the dead, or in the grain-field to insure a plentiful crop.

It is evident from these earliest sources that Osiris was identified
with the waters, especially the inundation, with the *soil*, and with
*vegetation*. This is a result of the Egyptian tendency always to think
in graphic and concrete forms. The god was doubtless in Egyptian thought
the imperishable principle of life wherever found, and this conception
not infrequently appears in representations of him, showing him even in
death as still possessed of generative power. The ever-waning and
reviving life of the earth, sometimes associated with the life-giving
waters, sometimes with the fertile soil, or again discerned in
vegetation itself—that was Osiris. The fact that the Nile, like the
vegetation which its rising waters nourished awl supported, waxed and
waned every year, made it more easy to see him in the Nile, the most
important feature of the Egyptian's landscape, than in any other
form. <span id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49.md) As a matter of fact the Nile
was but the source

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

and visible symbol of that fertility of which Osiris was the
personification.

This ever-dying, ever-reviving god, who seemed to be subjected to human
destiny and human mortality, was inevitably the inexhaustible theme of
legend and saga. Like the Sun-god, after kings appeared in the land,
Osiris soon became an ancient king, who had been given the inheritance
of his father Geb, the Earth-god. He was commonly called "the heir of
Geb," who "assigned to him the leadership of the lands for the good of
affairs. He put this land in his hand, its water, its air, its verdure,
all its herds, all things that fly, all things that flutter, its
reptiles, its game of the desert, legally conveyed to the son of Nut
(Osiris)." <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md)

Thus Osiris began his beneficent rule, and "Egypt was content therewith,
as he dawned upon the throne of his father, like Re when he rises in the
horizon, when he sends forth light for him that is in darkness. He shed
forth light by his radiance, and he flooded the Two Lands like the sun
at early morning, while his diadem pierced the sky and mingled with the
stars—he, leader of every god, excellent in command, favorite of the
Great Ennead, beloved of the Little Ennead." <span
id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51.md) In power and splendor and benevolence he
ruled a happy people. He "established justice in Egypt, putting the son
in the seat of the father." "He overthrew his enemies, and with a mighty
arm he slew his foes, setting the fear of him among his adversaries, and
extending his boundaries." <span id="fr_52"></span>[3](#fn_52.md)

His sister Isis, who was at the same time his wife, stood

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

loyally at his side; she "protected him, driving away enemies, warding
off ⌈danger,⌉ taking the foe by the excellence of her speech—she, the
skilful-tongued, whose word failed not, excellent in command, Isis,
effective in protecting her brother." <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53.md) The arch enemy of the good Osiris was his
brother Set, who, however, feared the good king. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54.md) The Sun-god warned him and his followers:
"Have ye done aught against him and said that he should die? He shall
not die but he shall live forever." <span id="fr_55"></span>[3](#fn_55.md)

Nevertheless his assailants at last prevailed against him, if not openly
then by stratagem, as narrated by Plutarch, although there is no trace
in the Egyptian sources of Plutarch's story of the chest into which the
doomed Osiris was lured by the conspirators and then shut in to
die. <span id="fr_56"></span>[4](#fn_56.md)

The oldest source, the Pyramid Texts, indicates assassination: "his
brother Set felled him to the earth in Nedyt"; <span
id="fr_57"></span>[5](#fn_57.md) or "his brother Set overthrew him upon his
side, on the further side of the land of Gehesti"; <span
id="fr_58"></span>[6](#fn_58.md) but another document of the Pyramid Age,
and possibly quite as old as the passages quoted from the Pyramid Texts,
says: "Osiris was drowned in his new water (the inundation)." <span
id="fr_59"></span>[7](#fn_59.md)

When the news reached the unhappy Isis, she wandered in great affliction
seeking the body of her lord, "seeking

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

him unweariedly, sadly going through this land, nor stopping until she
found him." <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) The oldest literature is
full of references to the faithful wife unceasingly seeking her murdered
husband: "Thou didst come seeking thy brother Osiris, when his brother
Set had overthrown him." <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md) The
Plutarch narrative even carries her across the Mediterranean to Byblos,
where the body of Osiris had drifted in the waters. The Pyramid Texts
refer to the fact that she at last found him "upon the shore of
Nedyt," <span id="fr_62"></span>[3](#fn_62.md) where we recall he was slain
by Set, and it may be indeed that Nedyt is an ancient name for the
region of Byblos, although it was later localized at Abydos, and one act
of the Osirian passion play was presented at the shore of Nedyt, near
Abydos. <span id="fr_63"></span>[4](#fn_63.md) The introduction of Byblos
is at least as old as the thirteenth century B.C., when the Tale of the
Two Brothers in an Osirian incident pictures the Osirian hero as slain
in the Valley of the Cedar, which can have been nowhere but the Syrian
coast where the cedar flourished. Indeed in the Pyramid Texts, Horus is
at one point represented as crossing the sea. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[5](#fn_64.md) All this is doubtless closely connected
with the identification of Osiris with the waters, or even with the sea,
and harmonizes easily with the other version of his death, which
represents him as drowning. In that version "Isis and Nephthys saw him.
. . . Horus commanded Isis and Nephthys in Busiris, that they seize upon
Osiris, and that they prevent him from drowning. They turned around the
head (of Osiris) . . . and they

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

brought him to the land." <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) Nephthys
frequently accompanies her sister in the long search, both of them being
in the form of birds. "Isis comes, Nephthys comes, one of them on the
right, one of them on the left, one of them as a het-bird, one of them
as a falcon. They have found Osiris, as his brother Set felled him to
the earth in Nedyt." <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66.md) "'I have found
(him),' said Nephthys, when they saw Osiris (lying) on his side on the
shore. . . . O my brother, I have sought thee; raise thee up, O
spirit." <span id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_67.md) "The het-bird comes, the
falcon comes; they are Isis and Nephthys, they come embracing their
brother, Osiris. . . . Weep for thy brother, Isis! Weep for thy brother,
Nephthys! Weep for thy brother. Isis sits, her arms upon her head;
Nephthys has seized the tips of her breasts (in mourning) because of her
brother." <span id="fr_68"></span>[4](#fn_68.md) The lamentations of Isis
and Nephthys became the most sacred expression of sorrow known to the
heart of the Egyptian, and many were the varied forms which they took
until they emerged in the Osirian mysteries of Europe, three thousand
years later.

Then the two sisters embalm the body of their brother to prevent its
perishing, <span id="fr_69"></span>[5](#fn_69.md) or the Sun-god is moved
with pity and despatches the ancient mortuary god "Anubis . . . lord of
the Nether World, to whom the westerners (the dead) give praise . . .
him who was in the middle of the mid-heaven, fourth of the sons of Re,
who was made to descend from the sky to embalm Osiris, because he was so
very worthy in the heart of Re." <span id="fr_70"></span>[6](#fn_70.md)
Then when they have laid him in his tomb a sycomore grows up and

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

envelops the body of the dead god, like the *erica* in the story of
Plutarch. This sacred tree is the visible symbol of the imperishable
life of Osiris, which in the earliest references was already divine and
might be addressed as a god. Already in the Pyramid Age men sang to it:
"Hail to thee, Sycomore, which encloses the god, under which the gods of
the Nether Sky stand, whose tips are scorched, whose middle is burned,
who art just in ⌈suffering⌉. . . . Thy forehead is upon thy arm (in
mourning) for Osiris. . . . Thy station, O Osiris; thy shade over thee,
O Osiris, which repels thy defiance, O Set; the gracious damsel (meaning
the tree) which was made for this soul of Gehesti; thy shade, O
Osiris." <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71.md)

Such was the life and death of Osiris. His career, as picturing the
cycle of nature, could not of course end here. It is continued in his
resurrection, and likewise in a later addition drawn from the Solar
theology, the story of his son Horus and the Solar feud of Horus and
Set, which was not originally Osirian. Even in death the life-giving
power of Osiris did not cease. The faithful Isis drew near her dead
lord, "making a shadow with her pinions and causing a wind with her
wings . . . raising the weary limbs of the silent-hearted (dead),
receiving his seed, bringing forth an heir, nursing the child in
solitude, whose place is not known, introducing him when his arm grew
strong in the Great Hall" (at Heliopolis?) <span
id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72.md)

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

The imagination of the common people loved to dwell upon this picture of
the mother concealed in the marshes of the Delta, as they fancied, by
the city of Khemmis, and there bringing up the youthful Horus, that
"when his arm grew strong" he might avenge the murder of his father. All
this time Set was, of course, not idle, and many were the adventures and
escapes which befell the child at the hands of Set. These are too
fragmentarily preserved to be reconstructed clearly, but even after the
youth has grown up and attained a stature of eight cubits (nearly
fourteen feet), he is obliged to have a tiny chapel of half a cubit long
made, in which he conceals himself from Set. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) Grown to manhood, however, the youthful
god emerges at last from his hiding-place in the Delta. In the oldest
fragments we hear of "Isis the great, who fastened on the girdle in
Khemmis, when she brought her ⌈censer⌉ and burned incense before her son
Horus, the young child, when he was going through the land on his white
sandals, that he might see his father Osiris." <span
id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74.md) Again: "Horus comes forth from Khemmis,
and (the city of) Buto arises for Horus, and he purifies himself there.
Horus comes purified that he may avenge his father." <span
id="fr_75"></span>[3](#fn_75.md)

The filial piety of Horus was also a theme which the imagination of the
people loved to contemplate, as he went forth to overthrow his father's
enemies and take vengeance upon Set. They sang to Osiris: "Horus hath

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

come that he might embrace thee. He hath caused Thoth to turn back the
followers of Set before thee. He hath brought them to thee all together.
He hath turned back the heart of Set before thee, for thou art greater
than he. Thou hast gone forth before him, thy character is before him.
Geb hath seen thy character, he hath put thee in thy place. Geb hath
brought to thee thy two sisters to thy side: it is Isis and Nephthys.
Horus hath caused the gods to unite with thee and fraternize with thee.
. . . He hath caused that the gods avenge thee. Geb hath placed his foot
on the head of thy enemy, who hath retreated before thee. Thy son Horus
hath smitten him. He hath taken away his eye from him; he hath given it
to thee, that thou mightest become a soul thereby and be mighty thereby
before the spirits. Horus hath caused that thou seize thy enemies and
that there should be none escaping among them before thee. . . . Horus
hath seized Set, he hath laid him for thee under thee, that he (Set) may
lift thee up and tremble under thee as the earth trembles. . . . Horus
hath caused that thou shouldest recognize him in his inner heart,
without his escaping from thee. O Osiris, . . . Horus hath avenged
thee." <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md) "Horus hath come that he may
recognize thee. He hath smitten Set for thee, bound. Thou art his
(Set's) ka. Horus hath driven him back for thee; thou art greater than
he. He swims bearing thee; he carries in thee one greater than he. His
followers behold thee that thy strength is greater than he, and they do
not attack thee. Horus comes, he recognizes his father in thee, youthful
(rnp) in thy name of 'Fresh Water' (mw-rnpw)." <span
id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77.md) "Loose thou Horus from his bonds, that he
may punish the followers of Set. Seize

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

them, remove their heads, wade thou in their blood. Count their hearts
in this thy name of 'Anubis counter of hearts.'" <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78.md)

The battle of Horus with Set, which as we shall see was a Solar
incident, waged so fiercely that the young god lost his eye at the hands
of his father's enemy. When Set was overthrown, and it was finally
recovered by Thoth, this wise god spat upon the wound and healed it.
This method of healing the eye, which is, of course, folk-medicine
reflected in the myth, evidently gained wide popularity, passed into
Asia, and seems to reappear in the New Testament narrative, in the
incident which depicts Jesus doubtless deferring to recognized
folk-custom in employing the same means to heal a blind man. Horus now
seeks his father, even crossing the sea in his quest, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79.md) that he may raise his father from the dead
and offer to him the eye which he has sacrificed in his father's behalf.
This act of filial devotion, preserved to us in the Pyramid Texts (see
above, p. 12), made the already sacred Horus-eye doubly revered in the
tradition and feeling of the Egyptians. It became the symbol of all
sacrifice; every gift or offering might be called a "Horus-eye,"
especially if offered to the dead. Excepting the sacred beetle, or
scarab, it became the commonest and the most revered symbol known to
Egyptian religion, and the myriads of eyes, wrought in blue or green
glaze, or even cut from costly stone, which fill our museum collections,
and are brought home by thousands by the modern tourist, are survivals
of this ancient story of Horus and his devotion to his father.

A chapter of the Pyramid Texts tells the whole story of the
resurrection. "The gods dwelling in Buto ⌈approach⌉,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

they come to Osiris <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md) at the sound of
the mourning of Isis, at the cry of Nephthys, at the wailing of these
two horizon-gods over this Great One who came forth from the Nether
World. The souls of Buto wave their arms to thee, they . strike their
flesh for thee, they throw their arms for thee, they beat on their
temples for thee. They say of thee, O Osiris:

"'Though thou departest, thou comest (again); though thou sleepest, thou
wakest (again); though thou diest, thou livest (again).'

"'Stand up, that thou mayest see what thy son has done for thee. Awake,
that thou mayest hear what Horus has done for thee.'

"'He has smitten (ḥy) for thee the one that smote thee, as an ox (yḥ);
he has slain (sm’) for thee the one that slew thee, as a wild bull
(sm’). He has bound for thee the one that bound thee.'

"'He has put himself under thy daughter, the Great One (fem.) dwelling
in the East, that there may be no mourning in the palace of the gods.'

"Osiris speaks to Horus when he has removed the evil that was in Osiris
on his fourth day, and had forgotten what was done to him on his eighth
day. Thou hast come forth from the lake of life, purified in the
celestial lake, becoming Upwawet. Thy son Horus leads thee when he has
given to thee the gods who were against thee, and Thoth has brought them
to thee. How beautiful are they who saw, how satisfied are they who
beheld, who saw Horus when he gave life to his father, when he offered
satisfaction to Osiris before the western gods."

"Thy libation is poured by Isis, Nephthys has purified

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

thee, thy two great and mighty sisters, who have put together thy flesh,
who have fastened together thy limbs, who have made thy two eyes to
shine (again) in thy head." <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md)

Sometimes it is Horus who puts together the limbs of the dead god, <span
id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82.md) or again he finds his father as embalmed
by his mother and Anubis: "Horus comes to thee, he separates thy
bandages, he throws off thy bonds;" <span id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83.md)
"arise, give thou thy hand to Horus, that he may raise thee up." Over
and over again the rising of Osiris is reiterated, as the human protest
against death found insistent expression in the invincible fact that he
rose. We see the tomb opened for him: "The brick are drawn for thee out
of the great tomb," <span id="fr_84"></span>[4](#fn_84.md) and then "Osiris
awakes, the weary god wakens, the god stands up, he gains control of his
body." <span id="fr_85"></span>[5](#fn_85.md) "Stand up! Thou shalt not
end, thou shalt not perish." <span id="fr_86"></span>[6](#fn_86.md)

The malice of Set was not spent, however, even after his defeat by Horus
and the resurrection of Osiris. He entered the tribunal of the gods at
Heliopolis and lodged with them charges against Osiris. We have no clear
account of this litigation, nor of the nature of the charges, except
that Set was using them to gain the throne of Egypt. There must have
been a version in which the subject of the trial was Set's crime in
slaying Osiris. In dramatic

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

setting the Pyramid Texts depict the scene. "The sky is troubled, earth
trembles, Horus comes, Thoth appears. They lift Osiris from his side;
they make him stand up before the two Divine Enneads. 'Remember O Set,
and put it in thy heart, this word which Geb spoke, and this
manifestation which the gods made against you in the hall of the prince
in Heliopolis, because thou didst fell Osiris to the earth. When thou
didst say, O Set, "I have not done this to him," that thou mightest
prevail thereby, being saved that thou mightest prevail against Horus.
When thou didst say, O Set, "It was he who bowed me down" . . . When
thou didst say, O Set, "It was he who attacked me" . . . Lift thee up, O
Osiris! Set has lifted himself. He has heard the threat of the gods who
spoke of the Divine Father. Isis has thy arm, Osiris; Nephthys has thy
hand and thou goest between them.'" <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87.md)

But Osiris is triumphantly vindicated, and the throne is restored to him
against the claims of Set. "He is justified through that which he has
done. . . . The Two Truths <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88.md) have held
the legal hearing. Shu was witness. The Two Truths commanded that the
thrones of Geb should revert to him, that he should raise himself to
that which he desired, that his limbs which were in concealment should
be gathered together (again); that he should join those who dwell in Nun
(the primeval ocean); and that he should terminate the words in
Heliopolis." <span id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_89.md)

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

The verdict rendered in favor of [Osiris](errata.htm#1.md), which we
translate "justified," really means "true, right, just, or righteous of
voice." It must have been a legal term already in use when this episode
in the myth took form. It is later used in frequent parallelism with
"victorious" or "victory," and possessed the essential meaning of
"triumphant" or "triumph," both in a moral as well as a purely material
and physical sense. The later development of the Osirian litigation
shows that it gained a moral sense in this connection, if it did not
possess it in the beginning. We shall yet have occasion to observe the
course of the moral development involved in the wide popularity of this
incident in the Osiris myth.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The gods rejoice in the triumph of Osiris.  
 "All gods dwelling in the sky are satisfied;  
 All gods dwelling in the earth are satisfied;  
 All gods southern and northern are satisfied;  
 All gods western and eastern are satisfied;  
 All gods of the nomes are satisfied;  
 All gods of the cities are satisfied;</span>

</div>

with this great and mighty word that came out of the mouth of Thoth in
favor of Osiris, treasurer of life, seal-bearer of the gods." <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md)

The penalty laid upon Set was variously narrated in the different
versions of the myth. The Pyramid Texts several times refer to the fact
that Set was obliged to take Osiris on his back and carry him. "Ho!
Osiris! Rouse thee! Horus causes that Thoth bring to thee thy enemy. He
places thee upon his back. Make thy seat upon him. Ascend and sit down
upon him; let him not escape thee"; <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91.md)
or again, "The great Ennead avenges thee; they put for

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

thee thy enemy under thee. Carry one who is greater than thou,' say they
of him. . . . 'Lift up one greater than thou,' say they." <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md) "'He to whom evil was done by his brother
Set comes to us,' say the Two Divine Enneads, 'but we shall not permit
that Set be free from bearing thee forever, O king Osiris,' say the Two
Divine Enneads concerning thee, O king Osiris." <span
id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93.md) If Osiris is here the earth as commonly,
it may be that we have in this episode the earliest trace of the Atlas
myth. Another version, however, discloses Set, bound hand and foot "and
laid upon his side in the Land of Ru," <span
id="fr_94"></span>[3](#fn_94.md) or slaughtered and cut up as an ox and
distributed as food to the gods; <span id="fr_95"></span>[4](#fn_95.md) or
he is delivered to Osiris "cut into three pieces." <span
id="fr_96"></span>[5](#fn_96.md)

The risen and victorious Osiris receives the kingdom. "The sky is given
to thee, the earth is given to thee, the fields of Rushes are given to
thee, the Horite regions, the Setite regions, the cities are given to
thee. The nomes are united for thee by Atum. It is Geb (the Earth-god)
who speaks concerning it." <span id="fr_97"></span>[6](#fn_97.md) Indeed
Geb, the Earth-god and father of Osiris, "assigned the countries to the
embrace of Osiris, when he found him lying upon his side in
Gehesti." <span id="fr_98"></span>[7](#fn_98.md) Nevertheless Osiris does
not really belong to the kingdom of the living. His dominion is the
gloomy Nether World beneath the earth, to which he at once descends.
After his death, one of the oldest sources says of him: "He entered the
secret gates in the ⌈splendid⌉ precincts of the lords of eternity, at
the goings of him who rises in the horizon, upon the ways of Re in the
Great Seat." <span id="fr_99"></span>[8](#fn_99.md) There he is proclaimed
king. Horus "proclaimed the royal decree in the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

places of Anubis. <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) Every one
hearing it, he shall not live." <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101.md) It
was a subterranean kingdom of the dead over which Osiris reigned, and it
was as champion and friend of the dead that he gained his great position
in Egyptian religion.

But it will be discerned at once that the Osiris myth expressed those
hopes and aspirations and ideals which were closest to the life and the
affections of this great people. Isis was the noblest embodiment of
wifely fidelity and maternal solicitude, while the highest ideals of
filial devotion found expression in the story of Horus. About this group
of father, mother, and son the affectionate fancy of the common folk
wove a fair fabric of family ideals which rise high above such
conceptions elsewhere. In the Osiris myth the institution of the family
found its earliest and most exalted expression in religion, a glorified
reflection of earthly ties among the gods. The catastrophe and the
ultimate triumph of the righteous cause introduced here in a nature-myth
are an impressive revelation of the profoundly moral consciousness with
which the Egyptian at a remote age contemplated the world. When we
consider, furthermore, that Osiris was the kindly dispenser of plenty,
from whose prodigal hand king and peasant alike received their daily
bounty, that he was waiting over yonder behind the shadow of death to
waken all who have fallen asleep to a blessed hereafter with him, and
that in every family group the same affections and emotions which had
found expression in the beautiful myth were daily and hourly
experiences, we shall understand something of the reason for the
universal devotion which was ultimately paid the dead god.

The conquest of Egypt by the Osiris faith was, however,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

a gradual process. He had once in prehistoric times been a dangerous
god, and the tradition of his unfavorable character survived in vague
reminiscences long centuries after he had gained wide popularity. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102.md) At that time the dark and forbidding
realm which he ruled had been feared and dreaded. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103.md) In the beginning, too, he had been local
to the Delta, where he had his home in the city of Dedu, later called
Busiris by the Greeks. His transformation into a friend of man and
kindly ruler of the dead took place here in prehistoric ages, and at an
enormously remote date, before the two kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt
were united under one king (3400 B.C.), the belief in him spread into
the southern Kingdom. <span id="fr_104"></span>[3](#fn_104.md) He
apparently first found a home in the south at Siut, and in the Pyramid
Texts we read, "Isis and Nephthys salute thee in Siut, (even) their lord
in thee, in thy name of 'Lord of Siut.'" <span
id="fr_105"></span>[4](#fn_105.md) But the Osirian faith was early
localized at Abydos, whither an archaic mortuary god, known as
Khenti-Amentiu, "First of the Westerners," had already preceded
Osiris. <span id="fr_106"></span>[5](#fn_106.md) There he became the
"Dweller in Nedyt," <span id="fr_107"></span>[6](#fn_107.md) and even in
the Pyramid Texts he is identified with the "First of the Westerners."

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Thou art on the throne of Osiris,  
 As representative of the First of the Westerners." <span
id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108.md)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As "Lord of
Abydos," Osiris continued his triumphant career, and ultimately was
better known under this title than by his old association with Busiris
(Dedu). All this, however, belongs to the historical development which
we are to follow.

In spite of its popular origin we shall see that the Osirian faith, like
that of the Sun-god, entered into the most intimate relations with the
kingship. In probably the oldest religious feast of which any trace has
been preserved in Egypt, known as the "Heb-Sed" or "Sed-Feast," the king
assumed the costume and insignia of Osiris, and undoubtedly impersonated
him. The significance of this feast is, however, entirely obscure as
yet. The most surprising misunderstandings have gained currency
concerning it, and the use of it for far-reaching conclusions before the
surviving materials have all been put together is premature.

One of the ceremonies of this feast symbolized the resurrection of
Osiris, and it was possibly to associate the Pharaoh with this
auspicious event that he assumed the rôle of Osiris. In the end the
deceased [Pharaoh](errata.htm#2.md) became Osiris and enjoyed the same
resuscitation by Horus and Isis, all the divine privileges, and the same
felicity in the hereafter which had been accorded the dead god.

Some attempt to correlate the two leading gods of Egypt,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

the Sun-god and Osiris, was finally inevitable. The harmonization was
accomplished by the Solar theologians at Heliopolis, though not without
inextricable confusion, as the two faiths, which had already interfused
among the people, were now wrought together into a theological system.
It is quite evident from the Pyramid Texts that the feud between Horus
and Set was originally a Solar incident, and quite independent of the
Osiris myth. We find that in the mortuary ceremonies, Set's spittle is
used to purify the dead in the same words as that of Horus; <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109.md) and that Set may perform the same
friendly offices for the dead as those of Horus. <span
id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110.md) Indeed we find him fraternizing with the
dead, precisely as Horus does. <span id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111.md) We
find them without distinction, one on either side of the dead, holding
his arms and aiding him as he ascends to the Sun-god. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[4](#fn_112.md) Set was king of the South on equal terms
with Horus as king of the North; <span id="fr_113"></span>[5](#fn_113.md)
over and over again in the Pyramid Texts they appear side by side,
though implacable enemies, without the least suggestion that Set is a
foul and detested divinity. <span id="fr_114"></span>[6](#fn_114.md) There
are even traces of a similar ancient correlation of Osiris himself with
Set! <span id="fr_115"></span>[7](#fn_115.md) Set appears too without any
unfavorable reflection upon him in connection with the Sun-god and his
group, <span id="fr_116"></span>[8](#fn_116.md) and in harmony with this an
old doctrine represents Set as in charge of the ladder by which the dead
may ascend to the Sun-god—the ladder up which he himself once
climbed. <span id="fr_117"></span>[9](#fn_117.md) Set was doubtless some
natural phenomenon like the others of the group to which he belongs, and
it is most probable that he was the darkness. He and Horus divided Egypt
between them, Set being most

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

commonly represented as taking the South and Horus the North. The oldest
royal monuments of Egypt represent the falcon of Horus and the strange
animal (probably the okapi) of Set, side by side, as the symbol of the
kingship of the two kingdoms now ruled by one Pharaoh. It is not our
purpose, nor have we the space here, to study the question of Set,
further than to demonstrate that he belonged to the Solar group, on full
equality with Horus.

By what process Set became the enemy of Osiris we do not know. The
sources do not disclose it. When this had once happened, however, it
would be but natural that the old rival of Set, the Solar Horus, should
be drawn into the Osirian situation, and that his hostility toward Set
should involve his championship of the cause of Osiris. An old Memphite
document of the Pyramid Age unmistakably discloses the absorption of the
Set-Horus feud by the Osirian theology. In dramatic dialogue we discern
Geb assigning their respective kingdoms to Horus and Set, a purely Solar
episode, while at the same time Geb involves in this partition the
incidents of the Osirian story.

"Geb says to Set: 'Go to the place where thou wast born.'"

"Geb says to Horus: 'Go to the place where thy father was drowned.'"

"Geb says to Horus and Set: 'I have separated you.'"

"Set: Upper Egypt."

"Horus: Lower Egypt."

"\[Horus and Set\]: Upper and Lower Egypt."

"Geb says to the Divine Ennead: 'I have conveyed my heritage to this my
heir, the son of my first-born son. He is my son, my child.'"

The equality of Horus and Set, as in the old Solar

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

theology, is quite evident, but Horus is here made the son of Osiris. An
ancient commentator on this passage has appended the following
explanation of Geb's proceeding in assigning the kingdoms.

"He gathered together the Divine Ennead and he separated Horus and Set.
He prevented their conflict and he installed Set as king of Upper Egypt
in Upper Egypt, in the place where he was born in Sesesu. Then Geb
installed Horus as king of Lower Egypt, in Lower Egypt in the place
where his father was drowned, at (the time of) the dividing of the Two
Lands."

"Then Horus stood in (one) district, when they satisfied the Two Lands
in Ayan—that is the boundary of the Two Lands."

"Then Set stood in the (other) district, when they satisfied the Two
Lands in Ayan—that is the boundary of the Two Lands.

"It was evil to the heart of Geb, that the portion of Horus was (only)
equal to the portion of Set. Then Geb gave his heritage to Horus, this
son of his first-born son, and Horus stood in the land and united this
land." <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118.md)

Here the Osirian point of view no longer permits Set and Horus to rule
in equality side by side, but Set is dispossessed, and Horus receives
all Egypt. The Solar theologians of Heliopolis certainly did not take
this position in the beginning. They built up a group, which we have
already noted, of nine gods (commonly called an ennead), headed by the
ancient Atum, and among this group of nine divinities appears Osiris,
who had no real

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

original connection with the Solar myth. As Horus had no place in the
original ennead, it was the more easy to appropriate him for the Osirian
theology. As the process of correlation went on, it is evident also
that, like Osiris, the local gods of all the temples were more and more
drawn into the Solar theology. The old local Sun-gods had merged, and we
find five Solar divinities in a single list in the Pyramid Texts, all
addressed as Re. <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119.md) A distinct
tendency toward Solar henotheism, or even pantheism, is now discernible.
Each of the leading temples and priesthoods endeavored to establish the
local god as the focus of this centralizing process. The political
prestige of the Sun-god, however, made the issue quite certain. It
happens, however, that the system of a less important temple than that
of Heliopolis is the one which has survived to us. A mutilated stela in
the British Museum, on which the priestly scribes of the eighth century
B.C. have copied and rescued a worm-eaten papyrus which was falling to
pieces in their day, has preserved for two thousand seven hundred years
more, and thus brought down to our time, the only fragment of the
consciously constructive thought of the time, as the priests endeavored
to harmonize into one system the vast complex of interfused local
beliefs which made up the religion of Egypt.

It was the priests of Ptah, the master craftsman of the gods, whose
temple was at Memphis, who are at this juncture our guides in tracing
the current of religious thought in this remote age. This earliest
system, as they wrought it out, of course made Ptah of Memphis the great
and central figure. He too had his Memphite ennead made up of a primeval
Ptah and eight emanations or manifestations of himself. In the
employment of an ennead

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

to begin with, the theologians of Memphis were betraying the influence
of Heliopolis, where the first ennead had its origin. The supremacy of
the Solar theology, even in this Memphite system, is further discernible
in the inevitable admission of the fact that Atum the Sun-god was the
actual immediate creator of the world. But this they explained in this
way. One of the members of the Memphite ennead bears the name "Ptah the
Great," and to this name is appended the remarkable explanation, "he is
the heart and tongue of the ennead," meaning of course the *Memphite*
ennead. This enigmatic "heart and tongue" are then identified with Atum,
who, perhaps operating through other intermediate gods, accomplishes all
things through the "heart and tongue." When we recall that the Egyptian
constantly used "heart" as the seat of the mind, we are suddenly aware
also that he possessed no word for mind. A study of the document
demonstrates that the ancient thinker is using "heart" as his only means
of expressing the idea of "mind," as he vaguely conceived it. From Ptah
then proceeded "the power of mind and tongue" which is the controlling
power in "all gods, all men, all animals, and all reptiles, which live,
thinking and commanding that which he wills." <span
id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120.md)

After further demonstrating that the members of Atum, especially his
mouth which spake words of power, were made up of the ennead of Ptah,
and thus of Ptah himself, our thinker passes on to explain his
conception of the function of "heart (mind) and tongue." "When the eyes
see, the ears hear, and the nose breathes, they transmit to the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

heart. It is he (the heart) who brings forth every issue, and it is the
tongue which repeats the thought of the heart. He <span
id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md) fashioned all gods, even Atum and his
ennead. Every divine word came into existence by the thought of the
heart and the commandment of the tongue. It was he who made the kas and
⌈created⌉ the qualities; <span id="fr_122"></span>[2](#fn_122.md) who made
all food, all offerings, by this word; who made that which is loved and
that which is hated. It was he who gave life to the peaceful and death
to the guilty."

After this enumeration of things chiefly supermaterial, of which the
mind and the tongue were the creator, our Memphite theologian passes to
the world of material things.

"It was he who made every work, every handicraft, which the hands make,
the going of the feet, the movement of every limb, according to his
command, through the thought of the heart that came forth from the
tongue."

"There came the saying that Atum, who created the gods, stated
concerning Ptah-Tatenen: 'He is the fashioner of the gods, he, from whom
all things went forth, even offerings, and food and divine offerings and
every good thing! And Thoth perceived that his strength was greater than
all gods. Then Ptah was satisfied, after he had made all things and
every divine word."

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

"He fashioned the gods, he made the cities, he settled the nomes. He
installed the gods in their holy places, he made their offerings to
flourish, he equipped their holy places. He made likenesses of their
bodies to the satisfaction of their hearts. Then the gods entered into
their bodies of every wood and every stone and every metal. Everything
grew upon its trees whence they came forth. Then he assembled all the
gods and their kas (saying to them): 'Come ye and take possession of
"Neb-towe," the divine store-house of Ptah-Tatenen, the great seat,
which delights the heart of the gods dwelling in the House of Ptah, the
mistress of life . . . whence is furnished the "Life of the Two
Lands."'" <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123.md)

In this document we are far indeed from the simple folk-tales of the
origin of the world, which make up the mythology of Egypt. Assuming the
existence of Ptah in the beginning, the Memphite theologian sees all
things as first existing in the thought of the god. This world first

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

conceived in his "heart," then assumed objective reality by the
utterance of his "tongue." The utterance of the thought in the form of a
divine fiat brought forth the world. We are reminded of the words in
Genesis, as the Creator spoke, "And God said." Is there not here the
primeval germ of the later Alexandrian doctrine of the "Logos"?

We should not fail to understand in this earliest philosophico-religious
system, that the world which Ptah brought forth was merely the Egyptian
Nile valley. As we shall discover in our further progress, the
world-idea was not yet born. This Memphite Ptah was far from being a
world-god. The world, in so far as it was possible for the men of the
ancient Orient to know it, was still undiscovered by the Memphite
theologians or any other thinkers of that distant age, and the
impression which the world-idea was to make on religion was still over a
thousand years in the future when this venerable papyrus of

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the Pyramid Age was written. The forces of life which were first to
react upon religion were those which spent themselves within the narrow
borders of Egypt, and especially those of moral admonition which
dominate the inner world and which had already led the men of this
distant age to discern for the first time in human history that God
"gave life to the peaceful and death to the guilty."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:1](rtae05.htm#fr_0.md) These remarks are in part
drawn from the writer's *History of Egypt*, p. 53.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[9:1](rtae05.htm#fr_1.md) These four Horuses are:
(1) "Harakhte," (2) "Horus of the Gods," (3) "Horus of the East," and
(4) "Horus-shesemti." On their relation to Osiris, see *infra*, [p.
156](rtae09.htm#page_156.md). Three important Utterances of the Pyramid
Texts are built up on them: Ut. 325, 563, and 479. They are also
inserted into Ut. 504 (§§ 1085–6). See also § 1105 and § 1206. They
probably occur again as curly haired youths in charge of the ferry-boat
to the eastern sky in Ut. 520, but in Ut. 522 the four in charge of the
ferry-boat are the four genii, the sons of the Osirian Horus, and
confusion must be guarded against. On this point see *infra*, [p.
157](rtae09.htm#page_157.md). In Pyr. § 1258 the four Horuses appear with
variant names and are perhaps identified with the dead; they are
prevented from decaying by Isis and Nephthys. In Pyr. § 1478 also the
four Horuses are identified with the dead, who is the son of Re, in a
resurrection. Compare also the four children of the Earth-god Geb (Pyr.
§§ 1510–11), and especially the four children of Atum who decay not
(Pyr. §§2057–8), as in Pyr. § 1258.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[10:1](rtae05.htm#fr_2.md) Pyr. Texts, § 1105.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[10:2](rtae05.htm#fr_3.md) Pyr. § 1125.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[10:3](rtae05.htm#fr_4.md) Pyr. §§ 1694–5.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[10:4](rtae05.htm#fr_5.md) Pyr. §§ 1208–9.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[11:1](rtae05.htm#fr_6.md) Pyr. § 1778.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[11:2](rtae05.htm#fr_7.md) Pyr. § 1652.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[11:3](rtae05.htm#fr_8.md) Pyr. § 1818 and § 1248,
where the act is described in detail.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[11:4](rtae05.htm#fr_9.md) Pyr: § 500.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[12:1](rtae05.htm#fr_10.md) Pyr. § 2213 d.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12:2](rtae05.htm#fr_11.md) On the two eyes of the
Sun-god, see <span class="smallcaps">Erman's</span> full statement,
*Hymnen an das Diadem der Pharaonen*, in *Abhandl. der Kgl. Preuss.
Akad.*, 1911, pp. 11–14.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12:3](rtae05.htm#fr_12.md) On the sun-myths see
<span class="smallcaps">Erman</span>, *Aegyptische Religion*, pp. 33–38.
An insurrection suppressed by the Sun-god is referred to in the Pyramid
Texts, Ut. 229 and § 311.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13:1](rtae05.htm#fr_13.md) Pyr. § 1479.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[14:1](rtae05.htm#fr_14.md) A priestly title
meaning "Pillar of his mother" and containing some mythological
allusion.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[14:2](rtae05.htm#fr_15.md) Pyr. §§ 1587–95.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[14:3](rtae05.htm#fr_16.md) The word used applies
only to the people of Egypt.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[15:1](rtae05.htm#fr_17.md) Pyr. § 1837.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[16:1](rtae05.htm#fr_18.md) BAR, II, 187–212.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[16:2](rtae05.htm#fr_19.md) The material will be
found in <span class="smallcaps">Maspero's</span> useful essay, *Comment
Alexandre devint dieu en Égypte, École des Hautes Études, annuaire*,
1897.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[16:3](rtae05.htm#fr_20.md) BAR, I, 247.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[16:4](rtae05.htm#fr_21.md) BAR, I, 247.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[17:1](rtae05.htm#fr_22.md) The character and
origin, and the later use of this song as a part of temple ritual and
worship, were first noticed by <span class="smallcaps">Erman</span>,
*Hymnen an das Diadem der Pharaonen, Abhandl. der Kgl. Preuss. Akad.*,
Berlin, 1911, pp. 15, *ff*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[17:2](rtae05.htm#fr_23.md) Pyr. §§ 1478, 1518.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[17:3](rtae05.htm#fr_24.md) See <span
class="smallcaps">Erman</span>, *ibid.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[18:1](rtae05.htm#fr_25.md) The material known
before the discovery of the Pyramid Texts was put together by <span
class="smallcaps">Lefebure</span>, *Le mythe osirien*, Paris, 1874;
review by <span class="smallcaps">Maspero</span>, *Revue critique*,
1875, t. II, pp. 209–210. Without the Pyramid Texts, the oldest source,
it is hardly possible to settle the question. The complete material from
this source has not hitherto been brought to bear on the question, not
even in the latest work on the subject, <span
class="smallcaps">Frazer's</span> admirable book, *Adonis Attis Osiris*,
London, 1907.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[18:2](rtae05.htm#fr_26.md) Pyr. § 589.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[18:3](rtae05.htm#fr_27.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Mariette</span>, *Abydos*, II, 54, 1. 7.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[18:4](rtae05.htm#fr_28.md) Pyr. § 2111.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[19:1](rtae05.htm#fr_29.md) Pyr. §§ 507–8.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[19:2](rtae05.htm#fr_30.md) Pyr. § 388.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[19:3](rtae05.htm#fr_31.md) The word used is t̠pḥt,
the term constantly employed in later religious texts for the cavern
from which the Nile had its source.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[19:4](rtae05.htm#fr_32.md) Pyr. §§ 1551–4.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[19:5](rtae05.htm#fr_33.md) Pyr. § 848.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[19:6](rtae05.htm#fr_34.md) Pyr. § 868.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[20:1](rtae05.htm#fr_35.md) Pyr. §§ 2063–8.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[20:2](rtae05.htm#fr_36.md) Pyr. §§ 628–9. Osiris
is made ruler of the Haunebu also in the Stela No. 20, Bibl. Nat. Cat.
Ledrain, pl. xxvi, ll. 19–20.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[20:3](rtae05.htm#fr_37.md) Pyr. § 1631.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[20:4](rtae05.htm#fr_38.md) Pyr. § 847.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[20:5](rtae05.htm#fr_39.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Bonomi</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Sharpe</span>, *Alabaster Sarcophagus of Oimeneptah
I*, London, 1864, pl. 15.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[20:6](rtae05.htm#fr_40.md) Pyr. § 1752.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[21:1](rtae05.htm#fr_41.md) The Tale of the Two
Brothers; see *infra*, pp.
[357](rtae14.htm#page_357)–[360](rtae14.htm#page_360.md).

<span id="fn_42"></span>[22:1](rtae05.htm#fr_42.md) <span
class="smallcaps">Erman</span>, *Zeitschr. für aegypt. Sprache*, 38, pp.
30–33.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[22:2](rtae05.htm#fr_43.md) Pyr. § 699.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[22:3](rtae05.htm#fr_44.md) Pyr. § 1019.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[22:4](rtae05.htm#fr_45.md) Pyr. § 1524.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[22:5](rtae05.htm#fr_46.md) Pyr. § 1065.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[22:6](rtae05.htm#fr_47.md) Pyr. §§ 1194–5.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[23:1](rtae05.htm#fr_48.md) Here personified as god
of Grain (Npr). The passage is from the Middle Kingdom Coffin Texts,
published by <span class="smallcaps">Lacau</span>, *Recueil de trav.*
See also "Chapter of Becoming the Nile" (XIX) and *cf.* XLIV.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[23:2](rtae05.htm#fr_49.md) The later classical
evidence from Greek and Roman authors is in general corroborative of the
above conclusions. It is of only secondary importance as compared with
the early sources employed above. The most important passages will be
found in <span class="smallcaps">Frazer's</span> *Adonis Attis Osiris*,
London, 1907, pp. 330–345.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[24:1](rtae05.htm#fr_50.md) Hymn to Osiris in the
Bibliothèque Nationale, Stela No. 20, published by <span
class="smallcaps">Ledrain</span>, *Les monuments égyptiens de la
Bibliothèque Nationale*, Paris, 1879, pls. xxi-xxviii, ll. 10–11.
Hereafter cited as Bib. Nat. No. 20. It dates from the Eighteenth
Dynasty.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[24:2](rtae05.htm#fr_51.md) Bib. Nat. No. 20, ll.
12–13.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[24:3](rtae05.htm#fr_52.md) *Ibid.*, 20, ll. 9–10.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[25:1](rtae05.htm#fr_53.md) Bib. Nat. No. 20, ll.
13–14.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[25:2](rtae05.htm#fr_54.md) Pyr. § 589. The same
intimations are discernible throughout this Utterance (357).

<span id="fn_55"></span>[25:3](rtae05.htm#fr_55.md) Pyr. § 1471. The
Pharaoh's name has been inserted in place of the last pronoun. In the
variants of this text (§ 481 and § 944) the enemy is in the singular.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[25:4](rtae05.htm#fr_56.md) See <span
class="smallcaps">Schaefer</span>, *Zeitschrift für aegypt. Sprache*,
41, 81

<span id="fn_57"></span>[25:5](rtae05.htm#fr_57.md) Pyr. § 1256.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[25:6](rtae05.htm#fr_58.md) Pyr. 972.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[25:7](rtae05.htm#fr_59.md) British Museum, Stela
797, ll. 19 and 62. On this monument see *infra*, pp.
[41](#page_41)–[47](#page_47.md).

<span id="fn_60"></span>[26:1](rtae05.htm#fr_60.md) Bib. Nat. No. 20, ll.
14–15.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[26:2](rtae05.htm#fr_61.md) Pyr. § 972.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[26:3](rtae05.htm#fr_62.md) Pyr. § 1008.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[26:4](rtae05.htm#fr_63.md) See *infra*, [p.
289](rtae12.htm#page_289.md). Nedyt was conceived as near Abydos even in
the Pyramid Texts, see § 754, where Nedyt occurs in parallelism with
Thinis the nome of Abydos.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[26:5](rtae05.htm#fr_64.md) Pyr. §§ 1505, 1508.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[27:1](rtae05.htm#fr_65.md) Brit. Museum, 797, ll.
62–63.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[27:2](rtae05.htm#fr_66.md) Pyr. §§ 1255–6.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[27:3](rtae05.htm#fr_67.md) Pyr. §§ 2144–5.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[27:4](rtae05.htm#fr_68.md) Pyr. §§ 1280–2.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[27:5](rtae05.htm#fr_69.md) Pyr. § 1257.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[27:6](rtae05.htm#fr_70.md) Coffin of Henui, <span
class="smallcaps">Steindorff</span>, *Grabfunde des Mittleren Reichs*,
II, 17.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[28:1](rtae05.htm#fr_71.md) Pyr. §§ 1285–7. Gehesti
is the name of the land where Osiris was slain. The reference to the
scorching and burning of the tree is doubtless the earliest native
mention of the ceremony of enclosing an image of Osiris in a tree and
burning it, as narrated by <span class="smallcaps">Firmicus
Maternus</span>, *De errore profanarum religionum*, 27; <span
class="smallcaps">Frazer</span>, *Adonis Attis Osiris*, pp. 339–340.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[28:2](rtae05.htm#fr_72.md) Bib. Nat. No. 20, ll.
15–16. The story is told with coarse frankness also in the Pyramid
Texts: "Thy sister Isis comes to thee, rejoicing for love of thee. Ponis
eam ad phallum tuum, semen tuum <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> emergit
in eam." Pyr. § 632, and again less clearly in Pyr. § 1636. At Abydos
and Philæ the incident is graphically depicted on the wall in relief.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[29:1](rtae05.htm#fr_73.md) See <span
class="smallcaps">Schaefer</span>, *Zeitschr. f. aegypt. Sprache*, 41,
81.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[29:2](rtae05.htm#fr_74.md) Pyr. § 1214.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[29:3](rtae05.htm#fr_75.md) Pyr. § 2190. There was
also a story of how he left Buto, to which there is a reference in Pyr.
§ 1373 = § 1089.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[30:1](rtae05.htm#fr_76.md) Pyr. §§ 575–582.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[30:2](rtae05.htm#fr_77.md) Pyr. §§ 587–9.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[31:1](rtae05.htm#fr_78.md) Pyr. §§ 1285–7.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[31:2](rtae05.htm#fr_79.md) Pyr. §§ 1505, 1508.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[32:1](rtae05.htm#fr_80.md) The name of the king
for whom the chapter was employed has been inserted here.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[33:1](rtae05.htm#fr_81.md) Pyr. Ut. 670, §§
1976–82, as restored from Ut. 482 (a shorter redaction), and the tomb of
Harhotep and the tomb of Psamtik. (See <span
class="smallcaps">Sethe</span>, *Pyr*., vol. II, pp. iii-iv, Nos. 6, 10,
11).

<span id="fn_82"></span>[33:2](rtae05.htm#fr_82.md) Pyr. §§ 617, 634.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[33:3](rtae05.htm#fr_83.md) Pyr. §§ 2201–2.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[33:4](rtae05.htm#fr_84.md) Pyr. § 572.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[33:5](rtae05.htm#fr_85.md) Pyr. § 2092.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[33:6](rtae05.htm#fr_86.md) Pyr. § 1299. Commonly
so in the Pyramid Texts. It became a frequent means of introducing the
formulas of the ritual of mortuary offerings, in order that the dead
might be roused to partake of the food offered; see Pyr. § 654 and §
735, or Ut. 413 and 437 entire. The resurrection of Osiris by Re was
doubtless a theological device for correlating the Solar and Osirian
doctrines (Pyr. § 721).

<span id="fn_87"></span>[34:1](rtae05.htm#fr_87.md) Pyr. §§ 956–960.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[34:2](rtae05.htm#fr_88.md) On the Two Truths see
the same phrase in the Book of the Dead, *infra*, p. 299 and notes 2 and
3.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[34:3](rtae05.htm#fr_89.md) Pyr. §§ 316–318.
Compare also, "'Set is guilty, Osiris is righteous,' (words) from the
mouth of the gods on that good day of going forth upon the mountain"
(for the interment of Osiris) (Pyr. §1556), from which it would appear
that there was a verdict before the resurrection of Osiris.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[35:1](rtae05.htm#fr_90.md) Pyr. §§ 1522–3.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[35:2](rtae05.htm#fr_91.md) Pyr. §§ 651–2; see also
§§ 642, 649.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[36:1](rtae05.htm#fr_92.md) Pyr. §§ 626–7, var. §
1628. See also § 1632.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[36:2](rtae05.htm#fr_93.md) Pyr. § 1699.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[36:3](rtae05.htm#fr_94.md) Pyr. § 1035.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[36:4](rtae05.htm#fr_95.md) Pyr. Ut. 580.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[36:5](rtae05.htm#fr_96.md) Pyr. Ut. 543; see also
1339.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[36:6](rtae05.htm#fr_97.md) Pyr. § 961.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[36:7](rtae05.htm#fr_98.md) Pyr. § 1033.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[36:8](rtae05.htm#fr_99.md) Brit. Mus. Stela 797,
l. 63.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[37:1](rtae05.htm#fr_100.md) An old god of the
hereafter.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[37:2](rtae05.htm#fr_101.md) Pyr. § 1335.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[38:1](rtae05.htm#fr_102.md) Pyr. §§ 1266–7.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[38:2](rtae05.htm#fr_103.md) Pyr. §§ 251, 350; see
also *infra*, pp. [142](rtae09.htm#page_142)–[143](rtae09.htm#page_143.md).

<span id="fn_104"></span>[38:3](rtae05.htm#fr_104.md) This is shown in the
Pyramid Texts, where the sycomore of Osiris is thus addressed: "Thou
hast hurled thy terror into the heart of the kings of Lower Egypt
dwelling in Buto" (Pyr. § 1488). Osiris must therefore have reached
Upper Egypt, and have become domiciled there at a time when the kings of
the North were still hostile.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[38:4](rtae05.htm#fr_105.md) Pyr. § 630. There is
not space here to correlate this fact with <span
class="smallcaps">Meyer's</span> results regarding the wolf and jackal
gods at Abydos and Siut.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[38:5](rtae05.htm#fr_106.md) See <span
class="smallcaps">Maspero</span>, *Etudes de mythologie et d’archéologie
égyptiennes*, II, pp. 10, 359, etc., and <span class="smallcaps">Eduard
Meyer</span>, *Zeitschr. für aegypt. Sprache*, 41, pp. 97 *ff*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[38:6](rtae05.htm#fr_107.md) Pyr. § 754.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[39:1](rtae05.htm#fr_108.md) Pyr. § 2021; see also
§ 1996. <span class="smallcaps">Eduard Meyer</span> (*ibid.*, p. 100)
states that Osiris is never identified with Khenti-Amentiu in the
Pyramid Texts, and it is true that the two names are not placed side by
side as proper name and accompanying epithet in the Pyramid Texts, as
they are so commonly later, but such a parallel as that above seems to
me to indicate essential identity.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[40:1](rtae05.htm#fr_109.md) Pyr. § 850.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[40:2](rtae05.htm#fr_110.md) Pyr. §§ 1492–3.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[40:3](rtae05.htm#fr_111.md) Pyr. § 1016 = § 801.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[40:4](rtae05.htm#fr_112.md) Pyr. § 390.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[40:5](rtae05.htm#fr_113.md) Pyr. §§ 204–6.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[40:6](rtae05.htm#fr_114.md) See Pyr. §§ 418, 473,
487, 535, 594, 601, 683, 798, 823, 946, 971, 1148.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[40:7](rtae05.htm#fr_115.md) Pyr. §§ 832, 865.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[40:8](rtae05.htm#fr_116.md) Pyr. § 370.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[40:9](rtae05.htm#fr_117.md) Pyr. §§ 478, 1148,
1253.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[42:1](rtae05.htm#fr_118.md) British Museum, Stela
No. 797, as reconstructed by <span class="smallcaps">Erman</span>, E*in
Denkmal memphitischer Theologie* (*Sitzungsber. der Kgl. Preuss. Akad.*,
1911, XLIII), pp. 925–932. On this remarkable monument see also below,
pp. [43](#page_43)–[47](#page_47.md).

<span id="fn_119"></span>[43:1](rtae05.htm#fr_119.md) Pyr. §§ 1444–9.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[44:1](rtae05.htm#fr_120.md) The verbal form of
"thinking" is questionable, but no other interpretation seems possible.
Whether "he" in "he wills" refers to Ptah directly or to the "power of
mind and tongue" is not essential, as the latter proceeds from Ptah.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[45:1](rtae05.htm#fr_121.md) Heart and tongue have
the same gender in Egyptian and the pronoun may equally well refer to
either. I use "he" for heart and "it" for tongue, but, I repeat, the
distinction is not certain here.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[45:2](rtae05.htm#fr_122.md) Ḥmswt, which, as
<span class="smallcaps">Brugsch</span> has shown (*Woerterbuch Suppl.*,
pp. 996 *ff*.), indicates the qualities of the Sun-god, here attributed,
in origin, to Ptah. These are: "Might, radiance, prosperity, victory,
wealth, plenty, augustness, readiness or equipment, making,
intelligence, adornment, stability, obedience, nourishment (or taste)."
They appear with the kas at royal births, wearing on their heads shields
with crossed arrows. So at Der el-Bahri.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[46:1](rtae05.htm#fr_123.md) British Museum, Stela
No. 797, formerly No. 135, ll. 48–61. This remarkable document long
rested in obscurity after its acquirement by the British Museum in 1805.
The stone had been used as a nether millstone, almost abrading the
inscription and rendering it so illegible that the process of copying
was excessively difficult. It was early published by <span
class="smallcaps">Sharpe</span> (Inscriptions, I, 36–38), but the
knowledge of the language current in his day made a usable copy
impossible. As the signs face the end instead of the beginning as usual,
<span class="smallcaps">Sharpe</span> numbered the vertical lines
backward, making the last line first. Mr. <span
class="smallcaps">Bryant</span> and Mr. <span
class="smallcaps">Read</span> then published a much better copy in the
*Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archæology*, March, 1901, pp.
160 *ff*. They still numbered the lines backward, however, and so
translated the document. In working through the inscriptions of the
British Museum for the Berlin Egyptian Dictionary it had soon become
evident to me that the lines of this inscription were to be numbered in
the other direction. I then published a fac-simile copy of the stone in
the *Zeitschrift für aegypt. Sprache*, 39, pp. 39 *ff*. I stated at the
time: "The signs are very faint, and in badly worn places reading is
excessively difficult. . . . I have no doubt that <span id="page_47">p.
47</span> with a better light than it is possible to get in the museum
gallery, more could in places be gotten out." At the same time I
ventured to publish a preliminary "rapid sketch" of the content which
was undoubtedly premature and which dated the early
[Egyptian](errata.htm#3.md) original papyrus of which our stone is a copy
at least as early as the Eighteenth Dynasty, adding that "some points in
orthography would indicate a much earlier date." Professor <span
class="smallcaps">Erman</span> has now published a penetrating critical
analysis of the document (E*in Denkmal memphitischer Theologie*,
*Sitzungsber. der Kgl. Preuss. Akad.*, 1911, XLIII, pp. 916–950) which
places it on the basis of orthography in the Pyramid Age, to which I had
not the courage to assign it on the same evidence. With a better
knowledge of the Pyramid Texts and Old Kingdom orthography than I had
twelve years ago, I wholly agree with <span
class="smallcaps">Erman's</span> date for the document, surprising as it
is to find such a treatise in the Pyramid Age. From <span
class="smallcaps">Lepsius's</span> squeeze of the stone, <span
class="smallcaps">Erman</span> has also secured a number of valuable new
readings, while the summary of the document given above is largely
indebted to his analysis. The discussion in my *History of Egypt*, pp.
356–8, as far as it employs this document, should be eliminated from the
Empire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture II. Life After Death—The Sojourn in the Tomb—Death Makes
its Impression on Religion](rtae06.md)
