[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rtae06)  [Next](rtae08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027ISA32/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt*, by James Henry
Breasted, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

### LECTURE III

#### THE REALMS OF THE DEAD—THE PYRAMID TEXTS—THE ASCENT TO THE SKY

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Pharaoh himself might reasonably
expect that his imposing tomb would long survive the destruction of the
less enduring structures in which his nobles were laid, and that his
endowments, too, might be made to outlast those of his less powerful
contemporaries. The pyramid as a stable form in architecture has
impressed itself upon all time. Beneath this vast mountain of stone, as
a result of its mere mass and indestructibility alone, the Pharaoh
looked forward to the permanent survival of his body, and of the
personality with which it was so indissolubly involved. Moreover, the
origin of the monument, hitherto overlooked, made it a symbol of the
highest sacredness, rising above the mortal remains of the king, to
greet the Sun, whose offspring the Pharaoh was.

The pyramid form may be explained by an examination of the familiar
obelisk form. The obelisk, as is commonly known, is a symbol sacred to
the Sun-god. So far as I am aware, however, little significance has
heretofore been attached to the fact that the especially sacred portion
of the obelisk is the pyramidal apex with which it is surmounted. An
obelisk is simply a pyramid upon a lofty base which has indeed become
the shaft. In the Old Kingdom Sun-temples at Abusir, this is quite
clear, the diameter of the shaft being at the bottom quite one-third

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

of its height. Thus the shaft appears as a high base, upon which the
surmounting pyramid is supported. This pyramidal top is the essential
part of the monument and the significant symbol which it bore. The
Egyptians called it a *benben* (or *benbenet*), which we translate
"pyramidion," and the shaft or high base would be without significance
without it. Thus, when Sesostris I proclaims to posterity the survival
of his name in his Heliopolis monuments, he says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"My beauty shall be remembered in his house,  
 My name is the pyramidion and my name is the lake." <span
id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_186)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His meaning is
that his name shall survive on his great obelisks, and in the sacred
lake which he excavated. The king significantly designates the obelisk,
however, by the name of its pyramidal summit. Now the long recognized
fact that the obelisk is sacred to the sun, carries with it the
demonstration that it is the *pyramid* surmounting the obelisk which is
sacred to the Sun-god. Furthermore, the sanctuary at Heliopolis was
early designated the "Benben-house," that is the
"pyramidion-house." <span id="fr_187"></span>[2](#fn_187) The symbol,
then, by which the sanctuary of the Sun-temple at Heliopolis was
designated was a pyramid. Moreover, there was in this same Sun-temple a
pyramidal object called a "ben," presumably of stone standing in the
"Phœnix-house"; and upon this pyramidal object the Sun-god in the form
of a Phœnix had in the beginning first appeared. This object was already
sacred as far back as the middle of the third millennium B.C., <span
id="fr_188"></span>[3](#fn_188) and will doubtless have

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

been vastly older. We may conjecture that it was one of those sacred
stones, which gained their sanctity in times far back of all
recollection or tradition, like the *Ka‘aba* at Mecca. In hieroglyphic
the Phœnix is represented as sitting upon this object, the form of which
was a universally sacred symbol of the Sun-god. Hence it is that in the
Pyramid Texts the king's pyramid tomb is placed under the protection of
the *Sun-god* in two very clear chapters, <span
id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189) the second of which opens with a
reference to the fact that the Sun-god when he created the other gods
was sitting aloft on the *ben* as a Phœnix, and hence it is that the
king's pyramid is placed under his protection. (See pp.
[76](#page_76)–[77](#page_77).)

The pyramidal form of the king's tomb therefore was of the most sacred
significance. The king was buried under the very symbol of the Sun-god
which stood in the holy of holies in the Sun-temple at Heliopolis, a
symbol upon which, from the day when he created the gods, he was
accustomed to manifest himself in the form of the Phœnix; and when in
mountainous proportions the pyramid rose above the king's sepulchre,
dominating the royal city below and the valley beyond for many miles, it
was the loftiest object which greeted the Sun-god in all the land, and
his morning rays glittered on its shining summit long before he
scattered the shadows in the dwellings of humbler mortals below. We
might expect to find some hint of all this on the pyramids themselves,
and in this expectation we are not disappointed, in spite of the fact
that hitherto no exterior inscription has ever been found actually in
position in the masonry of a pyramid, so sadly have they suffered at the
hands of time and vandals. A magnificent

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

pyramidal block of polished granite, found lying at the base of
Amenemhet III's pyramid at Dahshur, is, however, unquestionably the
ancient apex of that monument, from which it has fallen down as a result
of the quarrying by modern natives. <span
id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_190)

On the side which undoubtedly faced the east appears a winged sun-disk,
surmounting a pair of eyes, beneath which are the words "beauty of the
sun," the eyes of course indicating the idea of beholding, which is to
be understood with the words "beauty of the sun." Below is an
inscription <span id="fr_191"></span>[2](#fn_191) of two lines
beginning: "The face of king Amenemhet III is opened, that he may behold
the Lord of the Horizon when he sails across the sky." <span
id="fr_192"></span>[3](#fn_192)

Entirely in harmony with this interpretation of the significance of the
pyramid form is its subsequent mortuary use. A large number of small
stone pyramids, each cut from a single block, has been found in the
cemeteries of later times. On opposite sides of such a pyramid is a
niche in which the deceased appears kneeling with upraised hands, while
the accompanying inscriptions represent him as singing a hymn to the
Sun-god, on one side to the rising and on the other to the setting sun.
The larger museums of Europe possess numbers of these small monuments.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

In the selection of the pyramid, the greatest of the Solar symbols, as
the form of the king's tomb, we must therefore recognize another
evidence of the supremacy of the Solar faith at the court of the
Pharaohs. <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193) It is notable in this
connection that it was chiefly against Osiris and the divinities of his
cycle that protection was sought at the dedication of a royal pyramid
tomb. <span id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_194)

The imposing complex of which the pyramid was the chief member has only
been understood in recent years as a result of the excavations of the
Deutsche Orient-Gesellschaft at Abusir. The pyramid occupied a prominent
position on the margin of the desert plateau overlooking the Nile
valley. On its east side, properly called the front of the monument, and
abutting on the masonry of the pyramid, rose an extensive temple, with a
beautiful colonnaded court in front, storage chambers on either side,
and in the rear a holy place. The back wall of this "holy of holies" was
the east face of the pyramid itself, in which was a false door. Through
this the dead king might step forth to receive and enjoy the offerings
presented to him here. A covered causeway of massive masonry led up from
the valley below to the level of the plateau where pyramid and temple
stood, and extended to the very door

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

in the front of the temple, with whose masonry it engaged. The lower end
of the causeway was adorned with a sumptuous colonnaded entrance, a
monumental portal, which served as a town or residence temple of the
pyramid and was probably within the walls of the royal residence city
below. These temples were of course the home of the mortuary ritual
maintained on behalf of the king, and were analogous in origin to the
chapel of the noble's tomb already discussed ([p.
62](rtae06.htm#page_62)). The whole group or complex, consisting of
pyramid, temple, causeway, and town temple below, forms the most
imposing architectural conception of this early age and its surviving
remains have contributed in the last few years an entirely new chapter
in the history of architecture. They mark the culmination of the
development of the material equipment of the dead.

Each Pharaoh of the Third and Fourth Dynasties spent a large share of
his available resources in erecting this vast tomb, which was to receive
his body and insure its preservation after death. It became the chief
object of the state and its organization thus to insure the king's
survival in the hereafter. More than once the king failed to complete
the enormous complex before death, and was thus thrown upon the piety of
his successors, who had all they could do to complete their own tombs.
When completed the temple and the pyramid were dedicated by the royal
priests with elaborate formulæ for their protection. The building was
addressed and adjured not to admit Osiris or the divinities of his
cycle, when they came, "with an evil coming," that is of course with
evil designs upon the building. On the other hand, the building was
charged to receive hospitably the dead king at his coming. The priest
addressing the building said: "When this king

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pepi, together
with his ka, comes, open thou thy arms to him." At the same time Horus
is supposed to say: "Offer this pyramid and this temple to king Pepi and
to his ka. That which this pyramid and this temple contain belongs to
king Pepi and to his ka." <span id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_195) Besides
this the buildings were protected by doors with boukrania upon or over
them, and "sealed with two evil eyes," and the great hall being "purer
than the sky," the place was thus inviolable <span
id="fr_196"></span>[2](#fn_196) even by the mortuary patron god Osiris
if he should come with malicious intent.

Similarly the pyramid and temple were protected from decay for all time.
When the dead king appears in the hereafter he is at once hailed with
greetings by Atum, the ancient Sun-god; Atum then summons the gods: "Ho,
all ye gods, come, gather together; come, unite as ye gathered together
and united for Atum in Heliopolis, that he might hail you. Come ye, do
ye everything which is good for king Pepi II for ever and ever." Atum
then promises generous offerings "for all gods who shall cause every
good thing to be king Pepi II's; who shall cause to endure this pyramid
and this building like that where king Pepi II loved to be for ever and
ever. All gods who shall cause to be good and enduring this pyramid and
this building of king Pepi II they shall be equipped (or prepared), they
shall be honored, they shall become souls, they shall become mighty; to
them shall be given royal mortuary offerings, they shall receive divine
offerings; to them shall joints be presented, to them shall oblations be
made." <span id="fr_197"></span>[3](#fn_197)

Again the priest addresses the Sun-god under his earliest name, Atum,
and recalls the time when the god sat high on the sacred *ben*, the
pyramidal symbol at Heliopolis,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

and created the other gods. This then is a special reason why he should
preserve the pyramid of the king forever. "Thou wast lofty," says the
priest, "on the height; thou didst shine as Phœnix of the *ben* in the
Phœnix-hall in Heliopolis. That which thou didst spew out was Shu; that
which thou didst spit out was Tefnut (his first two children). Thou
didst put thy arms behind them as a ka-arm, that thy ka might be in
them. O Atum, put thou thy arms behind king Mernere, behind this
building, and behind this pyramid, as a ka-arm, that the ka of king
Mernere may be in it enduring for ever and ever. Ho, Atum! Protect thou
this king Mernere, this his pyramid and this building of king
Mernere." <span id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198) The priest then commends
the pyramid to the whole Ennead, and finally proceeds to another long
Utterance, which takes up the names of all the gods of the Ennead one
after the other, affirming that, "as the name of the god so-and-so is
firm, so is firm the name of king Mernere; so are firm this his pyramid
and this his building likewise for ever and ever." <span
id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_199)

Resting beneath the pyramid, the king's wants were elaborately met by a
sumptuous and magnificent ritual performed on his behalf in the temple
before his tomb. Of this ritual we know nothing except such portions of
it as have been preserved in the Pyramid Texts. These show that the
usual calendar of feasts of the living was celebrated for the
king, <span id="fr_200"></span>[3](#fn_200) though naturally on a more
splendid scale. Evidently the observances consisted chiefly in the
presentation of plentiful food, clothing, and the like. One hundred and
seventy-eight formulæ or utterances, forming about one-twentieth of the
bulk of the Pyramid Texts, <span id="fr_201"></span>[4](#fn_201) contain
the words spoken by the royal mortuary

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

priests in offering food, drink, clothing, ointment, perfume, and
incense, revealing the endless variety and splendid luxury of the king's
table, toilet, and wardrobe in the hereafter. The magnificent vases
discovered by Borchardt at Abusir in the pyramid-temple of Neferirkere
(twenty-eighth century B.C.) are a further hint of the royal splendor
with which this ritual of offerings was maintained, while the beauty and
grandeur of the pyramid-temples themselves furnished an incomparable
setting within which all this mortuary magnificence was maintained.

All this system of mortuary maintenance early came under the complete
domination of the Osirian faith, though the very tomb at which it was
enacted was a symbol of the Sun-god. Osiris had died not in the distant
sky like Re, but on earth as men die. The human aspects of his life and
death led to the early adoption of the incidents in his story as those
which took place in the life and death of every one. Horus had offered
to his father the eye which Set had wrenched out, and this evidence of
the son's self-sacrifice for the father's sake had made Osiris a "soul,"
and proven of incalculable blessing. The "Horus-eye" became the primal
type of all offerings, especially those offered to the dead, Osiris
having been dead when he received the eye. Thus every offering presented
to the king in the ritual of the pyramids was called the "Horus-eye," no
matter what the character of the offering might be. In presenting linen
garments the priest addressed the dead king thus: "Ho! This king Pepi!
Arise thou, put on thee the Horus-eye, receive it upon thee, lay it to
thy flesh; that thou mayest go forth in it, and the gods may see thee
clothed in it. . . . The Horus-eye is brought to thee, it removes not
from thee

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

for ever and ever." <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_202) Again in
offering ointment the priest assuming the office of Horus says: "Horus
comes filled with ointment. He has embraced his father Osiris. He found
him (lying) upon his side in Gehesti. Osiris filled himself with the eye
of him whom he begat. Ho! This king Pepi II! I come to thee steadfast,
that I may fill thee with the ointment that came forth from the
Horus-eye. Fill thyself therewith. It will join thy bones, it will unite
thy members, it will join to thee thy flesh, it will dissolve thy evil
sweat to the earth. Take its odor upon thee that thy odor may be sweet
like (that of) Re, when he rises in the horizon, and the horizon-gods
delight in him. Ho! This king Pepi II! The odor of the Horus-eye is on
thee; the gods who follow Osiris delight In thee." <span
id="fr_203"></span>[2](#fn_203)

The individual formulæ in the long offering-ritual are very brief. The
prevailing form of offering is simply: "O king X! Handed to thee is the
Horus-eye which was wrested from Set, rescued for thee, that thy mouth
might be filled with it. Wine, a white jar." <span
id="fr_204"></span>[3](#fn_204) The last words prescribe the offering
which the formula accompanies. Similarly the method of offering or the
accompanying acts may be appended to the actual words employed by the
priest. Thus through the lengthy ritual of six or eight score such
utterances, besides some others scattered through the Pyramid Texts, the
priest lays before the dead king those creature comforts which he had
enjoyed in the flesh. <span id="fr_205"></span>[4](#fn_205) In doing so
he entered the mysterious

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

chamber behind the temple court, where he stepped into the presence of
the pyramid itself, beneath which the king lay. Before the priest rose
the great false door through which the spirit of the king might re-enter
the temple from his sepulchre far beneath the mountain of masonry now
towering above it. Standing before the false door the priest addressed
the king as if present and presented a vast array of the richest gifts,
accompanying each with the precribed formula of presentation which we
have already discussed. But the insistent fact of death cannot be
ignored even in these utterances which exist solely because the dead is
believed to live and feels the needs of the living. In the silent
chamber the priest feels the unresponsiveness of the royal dead yonder
far beneath the mountainous pyramid, and hence from time to time calls
upon him to rise from his sleep and behold the food and the gifts spread
out for him. In order that none of these may be omitted, the priest
summarizes them all in the promise to the king: "Given to thee are all
offerings, all oblations, (even) thy desire, and that by which it is
well for thee with the god forever." <span
id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_206) Added to all this elaborate ritual of
gifts there were also charms potent to banish hunger from the vitals of
the king, and these, too, the priest from time to time recited for the
Pharaoh's benefit. <span id="fr_207"></span>[2](#fn_207)

The kings of the early Pyramid Age in the thirtieth century

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> B.C. evidently
looked confidently forward to indefinite life hereafter maintained in
this way. In a lament for the departed Pharaoh, which the priest as
Horus recited, Horus says: "Ho! king Pepi! I have wept for thee! I have
mourned for thee. I forget thee not, my heart is not weary to give to
thee mortuary offerings every day, at the (feast of the) month, at the
(feast of the) half-month, at the (feast of) 'Putting-down-the-Lamp,' at
the (feast of) Thoth, at the (feast of) Wag, at the period of thy years
and thy months which thou livest as a god." <span
id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_208) But would the posterity of an Oriental
sovereign never weary in giving him mortuary offerings every day? We
shall see.

Such maintenance required a considerable body of priests in constant
service at the pyramid-temple, though no list of a royal pyramid
priesthood has survived to us. They were supported by liberal
endowments, for which the power of the royal house might secure respect
for a long time. The priesthood and the endowment of the pyramid of
Snefru at Dahshur (thirtieth century B.C.) were respected and declared
exempt from all state dues and levies by a royal decree issued by Pepi
II of the Sixth Dynasty, three hundred years after Snefru's death.
Moreover, there had been three changes of dynasty since the decease of
Snefru. But such endowments, accumulating as they did from generation to
generation, must inevitably break down at last. In the thirtieth century
B.C., Snefru himself had given to one of his nobles "one hundred loaves
every day from the mortuary temple of the mother of the king's children,
Nemaathap." <span id="fr_209"></span>[2](#fn_209) This queen had died at
the close of the Second Dynasty, some

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

two generations earlier. Snefru, while he may not have violated her
mortuary income, at least disposed of it after it had served its purpose
at her tomb, in rewarding his partisans. In the same way Sahure,
desiring to reward Persen, one of his favorite nobles, finds no other
resources available and diverts to Persen's tomb an income of loaves and
oil formerly paid to the queen Neferhotepes every day. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210) There is in these acts of Snefru and
Sahure a hint of one possible means of meeting the dilemma as the number
of tomb endowments increased, viz., by supplying one tomb with
food-offerings which had already served in another. Even so the
increasing number of royal tombs made it more and more difficult as a
mere matter of management and administration to maintain them. Hence
even the priests of Sahure's pyramid in the middle of the twenty-eighth
century B.C., unable properly to protect the king's pyramid-temple,
found it much cheaper and more convenient to wall up all the side
entrances and leave only the causeway as the entrance to the temple.
They seem to have regarded this as a pious work, for they left the name
of the particular phyle of priests who did it, on the masonry of the
doorways which they thus closed up. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_211) After this the accidentally acquired
sanctity of a figure of the goddess Sekhmet in the temple, a figure
which enjoyed the local reverence and worship of the surrounding
villages, and continued in their favor for centuries, resulted in the
preservation of a large portion of the temple which otherwise would long
before have fallen into ruin. Sahure's successor, Neferirkere, fared
much worse. A few years after his death a successor of the same dynasty
(Nuserre) broke away the causeway leading up to the

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

pyramid-temple that he might divert it to his own temple near by. The
result was that the mortuary priests of Neferirkere, unable longer to
live in the valley below, moved up to the plateau, where they grouped
their sun-dried brick dwellings around and against the façade of the
temple where they ministered. As their income dwindled these dwellings
became more and more like hovels, they finally invaded the temple court
and chambers, and the priests, by this time in a state of want, fairly
took possession of the temple as a priestly quarter. Left at last
without support, their own tumble-down hovels were forsaken and the
ruins mingled with those of the temple itself. When the Middle Kingdom
opened, six hundred years after Neferirkere's death, the temple was
several metres deep under the accumulation of rubbish, and the mounds
over it were used as a burial ground, where the excavations disclosed
burials a metre or two above the pavement of the temple. The great
Fourth Dynasty cemetery at Gizeh experienced the same fate. The mortuary
priests whose ancestors had once administered the sumptuous endowments
of the greatest of all pyramids, pushed their intrusive burials into the
streets and areas between the old royal tombs of the extinct line, where
they too ceased about 2500 B.C., four hundred years after Khufu laid out
the Gizeh cemetery. Not long after 2500 B.C., indeed the whole
sixty-mile line of Old Kingdom pyramids from Medûm on the south to Gizeh
on the north had become a desert solitude. <span
id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_212) This melancholy condition is discernible
also in the reflections of the thoughtful in the Feudal Age five hundred
years later as they contemplated the wreck of these massive tombs. (See
pp. 181–4.)

What was so obvious centuries after the great Pharaohs

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

of the Pyramid Age had passed away was already discernible long before
the Old Kingdom fell. The pyramids represent the culmination of the
belief in *material equipment* as completely efficacious in securing
felicity for the dead. The great pyramids of Gizeh represent the effort
of titanic energies absorbing all the resources of a great state as they
converged upon one supreme endeavor to sheath eternally the body of a
single man, the head of the state, in a husk of masonry so colossal that
by these purely material means the royal body might defy all time and by
sheer force of mechanical supremacy make conquest of immortality. The
decline of such vast pyramids as those of the Fourth Dynasty at Gizeh,
and the final insertion of the Pyramid Texts in the pyramids beginning
with the last king of the Fifth Dynasty about 2625 B.C., puts the
emphasis on well-being elsewhere, a belief in felicity in some distant
place not so entirely dependent upon material means, and recognizes in
some degree the fact that piles of masonry cannot confer that
immortality which a man must win in his own soul.

The Pyramid Texts as a whole furnish us the oldest chapter in human
thinking preserved to us, the remotest reach in the intellectual history
of man which we are now able to discern. It had always been supposed
that the pyramids were all without inscription, until the native workmen
employed by Mariette at Sakkara in 1880, the year before his death,
penetrated the pyramid of Pepi I, and later that of Mernere. For the
first edition of the Pyramid Texts we are indebted to Maspero, who
displayed great penetration in discerning the general character of these
texts, which he published during the next ten years. Nevertheless, it
has been only since the appearance of Sethe's great edition in 1910 that
it has been possible to

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

undertake the systematic study of these remarkable documents. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_213)

Written in hieroglyphic they occupy the walls of the passages,
galleries, and chambers in five of the pyramids of Sakkara: the
earliest, that of Unis, belonging at the end of the Fifth Dynasty in the
latter half of the twenty-seventh century B.C., and the remaining four,
those of the leading kings of the Sixth Dynasty, Teti, Pepi I, Mernere,
and Pepi II, the last of whom died early in the twenty-fifth century
B.C. They thus represent a period of about one hundred and fifty years
from the vicinity of 2625 to possibly 2475 B.C., that is the whole of
the twenty-sixth century and possibly a quarter of a century before and
after it.

It is evident, however, that they contain material much older than this,
the age of the copies which have come down to us. The five copies
themselves refer to material then in existence which has not survived.
We read in them of "the Chapter of Those Who Ascend," and the "Chapter
of Those Who Raise Themselves Up," which purport to have been used on
the occasion of various incidents in the myths. <span
id="fr_214"></span>[2](#fn_214) They were thus regarded as older than
our Pyramid Texts. Such older material, therefore, existed, whether we
possess any of it or not. We find conditions of civilization also in the
Pyramid Texts which were far older than the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties.
In

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

summoning the dead to rise he is bidden: "Throw off the sand from thy
face," <span id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_215) or "Remove thy
earth." <span id="fr_216"></span>[2](#fn_216) Such passages as these
must have arisen in a time when the king was buried in a primitive grave
scooped out of the desert sand. Similarly when the king's tomb is opened
for him that he may rise he is assured: "The brick are drawn for thee
out of the great tomb," <span id="fr_217"></span>[3](#fn_217) a passage
which must have come into use when the kings used brick tombs like those
at Abydos in the First and Second Dynasties. Like the sand grave or the
brick tomb, is the common representation of the king crossing the
celestial waters on the two reed floats, used by the peasants of Nubia
to this day.

Parallel with these hints in the conditions of civilization are others
referring to the political conditions, which plainly place some of the
Pyramid Texts in the days before the rise of the dynasties, in the age
when South and North were warring together for supremacy, that is before
3400 B.C. We find a sycomore-goddess addressed thus: "Thou hast placed
the terror of thee in the heart of the kings of Lower Egypt, dwelling in
Buto" (the capital of the prehistoric Delta kingdom), <span
id="fr_218"></span>[4](#fn_218) a passage evidently written from the
point of view of the South in hostility toward the North. We read of
Horus "who smote the Red Crowns"; <span id="fr_219"></span>[5](#fn_219)
again "the White (southern) Crown comes forth, it has devoured the Great
(northern) Crown;" <span id="fr_220"></span>[6](#fn_220) or "the horizon
burns incense to Horus of Nekhen (capital of the South), . . . the flood
of its flame is against you, ye wearers of the Great (northern)
Crown." <span id="fr_221"></span>[7](#fn_221) It is said of the king
that

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "he has eaten the
Red (crown), he has swallowed the Green" (Buto goddess of the
North); <span id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_222) and in the hereafter he is
crowned with the White (southern) Crown. <span
id="fr_223"></span>[2](#fn_223) There too he receives the southern
(Upper Egyptian) district of the blessed Field of Rushes, <span
id="fr_224"></span>[3](#fn_224) and he descends to the southern district
of the Field of Offerings. <span id="fr_225"></span>[4](#fn_225) As
priest of Re in the hereafter the king has a libation jar "which
purifies the Southland." <span id="fr_226"></span>[5](#fn_226) Finally,
"it is king Unis who binds with lilies the papyrus (the two flowers of
North and South); it is king Unis who reconciles the Two Lands; it is
king Unis who unites the Two Lands." <span
id="fr_227"></span>[6](#fn_227) It is evident therefore that the Pyramid
Texts contain passages which date from before the union of the Two
Lands, that is before the thirty-fourth century B.C.; and also others
which belong to the early days of the union when the hostilities had not
yet ceased, but the kings of the South were nevertheless maintaining
control of the North and preserving the united kingdom. All these are
written from the southern point of view. It should not be forgotten also
that some of them were composed as late as the Old Kingdom itself, like
the formulæ intended to protect the pyramid, <span
id="fr_228"></span>[7](#fn_228) which of course are not earlier than the
rise of the pyramid-form in the thirtieth century B.C. Within the period
of a century and a half covered by our five copies also, differences are
noticeable. Evidences of editing in the later copies, which, however,
are not found in the earlier copies, are clearly discernible. The
processes of thought and the development of custom and belief which
brought them forth were going on until the last copy was produced in the
early twenty-fifth century B.C. They therefore represent a period of at
least a

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

thousand years, and a thousand years, it should not be forgotten, which
was ended some four thousand five hundred years ago. Such a great mass
of documents as this from the early world exists nowhere else and forms
a storehouse of experience from the life of ancient man which largely
remains to be explored.

While their especial function may be broadly stated to be *to insure the
king felicity in the hereafter*, they constantly reflect, as all
literature does, the ebb and flow of the life around them, and they
speak in terms of the experience of the men who produced them, terms
current in the daily life of palace, street, and bazaar, or again terms
which were born in the sacred solitude of the inner temple. To one of
quick imagination they abound in pictures from that long-vanished world
of which they are the reflection. While they are concerned chiefly with
the fortunes of the king, these do not shut out the world around. Of the
happiness of the king beyond the grave it is said: "This that thou hast
heard in the houses and learned in the streets on this day when king
Pepi was summoned to life." <span id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_229) Of
this life in the houses and on the streets of five thousand years ago we
catch fleeting glimpses: the swallows twittering on the wall, <span
id="fr_230"></span>[2](#fn_230) the herdman wading the canal immersed to
his middle and bearing across the helpless young of his flock, <span
id="fr_231"></span>[3](#fn_231) the crooning of the mother to her
nursing child at twilight, <span id="fr_232"></span>[4](#fn_232) "the
hawk seen in the evening traversing the sky," <span
id="fr_233"></span>[5](#fn_233) the wild goose withdrawing her foot and
escaping the hand of the baffled fowler in the marsh, <span
id="fr_234"></span>[6](#fn_234) the passenger at the ferry with nothing
to offer the boatmen for a seat in the crowded ferry-boat, but who is
allowed to embark and work his passage wearily bailing the leaky
craft; <span id="fr_235"></span>[7](#fn_235)

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

the noble sitting by the pool in his garden beneath the shade of the
reed booth; <span id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_236) these pictures and
many others are alive with the life of the Nile-dweller's world. The
life of the palace is more fully and picturesquely reflected than that
of the world outside and around it. We see the king in hours heavy with
cares of state, his secretary at his side with writing kit and two pens,
one for black and the other for the red of the rubrics; <span
id="fr_237"></span>[2](#fn_237) again we discern him in moments of
relaxation leaning familiarly on the shoulder of a trusted friend and
counsellor, <span id="fr_238"></span>[3](#fn_238) or the two bathe
together in the palace pool and royal chamberlains approach and dry
their limbs. <span id="fr_239"></span>[4](#fn_239) Often we meet him
heading a brilliant pageant as he passes through the streets of the
residence with outrunners and heralds and messengers clearing the way
before him; <span id="fr_240"></span>[5](#fn_240) when he ferries over
to the other shore and steps out of the glittering royal barge, we see
the populace throwing off their sandals, and then even their garments,
as they dance in transports of joy at his coming; <span
id="fr_241"></span>[6](#fn_241) again we find him surrounded by the pomp
and splendor of his court at the palace gate, or seated on his gorgeous
throne, adorned with lions’ heads and bulls’ feet. <span
id="fr_242"></span>[7](#fn_242) In the palace-hall "he sits upon his
marvellous throne, his marvellous sceptre in his hand; he lifts his hand
toward the children of their father and they rise before this king Pepi;
he drops his hand toward them and they sit down (again)." <span
id="fr_243"></span>[8](#fn_243) To be sure these are depicted as
incidents of the life beyond the grave, but the subject-matter and the
colors with which it is portrayed are drawn from the life here and the
experience here. It is the gods who cast off their sandals and their
raiment to dance for joy at the arrival of the king, as he crosses the
heavenly

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nile; but they of
course are depicted as doing that which the Pharaoh's subjects were
accustomed to do along the earthly Nile. It is the gods who dry the
Pharaoh's limbs as he bathes with the Sun-god in the "lake of rushes,"
but here too the gods do for the Pharaoh what his earthly chamberlains
had been wont to do for him.

But notwithstanding the fact that these archaic texts are saturated with
the life out of which they have come, they form together almost a *terra
incognita*. As one endeavors to penetrate it, his feeling is like that
of entering a vast primeval forest, a twilight jungle filled with
strange forms and elusive shadows peopling a wilderness through which
there is no path. An archaic orthography veils and obscures words with
which the reader may be quite familiar in their later and habitual garb.
They serve too in situations and with meanings as strange to the reader
as their spelling. Besides these disguised friends, there is a host of
utter strangers, a great company of archaic words which have lived a
long and active life in a world now completely lost and forgotten. Hoary
with age they totter into sight for a brief period, barely surviving in
these ancient texts, then to disappear forever, and hence are never met
with again. They vaguely disclose to us a vanished world of thought and
speech, the last of the unnumbered æons through which prehistoric man
has passed till he finally comes within hailing distance of us as he
enters the historic age. But these hoary strangers, survivors of a
forgotten age, still serving on for a generation or two in the Pyramid
Texts, often remain strangers until they disappear; we have no means of
making their acquaintance or forcing them to reveal to us their names or
the message which they bear, and no art of lexicography can force them
all to yield up their secrets. Combined with these

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

words, too, there is a deal of difficult construction, much enhanced by
the obscure, dark, and elusive nature of the content of these archaic
documents; abounding in allusions to incidents in lost myths, to customs
and usages long since ended, they are built up out of a fabric of life,
thought, and experience largely unfamiliar or entirely unknown to us.

We have said that their function is essentially to insure the king's
felicity in the hereafter. The chief and dominant note throughout is
insistent, even passionate, protest against death. They may be said to
be the record of humanity's earliest supreme revolt against the great
darkness and silence from which none returns. The word death never
occurs in the Pyramid Texts except in the negative or applied to a foe.
Over and over again we hear the indomitable assurance that the dead
lives. "King Teti has not died the death, he has become a glorious one
in the horizon"; <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_244) "Ho! King Unis!
Thou didst not depart dead, thou didst depart living"; <span
id="fr_245"></span>[2](#fn_245) "Thou hast departed that thou mightest
live, thou hast not departed that thou mightest die"; <span
id="fr_246"></span>[3](#fn_246) "Thou diest not"; <span
id="fr_247"></span>[4](#fn_247) "This king Pepi dies not"; <span
id="fr_248"></span>[5](#fn_248) "King Pepi dies not by reason of any
king . . . (nor) by reason of any dead"; <span
id="fr_249"></span>[6](#fn_249) "Have ye said that he would die? He dies
not; this king Pepi lives forever"; <span
id="fr_250"></span>[7](#fn_250) "Live! Thou shalt not die"; <span
id="fr_251"></span>[8](#fn_251) "If thou landest (euphemism for
"diest"), thou livest (again)"; <span id="fr_252"></span>[9](#fn_252)
"This king Pepi has escaped his day of death"; <span
id="fr_253"></span>[10](#fn_253)—such is the constant refrain of these
texts. Not infrequently the utterance concludes with the assurance:
"Thou livest, thou livest, raise thee up"; <span
id="fr_254"></span>[11](#fn_254) or "Thou diest not, stand up,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

raise thee up"; <span id="fr_255"></span>[1](#fn_255) or "Raise thee up,
O this king Pepi, thou diest not"; <span id="fr_256"></span>[2](#fn_256)
or an appendix is added as a new utterance by itself: "O lofty one among
the Imperishable Stars, thou perishest not eternally." <span
id="fr_257"></span>[3](#fn_257) When the inexorable fact must be
referred to, death is called the "landing" or the "mooring" as we have
seen it above, <span id="fr_258"></span>[4](#fn_258) or its opposite is
preferred, and it is better to mention "not living" than to utter the
fatal word; <span id="fr_259"></span>[5](#fn_259) or with wistful
reminiscence of lost felicity once enjoyed by men, these ancient texts
recall the blessed age "before death came forth." <span
id="fr_260"></span>[6](#fn_260)

While the supreme subject of the Pyramid Texts is life, eternal life for
the king, they are a compilation from the most varied sources. Every
possible agency and influence was brought to bear to attain the end in
view, and all classes of ancient lore deemed efficacious or found
available for this purpose were employed by the priests who put together
this earliest surviving body of literature. Speaking chronologically,
there are strata here representing the different centuries for a
thousand years or more as we have seen; but speaking in terms of
subject-matter, we must change the figure and regard the Pyramid Texts
as a fabric into which the most varied strands have been woven. Whether
we make a vertical or a horizontal section, whether we cut across the
fabric transversely or longitudinally these varied elements are exposed
and contrasted. Cutting transversely we discover the varied constituents
side by side, the strands of the warp running in most cases from end to
end of the fabric; whereas when we cut longitudinally we disclose the
changes due to time as the woof is wrought into the fabric. We shall
make the transverse cut first and ascertain the character of the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

constituent strands, without reference to the time element. Our question
is, what is the content of the Pyramid Texts?

It may be said to be in the main sixfold:

1\. A funerary ritual and a ritual of mortuary offerings at the tomb.

2\. Magical charms.

3\. Very ancient ritual of worship.

4\. Ancient religious hymns.

5\. Fragments of old myths.

6\. Prayers and petitions on behalf of the dead king.

There is of course some miscellaneous matter and some which falls under
several of the above classes at once. Taking up these six classes we
find that the priestly editors have arranged their materials in sections
often of some length, each section headed by the words: "Utter (or
Recite) the words." Each such section has been called by Sethe in his
edition a "Spruch," and we call them "Utterances." Of these the first of
the five pyramids, that of Unis, contains two hundred and twenty-eight,
while the others contain enough additional "Utterances" to make up a
total of seven hundred and fourteen. In their modern published form,
including the variants, they fill two quarto volumes containing together
over a thousand pages of text. <span id="fr_261"></span>[1](#fn_261)

With the exception of the funerary and offering ritual, which is at the
head of the collection, and with which we have already dealt in the
preceding lectures, the material was arranged by the successive editors
almost at haphazard. If such an editor had the materials before him in
groups he made no effort to put together groups of like content, but he
copied as he happened to come upon his

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

sources. He must have had before him a series of ancient books, each
containing a number of groups of Utterances falling into all six of the
above classes, but he copied each book from beginning to end before he
took up the next one. Thus it is that we find groups of charms, or
prayers, or hymns devoted to the same subject embedded in various places
widely separated, or distributed throughout the entire collection,
without any attempt to bring them together.

There can be no doubt that a considerable portion of the Pyramid Texts
were intended to be employed as charms. Some of these were used by the
mortuary priest at the interment; others were wielded by the deceased
himself in self-defence. "King Pepi is a magician, King Pepi is one who
is possessed of magic," <span id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_262) say the
texts. The dead are called "the glorious by reason of (or 'by means of')
their equipped mouths," <span id="fr_263"></span>[2](#fn_263) meaning
that their mouths are equipped with the charms, prayers, and ritual of
the Pyramid Texts. It is evident that the dead king was supposed to
employ magic power, and the agency of this power was the Pyramid Texts
themselves. They are sometimes unequivocally called magical charms.
"This charm that is in the belly of king Pepi is on him when he ascends
and lifts himself to the sky" affirms one passage, <span
id="fr_264"></span>[3](#fn_264) and the Utterance referred to is an
accompanying list of the limbs of the king, which are thus protected.
Again in a remarkable passage the ancient text insists: "It is not this
king Pepi who says this against you, ye gods; it is the charm which says
this against you, ye gods," <span id="fr_265"></span>[4](#fn_265) and
"this" is the text of the accompanying Utterance. The possession of such
charms was vitally important, so that a special charm was included to
prevent the departed

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pharaoh from being
deprived of his charm or his magical power. <span
id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_266)

The distinction between a charm and a prayer in these texts is difficult
for the reason that a text of a character originally in no way connected
or identified with magical formula may be employed as such. We find a
Sun-hymn <span id="fr_267"></span>[2](#fn_267) called a "charm" in the
Pyramid Texts. Again the archaic hymn to Nut, <span
id="fr_268"></span>[3](#fn_268) a fragment of ancient ritual, is later
employed as a household charm. <span id="fr_269"></span>[4](#fn_269) The
question is not infrequently one of function rather than one of content.
The serpent-charms are distinguishable as such in the Pyramid Texts at
the first glance in most cases; but the question whether a hymn or a
prayer may not be designed to serve as a charm is sometimes not easily
decided. The question is an important one, because some have averred
that the whole body of Pyramid Texts is simply a collection of magical
charms, and that therefore the repetition of any Utterance was supposed
to exert magical power. Such a sweeping statement cannot be
demonstrated. An ancient hymn supposed to be repeated by the dead king,
when it is accompanied by no express statement that it is a charm, may
have served the same function with regard to the god to whom it is
addressed, which it served in the ancient ritual from which it was
taken; and because some such hymns have been inserted in charms is no
sufficient reason for concluding that all such hymns in the Pyramid
Texts are necessarily charms. The Pyramid Texts themselves are one of
the most important documents in which we may observe the gradual
invasion of mortuary religious beliefs by the power of magic, but when
the last of the Pyramid Texts was edited

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

in the twenty-fifth century B.C. the triumph of magic in the realm of
such beliefs was still a thousand years away.

Besides the funerary and offering ritual employed at the tomb, and
besides the charms unquestionably present, there is then a large
residuum of ancient religious literature, consisting of ritual of
worship, religious hymns, fragments of old myths, and finally prayers on
behalf of the dead (Nos 3, 4, 5, and 6, above). An Osirian Utterance in
the Pyramid Texts <span id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_270) occurs over a
thousand years later as part of the ritual at Abydos on the wall of the
Atum chapel in the Seti temple of Osiris. There can be little doubt that
it was temple ritual also in the Pyramid Age. It is not unlikely that
the religious hymns embedded in this compilation, like the impressive
Sun-hymn in Utterance 456, <span id="fr_271"></span>[2](#fn_271) or the
archaic hymn to the Sky-goddess, <span id="fr_272"></span>[3](#fn_272)
or the hymn to Osiris as Nile, <span id="fr_273"></span>[4](#fn_273)
also belonged to temple rituals. In this case they fall in the same
class with temple ritual and should not be made a class by themselves.
In so far as the fragments of the old myths fall into poetic form they
too are not distinguishable from the religious hymns. These fragments in
most cases recite current incidents in which some god enjoys some
benefit or passes through some desirable experience or attains some
triumph, and the same good fortune is now desired for the deceased king.
Many of them, as we have already seen, relate to matters which unhappily
are unintelligible without a full knowledge of the myth from which they
are drawn.

While the *content* of the Pyramid Texts may be thus indicated in a
general way, a precise and full analysis is a far more difficult matter.
The *form* of the literature contained

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

is happily more easily disposed of. Among the oldest literary fragments
in the collection are the religious hymns, and these exhibit an early
poetic form, that of couplets displaying parallelism in arrangement of
words and thought—the form which is familiar to all in the Hebrew psalms
as "parallelism of members." It is carried back by its employment in the
Pyramid Texts into the fourth millennium B.C., by far earlier than its
appearance anywhere else. It is indeed the oldest of all literary forms
known to us. Its use is not confined to the hymns mentioned, but appears
also in other portions of the Pyramid Texts, where it is, however, not
usually so highly developed.

Besides this form, which strengthens the claim of these fragments to be
regarded as literature in our sense of the term, there is here and
there, though not frequently, some display of literary quality in
thought and language. There is, for example, a fine touch of imagination
in one of the many descriptions of the resurrection of Osiris: "Loose
thy bandages! They are not bandages, they are the locks of
Nephthys," <span id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_274) the weeping goddess
hanging over the body of her dead brother. The ancient priest who wrote
the line sees in the bandages that swathe the silent form the heavy
locks of the goddess which fall and mingle with them. There is an
elemental power too in the daring imagination which discerns the
sympathetic emotion of the whole universe as the dread catastrophe of
the king's death and the uncanny power of his coming among the gods of
the sky are realized by the elements. "The sky weeps for thee, the earth
trembles for thee" say the ancient mourners for the king, <span
id="fr_275"></span>[2](#fn_275) or when they see him in imagination
ascending the vault of the sky they say:

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Clouds darken the sky,  
 The stars rain down,  
 The Bows (a constellation) stagger,  
 The bones of the hell-hounds tremble,  
 The \[porters\] are silent,  
 When they see king Unis,  
 Dawning as a soul." <span id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_276)</span>

</div>

A fundamental question which arises as one endeavors to interpret these
ancient documents is that of the method of employment. How were they
used? In all likelihood the entire collection was recited by the
mortuary priests on the day of burial. The entire offering ritual
(including in the different pyramids one hundred and seventy-eight
"Utterances") was furthermore recited on all feast days, and probably
also on all other days. The fact that each "Utterance" is headed by the
words "recite the words" also indicates this manner of employing them. A
large proportion are personal equipment of the dead king to be recited
by him as occasion demanded. This is shown by the curious fact that a
number of long sections were in the first person originally, and were so
engraved on the pyramid walls; but these passages were afterward altered
to the third person, usually by the insertion of the king's name over
the old personal pronoun. It is evident that many of the charms were
designed for use by the dead, as when a Sun-hymn is accompanied by
directions stating that the king is to employ it as a charm, which, if
he knows it, will secure him the friendship of the Sun-god. <span
id="fr_277"></span>[2](#fn_277) When the whole collection was recited by
the priest he of course personified the king, in all passages where the
king speaks in the first person, just as he personified so many of the
gods who are depicted speaking and acting in these texts; but the fact
that a large body

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

of texts address the dead king in the second person clearly shows that
they were uttered by the priest or some one on the king's behalf. In one
case the speaker is the living and still reigning king who offers
eye-paint to his departed royal ancestor. <span
id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_278)

On one other question in this connection there can be no doubt. These
mortuary texts were all intended for the king's exclusive use, and as a
whole contain beliefs which apply only to the king. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_279) This is not to say, however, that some
archaic texts in use among the people have not here and there crept into
the collection. To these may possibly belong the addresses to the dead
as if buried in the desert sand, or a few others like simple serpent
charms, or passages according the king hereafter a destiny not strictly
peculiar to him and one which ordinary mortals already believed
attainable by them. It is a significant fact that the nobles of the age
made practically no use of the Pyramid Texts in their own tombs.

While the Pyramid Texts have not been able to shake off the old view of
the sojourn at the tomb, they give it little thought, and deal almost
entirely with a blessed life in a distant realm. Let it be stated
clearly at the outset that this distant realm is the sky, and that the
Pyramid Texts know practically nothing of the hereafter in the Nether
World. Echoes of other archaic notions of the place of the dead have
been preserved here and there.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The oldest
doubtless is contained in that designation of the dead which claims
ignorance as to their whereabouts, and calls them "those whose places
are hidden." <span id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_280) Another ancient
belief conceives the dead as somewhere in the distant "west," but this
belief plays practically no part in the Pyramid Texts, and is
discernible there only in an archaic title of the mortuary Anubis of
Siut, who occasionally has appended to his name the words "First or Lord
of the Westerners," <span id="fr_281"></span>[2](#fn_281) a designation
which served as the name of an old mortuary god at Abydos, who was later
identified with Osiris, and his name appropriated by him also occurs a
number of times in the Pyramid Texts. <span
id="fr_282"></span>[3](#fn_282) But the "west" hardly attains even a
subordinate rôle in the beliefs which dominate the Pyramid Texts. We
hear of it once as a means of gaining access to the Sun-god: "These thy
four ways which are before the tomb of Horus, wherein one goes to the
(Sun-) god, as soon as the sun goes down. He (the Sun-god) grasps thy
arm. . . ." <span id="fr_283"></span>[4](#fn_283) In one passage, too,
the dead is adjured to go to the "west" in preference to the east, in
order to join the Sun-god, but in this very passage he appears as one
whose function was in the east. <span id="fr_284"></span>[5](#fn_284) An
analogous passage affirms: "King Unis rests from life (dies) in the
west, . . . King Unis dawns anew in the east." <span
id="fr_285"></span>[6](#fn_285) The west is mentioned casually, also
along with the other celestial regions where the Sun-god in his course
finds the translated Pharaoh. <span id="fr_286"></span>[7](#fn_286) It
is the east which with constant reiteration is affirmed to be the most
sacred of all regions, and that to which the dead king

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

should fare. Indeed he is explicitly cautioned against the west: "Go not
on those currents of the west; those who go thither, they return not
(again)." <span id="fr_287"></span>[1](#fn_287) In the Pyramid Texts it
may be fairly said that the old doctrine of the "west" as the permanent
realm of the dead, a doctrine which is later so prominent, has been
quite submerged by the pre-eminence of the east.

This "east," therefore, is the east of the sky, and the realm of the
dead is a celestial one, using the term with none of its frequent
theological significance in English. Two ancient doctrines of this
celestial hereafter have been commingled in the Pyramid Texts: one
represents the dead as a star, and the other depicts him as associated
with the Sun-god, or even becoming the Sun-god himself. It is evident
that these two beliefs, which we may call the stellar and the Solar
hereafter, were once in a measure independent, and that both have then
entered into the form of the celestial hereafter which is found in the
Pyramid Texts. In the cloudless sky of Egypt it was a not unnatural
fancy which led the ancient Nile-dweller to see in the splendor of the
nightly heavens the host of those who had preceded him; thither they had
flown as birds, rising above all foes of the air, <span
id="fr_288"></span>[2](#fn_288) and there they now swept across the sky
as eternal stars. <span id="fr_289"></span>[3](#fn_289) It is especially
those stars which are called "the Imperishable Ones" in which the
Egyptian saw the host of the dead. These are said to be in the north of
the sky, <span id="fr_290"></span>[4](#fn_290) and the suggestion that
the circumpolar stars, which never set or disappear, are the ones which
are meant is a very probable one. <span id="fr_291"></span>[5](#fn_291)
While there are Utterances in the Pyramid Texts which define

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

the stellar notion of the hereafter without any reference to the Solar
faith, <span id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_292) and which have doubtless
descended from a more ancient day when the stellar belief was
independent of the Solar, it is evident that the stellar notion has been
absorbed in the Solar. There is a trace of the process in the endeavor
to reconcile the northern station of the "Imperishables" with the "east"
as the place of the dead in the Solar faith. We find provision made that
the deceased king "may ferry over to Re, to the horizon . . . to his
station on the east side of the sky, in its northern region among the
Imperishable (Stars)." <span id="fr_293"></span>[2](#fn_293) Thus the
stellar and the Solar elements were combined, though the Solar beliefs
predominate so strongly that the Pyramid Texts as a whole and in the
form in which they have reached us may be said to be of Solar origin.

The Solar destiny was perhaps suggested by the daily disappearance and
reappearance of the sun. We find the texts assuring us, "This king Pepi
lives as lives he (= the Sun-god) who has entered the west of the sky,
when he rises in the east of the sky." <span
id="fr_294"></span>[3](#fn_294) It should be noted that the place of
living again is, however, the east, and it is not only the east, but
explicitly the east of the sky. Death was on earth; life was to be had
only in the sky.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Men fall,  
 Their name is not.  
 Seize thou king Teti by his arm,  
 Take thou king Teti to the sky,  
 That he die not on earth,  
 Among men." <span id="fr_295"></span>[4](#fn_295)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This idea that
life was in the sky is the dominant notion, far older than the Osirian
faith in the Pyramid Texts.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So powerful was it
that Osiris himself is necessarily accorded a celestial and a Solar
hereafter in the secondary stage, in which his myth has entered the
Pyramid Texts.

The prospect of a glorious hereafter in the splendor of the Sun-god's
presence is the great theme of the Pyramid Texts. Even the royal tomb,
as we have seen, assumed the form of the Sun-god's most sacred symbol.
The state theology, which saw in the king the bodily son and the earthly
representative of Re, very naturally conceived him as journeying at
death to sojourn forever with his father, or even to supplant his
father, and be his successor in the sky as he had been on earth. The
Solar hereafter is properly a royal destiny, possible solely to a
Pharaoh; it is only later that ordinary mortals gradually assume the
right to share it, though, as we shall see, this could be done only by
assuming also the royal character of every such aspirant.

Passing as the king did to a new kingdom in the sky, even though the
various notions of his status there were not consistent, he was called
upon to undergo a purification, which is prescribed and affirmed in the
texts with wearisome reiteration. It may take place after the king's
arrival in the sky, but more often it follows directly upon his
resuscitation from the sleep of death. It may be accomplished by
libations or by bathing in the sacred lake in the blessed fields, with
the gods even officiating at the royal bath with towels and raiment, or
by the fumes of incense which penetrate the limbs of the royal
dead. <span id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_296) Sometimes it is the water of
the traditional Nile sources at Elephantine which, as especially sacred
and pure, should be employed, <span id="fr_297"></span>[2](#fn_297) or
the dead king appears there and the goddess of the cataract, Satis,
performs the ceremonies

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

of purification. <span id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_298) That this
purification might have moral aspects we shall later ([p.
171](rtae10.htm#page_171)) see. But it was chiefly intended to produce
ceremonial cleanness, and when this was attained the king was prepared
to undertake the journey to the sky.

We have already had occasion to remark that the region toward which he
fared was the east of the sky, which in the Pyramid Texts is far more
sacred than the west (pp. [100](#page_100)–[102](#page_102)). Not only
was the Sun-god born there every day as we have seen, but also the other
gods. Over there was "this field, where the gods were begotten, over
which the gods rejoice on these their New Year's Days," <span
id="fr_299"></span>[2](#fn_299) and there likewise they were born. <span
id="fr_300"></span>[3](#fn_300) Similarly according to one view, not
infrequently occurring, the deceased king is born there. <span
id="fr_301"></span>[4](#fn_301) It was there too that the eye of Horus
fell when it was wrenched out by Set. <span
id="fr_302"></span>[5](#fn_302) In this sacred place are the doors of
the sky, <span id="fr_303"></span>[6](#fn_303) before which stands "that
tall sycomore east of the sky whereon the gods sit." <span
id="fr_304"></span>[7](#fn_304) Again we hear of "the two sycomores
which are on yonder side of the sky," which the king seizes when "they
ferry him over and set him on the east side of the sky." <span
id="fr_305"></span>[8](#fn_305) Here in this sacred place too the dead
king finds the Sun-god, or is found by him, <span
id="fr_306"></span>[9](#fn_306) here he ascends to the sky, <span
id="fr_307"></span>[10](#fn_307) and here the ferry lands which has
brought him over. <span id="fr_308"></span>[11](#fn_308)

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

When the deceased Pharaoh turned his face eastward toward this sacred
region he was confronted by a lake lying along the east which it was
necessary for him to cross in order to reach the realm of the Sun-god.
It was on the further, that is eastern, shore of this lake that the eye
of Horus had fallen in his combat with Set. <span
id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_309) It was called the "Lily-lake," and it
was long enough to possess "windings," <span
id="fr_310"></span>[2](#fn_310) and must have stretched far to the north
and south along the eastern horizon. <span
id="fr_311"></span>[3](#fn_311) Beyond it lay a strange wonder-land,
alive with uncanny forces on every hand. *All* was alive, whether it was
the seat into which the king dropped, or the steering-oar to which he
reached out his hand, <span id="fr_312"></span>[4](#fn_312) or the
barque into which he stepped, <span id="fr_313"></span>[5](#fn_313) or
the gates through which he passed. To all these, or to anything which he
found, he might speak; and these uncanny things might speak to him, like
the swan-boat of Lohengrin. Indeed it was a wonder-world like that in
the swan-stories or the Nibelungen tales of the Germanic traditions, a
world like that of the Morte d’Arthur, where prodigies meet the wayfarer
at every turn.

To the dweller along the Nile the most obvious way to cross the
Lily-lake is to embark in a ferry-boat. We find it among the rushes of
the lake-shore with the ferryman standing in the stern poling it rapidly
along. To do so he faces backward, and is therefore called
"Face-behind," or "Look-behind." <span id="fr_314"></span>[6](#fn_314)
He rarely speaks, but stands in silence awaiting his passenger. Numerous
are the pleas and the specious petitions by which the waiting Pharaoh

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

seeks to cajole this mysterious boatman with averted face. We hear him
assured that "this king Pepi is the herdman of thy cattle who is over
thy breeding-place," <span id="fr_315"></span>[1](#fn_315) and who must
therefore be ferried over at once in the ferryman's own interests. Or
the king brings with him a magic jar the power of which the boatman
cannot resist, <span id="fr_316"></span>[2](#fn_316) or the ferryman is
assured that the Pharaoh is "righteous in the sight of the sky and of
the earth" and of the isle to which they go. <span
id="fr_317"></span>[3](#fn_317) Again the king is the dwarf or pygmy of
the royal dances "who gladdens the (king's) heart before the great
throne," <span id="fr_318"></span>[4](#fn_318) and he must therefore be
hastened across to the court of Re to gladden the Sun-god. Indeed this
is matter of common knowledge, as the ferryman is now told: "This is
what thou hast heard in the houses and learned in the streets on this
day when this king Pepi was summoned to life. . . . Lo, the two who are
on the throne of the Great God (Re), they summon this king Pepi to life
and satisfaction forever: they are Prosperity and Health. (Therefore)
ferry over this king Pepi to the field of the good seat of the Great
God." <span id="fr_319"></span>[5](#fn_319) We hear the boatman's
challenge of the new-corner: "Whence hast thou come?" and the dead king
must prove his royal lineage. <span id="fr_320"></span>[6](#fn_320) Or
appeal may be made directly to Re: "O Re! Commend king Teti to
'Look-behind' ferryman of the Lily-lake, that he may bring that
ferry-boat of the Lily-lake, for king Teti, in which he ferries the gods
to yonder side of the Lily-lake, that he may ferry king Teti to yonder
side of the Lily-lake, to the east side of the sky." <span
id="fr_321"></span>[7](#fn_321) If in spite of all the king's efforts
the shadowy boatman proves obdurate and refuses to bring his boat to the
shore, then the king addresses the oar in the ferryman's hand: "Ho!

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thou who art in
the fist of the ferryman," <span id="fr_322"></span>[1](#fn_322) and if
his words are powerful enough, the oar brings in the boat for the king.
Sometimes it is on the opposite shore in charge of four curly haired
guardians. These four are peremptorily summoned to bring it over to the
king: "If ye delay to ferry over the ferry-boat to this king Pepi, this
king Pepi will tell this your name to the people, which he knows; <span
id="fr_323"></span>[2](#fn_323) . . . king Pepi will pluck out these
locks that are in the middle of your heads like lotus flowers in the
garden." <span id="fr_324"></span>[3](#fn_324)

Again, as so frequently in these texts, an unknown speaker in the king's
behalf stands forth and threatens the boatman: "If thou dost not ferry
over king Unis, then he will place himself upon the wing of Thoth. He,
(even) he will ferry over king Unis to yonder side of the
horizon." <span id="fr_325"></span>[4](#fn_325) There is also another
ferryman of a boat bearing the remarkable name of "Eye of Khnum," <span
id="fr_326"></span>[5](#fn_326) who may be called upon in emergency; and
should all other means fail the sceptres of the Imperishable Stars may
serve as ferryman <span id="fr_327"></span>[6](#fn_327) or the two
sycomores in the east may be prevailed upon to perform the same office
for the king. <span id="fr_328"></span>[7](#fn_328) Even Re himself is
not unwilling to appear and ferry the dead king across. <span
id="fr_329"></span>[8](#fn_329) In any case the dead cannot be left
without a ship, for he possesses the cunning charm which brings them all
together: "The knots are tied, the ferryboats are brought together for
the son of Atum. The

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

son of Atum is not without a boat; king Mernere is with the son of Atum;
the son of Atum is not without a boat." <span
id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_330)

From the earliest days the prehistoric peasant might cross the Nile on
two reed floats bound firmly together side by side like two huge
cigars. <span id="fr_331"></span>[2](#fn_331) One of the earliest
folk-tales of the Sun-god's voyage depicted him as crossing the
celestial waters on such a pair of floats, and however primitive they
might be, their use by the Sun-god had become common and involuntary
belief. It required but the proper "sympathetic" transference of their
use by Re to the dead Pharaoh, to insure him certain passage like that
of the Sun-god. Horus (who, we recall, is but another form of the
Sun-god) ferries over to the east of the sky on the two floats and he
commends the dead king to "these four youths who sit on the east side of
the sky, these four youths who sit in the shade of the tower of
Kati," <span id="fr_332"></span>[3](#fn_332) "these four youths who
stand on the east side of the sky . . . (and) who bind together the two
floats for Re, . . ." will also "bind together the two floats for this
king Pepi." <span id="fr_333"></span>[4](#fn_333) Thus just as "the two
floats of the sky are placed for Re that he may ferry over therewith to
the horizon," so "the two floats of the sky are placed for

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

king Unis that he may ferry over therewith to the horizon to Re." <span
id="fr_334"></span>[1](#fn_334)

But even these many devices for crossing the eastern sea might fail and
then the king must commit himself to the air and make the ascent to the
sky. "Thy two wings are spread out like a falcon with thick plumage,
like the hawk seen in the evening traversing the sky, "says the
mysterious speaker to the king. <span id="fr_335"></span>[2](#fn_335)
"He flies who flies; this king Pepi flies away from you, ye mortals. He
is not of the earth, he is of the sky. . . . This king Pepi flies as a
cloud to the sky, like a masthead bird; this king Pepi kisses the sky
like a falcon, this king Pepi reaches the sky like the Horizon-god
(Harakhte)." <span id="fr_336"></span>[3](#fn_336) The variant text has
like a grasshopper, and in accordance with this we find that the dead
king was born with the back of a grasshopper. <span
id="fr_337"></span>[4](#fn_337) As the Egyptian grasshopper flies like a
bird to vast heights, the back of a grasshopper was undoubtedly an
appropriate adjunct to the royal anatomy. But it was the falcon, the
sacred bird of the Sun-god, whose lofty flight was especially desired
for the king. He is "the great falcon upon the battlements of the house
of him of the hidden name." <span id="fr_338"></span>[5](#fn_338) "Thy
bones are falconesses, goddesses dwelling in the sky," say they to the
king; <span id="fr_339"></span>[6](#fn_339) or again, "Thou ascendest to
the sky as a falcon, thy feathers are (those of) geese." <span
id="fr_340"></span>[7](#fn_340) The speaker also sees him escaping from
the hands of men as the wild goose escapes the hand of the fowler
clutching his feet and flies away to the sky; <span
id="fr_341"></span>[8](#fn_341) "the tips of his wings are those of the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

great goose." <span id="fr_342"></span>[1](#fn_342) Thus he "flies as a
goose and flutters as a beetle." <span id="fr_343"></span>[2](#fn_343)
"His face is (that of) falcons and his wings are (those of)
geese"; <span id="fr_344"></span>[3](#fn_344) "king Unis flaps his wings
like a zeret-bird," <span id="fr_345"></span>[4](#fn_345) and the wind
bears him on high. "King Unis goes to the sky, king Unis goes to the
sky! On the wind! On the wind!" <span id="fr_346"></span>[5](#fn_346)
"The clouds of the sky have taken him away, they exalt king Unis to
Re." <span id="fr_347"></span>[6](#fn_347) He "has ascended upon the
rain-cloud." <span id="fr_348"></span>[7](#fn_348) Or the priest sees
strange forms in the cloud of incense that soars above him and he cries:
"He ascends upon the smoke of the great incense-burning." <span
id="fr_349"></span>[8](#fn_349)

In the oblique rays of the sun also, shooting earthward through some
opening in the clouds, they beheld a radiant stairway let down from the
sky that the king might ascend. "King Pepi has put down this radiance as
a stairway under his feet, whereon king Pepi ascended to this his
mother, the living Uræus that is on the head of Re." <span
id="fr_350"></span>[9](#fn_350) "Thou climbest, thou mountest the
radiance, "says the speaker <span id="fr_351"></span>[10](#fn_351) as he
beholds the king grasping the Solar rays. <span
id="fr_352"></span>[11](#fn_352) Thus "stairs to the sky are laid for
him that he may ascend thereon to the sky." <span
id="fr_353"></span>[12](#fn_353) It is of course with the city of the
sun that this stairway is associated: "The spirits of Heliopolis, they
set up for him a stairway in order to reach the top." <span
id="fr_354"></span>[13](#fn_354) Sometimes the Solar splendor seems
stretched out to him like vast arms, and the king "is a flame (moving)
before the wind to the ends of the sky, to the ends of the earth when
the arm of the sunbeams is lifted with king Unis." <span
id="fr_355"></span>[14](#fn_355) Lest any portion of the king's body
should fail to rise with him, all of his members, or at least the more
important

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

ones, twenty-six in number, are enumerated by name, beginning with the
crown of his head and descending through face, eyes, nose, mouth, etc.,
to his toes, each member being identified with a different god, "when he
ascends and lifts himself to the sky." This canny device is of
irresistible magical potency, so that "every god who shall not lay steps
for this king Pepi when he ascends" shall suffer loss of all his
offerings. Moreover, the gods are bidden to remember that "It is not
this king Pepi who says this against you, it is the charm which says
this against you, ye gods." On the other hand, "every god who shall lay
steps for king Pepi when he ascends" is promised all offerings, and if
he extends a helping hand to the king as he climbs up, this god's "ka
shall be justified by Geb." <span id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_356)

Again the broad sunbeams slanting earthward seem like a ladder to the
imagination of this remote people and they say, "King Unis ascends upon
the ladder which his father Re (the Sun-god) made for him. " <span
id="fr_357"></span>[2](#fn_357) Indeed we find the Sun-god making the
ladder: "Atum has done that which he said he would do for this king Pepi
II, binding for him the rope-ladder, joining together the (wooden)
ladder for this king Pepi II; (thus) this king is far from the
abomination of men." <span id="fr_358"></span>[3](#fn_358) Again it is
the four sons of

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Horus who "bind a
rope-ladder for this king Pepi II; they join together a (wooden) ladder
for king Pepi II. They send up king Pepi II to Khepri (the Sun-god) that
he may arrive on the east side of the sky. Its timbers are hewn by
Shesa, the ropes that are in it are joined together with cords of
Gasuti, the Bull of the Sky (Saturn); the uprights at its sides are
fastened with leather of ⌈—⌉, born of the Heset-cow; a great support is
placed under it by 'Him-who-Binds-the-Great-One.' Lift ye up the ka of
this king Pepi II; lead ye him to the two lions; make him ascend to
Atum." <span id="fr_359"></span>[1](#fn_359) An old Solar legend places
the ladder in charge of Set, or at least associates it closely with him.
We find it called the "ladder which carried the Ombite (Set)"; <span
id="fr_360"></span>[2](#fn_360) but it also appears occasionally under
the guardianship of Kebehet, daughter of Anubis. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[3](#fn_361) Sometimes the Sun-god summons all his
divine subjects to assist in making the ladder. "It is done for this
king Pepi by Atum as it was done for himself (Atum). He brings to this
Pepi the gods belonging to the sky, he brings to him the gods belonging
to the earth. They place their

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

arms under him. They make a ladder for king Pepi that he may ascend upon
it to the sky." <span id="fr_362"></span>[1](#fn_362) The spectacle of
the ascending king calls forth the admiration of the gods: "'How
beautiful to see, how satisfying to behold,' say the gods, 'when this
god (meaning the king) ascends to the sky. His fearfulness is on his
head, his terror is at his side, his magical charms are before
him.' <span id="fr_363"></span>[2](#fn_363) Geb has done for him as was
done for himself (Geb). The gods and souls of Buto, the gods and souls
of Hierakonpolis, the gods in the sky and the gods on earth come to him.
They make supports for king Unis on their arm(s). Thou ascendest, O king
Unis, to the sky. Ascend upon it in this its name 'Ladder.'" <span
id="fr_364"></span>[3](#fn_364)

Men and gods together are called upon in mighty charms to lift the king.
"O men and gods! Your arms under king Pepi! Raise ye him, lift ye him to
the sky, as the arms of Shu are under the sky and he raises it. To the
sky! To the sky! To the great seat among the gods!" <span
id="fr_365"></span>[4](#fn_365) Or the daughter of the ancient mortuary
Anubis offers him her shoulder: "Kebehet places him on her shoulder, she
puts him down among the gardens (like) the herdmen of the calves," <span
id="fr_366"></span>[5](#fn_366) a picture which we often see in the
mastaba reliefs, as the cowherd wades cautiously across the canal,
immersed to the waist, with a calf borne tenderly upon his shoulders,
while the solicitous mother beast follows anxiously behind licking the
flanks of the calf. Should all other means fail, Isis and Nephthys will
offer their hips upon which the king mounts, while his father Atum
reaches down and seizes the arm of the Pharaoh; <span
id="fr_367"></span>[6](#fn_367) or the earth itself may rise under the
feet of the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

waiting king and lift him to the sky, where Tefnut grasps his arm <span
id="fr_368"></span>[1](#fn_368) and leads him into the celestial fields.

But the possibility remained that the gates of the celestial country
might not be opened to the new-comer. Over and over again we find the
assurance that the double doors of the sky are opened before the
Pharaoh: "Opened are the double doors of the horizon; unlocked are its
bolts" <span id="fr_369"></span>[2](#fn_369) is a constant refrain in
the Pyramid Texts. That art which opened the door for Ali Baba and the
Forty Thieves had opened many a gate in the ancient East, thousands of
years before the Arabian Nights made it familiar to us of the western
world. The king faces the gates with these words: "O lofty one, (Gate)
whom no one names! Gate of Nut! King Teti is Shu who came forth from
Atum. O Nun! (the primeval waters) cause that this (gate) be opened for
king Teti." <span id="fr_370"></span>[3](#fn_370) "He causes that those
double doors of the sky be opened for king Teti (by the following
charm):

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Men fall,  
 Their name is not.  
 Seize thou king Teti by his arm;  
 Take thou king Teti to the sky,  
 That he die not on earth,  
 Among men.'" <span id="fr_371"></span>[4](#fn_371)</span>

</div>

A similar method appealed to the fact that the sky-gates had once opened
to each of the four eastern Horuses, and by sympathetic analogy they
must now inevitably do the same for the king. "The double doors of the
sky are opened, the double doors of the firmament are thrown open to
Horus of the gods. . . . The double doors of the sky are opened to this
king Pepi, the double doors of the

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

firmament are thrown open to this king Pepi." <span
id="fr_372"></span>[1](#fn_372) In the same way the approaching king is
identified with the four eastern Horuses one after the other, after
which Re may be appealed to as his father: "O father of king Pepi, O Re!
Take thou this king Pepi with thee for life to thy mother Nut, who opens
the double doors of the sky to this king Pepi, who throws open the
double doors of the firmament to this king Pepi." <span
id="fr_373"></span>[2](#fn_373)

The difficulty of the gates and the ascension might, however, be met by
an appeal of men directly to the Sun-god: "'Ho Re,' say men, when they
stand beside this king Pepi on earth while thou appearest in the east of
the sky, 'give thy arm to king Pepi; take thou him with thee to the east
side of the sky.'" <span id="fr_374"></span>[3](#fn_374)

It will be seen that in spite of the conviction of life, abounding life,
with which the Pyramid Texts are filled, they likewise reveal the
atmosphere of apprehension which enveloped these men of the early world
as they contemplated the unknown and untried dangers of the shadow
world. Whichever way the royal pilgrim faced as he looked out across the
eastern sea he was beset with apprehensions of the possible hostility of
the gods, and there crowded in upon him a thousand fancies of danger and
opposition which clouded the fair picture of blessedness beyond. There
is an epic touch in the dauntless courage, with which the solitary king,
raising himself like some elemental colossus, and claiming sway over the
gods themselves, confronts the celestial realm and addresses the

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sun-god: "I know
thy name. I am not ignorant of thy name. <span
id="fr_375"></span>[1](#fn_375) 'Limitless' is thy name. The name of thy
father is 'Possessor-of-Greatness.' Thy mother is 'Satisfaction,' who
bears thee every morning. The birth of 'Limitless' in the horizon shall
be prevented, if thou preventest this king Pepi from coming to the place
where thou art." <span id="fr_376"></span>[2](#fn_376) The king wielding
his magical power thus makes himself sovereign of the universe and will
stop the very rising ("birth") of the sun if he is halted at the gate of
the Sun-god's realm. Far less impressive is the king's threat directed
against the gods who oppose him as he mounts the ladder. "Every spirit
and every god who shall oppose his arm to this king Pepi, when he
ascends to the sky on the ladder of the god, the earth shall not be hoed
for him, an offering shall not be brought for him, he shall not ferry
over to the evening meal in Heliopolis, he shall not ferry over to the
morning meal in Heliopolis." <span id="fr_377"></span>[3](#fn_377)
Likewise Kebehet, the daughter of Anubis, perched on the two uprights of
the ladder, is adjured to "open the way of king Unis, that king Unis may
pass by," and in the same words the "Ostrich on the shore of the
Lily-lake" and the "Bull of Re, having four horns," one toward each of
the cardinal points, are warned to make way for him. <span
id="fr_378"></span>[4](#fn_378)

And so at last the departed king draws near the eastern shore of the
Lily-lake, <span id="fr_379"></span>[5](#fn_379) and "this king Pepi
finds the glorious by reason of their equipped mouths, <span
id="fr_380"></span>[6](#fn_380) sitting on

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

the two shores of the lake, . . . the drinking-place of every glorious
one by reason of his equipped mouth." Then they challenge the new
arrival and the king replies: "I am a glorious one by reason of his
equipped mouth." "'How has this happened to thee,' say they to king
Pepi, . . . 'that thou hast come to this place more august than any
place?' 'Pepi has come to this place more august than any place, because
the two floats of the sky were placed,' says the morning-barque, 'for
Re'"; <span id="fr_381"></span>[1](#fn_381) and at the story of his
successful crossing as Re had crossed, the celestials break out into
jubilee. <span id="fr_382"></span>[2](#fn_382) Thereupon the Pharaoh
lands, takes up their manner of life, and sits before the palace ruling
them. <span id="fr_383"></span>[3](#fn_383) Again we hear a solitary
voice issuing from the world of the dead and challenging the king as he
ascends and passes through the gates of the sky, led by Geb: "Ho! Whence
comest thou, son of my father?" And another voice answers: "He has come
from the Divine Ennead that is in the sky, that he may satisfy them with
their bread." Again comes the challenge: "Ho! Whence comest thou, son of
my father?" and we hear the reply: "He has come from the Divine Ennead
that is on earth, that he may satisfy them with their bread." The
questioner is still unsatisfied: "Ho! Whence comest thou, son of my
father?" "He has come from the Zenedzender-barque." And then we hear the
question for the last time: "Ho! Whence comest thou, son of my father?"
"He has come from these his two mothers, the two vultures with long hair
and hanging breasts, who are on the mountain of Sehseh. They draw their
breasts over the mouth of king Pepi, but they do not wean him forever."
Thereafter the challenging voice is silent <span
id="fr_384"></span>[4](#fn_384) and the Pharaoh enters the kingdom of
the sky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_186"></span>[71:1](rtae07.htm#fr_186) BAR, I, 503.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[71:2](rtae07.htm#fr_187) BAR, III, 16, l. 5;
Cairo Hymn to Amon, V, ll. 1–2, VIII, ll. 3–4; Piankhi Stela, l. 105 =
BAR, IV, 871.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[71:3](rtae07.htm#fr_188) Pyr. § 1652.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[72:1](rtae07.htm#fr_189) Ut. 599 and 600.
Their content with quotations is given below, pp.
[76](#page_76)–[77](#page_77).

<span id="fn_190"></span>[73:1](rtae07.htm#fr_190) It was published,
without indication of its original position, by <span
class="smallcaps">Maspero</span>, *Annales du Service des antiquités*,
III, pp. 206 *ff*. and plate; see <span
class="smallcaps">Schaefer</span>, *Zeitschrift für aegypt. Sprache*,
41, 84, who demonstrates its original position. This had also been noted
in the author's *History of Egypt*, Fig. 94.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[73:2](rtae07.htm#fr_191) The same inscription
is found accompanying the eyes on the outside of the Middle Kingdom
coffin of Sebek-o at Berlin. (See <span
class="smallcaps">Steindorff</span>, *Grabfunde des Mittleren Reichs*,
II, 5, 1.)

<span id="fn_192"></span>[73:3](rtae07.htm#fr_192) It is evident that
the identification of Osiris with the pyramid and temple in Pyr. §§
1657–8 is secondary and another evidence of his intrusion in the Solar
faith of which the Pyr. Texts furnish so many examples.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[74:1](rtae07.htm#fr_193) There is possibly
another connection in which the pyramid form may be discerned as
belonging to the Sun-god. The triangle of zodiacal light which some have
claimed to be able to discover in the east at sunrise at certain times,
and the writing of the Solar god, Soped's name with a triangle or
pyramid after it, may have some connection with the use of the pyramid
as a Solar symbol. The architectural evolution of the form through the
compound mastaba, the terraced structure, like the so-called "terraced
pyramid" of Sakkara, has long been understood.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[74:2](rtae07.htm#fr_194) Pyr. Ut. 534, all of
which is a long prayer intended to prevent the appropriation of pyramid,
temple, and their possessions by Osiris or the gods of his cycle. This
important Utterance is taken up again in connection with the dedication
of the pyramid, pp. [75](#page_75)–[76](#page_76).

<span id="fn_195"></span>[76:1](rtae07.htm#fr_195) Pyr. §§ 1276–7.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[76:2](rtae07.htm#fr_196) Pyr. § 1266.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[76:3](rtae07.htm#fr_197) Pyr. Ut. 599.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[77:1](rtae07.htm#fr_198) Pyr. Ut. 600.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[77:2](rtae07.htm#fr_199) Pyr. Ut. 601.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[77:3](rtae07.htm#fr_200) Pyr. § 2117.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[77:4](rtae07.htm#fr_201) Ut. 26–203.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[79:1](rtae07.htm#fr_202) Pyr. Ut. 453.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[79:2](rtae07.htm#fr_203) Pyr. Ut. 637.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[79:3](rtae07.htm#fr_204) Pyr. Ut. 54.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[79:4](rtae07.htm#fr_205) The ritual of
offerings, properly so called, in the Pyramid Texts, begins at Ut. 26
and continues to Ut. 203. This ritual as a whole has received an Osirian
editing and only Ut. 44 and 50 are clearly Solar. Each *Spruch*, or
Utterance, contains the words to be used by the priest, with some
designation of the offering, sometimes no more than the words
"Horus-eye." Not infrequently directions as to the place <span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> where the offering is to be put accompany the
formula, with memoranda also of the quantity and the like. A little
group of prayers and charms (Ut. 204–212) follows the offering-ritual.
This group also concerns offerings, but it is all Solar except the first
and last utterance. The other texts concerning material needs scattered
through the Pyramid Texts, conceive the king as dwelling no longer in
the tomb in most cases (*e.g.*, Ut. 413). There is a group of twelve
Utterances on food (Ut. 338–349), and a larger group concerned chiefly
with the physical necessities (Ut. 401–426).

<span id="fn_206"></span>[80:1](rtae07.htm#fr_206) Pyr. §§ 101 c, d.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[80:2](rtae07.htm#fr_207) Pyr. § 204.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[81:1](rtae07.htm#fr_208) Pyr. §§ 2117–18,
restored from Pap. Schmitt.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[81:2](rtae07.htm#fr_209) BAR, I, 173.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[82:1](rtae07.htm#fr_210) BAR, I, 241.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[82:2](rtae07.htm#fr_211) <span
class="smallcaps">Borchardt</span>, *Das Grabdenkmal des Koenigs
Sahure*, pp. 94 *ff*.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[83:1](rtae07.htm#fr_212) Confer <span
class="smallcaps">Reisner</span>, *Boston Mus. of Fine Arts Bulletin*,
IX, 16.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[85:1](rtae07.htm#fr_213) <span
class="smallcaps">Maspero</span>'S edition appeared in his journal, the
*Recueil*, in volumes 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 14; it later
appeared in a single volume. <span class="smallcaps">Sethe's</span>
edition of the hieroglyphic text in two volumes (*Die Altaegyptischen
Pyramidentexte von Kurt Sethe*, Leipzig, 1908–10) will be accompanied by
further volumes containing translation and discussion of the texts, and
with palæographic material by H. <span
class="smallcaps">Schaefer</span>.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[85:2](rtae07.htm#fr_214) Pyr. § 1245; see also
§ 1251.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[86:1](rtae07.htm#fr_215) Pyr. § 1878 b.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[86:2](rtae07.htm#fr_216) Pyr. § 747, same in §
1732.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[86:3](rtae07.htm#fr_217) Pyr. § 572.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[86:4](rtae07.htm#fr_218) Pyr. § 1488; this
passage was first remarked by <span class="smallcaps">Sethe</span> as
showing the early date of the document, *Zeitschr. für aegypt. Sprache*,
38, 64.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[86:5](rtae07.htm#fr_219) Pyr. § 2037.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[86:6](rtae07.htm#fr_220) Pyr. § 239.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[86:7](rtae07.htm#fr_221) Pyr. § 295.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[87:1](rtae07.htm#fr_222) Pyr. § 410.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[87:2](rtae07.htm#fr_223) Pyr. Ut. 524.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[87:3](rtae07.htm#fr_224) Pyr. § 1084.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[87:4](rtae07.htm#fr_225) Pyr. § 1087.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[87:5](rtae07.htm#fr_226) Pyr. § 1179.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[87:6](rtae07.htm#fr_227) Pyr. § 388.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[87:7](rtae07.htm#fr_228) Pyr. Ut. 599–600; see
*infra*, pp. [75](#page_75)–[76](#page_76).

<span id="fn_229"></span>[88:1](rtae07.htm#fr_229) Pyr. § 1189.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[88:2](rtae07.htm#fr_230) Pyr. § 1216.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[88:3](rtae07.htm#fr_231) Pyr. § 1348.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[88:4](rtae07.htm#fr_232) Pyr. § 912.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[88:5](rtae07.htm#fr_233) Pyr. § 1048.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[88:6](rtae07.htm#fr_234) Pyr. § 1484.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[88:7](rtae07.htm#fr_235) Pyr. § 335.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[89:1](rtae07.htm#fr_236) Pyr. § 130.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[89:2](rtae07.htm#fr_237) Pyr. § 954.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[89:3](rtae07.htm#fr_238) Pyr. § 730.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[89:4](rtae07.htm#fr_239) Pyr. Ut. 323.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[89:5](rtae07.htm#fr_240) Pyr., *passim*.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[89:6](rtae07.htm#fr_241) Pyr. § 1197.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[89:7](rtae07.htm#fr_242) Pyr. § 1123.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[89:8](rtae07.htm#fr_243) Pyr. § 1563.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[91:1](rtae07.htm#fr_244) Pyr. § 350.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[91:2](rtae07.htm#fr_245) Pyr. § 134.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[91:3](rtae07.htm#fr_246) Pyr. § 833.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[91:4](rtae07.htm#fr_247) Pyr. § 775.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[91:5](rtae07.htm#fr_248) Pyr. § 1464 c.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[91:6](rtae07.htm#fr_249) Pyr. § 1468 c–d.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[91:7](rtae07.htm#fr_250) Pyr. § 1477 b.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[91:8](rtae07.htm#fr_251) Pyr. § 2201 c.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[91:9](rtae07.htm#fr_252) Pyr. § 1975 b.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[91:10](rtae07.htm#fr_253) Pyr. § 1453 a–h.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[91:11](rtae07.htm#fr_254) Pyr. § 1262.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[92:1](rtae07.htm#fr_255) Pyr. § 867.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[92:2](rtae07.htm#fr_256) Pyr. § 875.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[92:3](rtae07.htm#fr_257) Pyr. Ut. 464.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[92:4](rtae07.htm#fr_258) See also Pyr. § 1090.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[92:5](rtae07.htm#fr_259) Pyr. § 1335.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[92:6](rtae07.htm#fr_260) Pyr. § 1466 d.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[93:1](rtae07.htm#fr_261) Exactly 1051.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[94:1](rtae07.htm#fr_262) Pyr. § 924 b.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[94:2](rtae07.htm#fr_263) Pyr. § 930 a.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[94:3](rtae07.htm#fr_264) Pyr. § 1318 c.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[94:4](rtae07.htm#fr_265) Pyr. § 1324.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[95:1](rtae07.htm#fr_266) Pyr. Ut. 678.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[95:2](rtae07.htm#fr_267) Pyr. Ut. 456.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[95:3](rtae07.htm#fr_268) Pyr. Ut. 429–435.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[95:4](rtae07.htm#fr_269) <span
class="smallcaps">Erman</span>, *Zauberspr. für Mutter and Kind,* 5,
8–6, 8.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[96:1](rtae07.htm#fr_270) Pyr. Ut. 637.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[96:2](rtae07.htm#fr_271) See above, pp.
[13](rtae05.htm#page_13)–[14](rtae05.htm#page_14).

<span id="fn_272"></span>[96:3](rtae07.htm#fr_272) Pyr. Ut. 427–435.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[96:4](rtae07.htm#fr_273) Pyr. Ut. 581.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[97:1](rtae07.htm#fr_274) Pyr. § 1363.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[97:2](rtae07.htm#fr_275) Pyr. § 1365.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[98:1](rtae07.htm#fr_276) Pyr. § 393.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[98:2](rtae07.htm#fr_277) Pyr. Ut. 456.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[99:1](rtae07.htm#fr_278) Pyr. Ut. 605.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[99:2](rtae07.htm#fr_279) The presence of the
word "mn" = "so and so" instead of the king's name (Pyr. § 147) does not
necessarily indicate the use of the passage by *any* one, but simply
shows that the priestly copyist, when first recording this text in his
manuscript, did not know for what king it was to be employed. Then in
copying it on the wall the draughtsman by oversight transferred the "so
and so" from his manuscript to the wall, instead of changing it to the
king's name.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[100:1](rtae07.htm#fr_280) Pyr. § 873 *et al*.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[100:2](rtae07.htm#fr_281) Pyr. §§ 745 a, 1833,
2198 b.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[100:3](rtae07.htm#fr_282) E. g., §§ 650, 759.
See *infra*, [p. 38](rtae05.htm#page_38).

<span id="fn_283"></span>[100:4](rtae07.htm#fr_283) Pyr. § 1355.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[100:5](rtae07.htm#fr_284) Pyr. §§ 1531–2; see
also § 1703, where, by total inversion of the myth, the king is born in
the west. Similarly in § 470 it is the western horn of the sky-bull that
is removed for the passage of the dead.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[100:6](rtae07.htm#fr_285) Pyr. § 306.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[100:7](rtae07.htm#fr_286) Pyr. § 919.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[101:1](rtae07.htm#fr_287) Pyr. § 2175.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[101:2](rtae07.htm#fr_288) Pyr. § 1216.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[101:3](rtae07.htm#fr_289) See the author's
*History of Egypt*, p. 64.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[101:4](rtae07.htm#fr_290) Pyr. § 1080.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[101:5](rtae07.htm#fr_291) <span
class="smallcaps">Borchardt</span>, in <span
class="smallcaps">Erman</span>, *Handbuch der aegypt. Rel.*, p. 107.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[102:1](rtae07.htm#fr_292) Pyr. Ut. 328, 329,
503.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[102:2](rtae07.htm#fr_293) Pyr. § 1000.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[102:3](rtae07.htm#fr_294) Pyr. § 1469.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[102:4](rtae07.htm#fr_295) Pyr. § 604.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[103:1](rtae07.htm#fr_296) Pyr. §§ 27–29, 275,
920–1; Ut. 323.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[103:2](rtae07.htm#fr_297) Pyr. § 864.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[104:1](rtae07.htm#fr_298) Pyr. § 1116.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[104:2](rtae07.htm#fr_299) Pyr. § 1187.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[104:3](rtae07.htm#fr_300) Pyr. § 928.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[104:4](rtae07.htm#fr_301) Pyr. § 607.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[104:5](rtae07.htm#fr_302) Pyr. §§ 594–6, 947.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[104:6](rtae07.htm#fr_303) Pyr. §§ 1343, 1440.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[104:7](rtae07.htm#fr_304) Pyr. § 916.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[104:8](rtae07.htm#fr_305) Pyr. § 1433.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[104:9](rtae07.htm#fr_306) Pyr. § 919.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[104:10](rtae07.htm#fr_307) Pyr. §§ 326, 883,
1530.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[104:11](rtae07.htm#fr_308) Pyr. § 1541. The
supremacy of the east is such that even the Osirian Isis and Nephthys
appear as "the great and mighty pair, who are in the east of the sky"
(Pyr. § 2200). In spite of the fact that Osiris is "First of the
Westerners" he goes to the east in the Pyramid Texts, and the pair, Isis
and Nephthys, carry the dead into the east (Pyr. Ut. 702). In Pyr. §§
1496–8 the east combines with the south and "the middle of the sky" as
places where the ascent to the sky may be made.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[105:1](rtae07.htm#fr_309) Pyr. § 595 b.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[105:2](rtae07.htm#fr_310) Pyr. § 2061 c.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[105:3](rtae07.htm#fr_311) Pyr. §§ 802, 1376–7.
On the eastern position of this lake see also Pyr. Ut. 359. The chief
references on the subject are Pyr. §§ 469 a, 543 b. 802 a, 1102 d, 1138
d, 1162 d, 1228 d, 1376 c, 1345 c, 1441 a, 1084 b; Ut. 359.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[105:4](rtae07.htm#fr_312) Pyr. § 6021.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[105:5](rtae07.htm#fr_313) Pyr. § 926.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[105:6](rtae07.htm#fr_314) Pyr. §§ 1201, 1227.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[106:1](rtae07.htm#fr_315) Pyr. § 1183.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[106:2](rtae07.htm#fr_316) Pyr. § 1185.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[106:3](rtae07.htm#fr_317) Pyr. § 1188.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[106:4](rtae07.htm#fr_318) Pyr. § 1189.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[106:5](rtae07.htm#fr_319) Pyr. §§ 1189–91.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[106:6](rtae07.htm#fr_320) Pyr. § 1091.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[106:7](rtae07.htm#fr_321) Pyr. §§ 599–600.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[107:1](rtae07.htm#fr_322) Pyr. Ut. 616.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[107:2](rtae07.htm#fr_323) To know the name of
a god is to be able to control him.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[107:3](rtae07.htm#fr_324) Pyr. § 1223. See
also: Pyr. §§ 597, 599, 697, 925, 946, 999, 1091, 1441, 1769, 1429, and
Ut. 310, 516–522, 616.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[107:4](rtae07.htm#fr_325) Pyr. § 387; see also
§§ 595–7, 1489, 1175.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[107:5](rtae07.htm#fr_326) This is of course
parallel with the designation, "Eye of Horus," which may also be applied
to the boat. See Pyr. §§ 946, 445, 1769.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[107:6](rtae07.htm#fr_327) Pyr. § 1432.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[107:7](rtae07.htm#fr_328) Pyr. § 1433.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[107:8](rtae07.htm#fr_329) Pyr. § 363.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[108:1](rtae07.htm#fr_330) Pyr. § 1472.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[108:2](rtae07.htm#fr_331) The writer was once,
like the Pharaoh, without a boat in Nubia, and a native from a
neighboring village at once hurried away and returned with a pair of
such floats made of dried reeds from the Nile shores. On this somewhat
precarious craft he ferried the writer over a wide channel to an island
in the river. It was the first time that the author had ever seen this
contrivance, and it was not a little interesting to find a craft which
he knew only in the Pyramid Texts of 5000 years ago still surviving and
in daily use on the ancient river in far-off Nubia. There can be no
doubt that this is the craft so often called the "two sḥnwy" (dual) in
the Pyr. Texts.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[108:3](rtae07.htm#fr_332) Pyr. § 1105.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[108:4](rtae07.htm#fr_333) Pyr. § 1026.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[109:1](rtae07.htm#fr_334) Pyr. § 337. The
floats were a favorite means of crossing; they are found frequently in
the Pyramid Texts. See besides the above passages also §§ 342, 351, 358,
464, 926–7, 932–5, 999–1000, 1085–6, 1103, 1705.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[109:2](rtae07.htm#fr_335) Pyr. § 1048.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[109:3](rtae07.htm#fr_336) Pyr. §§ 890–1.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[109:4](rtae07.htm#fr_337) Pyr. § 1772.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[109:5](rtae07.htm#fr_338) Pyr. § 1778.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[109:6](rtae07.htm#fr_339) Pyr. § 137.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[109:7](rtae07.htm#fr_340) Pyr. § 913.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[109:8](rtae07.htm#fr_341) Pyr. § 1484.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[110:1](rtae07.htm#fr_342) Pyr. § 1122.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[110:2](rtae07.htm#fr_343) Pyr. § 366.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[110:3](rtae07.htm#fr_344) Pyr. § 461.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[110:4](rtae07.htm#fr_345) Pyr. § 463.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[110:5](rtae07.htm#fr_346) Pyr. § 309.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[110:6](rtae07.htm#fr_347) Pyr. § 336.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[110:7](rtae07.htm#fr_348) Pyr. § 1774.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[110:8](rtae07.htm#fr_349) Pyr. § 365.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[110:9](rtae07.htm#fr_350) Pyr. § 1108.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[110:10](rtae07.htm#fr_351) Pyr. § 751.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[110:11](rtae07.htm#fr_352) Pyr. § 547.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[110:12](rtae07.htm#fr_353) Pyr. § 365.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[110:13](rtae07.htm#fr_354) Pyr. § 1090.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[110:14](rtae07.htm#fr_355) Pyr. § 324.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[111:1](rtae07.htm#fr_356) All the preceding
from Pyr. Ut. 539. It seems impossible to separate these primitive means
of reaching the sky from the similar or identical means employed in
later astral theology in the Mediterranean. They have survived in the
grotesque tale of the ascent of Alexander in the late western (Latin)
version of Pseudo-Callisthenes, from which they passed even into art.
See *Burlington Magazine*, vol. VI, pp. 395, *ff*. The ladder of the
next paragraph was a common device in astral mortuary theology. (See
<span class="smallcaps">Cumont</span>, *Astrology and Religion*, p.
184.)

<span id="fn_357"></span>[111:2](rtae07.htm#fr_357) Pyr. § 390;
similarly the ladder is associated with Heliopolis in Pyr. § 978.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[111:3](rtae07.htm#fr_358) Pyr. § 2083.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[112:1](rtae07.htm#fr_359) Pyr. §§ 2078–81. The
exhortation at the end is addressed to the four sons of Horus of
Letopolis, Imset, Hapi, Dewamutef, and Kebehsenuf, who made the ladders.
Some of the names and epithets are obscure; the two lions are Shu and
Tefnut, see § 696 c and parallels. The Solar character of the ladder is
evident in this passage also, which is one of the indications that the
four sons of Horus are of Solar origin. Even in Osirianized passages the
Solar origin of the ladder is unequivocal. See especially Pyr. § 472;
also § 971 and *infra*, [p. 153](rtae09.htm#page_153).

<span id="fn_360"></span>[112:2](rtae07.htm#fr_360) Pyr. § 1253. In §
971 it is called "ladder of Set," though as a pendant to this it is also
called "ladder of Horus." Throughout this Utterance (478), however, it
is afterward called the "ladder of Set," and it is evidently regarded as
his, even though Osiris climbs it. Is this another form of the tradition
that Set was forced to carry Osiris?

<span id="fn_361"></span>[112:3](rtae07.htm#fr_361) Pyr. § 468; besides
the preceding references see also Pyr. § 1431, where the ladder is
called "Ascender to the sky."

<span id="fn_362"></span>[113:1](rtae07.htm#fr_362) Pyr. §§ 1473–4.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[113:2](rtae07.htm#fr_363) For the
interpretation of this equipment, see [p. 61](rtae06.htm#page_61), note
[3](rtae06.htm#fn_169).

<span id="fn_364"></span>[113:3](rtae07.htm#fr_364) Pyr. §§ 476–9.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[113:4](rtae07.htm#fr_365) Pyr. § 1101.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[113:5](rtae07.htm#fr_366) Pyr. § 1348.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[113:6](rtae07.htm#fr_367) Pyr. §§ 379–380.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[114:1](rtae07.htm#fr_368) Pyr. § 990.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[114:2](rtae07.htm#fr_369) Pyr. § 194.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[114:3](rtae07.htm#fr_370) Pyr. § 603.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[114:4](rtae07.htm#fr_371) Pyr. § 604.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[115:1](rtae07.htm#fr_372) Pyr. § 1408.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[115:2](rtae07.htm#fr_373) Pyr. §§ 1479–80.
There are four Utterances which are built up on the four Horuses: 325,
563, and 479, which are of the same general structure; and 573 of
different structure, in which the identification of the king with the
four Horuses perhaps takes place. On the latter see also *infra*, pp.
[154](rtae09.htm#page_154)–6.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[115:3](rtae07.htm#fr_374) Pyr. § 1496.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[116:1](rtae07.htm#fr_375) To know the name of
a god was to hold sway over him.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[116:2](rtae07.htm#fr_376) Pyr. §§ 1434–5.
Compare similar threatening of the Sun-god, *infra*, [p.
308](rtae12.htm#page_308).

<span id="fn_377"></span>[116:3](rtae07.htm#fr_377) Pyr. § 978.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[116:4](rtae07.htm#fr_378) Pyr. §§ 468–471; see
also §§ 504, 1432, and 914.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[116:5](rtae07.htm#fr_379) This was the case
whether he ferried over by boat or employed the ladder; for the latter
was set up in the east, and the ascent was made there; *e.g.*, Pyr. §
928.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[116:6](rtae07.htm#fr_380) For the explanation
of this term see [p. 94](#page_94).

<span id="fn_381"></span>[117:1](rtae07.htm#fr_381) Pyr. §§ 930–2.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[117:2](rtae07.htm#fr_382) Pyr. § 935.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[117:3](rtae07.htm#fr_383) Pyr. §§ 936–8.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[117:4](rtae07.htm#fr_384) Pyr. §§ 1116–19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture IV. Realms of the Dead—The Earliest Celestial
Hereafter](rtae08)
