[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index)  [Tarot
Reading](tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pktpeac)  [Next](pkt0304) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPMP4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Pictorial Key to the Tarot*, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman
Smith \[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 3 THE GREATER ARCANA AND THEIR DIVINATORY MEANINGS

Such are the intimations of the Lesser Arcana in respect of divinatory
art, the veridic nature of which seems to depend on an alternative that
it may be serviceable to express briefly. The records of the art are *ex
hypothesi* the records of findings in the past based upon experience; as
such, they are a guide to memory, and those who can master the elements
may--still *ex hypothesi*--give interpretations on their basis. It is an
official and automatic working. On the other hand, those who have gifts
of intuition, of second sight, of clairvoyance--call it as we choose and
may--will supplement the experience of the past by the findings of their
own faculty, and will speak of that which they have seen in the pretexts
of the oracles. It remains to give, also briefly, the divinatory
significance allocated by the same art to the Trumps Major.

1\. THE MAGICIAN.--Skill, diplomacy, address, subtlety; sickness, pain,
loss, disaster, snares of enemies; self-confidence, will; the Querent,
if male. *Reversed*: Physician, Magus, mental disease, disgrace,
disquiet.

2\. THE HIGH PRIESTESS.--Secrets, mystery, the future as yet unrevealed;
the woman who interests the Querent, if male; the Querent herself, if
female; silence, tenacity; mystery, wisdom, science. *Reversed*:
Passion, moral or physical ardour, conceit, surface knowledge.

3\. THE EMPRESS.--Fruitfulness, action, initiative, length of days; the
unknown, clandestine; also difficulty, doubt, ignorance. *Reversed*:
Light, truth, the unravelling of involved matters, public rejoicings;
according to another reading, vacillation.

4\. THE EMPEROR.--Stability, power, protection, realization; a great
person; aid, reason, conviction; also authority and will. *Reversed*:
Benevolence, compassion, credit; also confusion to enemies, obstruction,
immaturity.

5\. THE HIEROPHANT.--Marriage, alliance, captivity, servitude; by
another account, mercy and goodness; inspiration; the man to whom the
Querent has recourse. *Reversed*: Society, good understanding, concord,
overkindness, weakness.

6\. THE LOVERS.--Attraction, love, beauty, trials overcome. *Reversed*:
Failure, foolish designs. Another account speaks of marriage frustrated
and contrarieties of all kinds.

7\. THE CHARIOT.--Succour, providence also war, triumph, presumption,
vengeance, trouble. *Reversed*: Riot, quarrel, dispute, litigation,
defeat.

8\. FORTITUDE.--Power, energy, action, courage, magnanimity; also
complete success and honours. *Reversed*: Despotism, abuse if power,
weakness, discord, sometimes even disgrace.

9\. THE HERMIT.--Prudence, circumspection; also and especially treason,
dissimulation, roguery, corruption. *Reversed*: Concealment, disguise,
policy, fear, unreasoned caution.

10\. WHEEL OF FORTUNE.-Destiny, fortune, success, elevation, luck,
felicity. *Reversed*: Increase, abundance, superfluity.

11\. JUSTICE.--Equity, rightness, probity, executive; triumph of the
deserving side in law. *Reversed*: Law in all its departments, legal
complications, bigotry, bias, excessive severity.

12\. THE HANGED MAN.--Wisdom, circumspection, discernment, trials,
sacrifice, intuition, divination, prophecy. *Reversed*: Selfishness, the
crowd, body politic.

13\. DEATH.--End, mortality, destruction, corruption also, for a man,
the loss of a benefactor for a woman, many contrarieties; for a maid,
failure of marriage projects. *Reversed*: Inertia, sleep, lethargy,
petrifaction, somnambulism; hope destroyed.

14\. TEMPERANCE.--Economy, moderation, frugality, management,
accommodation. *Reversed*: Things connected with churches, religions,
sects, the priesthood, sometimes even the priest who will marry the
Querent; also disunion, unfortunate combinations, competing interests.

15\. THE DEVIL.--Ravage, violence, vehemence, extraordinary efforts,
force, fatality; that which is predestined but is not for this reason
evil. *Reversed*: Evil fatality, weakness, pettiness, blindness.

16\. THE TOWER.--Misery, distress, indigence, adversity, calamity,
disgrace, deception, ruin. It is a card in particular of unforeseen
catastrophe. *Reversed*: According to one account, the same in a lesser
degree also oppression, imprisonment, tyranny.

17\. THE STAR.--Loss, theft, privation, abandonment; another reading
says-hope and bright prospects, *Reversed*: Arrogance, haughtiness,
impotence.

18\. THE MOON.--Hidden enemies, danger, calumny, darkness, terror,
deception, occult forces, error. *Reversed*: Instability, inconstancy,
silence, lesser degrees of deception and error.

19\. THE SUN.--Material happiness, fortunate marriage, contentment.
*Reversed*: The same in a lesser sense.

20\. THE LAST JUDGMENT.--Change of position, renewal, outcome. Another
account specifies total loss though lawsuit. *Reversed*: Weakness,
pusillanimity, simplicity; also deliberation, decision, sentence.

ZERO. THE FOOL.--Folly, mania, extravagance, intoxication, delirium,
frenzy, bewrayment. *Reversed*: Negligence, absence, distribution,
carelessness, apathy, nullity, vanity.

21\. THE WORLD.--Assured success, recompense, voyage, route, emigration,
flight, change of place. *Reversed*: Inertia, fixity, stagnation,
permanence.

It will be seen that, except where there is an irresistible suggestion
conveyed by the surface meaning, that which is extracted from the Trumps
Major by the divinatory art is at once artificial and arbitrary, as it
seems to me, in the highest degree. But of one order are the mysteries
of light and of another are those of fantasy. The allocation of a
fortune-telling aspect to these cards is the story of a prolonged
impertinence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4: Some Additional Meanings of the Lesser
Arcana](pkt0304)
