[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md)  [Tarot
Reading](tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pkttp)  [Next](pktcont.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ACPMP4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Pictorial Key to the Tarot*, by A.E. Waite, ill. by Pamela Colman
Smith \[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# Preface

IT seems rather of necessity than predilection in the sense of
*apologia* that I should put on record in the first place a plain
statement of my personal position, as one who for many years of literary
life has been, subject to his spiritual and other limitations, an
exponent of the higher mystic schools. It will be thought that I am
acting strangely in concerning myself at this day with what appears at
first sight and simply a well-known method of fortune-telling. Now, the
opinions of Mr. Smith, even in the literary reviews, are of no
importance unless they happen to agree with our own, but in order to
sanctify this doctrine we must take care that our opinions, and the
subjects out of which they arise, are concerned only with the highest.
Yet it is just this which may seem doubtful, in the present instance,
not only to Mr. Smith, whom I respect within the proper measures of
detachment, but to some of more real consequence, seeing that their
dedications are mine. To these and to any I would say that after the
most illuminated Frater Christian Rosy Cross had beheld the Chemical
Marriage in the Secret Palace of Transmutation, his story breaks off
abruptly, with an intimation that he expected next morning to be
door-keeper. After the same manner, it happens more often than might
seem likely that those who have seen the King of Heaven through the most
clearest veils of the sacraments are those who assume thereafter the
humblest offices of all about the House of God. By such simple devices
also are the Adepts and Great Masters in the secret orders distinguished
from the cohort of Neophytes as *servi servorum mysterii*. So also, or
in a way which is not entirely unlike, we meet with the Tarot cards at
the outermost gates--amidst the fritterings and débris of the so-called
occult arts, about which no one in their senses has suffered the
smallest deception; and yet these cards belong in themselves to another
region, for they contain a very high symbolism, which is interpreted
according to the Laws of Grace rather than by the pretexts and
intuitions of that which passes for divination. The fact that the wisdom
of God is foolishness with men does not create a presumption that the
foolishness of this world makes in any sense for Divine Wisdom; so
neither the scholars in the ordinary classes nor the pedagogues in the
seats of the mighty will be quick to perceive the likelihood or even the
possibility of this proposition. The subject has been in the hands of
cartomancists as part of the stock-in-trade of their industry; I do not
seek to persuade any one outside my own circles that this is of much or
of no consequence; but on the historical and interpretative sides it has
not fared better; it has been there in the hands of exponents who have
brought it into utter contempt for those people who possess
philosophical insight or faculties for the appreciation of evidence. It
is time that it should be rescued, and this I propose to undertake once
and for all, that I may have done with the side issues which distract
from the term. As poetry is the most beautiful expression of the things
that are of all most beautiful, so is symbolism the most catholic
expression in concealment of things that are most profound in the
Sanctuary and that have not been declared outside it with the same
fulness by means of the spoken word. The justification of the rule of
silence is no part of my present concern, but I have put on record
elsewhere, and quite recently, what it is possible to say on this
subject.

The little treatise which follows is divided into three parts, in the
first of which I have dealt with the antiquities of the subject and a
few things that arise from and connect therewith. It should be
understood that it is not put forward as a contribution to the history
of playing cards, about which I know and care nothing; it is a
consideration dedicated and addressed to a certain school of occultism,
more especially in France, as to the source and centre of all the
phantasmagoria which has entered into expression during the last fifty
years under the pretence of considering Tarot cards historically. In the
second part, I have dealt with the symbolism according to some of its
higher aspects, and this also serves to introduce the complete and
rectified Tarot, which is available separately, in the form of coloured
cards, the designs of which are added to the present text in black and
white. They have been prepared under my supervision--in respect of the
attributions and meanings--by a lady who has high claims as an artist.
Regarding the divinatory part, by which my thesis is terminated, I
consider it personally as a fact in the history of the Tarot--as such, I
have drawn, from all published sources, a harmony of the meanings which
have been attached to the various cards, and I have given prominence to
one method of working that has not been published previously; having the
merit of simplicity, while it is also of universal application, it may
be held to replace the cumbrous and involved systems of the larger
hand-books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Contents](pktcont.md)
