[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m04021.md) 
[Next](m04023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SECTION XXII

"Bhima said, 'I will, O timid one, do even as thou sayest. I will
presently slay Kichaka with all his friends. O Yajnaseni of sweet
smiles, tomorrow evening, renouncing sorrow and grief, manage to have a
meeting with Kichaka. The dancing-hall that the king of the Matsya hath
caused to be erected is used by the girls for dancing during the day.
They repair, however, to their homes at night. There in that hall, is an
excellent and well-placed wooden bed-stead. Even there I will make him
see the spirits of his deceased grandsires. But, O beautiful one, when
thou holdest converse with him, thou must manage it so that others may
not espy thee."

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having thus conversed with others, and shed
tears in grief, they waited for the dawn of that night with painful
impatience. And when the night had passed away, Kichaka, rising in the
morning, went to the palace, and accosted Draupadi saying, 'Throwing
thee down in the court I kicked thee in the presence of the king.
Attacked by mighty self, thou couldst not obtain protection. This Virata
is in name only the king of the Matsyas. Commanding the forces of this
realm it is I, who am the real lord of the Matsyas. Do thou, O timid
one, accept me cheerfully. I shall become thy slave. And, O thou of
graceful hips, I will immediately give thee a hundred *nishkas*, and
engage a hundred male and a hundred female servants (to tend thee), and
will also bestow on thee cars yoked with she-mules. O timid lady, let
our union take place.' Draupadi replied, 'O Kichaka, know even this is
my condition. Neither thy friends nor thy brothers should know thy union
with me. I am a terror of detection

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

by those illustrious Gandharvas. Promise me this, and I yield to thee.'
Hearing this Kichaka said, 'I will, O thou of graceful hips, do even as
thou sayest. Afflicted by the god of love, I will, O beauteous damsel,
alone repair to thy abode for union with thee, O thou of thighs round
and tapering like the trunks of the plantain,--so that those Gandharvas,
effulgent as the sun, may not come to know of this act of thine.'
Draupadi said, 'Do thou, when it is dark, go to the dancing-hall erected
by the king of the Matsyas where the girls dance during the day,
repairing to their respective homes at night. The Gandharvas do not know
that place. We shall then without doubt, escape all censure.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Reflecting on the subject of her conversation
with Kichaka, that half a day seemed to Krishna as long as a whole
month. And the stupid Kichaka also, not knowing that it was Death that
had assumed the form of a *Sairindhri*, returning home experienced the
greatest delight. And deprived of sense by lust, Kichaka became speedily
engaged in embellishing his person with unguents and garlands and
ornaments. And while he was doing all this, thinking of that damsel of
large eyes, the day seemed to him to be without an end. And the beauty
of Kichaka, who was about to forsake his beauty for ever, seemed to
[heighten](errata.htm#6.md), like the wick of a burning lamp about to
expire. And reposing the fullest confidence in Draupadi, Kichaka,
deprived of his senses by lust and absorbed in the contemplation of
expected meeting, did not even perceive that the day had departed.
Meanwhile, the beautiful Draupadi approaching her husband Bhima of the
Kuru race, stood before him in the kitchen. And that lady with tresses
ending in beautiful curls then spake unto him, saying, 'O chastiser of
foes, even as thou hadst directed, I have given Kichaka to understand
that our meeting will take place in the dancing-hall. Alone will he come
at night to the empty hall. Slay him there, O thou of mighty arms. Do
thou, O son of Kunti, repair to that dancing-hall, and take the life, O
Pandava, of Kichaka, that son of a *Suta* intoxicated with vanity. From
vanity alone, that son of a *Suta* slights the Gandharvas. O best of
smiters, lift him up from the earth even as Krishna had lifted up the
*Naga* (Kaliya) from the Yamuna. O Pandava, afflicted as I am with
grief, wipe thou my tears, and blessed be thou, protect thy own honour
and that of thy race.'

"Bhima said, 'Welcome, O beauteous lady, Except the glad tidings thou
bringest me, I need, O thou of exceeding beauty, no other aid whatever.
The delight that I feel, O thou of great beauty, on hearing from thee
about my coming encounter with Kichaka, is equal to what I felt in
slaying Hidimva. I swear unto thee by Truth, by my brothers, and by
morality, that I will slay Kichaka even as the lord of the celestials
slew Vritra. Whether secretly or openly, I will crush Kichaka, and if
the Matsyas fight for him, then I will slay them too. And slaying
Duryodhana afterwards, I shall win back the earth. Let Yudhishthira, the
son of Kunti, continue to pay homage unto the king of Matsya.' Hearing
these words of Bhima, Draupadi said, 'In order that, O lord,

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

thou mayst not have to renounce the truth already pledged to me, do
thou, O hero, slay Kichaka in secret.' Bhima assuring her said, 'Even
today I shall slay Kichaka together with his friends unknown to others
during the darkness of the night. I shall, O faultless lady, crush, even
as an elephant crusheth a *vela* fruit,  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md) the head of the wicked Kichaka who wisheth
for what is unattainable by him!'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Repairing first to the place of assignation at
night, Bhima sat down, disguising himself. And he waited there in
expectation of Kichaka, like a lion lying in wait for a deer. And
Kichaka, having embellished his person as he chose, came to the
dancing-hall at the appointed time in the hope of meeting Panchali. And
thinking of the assignation, he entered the chamber. And having entered
that hall enveloped in deep gloom, that wretch of wicked soul came upon
Bhima of incomparable prowess, who had come a little before and who was
waiting in a corner. And as an insect approacheth towards a flaming
fire, or a puny animal towards a lion, Kichaka approached Bhima, lying
down in a bed and burning in anger at the thought of the insult offered
to Krishna, as if he were the Suta's Death. And having approached Bhima,
Kichaka possessed by lust, and his heart and soul filled with ecstacy
smilingly said, 'O thou of pencilled eye-brows, to thee I have already
given many and various kinds of wealth from the stores earned by me, as
well as hundred maids and many fine robes, and also a mansion with an
inner apartment adorned with beauteous and lovely and youthful maid
servants and embellished by every kind of sports and amusements And
having set all those apart for thee, I have speedily come hither. And
all on a sudden, women have begun to praise me, saying, '*There is not
in this world any other person like unto thee in beauty and dress*!'
Hearing this, Bhima said, 'It is well that thou art handsome, and it is
well thou praisest thyself. I think, however, that thou hadst never
before this such pleasurable touch! Thou hast an acute touch, and
knowest the ways of gallantry. Skilled in the art of love-making, thou
art a favourite with women. There is none like thee in this world!'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Saying this, that son of Kunti, the
mighty-armed Bhima of terrible prowess, suddenly rose up, and laughingly
said, 'Thy sister, O wretch, shall today behold thee dragged by me to
the ground, like a mighty elephant, huge as a mountain, dragged to the
ground by a lion. Thyself slain *Sairindhri* will live in peace, and we,
her husbands, will also live in peace.' Saying this, the mighty Bhima
seized Kichaka by the hairs of his head, which were adorned with
garlands. And thus seized with force by the hair, that foremost of
mighty persons, Kichaka, quickly freed his hair and grasped the arms of
Bhima. And then between those lions among men, fired with wrath, between
that chief of the Kichaka clan, and that best of men, there ensued a
hand-to-hand

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

encounter, like that between two powerful elephants for a female
elephant in the season of spring, or like that which happened in days of
yore between those lions among monkeys, the brothers Vali and Sugriva.
And both equally infuriate and both eager for victory, both those
combatants raised their arms resembling snakes furnished with five
hoods, and attacked each other with their nails and teeth, wrought up to
frenzy of wrath. Impetuously assailed by the powerful Kichaka in that
encounter, the resolute Bhima did not waver a single step. And locked in
each other's embraces and dragging each other, they fought on like two
mighty bulls. And having nails and teeth for their weapons, the
encounter between them was fierce and terrible like that of two furious
tigers. And felling each other in fury, they encountered each other like
a couple of elephants with rent temples. And the mighty Bhima then
seized Kichaka, and Kichaka, that foremost of strong persons threw Bhima
down with violence. And as those mighty combatants fought on, the crash
of their arms produced a loud noise that resembled the clatter of
splitting bamboos. Then Vrikodara throwing Kichaka down by main force
within the room, began to toss him about furiously even as a hurricane
tosseth a tree. And attacked thus in battle by the powerful Bhima,
Kichaka grew weak and began to tremble. For all that, however, he tugged
at the Pandava to the best of his power. And attacking Bhima, and making
him wave a little, the mighty Kichaka struck him with his knees and
brought him down to the ground. And overthrown by the powerful Kichaka,
Bhima quickly rose up like Yama himself with mace in hand. And thus that
powerful *Suta* and the Pandava, intoxicated with strength and
challenging each other, grappled with each other at midnight in that
solitary place. And as they roared at each other in wrath, that
excellent and strong edifice began to shake every moment. And slapped on
the chest by the mighty Bhima, Kichaka fired with wrath moved not a
single pace. And bearing for a moment only that onslaught incapable of
being born on earth, the *Suta*, overpowered by Bhima's might, became
enfeebled. And seeing him waning weak, Bhima endued with great strength
forcibly drew Kichaka towards his breast, and began to press hard. And
breathing hard again and again in wrath, that best of victors,
Vrikodara, forcibly seized Kichaka by the hair. And having seized
Kichaka, the mighty 'Bhima began to roar like a hungry tiger that hath
killed a large animal. And finding him exceedingly exhausted, Vrikodara
bound him fast with his arms, as one binds a beast with a cord. And then
Bhima began for a long while, to whirl the senseless Kichaka, who began
to roar frightfully like a broken trumpet. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md) And in order to pacify Krishna's wrath
Vrikodara grasped Kichaka's throat with his arms and began to squeeze
it. And assailing with his knees the waist of that worst of the
Kichakas,

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

all the limbs of whose body had been broken into fragments and whose
eye-lids were closed, Vrikodara slew him, as one would slay a beast. And
beholding Kichaka entirely motionless, the son of Pandu began to roll
him about on the ground. And Bhima then said, 'Slaying this wretch who
intended to violate our wife,--this thorn in the side of *Sairindhri*, I
am freed from the debt I owed to my brothers, and have attained perfect
peace.' And having said this, that foremost of men, with eyes red in
wrath, relinquished his hold of Kichaka, whose dress and ornaments had
been thrown off his person, whose eyes were rolling, and whose body was
yet trembling. And that foremost of mighty persons, squeezing his own
hands, and biting his lips in rage, again attacked his adversary and
thrust his arms and legs and neck and head into his body like the
wielder of the *Pinaka* reducing into shapeless mass the deer, which
form sacrifice had assumed in order to escape his ire. And having;
crushed all his limbs, and reduced him into a ball of flesh, the mighty
Bhimasena showed him unto Krishna. And endued with mighty energy that
hero then addressed Draupadi, that foremost of all women, saying, 'Come
princess of Panchala, and see what hath become of that lustful wretch!'
And saying this, Bhima of terrible prowess began to press with his feet
the body of that wicked wight. And lighting a torch then and showing
Draupadi the body of Kichaka, that hero addressed her, saying, 'O thou
of tresses ending in beautiful curls, those that solicit thee, endued as
thou art with an excellent disposition and every virtue, will be slain
by me even as this Kichaka hath been, O timid one.' And having
accomplished that difficult task so highly agreeable to Krishna--having
indeed slain Kichaka and thereby pacified his wrath, Bhima bade farewell
to Krishna, the daughter of Drupada, and quickly went back to the
kitchen. And Draupadi also, that best of women, having caused Kichaka to
be slain had her grief removed and experienced the greatest delight. And
addressing the keepers of the dancing-hall, she said, 'Come ye and
behold Kichaka who had violated after other people's wives lieth down
here, slain by my Gandharva husbands.' And hearing these words the
guards of the dancing hall soon came by thousands to that spot, torches
in hand. And repairing to that room, they beheld the lifeless Kichaka
thrown on the ground, drenched with blood. And beholding him without
arms and legs, they were filled with grief. And as they gazed at
Kichaka, they were struck with amazement. And seeing that superhuman
act, *viz*., the overthrow of Kichaka, they said, 'Where is his neck,
and where are his legs?' And beholding him in this plight they all
concluded that he had been killed by a Gandharva.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[41:1](m04022.htm#fr_15.md) Some texts read,
*Vilwam nagaviodhara*--*i.e.,* 'As an elephant lifts up a vela fruit.'

<span id="fn_16"></span>[42:1](m04022.htm#fr_16.md) *Veri* means both a
kettle-drum and a trumpet. The latter however conveys a better meaning
here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXII](m04023.md)
