[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m04041) 
[Next](m04043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SECTION XLII

"Uttara said, 'To what warrior of fame doth this excellent bow belong,
on which are a hundred golden bosses and which hath such radiant ends?
Whose is this excellent bow of good sides and easy hold, on the staff of
which shine golden elephants of such brightness? Whose is this excellent
bow, adorned with three scores of *Indragoapkas*  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) of pure gold, placed on the back of the
staff at proper intervals? Whose is this excellent bow, furnished with
three golden suns of great effulgence, blazing forth with such
brilliancy? Whose is this beautiful bow which is variegated with gold
and gems, and on which are golden insects set with beautiful stones?
Whose are these arrows furnished with wing around, numbering a thousand,
having golden heads, and cased in golden quivers? Who owneth these large
shafts, so thick, furnished with vulturine wings whetted on stone,
yellowish in hue, sharp-pointed, well-tempered, and entirely made of
iron? Whose is this sable quiver,  <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43)
bearing five images of tigers, which holdeth shafts
[intermixed](errata.htm#10) with boar-eared arrows altogether numbering
ten? Whose are these seven hundred arrows, long and thick,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

capable of drinking (the enemy's) blood, and looking like the
crescent-shaped moon?  <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) Whose are
these gold-crested arrows whetted on stones, the lower halves of which
are well-furnished with wings of the hue of parrots' feather and the
upper halves, of well-tempered steels?  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) Whose is this excellent sword
irresistible, and terrible to adversaries, with the mark of a toad on
it, and pointed like a toad's head?  <span id="fr_46"></span>[3](#fn_46)
Cased in variegated sheath of tiger-skin, whose is this large sword of
excellent blade and variegated with gold and furnished with tinkling
bells? Whose is this handsome scimitar of polished blade and golden
hilt? Manufactured in the country of the *Nishadas*, irresistible,
incapable of being broken, whose is this sword of polished blade in a
scabbard of cow-skin? Whose is this beautiful and long sword, sable in
hue as the sky, mounted with gold, well-tempered, and cased in a sheath
of goat-skin? Who owneth this heavy, well-tempered, and broad sword,
just longer than the breadth of thirty fingers, polished by constant
clash with other's weapons and kept in a case of gold, bright as fire?
Whose is this beautiful scimitar of sable blade covered with golden
bosses, capable of cutting through the bodies of adversaries, whose
touch is as fatal as that of a venomous snake which is irresistible and
exciteth the terror of foes? Asked by me, O Vrihannala, do thou answer
me truly. Great is my wonder at the sight of all these excellent
objects.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[73:1](m04042.htm#fr_42) Indian insects of a
particular kind.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[73:2](m04042.htm#fr_43) Most editions read
*chapas* which is evidently wrong. The correct reading is *avapas*,
meaning quiver. The Burdwan Pandits give this latter reading.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[74:1](m04042.htm#fr_44) Some read
*chandrargha-darsanas.* The correct reading is *chandrardha-darsanas.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[74:2](m04042.htm#fr_45) Most editions read
*hema-punkha* and *silasita* in the instrumental plural; the correct
reading is their nominative plural forms.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[74:3](m04042.htm#fr_46) *Sayaka* means here, as
explained by Nilakantha, a sword, and not a shaft.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XLIII](m04043)
