[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m04038.md) 
[Next](m04040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

# SECTION XXXIX

"Vaisampayana said, 'Beholding that bull among men seated on the car in
the habit of a person of the third sex, driving toward the *Sami* tree,
having taken (the flying) Uttara up, all the great car-warriors of the
Kurus with Bhishma and Drona at their head, became affrighted at heart,
suspecting the comer to be Dhananjaya. And seeing them so dispirited and
marking also the many wonderful portents, that foremost of all wielders
of arms, the preceptor Drona, son of Bharadwaja, said, 'Violent and hot
are the winds that below, showering gravels in profusion. The sky also
is overcast with a gloom of ashy hue. The clouds present the strange
sight of being dry and waterless. Our weapons also of various kinds are
coming out of their cases. The jackals are yelling hideously affrighted
at the [conflagrations](errata.htm#9.md) on all sides. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md) The horses too are shedding tears, and our
banners are trembling though moved by none. Such being the inauspicious
indications seen, a great danger is at hand. Stay ye with vigilance,
Protect ye your own selves and array the troops in order of battle.
Stand ye, expecting a terrible slaughter, and guard ye well the kine.
This mighty bowman, this foremost of all wielders of weapons, this hero
that hath come in the habit of a person of the third sex, is the son of
Pritha. There is no doubt of this.' Then addressing Bhishma, the
preceptor continued, 'O offspring of the Ganges, apparelled as a woman,
this is *Kiriti* called after a tree, the son of the enemy of the
mountains, and having on his banner the sign of devastator of the
gardens of Lanka's lord. Vanquishing us he will surely take away the
kine today!  <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41.md) This chastiser of foes
is the valiant son of Pritha surnamed *Savyasachin*. He doth not desist
from conflict even with the gods and demons combined. Put to great
hardship in the forest he cometh in wrath. Taught by even Indra himself,
he is like unto Indra in battle. Therefore, ye Kauravas, I do not see
any hero who can withstand him. It is said that the lord *Mahadeva*
himself, disguised in the attire of a hunter, was gratified by this son
of Pritha in battle on the mountains of Himavat.' Hearing these words,
Karna said, 'You always censure us by speaking on the virtues of
*Falguna*, Arjuna, however, is

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

not equal to even a full sixteenth part of myself or Duryodhana!' And
Duryodhana said, 'If this be Partha, O Radheya, then my purpose hath
already been fulfilled, for then, O king, if traced out, the Pandavas
shall have to wander for twelve years again. Or, if this one be any
other person in a eunuch's garb, I will soon prostrate him on the earth
with keen-edged arrows.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The son of Dhritarashtra, O chastiser of foes,
having said this, Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and Drona's son all
applauded his manliness!'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[71:1](m04039.htm#fr_40.md) Some texts read
*Diptasya* for *Diptayam*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[71:2](m04039.htm#fr_41.md) This sloka does not
occur in every text. This is a typical illustration of the round about
way, frequently adopted by Sanskrit writers, of expressing a simple
truth. The excuse in the present instance consists in Drona's
unwillingness to identify the solitary hero with Arjuna, in the midst of
all his hearers. Nadiji is an exclamation referring to Bhishma, the son
of the river Ganga. *Lankesa-vanari-ketu* is simply 'ape-bannered,' or
as rendered in the text, having the devastator of the gardens of Lanka's
lord for the sign of his banner. Nagahvaya is 'named after tree' for
Arjuna is the name of an Indian tree. Nagri-sunu is 'Indra's
son',--Indra being the foe of mountain, for formerly it was he who cut
off the wings of all mountains and compelled them to be stationary. He
failed only in the case of Mainaka, the son of Himavat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XL](m04040.md)
