---
layout: seclanding
description: "The Talmud at Intangible Textual Heritage"
keywords: "Judaism Tanakh Tanach Torah Talmud Jewish Jew Judaica Midrash Haggada Samaritan"
title: "The Talmud"
categories: ' <A HREF="index">Judaism</A>&nbsp; <BR>'
---
# <span class="c_dt">The Babylonian Talmud</span>

### Translated by <span class="c_da">Michael L. Rodkinson</span>

#### \[<span class="c_dd">1918</span>\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Book 1: Tract Sabbath](#t01)  
[Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana](#t02)  
[Book 3: Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga](#t03)  
[Book 4: Tracts Betzh, Succah, Moed Katan, Taanith, Megilla and Ebel
Rabbathi or Semahoth](#t04)  
[Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba, Derech Eretz-Zuta, and Baba
Kama (First Gate)](#t05)  
[Book 6: Tract Baba Kama (First Gate), Part II and Tract Baba Metzia
(Middle Gate)](#t06)  
[Book 7: Tract Baba Bathra (Last Gate)](#t07)  
[Book 8: Tract Sanhedrin: Section Jurisprudence (Damages)](#t08)  
[Book 9: Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda Zara, and
Horioth](#t09)  
[Book 10: History of the Talmud](#t10)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A search for Talmud at Google will turn up hundreds of thousands of
hits, a depressing number of which are to anti-Semitic sites. However,
to our knowledge this is the first extensive English translation of the
Talmud to be posted on the Internet. The Talmud is a vast collection of
Jewish laws and traditions. Despite the dry subject matter the Talmud
makes interesting reading because it is infused with vigorous
intellectual debate, humor and deep wisdom. As the saying goes, 'you
don't have to be Jewish' to appreciate this text. If you put in the hard
work required to read the Talmud, your mind will get a world-class
workout. The process of studying the Talmud has been compared with the
practice of Zen Buddhist Koan meditation, and for good reason.

Rodkinsons' ten-book edition, the only extensive one currently in the
public domain, contains complete translations of the 'Festivals' and
'Jurisprudence' sections of the Talmud. Rodkinson only finished about a
third of the Talmud. All ten volumes were prepared at Intangible Textual
Heritage and are available here in their entirety.

Rodkinson has been widely criticized, both from traditionalist Jews who
feel that translating the Talmud is not an acceptable practice, as well
as from those hostile to the Talmud and Judaism in general. As often
seems to be the case, the political spectrum seems to be a Mobeius loop.
All of these viewpoints are abundantly represented on the Internet. Some
quote material out of context, or ascribe hostile intent to innocent
passages. The most hurtful critics are those who claim that Rodkinson
deliberately left out material to conceal an evil Jewish agenda. After
completion of this etext, I can unequivocally state that this is
hogwash. Rodkinson's Talmud is, by definition, an abridgement for modern
readers. He left out only the sections where the debate spins off into
complete obscurity, and was careful to document where he did so. Now
that this incredible text, lovingly translated, is on the Internet
perhaps these criticisms can finally be put to rest.

*Bibliographic note on Rodkinsons' Talmud*  
Rodkinson's translation went through at least two editions. The
sacred-texts version was prepared from the second edition. All of these
were from the 1918 printing, with the exception of book 1, which was
scanned from a 1903 printing. The numbering of the volumes changed
radically between the first and second edition; to add to the confusion
the second edition was bound into a ten book set, two volumes per book.
This numbering is consistent, for instance, the second edition book 1
contains volumes 1 and 2; book 5 contains volumes 9 and 10, and so on.
However, the volume sequence of the first edition was completely
shuffled in the second edition; for instance, volumes 9 and 10 of the
second edition (in book 5) correspond to volumes 1 and 2 of the first
edition. This confusion will be evident if you shop the used book market
for individual books of this set (which are fairly abundant at
reasonable prices).

<span id="t01"></span> [<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#)
<span class="c_e"> Book 1: <span class="c_t">[Tract
Sabbath](t01/index)</span>   <span class="c_b">Tract Sabbath discusses
what can and cannot be done on the Jewish Holy day.</span> This tract
has a wealth of information on everyday Jewish life in late Classical
times, including, for some reason, a great number of medical recipes.
Because almost everything is done differently on the Sabbath, this
contains an incredible level of ethnographic detail about a wide range
of household activities including livestock, clothing, meals,
horticulture, hunting, and other more obscure topics, such as
fire-fighting and feminine hygiene. Rodkinson makes the point in an
appendix that many of the Talmundic regulations which seem to be
arbitrary were developed as a response to political persecution. He also
includes a prayer which is offered upon the conclusion of studying any
tract. </span>

<span id="t02"></span>

[<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#) <span class="c_e">Book
2: <span class="c_t">[Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh
Hashana](t02/index)</span>   <span class="c_b">Tracts from section Moed
(Festivals).</span> Tract Erubin deals with regulations concerning
travel on the Sabbath, and the proper construction of 'Erub',
propitiatory offerings for transgressions of these rules, usually, but
not always, constructed of food. Tract Shekalim deals with tithes. Tract
Rosh Hashana discusses the Jewish New Year, a floating holiday tied to
lunar observations. </span>

<span id="t03"></span>

[<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#) <span class="c_e">Book
3: <span class="c_t">[Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and
Hagiga](t03/index)</span>   <span class="c_b">Continuing with tracts
from section Moed (Festivals).</span> These are primarily discussions of
the rituals to be performed on important holy days: principally Passover
and the Day of Atonement. The short third tract, Hagiga, discusses the
Holocaust ceremony, (meaning a burnt-offering), which today has come
into use as a term for the Nazi genocide. Among other points of interest
is description of the ritual of the scapegoat in Chapter VI. of Tract
Yomah; and Chapter II. of Tract Hagiga has a notable digression on a
variety of subjects, including the cryptic Chariot of God, and the names
and characteristics of the seven heavens. </span>

<span id="t04"></span>

[<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#) <span class="c_e">Book
4: <span class="c_t">[Tracts Betzh, Succah, Moed Katan, Taanith, Megilla
and Ebel Rabbathi or Semahoth](t04/index)</span>   <span
class="c_b">Completing the Festivals portion of Rodkinson's Talmud
translation.</span> Tract Betzah details regulations about cooking,
fishing, hunting and other activities on feast days. Tract Succah
discusses the Festival of the Tabernacles, particularly the construction
and use of the Succah, or booth. Moed Katan is about miscellaneous laws
about some minor festivals, for instance activites which are permissible
during intercalendary periods. Taanith has discussions about the
beginning of the rains, including a sequence of folktales about
rainmaking Rabbis. Megilla is about Purim, particularly about the public
reading of the book of Esther during that festival. Ebel Rabbath is
about mourning and other funerary activities. </span>

<span id="t05"></span>

[<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#) <span class="c_e">Book
5: <span class="c_t">[Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba, Derech
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)](t05/index)</span>   <span
class="c_b">This book starts out with three tracts on ethics</span>,
including the lucid and moving Pirqe Aboth (Sayings of the Fathers),
(also [available at Intangible Textual Heritage in a translation by
Taylor](sjf/index)). This edition of Aboth comes with extensive
commentary. The Baba Kama is the first section of a three-part opening
arc of the Jurisprudence section. To the modern reader it is of interest
because of the unintentional and (sometimes pungent) atmospheric details
of everyday life in first century Israel. Many of the Baba Kama cases
start when 'an ox gores' someone or something; the modern equivalent
would probably be automobile moving violations. The debates are notable
because they are based equally on scripture and appeals to an emerging
standard of common-sense justice and human rights. </span>

<span id="t06"></span>

[<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#) <span class="c_e">Book
6: <span class="c_t">[Tract Baba Kama (First Gate), Part II and Tract
Baba Metzia (Middle Gate)](t06/index)</span>   <span class="c_b">The
conclusion of Baba Kama, the First Gate, and Baba Metzia, the Middle
Gate.</span> The second half of Baba Kama continues with cases involving
stolen items. Baba Metzia continues with civil law, particularly cases
involving damages: among the topics are found and loaned articles, real
estate, loans, titles, what constitutes usury and fraud, and labor law.
Many of the cases in Baba Metzia are extremely convoluted, more so than
usual. There are a few scattered legends about the life and death of the
principal authors of the Talmud, and some notable passages, mostly in
[Chapter IV](t06/me105). </span>

<span id="t07"></span>

[<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#) <span class="c_e">Book
7: <span class="c_t">[Tract Baba Bathra (Last Gate)](t07/index)</span>  
<span class="c_b">This, the third part of the 'Gate' sequence of tracts,
deals with issues of civil law regarding property</span>, including real
estate, moveable possessions, and inheritance, in the usual great
detail. At times the discussion becomes so hypothetical that Rodkinson,
thankfully, skips ahead a bit. Sandwiched in this *very* dry volume is
[one wild section of Haggada](t07/t0709.htm#page_203) (at the end of
Chapter V) which consists of some very tall tales about fish, alligators
and nautical going-ons. Also, notably, this tract includes what has to
be one of the first attempts to discuss where transgender people fit
into the legal framework. </span>

<span id="t08"></span>

[<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#) <span class="c_e">Book
8: <span class="c_t">[Tract Sanhedrin: Section Jurisprudence
(Damages)](t08/index)</span>   <span class="c_b">The subject matter of
Tract Sanhedrin is principally crime and punishment.</span> One of the
most notable discussions in this book is the debate about the 'stubborn
and rebellious son' (Chapter VIII). The rabbis openly express scepticism
that a son who disrespects his father in a particular way should be put
to death. Out of this quibble over an obscure 'worst case scenario' we
see the emergence of a key principle of jurisprudence: the execution of
divine law must be tempered by human mercy. This book also wanders far
and wide, dispensing wisdom on such topics as the location of the lost
tribes, what the windows on Noah's ark were made of, and when the
Messiah is due to arrive. </span>

<span id="t09"></span>

[<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#) <span class="c_e">Book
9: <span class="c_t">[Tracts Maccoth, Shebuoth, Eduyoth, Abuda Zara, and
Horioth](t09/index)</span>   <span class="c_b">This is the final book of
the Rodkinson translation of the Talmud; it contains the remaining
portions of the Jurisprudence section.</span> Tract Maccoth deals with
corporal punishment. Tract Shebuoth discusses oaths: what constitutes an
oath, false oaths, and so on. Tract Eduyoth is a grab-bag of Mishna
without commentary which give various cases related to other Talmud
tracts. Tract Abuda Zara elaborates the Biblical commandment not to
worship idols; it is of historical interest because of the tangential
information about what the idolators (i.e. ancient Pagans) did or did
not do. Tract Horioth is another short tract which discusses a number of
very technical issues, including the hierarchy of dogs, cats and mice.
</span>

<span id="t10"></span>

[<img src="../img/buycd.jpg" height="20" />](#) <span class="c_e">Book
10: <span class="c_t">[History of the Talmud](t10/index)</span>   <span
class="c_b">This is the introduction to Rodkinsons' Talmud
translation.</span> A history of the Talmud, starting with its five
hundred years of composition from the first to fifth centuries C.E., and
its bitter persecution from antiquity, through the Reformation up to the
19th Century. Includes biographies of the dozens of authors who wrote
the Talmud, and a detailed bibliography through 1900. </span>

<span class="c_dd"></span> <span class="c_da"></span> <span
class="c_dt"></span>
