[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv03)  [Next](ogv05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### § I

When, after the revival of letters in Europe, Chancellor Bacon,
legislator of thought, sketched with bold strokes the tree of human
knowledge, and brought back each branch of science to that of the moral
faculties upon which it depends, he did not fail to observe sagaciously
that it was necessary to distinguish in poetry two things, its essence
and its form <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2): its essence as
pertaining wholly to the imagination, and composing by itself alone one
of the principal branches of science <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3);
its form, as making part of the grammar, and entering thus into the
domain of philosophy and into the rational faculty of the
understanding. <span id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4) This celebrated man had
borrowed this idea from a man much older and more celebrated than
himself, Plato. According to this admirable philosopher, poetry is
either a simple talent, an art which one uses to give to his own ideas a
particular form, or it is a divine inspiration by means of which one
clothes in the human language and transmits to men the ideas of the
gods. <span id="fr_5"></span>[4](#fn_5) It is because, never having felt
sufficiently this important distinction and having confused two ideas
that ought to be separated, the essence and the form of poetry, which
are as the soul and body of this science, that so many men among the
modern nations proclaimed themselves poets, whereas they were, in strict
truth, only clever versifiers. For it does not suffice, as Plato again
said, to have poetic talent, it does not suffice to make verse and even
good verse, to be called a poet <span id="fr_6"></span>[5](#fn_6); it is
necessary to possess that divine enthusiasm, that inspiration which
elevates the soul, enlightens it, transports it, as it

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

were, to intellectual regions and causes it to draw from its source the
very essence of this science.

How they delude themselves, those who, habitually deceived, foolishly
imagine that the lofty fame of Orpheus, Homer, Pindar, Æschylus, or
Sophocles and the immortality which they enjoy, belongs only to the plan
of their works, to the harmony of their verse, and to the happy use of
their talent! These flattering appearances which constitute the form of
their poetry would have disappeared long ago, they would have become
broken, like fragile vases, upon the torrent of centuries, if the
intelligence which animated them had not eternalized their duration. But
this secret intelligence does not reside, as certain other superficial
readers persuade themselves, being still deceived, in the simple
interest that the characters *mise en scène* inspire; this interest,
which results from their contrast and from the shock of the passions, is
another sort of form, more hidden, and less frail, than the former, it
is true, but as variable generally and subject to the great revolution
of customs, laws, and usages. True poetry does not depend upon that; it
depends upon the primordial ideas which the genius of the poet in his
exaltation has seized in the intellectual nature, and which his talent
has shown afterwards in the elementary nature, thus adapting the
simulacra of physical things to the movement inspired by the soul,
instead of adapting this movement to those same simulacra, as those who
write history. This is what Bacon, the modern philosopher whom I have
already cited, has felt so perfectly. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)
He says:

As the sentient world is inferior to the human soul, it is for poetry to
give to this nature what reality has refused it, lending to it the
faculties of the intellectual world; and as the acts and events which
make the subject of true history have not that grandeur and that
sublimity for which the human soul seeks, it is necessary that poetry
create acts and events greater and

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

more heroic. All must be increased and embellished by its voice and
receive from it a new existence; it is necessary even that virtue shine
with an *éclat* *\[acclaim—JBH\]* more pure; that the veil which covers
truth be lifted from its eyes and that the course of Providence, better
discerned, be allowed to penetrate into the most secret causes of
events.

The philosopher who expressed thus his thought regarding the essence of
poetry, was far from believing, as the vulgar have always believed, and
as certain modern writers have wished to convince the savants, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) that, of the two parts of poetry, the
positive form might be the only genuine; that is to say, that they do
not by any means consider that the human characters put upon the stage
by the poets whom I have just named, were historic characters. Bacon
understood well that Achilles, Agamemnon, Ulysses, Castor and Pollux,
Helen, Iphigenia, Œdipus, Phædra, etc., are somewhat more than they
appear to be, and that their virtues or their vices, their heroic
actions, even their crimes, celebrated by poetry, contain a profound
meaning wherein lie buried the mysteries of religion and the secrets of
philosophy. <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9)

It belongs only to the men to whom poetry is known by its exterior forms
alone and who have never penetrated as far as its essence, to imagine
that a small city of Asia, unknown to all Asia, around which the King of
kings of Greece waited in vain for ten years to avenge the honour of his
brother betrayed by his wife, should be able during three thousand years
to occupy the greatest minds of Europe, on account of a quarrel which
was raised in the tenth year of the siege, between this King of kings
and a petty prince of his army, angry and sulky, named Achilles. It is
only permitted to the phlegmatic chronologists, whom the muses

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

have never visited in their studies, to seek seriously to fix the year
and the day when this quarrel took place. A man, strongly imbued with
the spirit of Homer or of Sophocles, would never see in Ulysses a real
man, a king who, returning to his isle after long wanderings, kills in
cold blood a crowd of lovers of his wife and rests confident of the
conjugal fidelity of that spouse abandoned for twenty years, and whom he
had won in the course, <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) although,
according to the most common reports, she was delivered of a son in his
absence <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11); nor in Œdipus, another
king, who, without knowing it, without wishing it, always innocent,
kills his father, espouses his mother and, driven to parricide and
incest by an irresistible destiny, tears out his eyes and condemns
himself to wander over the earth, to be a frightful example of celestial
wrath. The platitudes and ridicule of the deed related by Homer, and the
horror which resulted from that presented on the stage by Sophocles, are
sufficient evidence against their reality. If the poem of the one and
the tragedy of the other do not conceal, under the coarse exterior which
covers them, a secret fire which acts unknown to the reader, never would
a sane man tolerate a presentation, on the one side, of vice changed
into virtue, and on the other, virtue changed into vice, and the gods
operating this strange metamorphosis against all the laws of natural
justice. He would throw aside the book with disgust, or, agreeing with
the judicious reflection of an ancient Greek writer, exclaim with
him <span id="fr_12"></span>[3](#fn_12):

If Homer had merely thought with respect to the gods what he said, he
would have been an impious, sacrilegious man, a veritable Salmoneus, a
second Tantalus; but let us guard against doing him this wrong, or
taking for guides those who, misunderstanding

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the allegorical genius of this great poet, and hesitating before the
outer court of his mysterious poetry, have never succeeded in
understanding the sublime philosophy which is enclosed therein.

You are not, *Messieurs*, of those designated by Heraclides in the words
I have just quoted. Members of these celebrated Academies where Homer
and Sophocles have found so many admirers, defenders, and illustrious
disciples, you can easily admit that I see in these great men more than
ordinary poets, that I place their glory elsewhere than in their talent,
and that I say, particularly of Homer, that his most just claims to
immortality are less in the form than in the essence of his poetry,
because a form, however admirable it may be, passes and yields to time
which destroys it, whereas the essence or the spirit which animates it,
immutable as the Divinity from which it emanates by inspiration, resists
all vicissitudes and seems to increase in vigour and *éclat*, in
proportion as the centuries passing away reveal its force and serve as
evidence of its celestial origin. I flatter myself that my sentiments in
this regard are not foreign to yours and that the successors of
Corneille, Racine, and Boileau hear with pleasure these eulogies given
to the creator of epopœia, to the founders of dramatic art, and agree
with me in regarding them as particular organs of the Divinity, the
instruments chosen for the instruction and civilization of men.

If you deign, *Messieurs*, to follow the development of my ideas with as
much attention as indulgence, you already know that what I call the
essence or spirit of poetry, and which, following upon the steps of the
founder of the Academy and of the regenerator of the sciences of Europe,
I distinguish from its form, is no other thing than the allegorical
genius, immediate production of the inspiration; you also understand
that I mean by inspiration, the infusion of this same genius into the
soul which, having power only

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

in the intellectual nature, is manifested in action by passing into the
elementary nature by means of the inner labour of the poet who invests
it with a sentient form according to his talent; you perceive finally,
how, following this simple theory, I explain the words of Plato, and how
I conceive that the inspired poet transmits to men the ideas of the
gods.

I have no need I think of telling you that I make an enormous difference
between this divine inspiration which exalts the soul and fills it with
a real enthusiasm, and that sort of inner movement or disorder which the
vulgar also call inspiration, which in its greatest perfection is only
passion excited by the love of glory, united with a habit of verse
making, which constitutes the talent, and in its imperfection is only a
disordered passion called by Boileau, an ardour for rhyming. These two
kinds of inspiration in no wise resemble each other; their effects are
as different as their causes, their productions as different as their
sources. The one, issuing from the intellectual nature, has its
immutability: it is the same in all time, among all peoples, and in the
heart of all men who receive it; it alone produces genius: its first
manifestation is very rare, but its second manifestation is less so, as
I will show later on. The other inspiration, inherent in sentient
nature, born of passion, varies with the whim of men and things, and
takes on the hue of the customs and the times; it can bring forth talent
or at least modify it, and when it is seconded by a great facility, can
go to the extent of feigning genius but never farther: its real domain
is the mind. Its possession is not very rare even in its perfection. One
can sometimes find it united with the true inspiration, first as in
Homer, or second as in Vergil; and then the form which it unceasingly
works over, joining its sentient beauties to the intellectual beauties
of genius, creates the monuments of science.

It may be that the development which I have just given of my ideas on
the essence of poetry will appear new, although I must acknowledge that
in reality they are not

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I am addressing
men who are too enlightened to ignore what the ancients have said in
this respect. Heraclides, whom I have already cited, is not the only one
who has given this impression. Strabo assures positively that ancient
poetry was only the language of allegory <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13), and he refutes Eratosthenes who pretended
that the aim of Homer was only to amuse and please. In this he is in
accord with Denys of Halicarnassus who avows that the mysteries of
nature and the most sublime conceptions of morals have been covered with
the veil of allegory. <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14) Phurnutus goes
farther: he declares that the allegories used by Hesiod and by Homer do
not differ from those which other foreign poets have used before
them. <span id="fr_15"></span>[3](#fn_15) Damascius said as much of the
poems of Orpheus, <span id="fr_16"></span>[4](#fn_16) and Plutarch
confirms it in a passage which has been preserved to us by
Eusebius. <span id="fr_17"></span>[5](#fn_17)

In the first ages of Greece, poetry, consecrated to the service of the
altars, left the enclosures of the temples only for the instruction of
the people: it was as a sacred language in which the priests, entrusted
with presiding at the mysteries of religion, interpreted the will of the
gods. The oracles, dogmas, moral precepts, religious and civil laws,
teachings of all sorts concerning the labours of the body, the
operations of the mind, in fact all that which was regarded as an
emanation, an order, or a favour from the Divinity, all was written in
verse. To this sacred language was given the name Poetry, that is to
say, the Language of the Gods: a symbolic name which accords with it
perfectly, since it expressed at the same time its origin and its
usage. <span id="fr_18"></span>[6](#fn_18) It was said to have come from
Thrace, <span id="fr_19"></span>[7](#fn_19) and the one who had invented
it and caused its first accents to be heard was

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

called Olen. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) Now these are again two
symbolic names perfectly adapted to the idea that one had of this divine
science: it was descended from *Thrace*, that is to say, from the
Ethereal Space; it was *Olen* who had invented it, that, is to say, the
Universal Being. <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21) To understand
these three etymologies which can be regarded as the fundamental points
of the history of poetry, it is necessary to remember, first, that the
Phœnicians, at the epoch when they covered not only Greece but the
coasts of the rest of Europe with their colonies, brought there their
language, and gave their names to the countries of which they had taken
possession; secondly, that these names drawn almost always from objects
symbolic of their cult, constituted for these countries a sort of sacred
geography, which Greece above all others, was faithful in
preserving. <span id="fr_22"></span>[†](#fn_22) It was thus (for there
is nothing

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

under the sun which cannot find either its model of its copy) when the
Europeans took possession of America and colonized it, and carried to
those regions their diverse dialects and covered it with names drawn
from the mysteries of Christianity. One ought therefore, when one wishes
to understand the ancient names of the countries of Greece, those of
their heroic personages, those of the mysterious subjects of their cult,
to have recourse to the Phœnician dialect which although lost to us can
easily be restored with the aid of Hebrew, Aramaic, Chaldean, Syriac,
Arabic, and Coptic.

I do not intend, Messieurs, to fatigue you with proofs of these
etymologies which are not in reality the subject of my discourse. I am
content to place them on the margin for the satisfaction of the curious.
Thus I shall make use of them later, when occasion demands. But to
return to Thrace, this country was always considered by the Greeks as
the place peculiar to their gods and the centre of their cult; the
divine country, *par excellence*. All the names that it has borne in
different dialects and which in the course of time have become
concentrated in particular regions, have been synonyms of theirs. Thus,
Getæ, Mœsia, Dacia, all signify the country of the gods. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23) Strabo, in speaking of the Getæ, said
that these peoples recognized a sovereign pontiff to whom they gave the
title of God, the dignity of which existed still in his time. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) This sovereign pontiff

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

resided upon a mountain that d’Anville believes he has recognized,
between Moldavia and Transylvania. The Thracians had also a sovereign
pontiff instituted in the same manner as that of the Getæ, and residing
likewise upon a sacred mountain. <span id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25) It
was, no doubt, from the heights of these mountains that the divine
oracles, the laws and teachings which the great pontiffs had composed in
verse, were at first spread throughout Greece; so that it might be said,
literally as well as figuratively, that poetry, revered as the language
of the gods, production of an Eternal Being, descended from the ethereal
abode and was propagated upon earth for the instruction and delight of
mortals. It appears to me very certain that the temple of Delphi,
erected upon the famous mountain of Parnassus, differed not essentially
at first from those of Thrace; and what confirms me in this idea is
that, according to an ancient tradition, it was Olen who, coming out
from Lycia, that is to say from the light, caused all Greece to
recognize the cult of Apollo and Diana; composed the hymns which were
chanted at Delos in honour of these two divinities and established the
temple of Delphi of which he was the first pontiff. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) Thus the temple of Delphi rivalled those
of Thrace. Its foundation, doubtless due to some innovator priest, was
attributed by a poetic metaphor to the divinity which had inspired it.
At that time a schism arose and two cults were formed, that of the
Thracians consecrated to Bacchus and Ceres, or Dionysus the divine
spirit, and Demeter the

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

earth-mother <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27); and that of the
Greeks, properly speaking, consecrated to the sun and the moon, adored
under the names of Apollo and Diana. It is to this schism that one
should ascribe the famous dispute which was raised, it is said, between
Bacchus and Apollo concerning the possession of the tripod of
Delphi. <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) The poetic fable woven from
this subject was made to preserve the remembrance of the moral incident
and not of the physical event; for at this remote epoch, when verse only
was written, history, ever allegorical, treated only of moral and
providential matters, disdaining all physical details deemed little
worthy of occupying the memory of men.

However that may be, it appears certain, notwithstanding this schism,
that the cult of the Thracians dominated Greece for a long time. The new
source of poetry opened at Delphi and on Mount Parnassus, destined in
time to become so celebrated, remained at first somewhat unknown. It is
worthy of observation that Hesiod, born in the village of Ascra, a short
distance from Delphi, makes no mention either of the oracle or of the
temple of Apollo. All that he said of this city, which he named Pytho,
has reference to the stone which Saturn had swallowed, believing to
devour his son. <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29) Homer does not
mention this Pytho in the *Iliad;*

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

he mentions in the *Odyssey* an oracle delivered by Apollo upon
Parnassus. For a long time, the peoples of Greece, accustomed to receive
from the ancient mountains of Thrace both their oracles and their
instructions, turned toward that country and neglected the new sacred
mount. This is why the most ancient traditions place in Thrace, with the
supremacy of cult and sacerdotalism, the cradle of the most famous poets
and that of the Muses who had inspired them: Orpheus, Musæus, Thamyris,
and Eumolpus were Thracians. Pieria, where the Muses were born, was a
mountain of Thrace; and when, at length, it was a question of rendering
to the gods a severe and orthodox cult, it was said that it was
necessary to imitate the Thracians, or, as one would say in French,
*thraciser*. <span id="fr_30"></span>[\*](#fn_30)

Besides it must be observed, that at the epoch when the temple of Delphi
was founded,, the new cult, presented to the Greeks under the name of
the universal Olen, tended to unite Apollo and Diana, or the sun and the
moon, under the same symbolic figure, and to make of it only one and the
same object of adoration, under the name of *Œtolinos*, that is to say,
*Sun-moon*. <span id="fr_31"></span>[†](#fn_31) It was proclaimed that
the middle of the earth, its paternal and maternal umbilicus, was found
placed exactly on the spot where the new sacred city was built, which
was called for this mystical reason

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Delphi. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) But it seems that the universality of this
Œtolinos was never well understood by the Greeks, who, in their minds,
united only with difficulty that which custom and their senses had
taught them to separate. Moreover one can well conjecture that, as in
all religious schisms, a host of difficulties and contradictory opinions
were raised. If I can believe the sacerdotal traditions of India, that I
encounter, the greatest difficulty was, not knowing which sex dominated
in this mysterious being whose essence was composed of the sun and moon
and whose hermaphroditic umbilicus was possessed in Delphi. This
insoluble question had more than once divided mankind and stained the
earth with blood. But here is not the place to touch upon one of the
most important and most singular facts of the history of man. I have
already deviated too much from my subject, and I return to it asking
pardon of my judges for this necessary digression.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[7:1](ogv04.htm#fr_2) *De Dignit. et Increment.
Scient.*, l. ii., c. 13.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:2](ogv04.htm#fr_3) *Ibid*., l. ii., c. 1.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[7:3](ogv04.htm#fr_4) *Ibid*., l. vi., c. 1.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:4](ogv04.htm#fr_5) Plat., *Dial. Ion.*
Aristotle, who was often opposed to Plato, did not dare to be on this
point. He agrees that verse alone does not constitute poetry, and that
the History of Herodotus, put into verse, would never be other than
history.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7:5](ogv04.htm#fr_6) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8:1](ogv04.htm#fr_7) *De Dignit. et Increment.
Scient.*, l. ii., c. 13.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9:1](ogv04.htm#fr_8) Leclerc, known by the
multitude of his works; l’abbé Bannier, Warburton, etc.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9:2](ogv04.htm#fr_9) *De Dignit. et Increment.
Scient.*, l. ii., c. 13. Court de Gébelin cites Chancellor Bacon as one
of the first defenders of allegory. (*Génie allég.*)

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10:1](ogv04.htm#fr_10) Pausanias, l. iii., p.
93.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[10:2](ogv04.htm#fr_11) Acron, *In Epist.
Horat.*, i., 2. Certain authors say that Penelope had conceived this son
when Mercury disguised as a goat had forced her virginity. (Lucian,
*Dialog. Deor.*, t. i., p. 176.)

<span id="fn_12"></span>[10:3](ogv04.htm#fr_12) Héraclides, entre les
petits mythologues.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13:1](ogv04.htm#fr_13) *Geogr.*, l. i.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[13:2](ogv04.htm#fr_14) *Antiq. rom.*, l. ii.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[13:3](ogv04.htm#fr_15) In his book entitled
Περὶ τῆς τῶν θεῶν φύσεως, ch. 17.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[13:4](ogv04.htm#fr_16) In his book entitled
Περὶ θεῶν καὶ κόσμον, ch. 3. Court de Gébelin cites these works. (*Génie
allég.*)

<span id="fn_17"></span>[13:5](ogv04.htm#fr_17) *Præp. Evang.*, l. iii.,
c. 1.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[13:6](ogv04.htm#fr_18) Court de Gébelin, *Génie
allég.*, p. 149.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[13:7](ogv04.htm#fr_19) Strabo positively
assures it. See Bannier, *Mythol.*, ii., p. 252.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[14:1](ogv04.htm#fr_20) Bailly, *Essai sur les
Fables*, ch. 14. Pausanias, l. ix., p. 302.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[14:\*](ogv04.htm#fr_21) Poetry, in Greek
ποίησις, derived from the Phœnician ‏פאח‎ (*phohe*), mouth, voice,
language, discourse; and from ‏יש‎ (*ish*), a superior being, a
principle being, figuratively God. This last word, spread throughout
Europe, is found with certain change of vowels and of aspirates, very
common in the Oriental dialects; in the Etruscan *Æs*, *Æsar*, in the
Gallic *Æs*, in the Basque *As*, and in the Scandinavian *Ase;* the
Copts still say *Os*, the lord, and the Greeks have preserved it in
Αῖ᾽σα, the immutable Being, Destiny, and in ἅζω, I adore, and ἀξιόω, I
revere.

*Thrace*, in Greek θρᾴκη, derived from the Phœnician ‏רקיע‎ (*rakiwha*),
which signifies the ethereal space, or, as one translates the Hebrew
word which corresponds to it, the firmament. This word is preceded in
the Dorian θρακιᾴ, by the letter θ, *th*, a kind of article which the
Oriental grammarians range among the *hémantique* letters placed at the
beginning of words to modify the sense, or to render it more emphatic.

*Olen*, in Greek ὤλεν, is derived from the Phœnician ‏עילן‎ (*whôlon*),
and is applied in the greater part of the Oriental dialects to all that
which is infinite, eternal, universal, whether in time or space. I ought
to mention as an interesting thing and but little known by mythologists,
that it is from the word ‏אפ‎ (*ab* or *ap*) joined to that of *whôlon*,
that one formed *ap-whôlon*, Apollon: namely, the Father universal,
infinite, eternal. This is why the invention of Poetry is attributed to
Olen or to Apollo. It is the same mythological personage represented by
the sun. According to an ancient tradition, Olen was native of Lycia,
that is to say, of the light; for this is the meaning of the Greek word
λύκη.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[14:†](ogv04.htm#fr_22) Strabo has judiciously
observed that in Greece all the technical words were foreign. (*Voyez*
Bailly, *Essai sur les Fables*, ch. 14, p. 136.)

<span id="fn_23"></span>[15:\*](ogv04.htm#fr_23) The Getæ, in Greek
Γέται, were, according to Ælius Spartianus, and according to the author
of *le Monde primitif* (t. ix., p. 49), the same peoples as the Goths.
Their country called Getæ, which should be pronounced *Ghœtie*, comes
from the word *Goth*, which signifies God in most of the idioms of the
north of Europe. The name of the Dacians is only a softening of that of
the Thracians in a different dialect.

Mœsia, in Greek Μοίσια, is, in Phœnician, the interpretation of the name
given to Thrace. The latter means, as we have seen, *ethereal space*,
and the former signifies *divine abode*, being composed from the word
‏איש‎ (*aïsh*), whose rendering I have already given, before which is
found placed the letter ‏מ‎ (M), one of the *hémantiques*, which
according to the best grammarians serves to express the proper place,
the means, the local manifestation of a thing.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[15:1](ogv04.htm#fr_24) *Voyez* Court de
Gébelin, *Monde primitif*, t. ix., p. 49.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[16:\*](ogv04.htm#fr_25) This mountain was
called Kô-Kajôn, according to d’Anville. This learned geographer has
clearly seen that this name was the same as that of Caucasus, a generic
name given to all the sacred mountains. It is known that Caucasus was
for the Persians, what Mount Merou had been for the Indians and what
Mount Parnassus became afterwards for the Greeks, the central place of
their cult. The Tibetans have also their sacred mountain distinct from
that of the Indians, upon which still resides the God-Priest, or
immortal Man, similar to that of the Getæ. (*Mém. de l’Acad. des
Inscript.*, t. xxv., p. 45.)

<span id="fn_26"></span>[16:1](ogv04.htm#fr_26) Bailly, *Essai sur les
Fables*, ch. 14. Conférez avec Hérodote, l. iv.; et Pausanias, l. ix.,
p. 302, l. x., p. 320.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[17:\*](ogv04.htm#fr_27) *Dionysus*, in Greek
Διονύσος, comes from the word Διός, irregular genitive of Ζεύς, the
living God, and of Νόος, mind or understanding. The Phœnician roots of
these words are ‏אש‎, ‏יש‎, or ‏איש‎ (*ash*, *ish*, or *aïsh*), Unique
Being, and ‏נו‎ (nô) the motive principle, the movement. These two
roots, contracted, form the word *Nôos*, which signifies literally the
principle of being, and figuratively, the understanding.

Demeter, in Greek Δημήτερ, comes from the ancient Greek Δημ, *the
earth*, united to the word μήτερ, *mother*. The Phœnician roots are ‏דם‎
(*dam*) and ‏מוט‎ (*môt*), the former expressing all that which is
formed by aggregation of similar parts; and the latter, all that which
varies the form and gives it generative movement.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[17:1](ogv04.htm#fr_28) Bailly, *Essai sur les
Fables*, ch. 15. Court de Gébelin expressly says, that the sacred
mountain of Thrace was consecrated to Bacchus. *Monde prim.*, t. ix., p.
49. Now, it is generally known that Parnassus of the Greeks was
consecrated to Apollo.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[17:2](ogv04.htm#fr_29) *Theog*., V. 500.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[18:\*](ogv04.htm#fr_30) The Greek word Θρᾴκη,
Thrace, in passing into the Ionian dialect Θρῄξ, has furnished the
following expressions: θρῆσκος, a devotee, θρησκεία, devotion, θρησκηύω,
I adore with devotion. These words, diverted from their real sense and
used ironically after the cult of Thrace had yielded to that of Delphi,
were applied to ideas of superstition and even of fanaticism. The point
of considering the Thracians as schismatics was even reached, and the
word ἐθελοθρησκεία composed to express a heresy, a cult particular to
those who practised it, and separated from orthodoxy.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[18:†](ogv04.htm#fr_31) Œtolinos is composed, by
contraction, of two words which appear to belong to one of the Thracian
dialects. *Œto-Kyros* signifies the ruling sun, among the Scythians,
according to Herodotus (l. iv., 59). *Helena* signified the moon, among
the Dorian. It is from this last word, deprived of its article *he*,
that the Latins have made *Luna*.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[19:1](ogv04.htm#fr_32) Court de Gébelin, *Monde
primit.*, t. viii., p. 190. Pausanias, l. x. Conférez avec Æschyl. *In
Choephori*, v. 1036; Eurip., *In Orest.*, v. 1330; Plat., *De Rep.*, l.
iv., etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § II](ogv05)
