[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv02)  [Next](ogv04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span
id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

# DISCOURSE UPON THE ESSENCE AND FORM OF POETRY

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### DISCOURSE UPON THE ESSENCE AND FORM OF POETRY <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0)

*Messieurs:*

Before publishing the translation of the *Golden Verses of Pythagoras*,
such as I have made it, in French verse which I have designated by the
expression *eumolpique*, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) I would have
liked to be able to submit it to you and thus be enlightened by your
counsels or sustained by your approbation; but academic laws and usages,
whose justice I have felt, have prevented my enjoying this advantage.
The innovation, however, which I have endeavoured to make in French
poetry and the new explanation which I have tried to give of one of the
most celebrated pieces of Greek poetry, have seemed to me to hold too
closely to your labours and to enter too deeply into your literary
provinces, for me to believe myself able to dispense with calling your
attention to them. I crave your indulgence, if in the demonstration of a
just deference to your judgment I involuntarily neglect certain
formalities; and I beg you to judge the purity of my intentions.

I claim not to be a poet; I had even long ago renounced the art of
verse, but notwithstanding that, I am now presenting myself in the
poetic career to solicit the hazardous success of an innovation! Is it
the love of glory which inspires in me this temerity, which dazzles me
today as

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

my autumn advances, whereas it was unable to move me when the
effervescence of my springtime ought to have doubled its strength? No:
however flattering the wreaths that you award to talent, they would not
concern me; and if an interest, as new as powerful, had not induced me
to address you, I would keep silent. This interest, *Messieurs*, is that
which science itself inspires in me, and the desire, perhaps
inconsiderate but commendable, of co-operating with my limited ability
for the development of a language whose literary and moral influence,
emerging from the bourns of Europe and the present century, ought to
invade the world and become universal like the renown of the hero who
extends his conquests with those of the empire whose foundations he has
laid.

I feel, *Messieurs*, that I should explain my thought. My assertion,
well founded as it may be, appears none the less extraordinary, and I am
bound to admit this. The disfavour which is attached to all new ideas,
to all innovations, the just defiance that they inspire, the element of
ridicule that springs from their downfall, would have arrested my
audacity, if I had had audacity alone, and if the worthy ambition of
effecting a general good had not raised me above a particular evil which
might have resulted for me. Besides I have counted upon the judicious
good-will of the two illustrious Academies to which I am addressing
myself: I have thought that they would distinguish in the verse which I
am presenting for their examination, both as a means of execution in
French poetry and as a means of translation in ancient and foreign
poetry, the real utility that they can offer, of the fortuitous beauty
which they lack, and which a more capable hand would have been able to
give them; I flatter myself, at length, that they would grant to the
end, without prejudice, the attention which is necessary, and that if
they refused an entire approbation to my efforts, they would at least
render justice to my zeal and commend the motives which have made me
attempt them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:\*](ogv03.htm#fr_0) Addressé à la Classe de la
Langue et de la Littérature françaises, et à celle d’Histoire et de
Littérature ancienne de l’Institut impérial de France.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:1](ogv03.htm#fr_1) This expression will be
explained in the progress of the discourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § I](ogv04)
