[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv07)  [Next](ogv09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § V

Now, summing up what I have said, it will be found that poetry, entirely
intellectual in its origin and destined only to be the language of the
gods, owed its first

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

developments in Greece to Orpheus, its second to Homer, and its last to
Æschylus. These three creative men, seizing the different germs of this
science still shrouded in their formless rudiments, warmed them with the
fire of their genius and according to the particular inspiration of
each, led them to the perfection of which they were susceptible. All
three of them were the object of a first inspiration, although
influenced one by the other, and were able to communicate the magnetic
power to new disciples. Orpheus possessor of intellectual and rational
poetry, constituted that which I call *Eumolpœia*, which, being divided
into theosophy and philosophy, produces all the works which treat of the
Divinity, of the Universe, of Nature, and of Man in general. <span
id="fr_171"></span>[\*](#fn_171) Homer, in joining to this spiritual
poetry the enthusiasm of the passions, created Epopœia, whose
magnificent genus envelops a multitude of specie, where the intellectual
faculty and passion dominate with more or less energy under the
influence of imagination. Homer rendered sentient that which was
intelligible and particularized that which Orpheus had left universal:
Æschylus, trying to bring into action what these two divine men had left
with potentiality, formed the idea of dramatic or active poetry, in
which he claimed to include whatever Eumolpœia and Epopœia had in
common, that was moral, allegorical, and passionate. He would have
succeeded, perhaps, and then would have produced the most perfect work
of thought, passion, and action possible for men, conceived by genius
and executed by talent; but Greece, exhausted by the abundant harvest
obtained by Orpheus and Homer, lacked the sap to give nourishment to
this new plant. Corrupted in its germ, this plant degenerated rapidly,
deteriorated, and put forth only a vain show of branches without
elevation and without virtue. The heroes of Thermopylæ succumbed under
the burden of their laurels. Given over to a foolish

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

arrogance, they covered with an unjust contempt their preceptors and
their fathers; they persecuted, they assassinated their defenders and
their sages and, base tyrants of the theatre, they prepared themselves
to bow the head beneath the yoke of the king of Macedonia.

This king, victor at Chæronea, became arbiter of Greece, and his son,
providential instrument of the ascendancy which Europe was to have over
Asia, crossing the Hellespont at the head of an army that his genius
alone rendered formidable, overthrew the empire of Cyrus and stood for a
moment upon its débris: I say for a moment, because it was not here that
the new empire was to be established: Europe had still obeyed; she was
one day to command. Rome was already, in the thought of the future, the
culminating point of the earth. A few centuries sufficed for this city,
then unknown, <span id="fr_172"></span>[\*](#fn_172) to attain to the
height of glory. Emerging from her obscurity, conquering Pyrrhus,
dominating Italy, combating and overthrowing Carthage, conquering
Greece, and trampling under foot twenty diadems borne by the successors
of Alexander, was for this ambitious Republic the work of a few
centuries. But it is not true, although certain men whose virtue was not
enlightened by the torch of experience may have been able to say it; it
is not true that a republic, already perplexed in governing itself, can
govern the world. It requires an empire, and this empire is created.

Cæsar laid its foundation, Augustus strengthened it. The sciences and
arts, brought to Rome from the heart of Greece, came out then from their
lethargy and flourished

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

with a new *éclat*. Poetry, especially, found numberless admirers.
Vergil, strongly attracted by the magnetic flame of Homer, dared to
tread in his light, overthrew all the obstacles that time had raised,
and drawing near to this divine model, received from him the second
inspiration without intermediary and without rival. Ovid, less
determined, hovering between Orpheus and Homer, succeeded, however, in
uniting the second inspiration of the one to the third inspiration of
the other, and left in his book of *Metamorphoses* a monument not less
brilliant and more inimitable than the *Æneid*. Horace, little satisfied
with succeeding Pindar, sought and found the means of uniting to the
enthusiasm of the passions the calm of rational poetry, and,
establishing himself a legislator of Parnassus, dictated laws to the
poets, or jeered at the absurdities of men.

This poetry of reason had long since fallen into desuetude. The false
movement that dramatic poetry had taken in Greece, the contempt that it
had come to inspire for gods and men, had reacted upon it. The
philosophers, disdaining a science which, by its own admission, was
founded upon falsehood, had driven it from their writings. As much as
they searched for it, when they believed it an emanation of the
Divinity, so much had they fled from it since they had come to see in it
only the vain production of an insensate delirium. Here is an
observation, *Messieurs*, somewhat new, with which I may engage your
attention: the first comedies appeared five hundred and eighty years
before our era, which was about twenty years after Pherecydes wrote the
first work in prose. <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173) This
philosopher doubtless, did not believe that a language prostituted to
the burlesque parodies of Susarion should be useful further to the
meditations of the sages. It is not, however, that at long intervals
certain philosophers such as Empedocles, Parmenides, and many others of
their disciples, have not

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

written in verse <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174); but the remains
of the ancient usage soon gave way, especially when Plato had
embellished prose with the charm of his captivating eloquence. Before
this philosopher, Herodotus had read in the assembly of the Olympic
games an history of Greece connected with that of the greater part of
the neighbouring nations. <span id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_175) This
work, written in a fluent style, clear and persuasive, had so enchanted
the Greeks, that they had given to the nine books which he composed, the
names of the nine Muses. Nevertheless, an observation which will not be
wholly foreign here, is, that the admission of prose in philosophy,
instead of rational poetry, produced a style of work hitherto unknown,
and of which the moderns made much; I am speaking of positive history.
Before this epoch, history written in verse was, as I have said,
allegorical and figurative, and was occupied only with the masses
without respect to individuals. Thus the evil which resulted on the one
side, from the degradation experienced by poetry in one of its branches,
was balanced by the good which was promised on the other, from the
purification of prose for the advancement of exact knowledge.

But returning to what I said just now on the subject of rational poetry,
joined by the Romans to the passionate part of that science, I will say
that this union created a new style, of which Horace was the originator:
this was the didactic style. This style ought not to be confused with
rational poetry, of which Hesiod has made use in his poem of *Works and
Days*, and which pertains to Eumolpœia; nor with pure rational poetry,
such as one finds in the writings of Parmenides and Empedocles: it is a
sort of poetry which, attaching itself to form alone, depends much upon
dramatic art. The didactic, satirical, or simply descriptive poet is
similar to an actor on the stage declaiming a long monologue. Rational
poetry was welcomed at Rome, and drawn from the long oblivion into which
it had fallen, by

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lucretius who,
being inspired by the works of Leucippus and of Epicurus <span
id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176) wrote a book upon the nature of things,
which has never been as yet well comprehended or well translated, the
language not being understood.

Comedy, reformed by Menander, was again improved by Plautus and by
Terence who acquired much reputation in this style; as to dramatic art
in itself, it remained in its inertia. The Romans having the same gods
and nearly the same mythology as the Greeks, were neither sufficiently
elevated in intelligence to reinstate this art and make of it the
masterpiece of the human mind; nor sufficiently advanced in exact
knowledge to change wholly its forms and make of it, as we have, a new
art, whence allegory and the moral part of Eumolpœia have been
completely banished. But what the Romans were unable to do for dramatic
art, they unfortunately were able to do for Epopœia. Certain writers,
able versifiers, but absolutely deprived of intellectual inspiration,
incapable of distinguishing in poetry the essence from the form,
following what the degenerated theatre and the inspired declamations of
Euhemerus <span id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_177) had taught them,
imagined foolishly that the gods and heroes of antiquity having been
only men stronger and more powerful than the others, mythology was only
a crude collection of historic facts disfigured, and Epopœia only an
emphatic discourse upon these same facts. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_178) Thereupon they believed that it was only
a question of taking any historic subject whatever, and relating it in
verse with certain embellishments,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

to create an epic poem. Lucan and Silius Italicus, in choosing, the one
the misfortunes of Pompey, and the other the victories of Hannibal,
considered themselves superior to Homer or Vergil, as much as they
supposed Rome or Carthage superior to Ilium. But a just posterity,
notwithstanding the prejudices of their panegyrists, has put them in
their place. It has considered them merely the inventors of a kind of
bastard poetry, which might be called historic poetry. This poetry,
entirely separated from Eumolpœia, whose moral essence it is unable to
realize, preserves only the material and physical forms of true Epopœia.
It is a body without soul, which is moved by a mechanical mainspring
applied by a skilful workman.

As to the poetic form in itself, its only point of variance with the
Greeks and Romans was that of elegance. The verses written in the same
manner, depended likewise upon a fixed number of time or of feet
regulated by musical rhythm. If rhyme had been admitted there in the
first ages, it had been excluded early enough so that there remained no
longer the least trace of it. The Latin tongue, very far from the Greek
in flexibility, variety, and harmony, for a long time treated with
contempt by the Greeks who, regarding it as a barbarous dialect, only
learned it with repugnance <span id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_179); the
Latin tongue, I say, unpleasing, obscure, not even supporting the
mediocrity of ordinary elocution, became, through the laborious efforts
of its writers, a tongue which in the works of Vergil, for example,
attained such a perfection,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

that it came to be doubted, owing to the grace, the justice, and the
force of its expression, whether the author of the *Æneid* did not
surpass the author of the *Iliad*. Such is the empire of forms. They
alone make problematical that which, in its essence, should not be
subject to the least discussion.

But at last the Roman Eagle, after having soared some time in the
universe and covered with his extended wings the most beautiful
countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa, fatigued by its own triumphs,
sank down again, allowed its power to be divided, and from the summit of
this same Capitol, whence it had for such a long time hurled its
thunderbolts, saw the vultures of the North divide among them its
spoils. The mythological religion, misunderstood in its principles,
attacked in its forms, given over to the corruption of things and men,
had disappeared to give place to a new religion, which born in
obscurity, was raised imperceptibly from the ranks of the humblest
citizens to the imperial throne. Constantine, who in embracing the
Christian cult had consolidated that religious revolution, believed
himself able to bring about another in politics, by transferring the
seat of his empire to the Bosphorus. Historians have often blamed this
last movement; but they have not seen that Providence, in inspiring this
division of the empire, foresaw that the darkness of ignorance rolling
with the waves of the barbarians was about to extend as far as Rome, and
that it would be necessary to concentrate at one point a part of the
learning, in order to save it from the general ruin. Whereas the Empire
of the Occident, assailed on all sides by the hordes from the North, was
overthrown, torn, divided into numberless small sovereignties whose
extent was often limited to the donjon where the sovereign resided; the
Empire of the Orient sustained the weight of the hordes from the South,
nourished continually in its midst certain men, guardians of the sacred
fire of science, and did not fall until more than nine centuries later;
and learning, commencing its

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

revival in the Occident, put minds in condition there, to appreciate the
models which were about to be presented to them and rendered them
capable of receiving their inspiration.

It was a very remarkable epoch, *Messieurs*, which saw grouped about it
in the space of less than a half century and coincident with the
downfall of the Empire of the Orient, the use of gunpowder, of the
compass, of the telescope in the Occident; the invention of engraving
upon copper, that of movable characters for printing, the extension of
commerce and navigation by the passage around the cape of Storms, and
finally the discovery of America. It was a very extraordinary century,
in which were born Mohammed II. and Lorenzo de’ Medici, Vasco da Gama
and Christopher Columbus, Theodoros Gaza and Pico della Mirandola,
Leonardo da Vinci and Bojardo, Leo X. and Luther. After the invasion of
the barbarians, Christian Europe had lost its political unity: it was as
a great republic whose divided members, struggling continuously one
against the other, tearing by turn a shadow of supremacy, were the
realms, the pontifical or laic principalities, the republics, the free
and commercial cities. The two chiefs of this gigantic and badly
organized body, the German Emperor and the Pope, bishop of Rome, were
vested only with a grandeur of opinion; their real power was void: they
were nothing more, in fact, than that which they appeared in form. Since
Charlemagne, who, in a century of darkness enlightened with his own
genius, had had the force to grasp the *débris* of the empire, uniting
them in his hand and giving them a momentary existence, it had not had
an emperor. The vain efforts of Hildebrand and of Charles V. had served
only at different times and under different conditions to demonstrate
their impotence. It was reserved for a much greater man to dominate
Europe regenerated by violent shocks, and to show to the universe the
legitimate successor of Augustus wreathed with the imperial crown.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

But without in any way anticipating time, without even leaving our
subject which is poetry, let us continue to follow the developments of
this science.

The original poets of Greece and Rome, brought into Italy by the savants
whom the taking of Constantinople forced to go back towards the Occident
of Europe, brought there an unexpected brilliancy, which, with the
ancient germs deeply buried in its midst, soon awakened certain new
germs that the peculiar circumstances had also brought there. In
explaining what these germs were, I am giving occasion for thinkers to
make certain reflections, and critics to form certain singular
conjectures upon works hitherto badly judged.

It is necessary at first, that I repeat a truth which I have already
said: that intellectual nature is always one and the same, whereas
physical nature varies, changes unceasingly with time and place, and is
modified in a thousand ways according to circumstances. Now, it is this
latter nature which gives the form, that is to say, which renders
sentient and particular that which the former gives to it as universal
and intelligible; so that its aptitude more or less great, in receiving
and in working upon the intelligence, can make the things which are more
homogeneous in their principle appear more dissimilar in their effect. I
will give a proof. Whilst the most profound obscurity covered Europe,
whilst ignorance spread on all sides its baleful veils, there were
found, however, at long intervals, certain privileged men, who, raising
themselves above these thick vapours, came to grasp certain faint
glimmerings of the light shining always above them. These men possessors
of such rare gifts, would have indeed wished to communicate them to
their contemporaries, but if they imprudently opened their mouths, the
blind and fanatic horde which surrounded them cried out forthwith
against the heretic, the magician, the sorcerer, and conducted them to
torture as the price of their

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

lessons. <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180) After several sorry
examples, these men, having become prudent, assumed the part of silence
by retiring into monasteries or hermitages, studying Nature there in
quietude, and profiting alone by their discoveries. If certain ones
still dared to speak, it was by borrowing the style of religion, or
history, diverting from the ordinary sense certain ideas received,
explaining themselves by enigmas, or by figures, which, when necessary,
they were able to explain as they wished.

Among this number was a man of strong imagination and of a genius really
poetic, who, having grasped certain truths of nature, and judging it
proper not to divulge them, took the expedient of enclosing them in a
book which he entitled: *Les Faits et Gestes de Charles-Magne*. This
extraordinary man who has, in these modern times, obtained an ascendancy
greater than one could ever have imagined, since he is the vital source
whence have come all the orders, all the institutions of chivalry with
which Europe has been inundated; this man, I say, was a monk of
*Saint-André de Vienne*, living from the tenth to the eleventh century
and perhaps a little before. <span id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_181) The
book that he composed had a success as much the more prodigious as it
was misunderstood, and such was the ignorance not only of the people,
but even of the clergy, that the most palpable fictions were taken for
realities. There are historians even who pretend that the council of
Rheims, celebrated in 1119, declared this work authentic <span
id="fr_182"></span>[3](#fn_182); and thence came the habit of
attributing it to Archbishop Turpin. However that may be, it is to the
allegorical history of Charlemagne, to that of his twelve paladins,
called peers of France, to that of the four sons of Aymon and of
Chevalier Bayard, to that of Renaud, Roland, Richard, and the other
heroes of the *bibliothèque bleue*, for

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

a long time our only *bibliotheca*, that we owe a new style of poetry,
called Romanesque, on account of the Romance tongue in which it had
birth. <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183) This style is to the
*eumolpique* style, as a wild offshoot, growing laboriously in an arid
and bramble-covered land, is to a cultivated tree which rises
majestically in the heart of a fertile country.

It was with the chivalrous ideas, inspired by the book of the monk of
Saint André, that the first poetic ideas were brought forth in France.
The Oscan troubadours seizing these first glimmerings of genius, threw
themselves with enthusiasm into a career which offered at the same time
pleasures, glory, and the gifts of fortune. <span
id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_184) They sang of the fair, of gallants and
of kings; but their verses, monotonous enough when a real passion did
not animate them, hardly reached above eulogy or satire. But little
capable of feeling the moral beauties of poetry, they stopped at form.
The rhyme for them was everything. For them the supreme talent was only
rhyming much and with difficulty. One could not imagine to what lengths
they went in this style. Not content with restricting themselves to
follow the same rhyme throughout the entire course of the poem, they
sometimes doubled it at the end of each verse, rhyming by echo, or else
they made an initial rhyme. <span id="fr_185"></span>[3](#fn_185) These
obstacles becoming multiplied stifled their muse in its cradle. All that
art owed to these first modern poets was limited to a sort

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

of song, gay and sprightly, ordinarily a parody upon a more serious
subject, and which, because it was quite frequently sung with an air of
the dance accompanied by the *vielle* or *hurdy-gurdy*, their favourite
instrument, was called *vau-de-vielle*, or as is pronounced today,
vaudeville. <span id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_186)

The Italians and Spaniards, who received from the Oscan troubadours
their first impulse toward poetry, would have been perhaps as limited as
they, to composing amorous sonnets, madrigals or, at the most, certain
vehement *sylves*, <span id="fr_187"></span>[2](#fn_187) if the Greeks,
driven from their country by the conquests of Mohammed II., had not
brought them the works of the ancients as I have already said. These
works, explained in the *chaire publique*, due to the munificence of the
Medicis, struck particularly the Italians: not however by exciting their
poets to take them as models; the turn of their mind and the form of
their poetry, similar in everything to that of the troubadours, were
opposed too obviously here; but by giving them that sort of emulation
which, without copying the others, makes one strive to equal them. At
this epoch the book of the monk of St. André, attributed as I have said
to Archbishop Turpin, already more than four centuries old, was known by
all Europe, whether by itself, or whether by the numberless imitations
of which it had been the subject. Not only France, Spain, Italy, but
also

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> England and
Germany were inundated with a mass of romances and ballads, wherein were
pictured the knights of the court of Charlemagne and those of the Round
Table. <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_188) All these works were
written in verse, and the greater part, particularly those composed by
the troubadours or their disciples, intended to be sung, were cut into
strophes. Those of the imitator poets, who had had the force to go back
to the allegorical sense of their model, had only developed and enriched
it with their own knowledge; the others, following their various methods
of considering it, had chosen subjects real and historical, or indeed
had followed ingenuously without aim or plan, the impulse of their
vagabond imagination. In France could be seen represented by the side of
the stories of Tristan, of Lancelot, of the Grail, and of
Ogier-le-Danois, that of Alexander the Great and of the Bible, that of
the Seven Sages and of Judas Maccabeus, that of the History of the
Normands and the Bretons, and finally that of the Rose, the most famous
of all. A certain Guilhaume had published a philosophical romance upon
the nature of beasts. <span id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_189)

Already the Italian poets, after having received from the troubadours
the form of their verses and that of their works, had surpassed their
masters and had caused them to be forgotten. Petrarch in the sonnet and
Dante in the *sirvente* assumed all the glory of their models, and left
not any for the successors <span id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_190);
already even Bojardo and some

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

others had attempted, with the example of Homer, to bring back to the
unity of epopœia, the incongruous and fantastic scenes of the romance,
when Ariosto appeared. This man, gifted with a keen and brilliant
imagination, and possessor of a matchless talent, executed what no one
else had been able to do before him; he was neither inspired by Homer,
nor by Vergil; he copied no one. He learned from them only to raise
himself to the poetic source, to see it where it was and to draw from it
his genius. Then he received a first inspiration and became the creator
of a particular style of poetry which may be called romantic.
Undoubtedly this style is greatly inferior to epopœia; but after all it
is original: its beauties as well as its faults belong to him.

Almost the same moment when Ariosto enriched Europe with his new poetry,
Camoëns wished to naturalize it in Portugal; but the *mélange* of Vergil
and Lucan that he essayed to make, betrayed his lack of understanding
and he did not succeed. I mention it only that you may observe,
*Messieurs*, that the form adopted by the Portuguese poet is exactly the
same as the one which Ariosto, his predecessors and his successors, have
followed in Italy: it is that of the troubadours. The poems of each are
long ballads, intersected by strophes of eight lines of alternate rhymes
which, succeeding one another with the same measure, can be sung from
one end to the other, with an appropriate air, and which in fact, as J.
J. Rousseau has very well remarked, were sung frequently. In these
poems, the essence is in accord with the form, and it is this that makes
their regularity. It is not the epopœia of Homer drawn from the Orphic
source, it is the romantic poetry of Ariosto, an issue of the fictions
attributed to Archbishop Turpin, which is associated with the verses of
the troubadours. These

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

verses subjected to rhyme are incapable in any tongue of attaining the
sublime heights of Eumolpœia or of Epopœia.

The French poets soon proved it, when coming to understand the works of
Homer and Vergil, they thought themselves able to imitate them by making
use of the same poetic forms by which the authors of *Perceval* or
*Berthe-au-grand-pied* had profited. It was all to no purpose that they
worked these forms, striking them upon the anvil, polishing them, they
remained inflexible. Ronsard was the first who made the fatal
experiment; and after him a crowd of careless persons came to run
aground upon the same reef. These forms always called up the spirit with
which they were born; the melancholy and unceasing sound, sonorous with
their rhymes in couplets or alternate, had something soporific which
caused the soul to dream and which allured it in spite of itself, not
into the sublime regions of allegory where the genius of Eumolpœia was
nourished, but into vague spaces of fictions, where, under a thousand
whimsical forms the romantic mind evaporates. Doubtless one would have
been able, in France, to limit the Italian poets, as had been done in
Spain and Portugal; but besides, as it would have been necessary to
confine itself to the second inspiration in a style already secondary,
the spirit of the nation, sufficiently well represented by that of
Ronsard, foreseeing from afar its high destinies, wished to command the
summit of Parnassus, before having discovered the first paths.

The disasters of the first epic poets did not discourage their
successors; vying with each other they sought to make amends; but
instead of seeing the obstacle where it really was, that is to say, in
the incompatible alliance of the essence of Epopœia with the form of
romance, they imagined that lack of talent alone had been prejudicial to
the success of their predecessors. Consequently they devoted themselves
to work with an indefatigable ardour, polishing and repolishing the
rhyme, tearing to pieces and revising twenty times their works, and
finally bringing the form to

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

the highest perfection that they were able to attain. The century of
Louis XIV., so fertile in able versifiers, in profound rhymers, saw,
however, the dawn of Epic poems only as a signal of their failure.
Chapelain had, nevertheless, shown talent before his catastrophe;
wishing to interest the French nation, he had chosen in its history the
sole epic subject which he found there. Why had he not succeeded? This
point was considered, and the truth still lacking, they went on to
imagine that the fault was inherent in the French tongue, and that it
was no longer capable of rising to the heights of Epopœia: deplorable
error, which for a long time has been harmful to the development of a
tongue destined to become universal and to carry to future centuries the
discoveries of past ones.

Ronsard had felt the difficulty most. Accustomed as he was to read Greek
and Latin works in the original, he had seen clearly that what prevented
the French tongue from following their poetic movement was particularly
the restraint of the rhyme; he had even sought to free it from this
servitude, endeavouring to make the French verses scan according to the
ancient rhythm; but, in another way he had not appreciated the genius of
that tongue which refused to follow this rhythm. Jodelle, Baïf,
Passerat, Desportes, Henri-Etienne, and certain other savants, have made
at different times the same attempt, and always without results. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_191) Each tongue has its own character which
it is necessary to know; ours has not at all the musical prosody of the
Greek and Latin; its syllables are not determined, long and short, by
the simple duration of time, but by the different accentuation and
inflection of the voice. Among our writers the one who has best
understood the nature of this prosody is certainly the abbé d’Olivet: he
declared firstly that he did not believe it possible to make French
verses

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

measured by rhythm; and secondly, that even in the case where this might
be possible, he did not see how this rhythm could be conformable to that
of the Greeks and Latins. <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192)

I am absolutely of his opinion on these two points; I am furthermore,
*en partie*, on what he says of the rhyme. I know as he, that it is not
an invention of the barbarous ages; I know even more, that it is the
luxurious production of a very enlightened age; I must say that it has
brought forth thousands of beautiful verses, that it is often to the
poet like a strange genius which comes to the assistance of his
own. <span id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_193) God forbid that I pretend to
separate it from French verse of which it is a charm. Rhyme is
necessary, even indispensable, to romantic poetry and to all that is
derived from it; and songs, ballads, vaudevilles, sylves of whatever
sort they may be, whatever form, whatever length they may have, cannot
pass away. It adds an infinite grace to all that is sung or recited with
the chivalrous sentiment. Even the lyric style receives from it a
romantic harmony which accords with it. All the secondary styles admit
of this. It can, up to a certain point, embellish descriptive verse,
soften didactic verse, add to the melancholy of the elegy, to the grace
of the idyl; it can at last become the ornament of dramatic art such as
we possess—that is to say, chivalrous and impassioned; but as to real
Eumolpœia and Epopœia—that is to say, as to what concerns intellectual
and rational poetry, pure or mingled with the enthusiasm of the
passions; prophetic verses or hymns, emanated from the Divinity or
destined to be raised to it; philosophical verse adapted to the nature
of things and developing the diverse moral and physical systems; epic
verses uniting talent to allegorical genius and joining together the
intelligible world to the sentient world; with all these, rhyme is
incompatible. As much as it delights in works of the mind just so much
is it rejected by genius. Fiction harmonizes with it, allegory is
opposed to it. It is chivalrous and not

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

heroic; agreeable, brilliant, clever, melancholy, sentimental, but it
could never be either profound or sublime.

Let us clear this up with the light of experience, and now that we can
do it to good purpose, let us make a rapid survey of the poetic
condition of the principal nations of the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[58:\*](ogv08.htm#fr_171) Thence arises the
epithet of *Eumolpique* that I give to the verses which form the subject
of this work.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[59:\*](ogv08.htm#fr_172) The proof that Rome
was scarcely known in Greece, at the epoch of Alexander, is that the
historian Theopompus, accused by all critics of too much prolixity, has
said only a single word concerning this city, to announce that she had
been taken by the Gauls (Pliny, l. iii., c. 5). Bayle observes with much
sagacity, that however little Rome had been known at that time, she
would not have failed to furnish the subject of a long digression for
this historian, who would have delighted much in it. (*Dict. crit.*,
art. THEOPOMPUS, rem. E.)

<span id="fn_173"></span>[60:1](ogv08.htm#fr_173) Diogen. Laërt., l. i.,
§ 116. Pliny, l. v., c. 29. Suidas, In φερεχύδς.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[61:1](ogv08.htm#fr_174) Degerando, *Hist. des
Systêm. de Phil.*, t. i., p. 128, à la note.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[61:2](ogv08.htm#fr_175) Dionys. Halic., *De
Thucid. Judic*.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[62:1](ogv08.htm#fr_176) The real founder of
the Atomic system such as has been adopted by Lucretius (*De Rerum
Natura*, l. i.), was Moschus, Phœnician philosopher whose works threw
light upon those of Leucippus (Posidonius cité par Strabon, l. xvi.,
Sext. Empiric., *Adv. mathem.*, p. 367). This system well understood,
does not differ from that of the monads, of which Leibnitz was the
inventor.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[62:2](ogv08.htm#fr_177) Fréret, *Mytholog. ou
Religion des Grecs*.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[62:3](ogv08.htm#fr_178) Voltaire, who has
adopted this error, has founded it upon the signification of the word
*Epos*, which he has connected with that of Discourse (Dictionn. philos.
au mot EPOPÉE). But he is mistaken. The Greek word ἔπος is translated
accurately by *versus*. Thence the verb επεῖν, to follow in the tracks,
to turn, to go, in the same sense.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[63:1](ogv08.htm#fr_179) The Greeks looked upon
the Latin authors and artists as paupers enriched by their spoils; also
they learned their language only when forced to do so. The most
celebrated writers by whom Rome was glorified, were rarely cited by
them. Longinus, who took an example of the sublime in Moses, did not
seek a single one either in Horace or in Vergil; he did not even mention
their names. It was the same with other critics. Plutarch spoke of
Cicero as a statesman; he quoted many of his clever sayings, but he
refrained from comparing him with Demosthenes as an orator. He excuses
himself on account of having so little knowledge of the Latin tongue, he
who had lived so long in Rome! Emperor Julian, who has written only in
Greek, cites only Greek authors and not one Latin.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[67:1](ogv08.htm#fr_180) *Voyez* l’ouvrage de
Naudé, intitulé: *Apologie des hommes accusés de magie*. Le nombre de
ces hommes est très-considérable.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[67:2](ogv08.htm#fr_181) Allard, *Bibl. du
Dauphiné*, à la fin.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[67:3](ogv08.htm#fr_182) Duplessis-Mornai,
*Mystère d’iniquité.*, p. 279.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[68:1](ogv08.htm#fr_183) This Ballad tongue, or
rather Romance, was a mixture of corrupt Latin, Teutonic, and ancient
Gallic. It was called thus, in order to distinguish it from the pure
Latin and French. The principal dialects of the Romance tongue were the
*langue d’oc*, spoken in the south of France, and the *langue d’oïl*,
spoken in the north. It is from the *langue d’oïl* that the French
descend. The *langue d’oc*, prevailing with the troubadours who
cultivated it, disappeared with them in the fourteenth century and was
lost in numberless obscure provincial dialects. Voyez *Le Troubadour*,
poésies occitaniques, à la Dissert., vol. i.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[68:2](ogv08.htm#fr_184) Fontenelle, *Hist. du
Théâtre Français*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[68:3](ogv08.htm#fr_185) *Voyez* Sainte-Palaye,
*Mém. sur l’ancienne Cheval.*; Millot, *Hist. des Troubad*. Disc.
prélim., on ce que j’ai dit moi-même dans le Troubadour, comme
ci-dessus.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[69:1](ogv08.htm#fr_186) It is necessary to
observe that *vau* or *val*, *bau* or *bal*, according to the dialect,
signifies equally a dance, a ball, and a folly, a fool. The Phœnician,
root ‏על‎ (*whal*) expresses all that is elevated, exalted. The French
words *bal*, *vol*, *fol*, are here derived.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[69:2](ogv08.htm#fr_187) The sonnets are of
Oscan origin. The word son signifies a song in the ancient *langue
d’oc*. The word *sonnet* is applied to a little song, pleasing and of an
affected form.

The madrigals are of Spanish origin as their name sufficiently proves.
The word *gala* signifies in Spanish a kind of favour, an honour
rendered, a gallantry, a present. Thus *Madrid-gala* arises from a
gallantry in the Madrid fashion.

The sylves, called *sirves* or *sirventes* by the troubadours, were
kinds of serious poems, ordinarily satirical. These words come from the
Latin *sylva* which, according to Quintilius, is said of a piece of
verse recited *ex-tempore* (l. x., c. 3).

<span id="fn_188"></span>[70:1](ogv08.htm#fr_188) *Voyez* Laborde,
*Essai sur la Musique*, t. i., p. 112, et t. ii., p. 168. On trouve, de
la page 149 à la page 232 de ce même volume, un catalogue de tous les
anciens romanciers français. On peut voir, pour les Italiens,
Crescembini, *Della Volgar Poësia*.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[70:2](ogv08.htm#fr_189) See Laborde. It is
believed that this Guilhaume, bishop of Paris, is the author of the
hieroglyphic figures which adorn the portal of Notre-Dame, and that they
have some connection with the hermetic science. (*Biblioth. des Phil.
Chim.*, t. iv. Saint-Foix, *Essai sur Paris*.)

<span id="fn_190"></span>[70:3](ogv08.htm#fr_190) Perhaps one is
astonished to see that I give the name of sirventes, or sylves, to that
which is commonly called the poems of Dante; but in order to understand
me, it is necessary to consider that these poems, composed of stanzas of
three verses joined in couplets, are properly only long songs on a <span
id="page_71">p. 71</span> serious subject, which agrees with the
*sirvente*. The poems of Bojardo, of Ariosto, of Tasso, are, as to form,
only long ballads. They are poems because of the unity which,
notwithstanding the innumerable episodes with which they are filled,
constitutes the principal subject.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[73:1](ogv08.htm#fr_191) Pasquier, *Hist. et
Recherch. des Antiq.*, l. vii., ch. 12. Henri-Etienne, *Précellence du
Lang. Franç.*, p. 12. D’Olivet, *Prosod.*, art. i., § 2.
Delisle-de-Salles, *Hist. de la Trag.*, t. i., p. 154, à la note.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[74:1](ogv08.htm#fr_192) D’Olivet, *Prosod.*,
art. V., § 1.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[74:2](ogv08.htm#fr_193) *Ibidem*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § VI](ogv09)
