[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv35)  [Next](ogv37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 25. I swear it by the one who in our hearts engraved The sacred Tetrad, symbol immense and pure, Source of Nature and model of the Gods.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

Drawn on by my subject, I have forgotten to say that, according to
Porphyry, there is lacking in the Golden Verses as given by Hierocles,
two lines which ought to be placed immediately before those which open
the unitive part of the doctrine of Pythagoras called *perfection;*
these are <span id="fr_551"></span>[a](#fn_550):

Πρῶτα μὲν ἐξ ὔπνοιο μελίφρονος ἐξ ὑπανίσας,  
Ἐν μάλα ποιπνευέιν ὅσ᾽ ἐν ἥμαγι ἕργα τελέσσεις.

On the moment of awakening, consider calmly  
What are thy duties, and what thou shouldst accomplish.

These lines, which express the general outline of this last part, are
remarkable, and one cannot conceive how Hierocles could have overlooked
or neglected them. Although, it is true, they add nothing in the literal
sense, they say much, however, in the figurative sense; they serve as
proof of the division of this poem, which Hierocles himself has adopted
without explanation. Lysis indicates quite strongly that he is about to
pass on to a new teaching: he calls the attention of the disciple of
Pythagoras to the new career which is opened before him, and to the
means of traversing it and of attaining to the divine virtues which must
crown it. This means is the knowledge of oneself, as I have said. This
knowledge, so commended by the ancient sages, so t exalted by them,
which must open the avenues of all the others and deliver to them the
key of the mysteries of nature and the doors of the Universe; this
knowledge, I say, could not be exposed unveiled at the epoch when
Pythagoras lived, on account of the secrets that it would of necessity
betray. Likewise this philosopher had the habit of proclaiming it under
the emblem of the sacred Tetrad or of the Quaternary. This is why Lysis,
in invoking the name of his master, designates it on this occasion with
the most striking characteristic of his doctrine. "I swear," he said,
"by the one who has revealed to our soul the knowledge of the Tetrad,
that source of eternal Nature": that is to say,

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I swear by the one
who, teaching our soul to know itself, has put it in condition to know
all nature of which it is the abridged image.

In many of my preceding Examinations I have already explained what
should be understood by this celebrated Tetrad, and here would perhaps
be the time to reveal its constitutive principles; but this revelation
would lead me too far. It would be necessary in order to do this, to
enter into details of the arithmological doctrine of Pythagoras which,
lacking preliminary data, would become fatiguing and unintelligible. The
language of Numbers of which this philosopher made use, following the
example of the ancient sages, seems today entirely lost. The fragments
which have come down to us serve rather to prove its existence than to
give any light upon its elements; for those who have composed these
fragments wrote in a language that they supposed understood, in the same
manner as our modern writers when they employ algebraic terms. It would
be ridiculous if one wished before having acquired any notion concerning
the value and use of the algebraic signs, to explain a problem contained
in these signs. This is, however, what has often been done relative to
the language of Numbers. One has pretended, not only to explain it
before having learned it, but even to write of it, and has by so doing
rendered it the most lamentable thing in the world. The savants seeing
it thus travestied have justly scorned it; as their contempt was not
unreasonable they have made it reflect, by the same language upon the
ancients who have employed it. They have acted in this as in many other
things; they themselves creating the stupidity of ancient sciences and
saying afterwards: antiquity was stupid.

One day I shall try, if I find the time and the necessary facilities, to
give the true elements of the arithmological science of Pythagoras and I
will show that this science was for intelligible things what algebra has
become among us for physical things; but I shall only do so after having
revealed

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

what the true principles of music are; for otherwise I should run the
risk of not being understood.

Without perplexing ourselves, therefore, with the constitutive
principles of the Pythagorean Quaternary. let us content ourselves with
knowing that it was the general emblem of anything moving by itself and
manifesting by its facultative modifications; for according to
Pythagoras, 1 and 2 represent the hidden principles of things; 3, their
faculties, and 4, their proper essence. These four numbers which, united
by addition produce the number 10, constituted the Being, as much
universal as particular; so that the Quaternary, which is as its virtue,
could become the emblem of all beings, since there is none which may not
recognize the principles, and which does not manifest itself by
faculties more or less perfect, and which may not enjoy an existence
universal or relative; but the being to which Pythagoras applied it most
commonly was Man. Man, as I have said, manifests himself as does the
Universe, under the three principal modifications of body, soul, and
spirit. The unknown principles of this first Ternary are what Plato
calls the *same*, and the *other*, the *indivisible* and the
*divisible*. The indivisible principle gives the spirit; the divisible
the body; and the soul has birth from this last principle elaborated by
the first. <span id="fr_552"></span>[a](#fn_551) Such was the doctrine
of Pythagoras which was borrowed by Plato. It had been that of the
Egyptians, as can be seen in the works which remain to us under the name
of Hermes. Synesius, who had been initiated into their mysteries, said
particularly, that human souls emanated from two sources: the one
luminous, which flows from heaven on high; the other tenebrous, which
springs from the earth in the abysmal depths of which it finds its
origin. <span id="fr_553"></span>[b](#fn_552) The early Christians,
faithful to theosophical tradition, followed the same teaching; they
established a great difference between the spirit and the soul. They
considered the soul as an issue of the material principle,

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

and in consequence being neither enlightened nor virtuous in itself. The
spirit, said Basil, is a gift of God: it is the soul of the soul, as it
were; it is united to the soul; it enlightens it, it rescues it from
earth and raises it to heaven. <span id="fr_554"></span>[a](#fn_553)
Beausobre, who relates these words, observes that this sentiment was
common to several Fathers of the primitive church, particularly to
Tatian. <span id="fr_555"></span>[b](#fn_554)

I have spoken often of this first Ternary, and even of the triple
faculties which are attached to each of its modifications; but as I have
done many times, I believe it useful to present here the *ensemble*, so
as to have the opportunity of uniting, under the same viewpoint, the
volitive unity, from which results the human Quaternary, in general, and
in the particular being, which is man.

The three faculties which, as I have said, distinguish each of the three
human modifications are: sense perception for the body, sentiment for
the soul, and assent for the spirit. These three faculties develop
instinct, understanding, and intelligence, which produce by a common
reaction, common sense, reason, and sagacity.

Instinct, placed at the lowest degree of the ontological hierarchy, is
absolutely passive; intelligence, raised to the summit, is entirely
active, and understanding placed in the centre, is neuter. Sense
perception perceives the sensations, sentiment conceives the ideas,
assent elects the thoughts; perception, conception, election are modes
of acting, of the instinct, the understanding, and the intelligence. The
understanding is the seat of all the passions that the instinct feeds
continually, excites, and tends to make unruly; and that the
intelligence purifies, tempers, and seeks always to put in harmony. The
instinct, reacted upon by the understanding, becomes common sense: it
perceives notions more or less clearly, following more or less, the
influence that it accords to the understanding.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The understanding,
reacted upon by the intelligence, becomes reason: it conceives of
opinions so much the more just, as its passions are the more calm.
Reason cannot by its own movement attain to wisdom and find truth,
because being placed in the middle of a sphere and forced from there, it
describes, from the centre to the circumference, a ray always straight
and subordinate to the point of departure; it has against it infinity,
that is to say, that truth being one, and residing in a single point of
the circumference, it cannot be the subject of reason, only as far as it
is known beforehand, and as reason is placed in the direction convenient
for its encounter. Intelligence, which can only put reason in this
direction by the assent that it gives at the point of departure, would
never know this point only by wisdom which is the fruit of inspiration:
now, inspiration is the mode of acting of the will, which joining itself
to the triple Ternary, as I have just described, constitutes the human
ontological Quaternary. It is the will which envelops the primordial
Ternary in its unity, and which determines the action of each of its
faculties according to its own mode without the will it would have no
existence. The three faculties by which the volitive unity is manifested
in the triple Ternary, are memory, judgment, and imagination. These
three faculties, acting in a homogeneous unity, have neither height nor
depth and do not affect one of the modifications of the being, any more
than another; they are all wherever the will is, and the will operates
freely in the intelligence or in the understanding; in the understanding
or in the instinct: where it wills to be there it is; its faculties
follow it everywhere. I say that it is wherever it wills to be when the
being is wholly developed; for following the course of Nature, it is
first in the instinct and only passes into the understanding and into
the intelligence successively and in proportion as the animistic and
spiritual faculties are developed. But in order that this development
may take place, the will must determine it; for without the will

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

there is no movement. Be assured of this. Without the operation of the
will, the soul is inert and the spirit sterile. This is the origin of
that inequality among men of which

I have spoken. When the will does not disengage itself from matter, it
constitutes instinctive men; when it is concentrated in the
understanding, it produces animistic men; when it acts in the spirit, it
creates intellectual men. Its perfect harmony in the primordial Ternary,
and its action more or less energetic in the uniformity of their
faculties, equally developed, constitute the extraordinary men endowed
with sublime genius; but the men of this fourth class which represents
the autopsy of the mysteries, <span id="fr_556"></span>[a](#fn_555) are
extremely rare. Often it suffices for a powerful will, acting either in
the understanding or in the intelligence and concentrating wholly there,
to astonish men by the strength of reasoning and outbursts of wisdom,
which draws the name of genius without being wholly merited. Recently
there has been seen in Germany the most extraordinary reasoning, in
Kant, failing in its aim through lack of intelligence; one has seen in
the same country the most exalted intelligence, in Boehme, giving way
for want of reason. There have been in all times and among all nations
men similar to Boehme and to Kant. These men have erred through not
knowing themselves; they have erred, through a lack of harmony that they
might have been able to acquire, if they had taken the time to perfect
themselves; they have erred, but their very error attests the force of
their will. A weak will, operating either in the understanding or in the
intelligence, makes only sensible men and men of intellect. This same
will acting in the instinct produces artful men; and if it is strong and
violently concentrated through its original attraction in this corporal
faculty, it constitutes men dangerous to society, miscreants, and
treacherous brigands.

After having applied the Pythagorean Quaternary to

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Man, and having
shown the intimate composition of this Being, image of the Universe,
according to the doctrine of the ancients, I ought perhaps to use all
the means in my power, in order to demonstrate with what facility the
physical and metaphysical phenomena which result from their combined
action can be deduced; but such an undertaking would necessarily draw me
into details foreign to these examinations. I must again put off this
point as I have put off many others; I will take them up in another
work, if the savants and the thinkers to whom I address myself approve
the motive which has put the pen in my hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_550"></span>[227:a](ogv36.htm#fr_551) Porphyr., *Vitâ
Pythag.*

<span id="fn_551"></span>[229:a](ogv36.htm#fr_552) Plato, *ut suprà*.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[229:b](ogv36.htm#fr_553) Synes., *De
Provident.*, c. 5.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[230:a](ogv36.htm#fr_554) Beausobre, *Hist. du
Manich.*, t. ii., p. 33.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[230:b](ogv36.htm#fr_555) Tatian, *Orat. contr.
Cræc.*, p. 152.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[232:a](ogv36.htm#fr_556) Plato, *In Gorgia;*
ibid., *In Phæd.*; ibid., *De Rep.*, l. vii.; August., *De Civit. Dei*,
l. iii., c. 1, et l. x., c. 29.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. Invoke these Gods with fervour](ogv37)
