[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv31)  [Next](ogv33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 21. Luxury and avarice have similar results. One must choose in all things a mean just and good.

Lysis terminates the purgative part of the doctrine of Pythagoras with
the trait which characterizes it in general and in particular; he has
shown the golden mean in virtue and in science; he has commended it in
conduct, he states in full and says openly that extremes meet; that
luxury and avarice differ not in their effects, and that philosophy
consists in avoiding excess in everything. Hierocles adds that, to be
happy, one must know how, where, when, and how much to take; and that he
who is ignorant of these just limits is always unhappy and he proves it
as follows:

Voluptuousness \[he said\] is necessarily the effect of an action: now,
if the action is good the voluptuousness remains; if it is evil the
voluptuousness passes and is corrupted. When one does a shameful thing
with, pleasure, the pleasure passes and the shame remains. When one does
an excellent thing with great trouble and labour the pain passes and the
excellence alone remains. Whence it follows necessarily, that the evil
life is also bitter and produces as much sorrow and chagrin as the good
life is sweet and procures joy and contentment. <span
id="fr_474"></span>[d](#fn_473)

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

"As the flame of a torch tends always upward whichever way one turns
it," said the Indian sages, "thus the man whose heart is afire with
virtue, whatever accident befalls him, directs himself always toward the
end that wisdom indicates." <span id="fr_475"></span>[a](#fn_474)

"Misfortune follows vice, and happiness virtue," said the Chinese, "as
the echo follows the voice and the shadow him who moves."' <span
id="fr_476"></span>[b](#fn_475)

O virtue! divine virtue! \[exclaims Kong-Tse <span
id="fr_477"></span>[c](#fn_476)\] a celestial power presents thee to us,
an interior force conducts us toward thee; happy the mortal in whom thou
dwellest! he strikes the goal without effort, a single glance suffices
for him to penetrate the truth. His heart becomes the sanctuary of peace
and his very inclinations protect his innocence. It is granted to the
sage only, to attain to so desirable a state. He who aspires to this
must resolve upon the good and attach himself strongly to it; he must
apply himself to the study of himself, interrogate nature, examine all
things carefully, meditate upon them and allow nothing to pass
unfathomed. Let him develop the faculties of his soul, let him think
with force, let him put energy and firmness into his actions. Alas! how
many men there are who seek virtue and science, and who stop in the
middle of their course, because the goal keeps them waiting! My studies,
they say, leave me with all my ignorance, all my doubts; my efforts, my
labours enlarge neither my views nor my sagacity; the same clouds hover
over my understanding and obscure it; I feel my forces abandoning me and
my will giving way beneath the weight of the obstacle. No matter; guard
yourself against discouragement; that which others have been able to
attain at the first attempt, you may be able at the hundredth; that
which they have done at the hundredth, you will do at the
thousandth. <span id="fr_478"></span>[d](#fn_477)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_473"></span>[196:d](ogv32.htm#fr_474) Hiérocl., *Aur.
Carm.*, v. 32.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[197:a](ogv32.htm#fr_475) *Proverbes du Brahme
Barthrovhari*.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[197:b](ogv32.htm#fr_476) *Chou-King*, ch.
*Yu-Mo*.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[197:c](ogv32.htm#fr_477) On trouve ce passages
dans le *Tchong-Yong*, ou Livre du Juste-Milieu; ouvrage très célèbre
parmi les Chinois.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[197:d](ogv32.htm#fr_478)

A la persévérance il n’est rien qui résiste:  
Quelques soient ses desseins, si le Sage y persiste,  
Nul obstacle si grand dont il ne vienne à bout:  
La constance et le temps sont les maîtres de tout.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. What have I omitted, and what done?](ogv33)
