[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv34)  [Next](ogv36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 24. Meditate upon my counsels, love them; follow them: To the divine virtues will they know how to lead thee.

I have spoken at considerable length of the skeptics; but I have
believed it necessary in explaining a dogmatic work, whose *esprit* is
wholly opposed to that of skepticism. When Lysis wrote in Greece, there
had been no one as yet who doubted either the existence of the gods, or
that of the Universe, or made the distinction between good and evil,
virtue and vice. Arcesilaus and Pyrrho were not born, and the clouds
that they raised afterwards concerning these great subjects of the
meditation of the sages were not even suspected. The minds had inclined
rather toward credulity than toward doubt; toward superstition than
toward atheism; it was more necessary to limit their curiosity than

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

to excite their indifference. At that epoch, the philosophers enveloped
the truth with veils, and rendered the avenues of science difficult, so
that the vulgar might not profane them. They knew what had been too long
forgotten: that all kinds of wood are not fitting to make a Mercury.
Also their writers were obscure and sententious: in order to dishearten,
not those who might be able to doubt, but those who were not in a
condition to comprehend.

Today, as the minds are changed, it is of more importance to attract
those who are able to receive the truth, than to keep at a distance
those who are unable to receive it; the latter, separating themselves,
are persuaded that they either possess it or have no need of it. I have
given the history of skepticism; I have shown its origin and the sorry
effects of its absolute and disordered influence; not in order to bring
back the skeptics of the profession, but to endeavour to prevent the men
who are still drifting in uncertainty from becoming so. I have essayed
to show them by the example of one of the greatest reasoners of Germany,
by the example of Kant, that reason alone, with whatever talents it may
be accompanied, cannot fail to lead them to nothingness. I have made
them see that this faculty so lauded is nothing of itself. I am content
with the example of the Koenigsberg professor; but had I not feared
prolixities, I would have added the example of Berkeley and that of
Spinoza. The varied catastrophes of these three savants form a striking
contrast. Kant, following step by step his pure Reason, comes to see
that the knowledge of intelligible things is impossible and finds
matter; Berkeley, led by the same reason, proves that the existence of
matter is illusory, and that all is spirit; Spinoza, drawing
irresistible arguments from this same faculty, shows that there exists
and can exist only one sole substance and that therefore spirit and
matter are but one. And do not think that, armed with reason alone, you
can combat separately Spinoza, Berkeley, or Kant: their contradictory
systems will clash in vain; they will triumph

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

over you and will push you into the dark and bottomless abyss of
skepticism.

Now, how can this be done? I have told you: it is because man is not a
simple being. Fix this truth firmly. Man is triple; and it is according
as his volitive unity operates in one or the other of his modifications
that he is led on to see, in such or such a way. Plato has said it,
following Pythagoras, and I say it to you not only following Pythagoras
and Plato, but following all the sages and all the theosophists of the
world. Plato places in the superior and spiritual modification, composed
of the *same*, that is to say of the indivisible substance of the
universe, the *hegemonicon*, <span id="fr_525"></span>[a](#fn_524) or
the intellectual assent; in the inferior and material modification,
composed of the *other* or the *diverse*, that is to say, of the
divisible substance, the *physicon*, <span
id="fr_526"></span>[b](#fn_525) or the physical sense perception; in the
median modification or the soul, properly speaking, composed of essence,
that is to say, of the most subtle parts of matter elaborated by the
spirit, the *logicon*, <span id="fr_527"></span>[c](#fn_526) or the
moral, logical, or reasonable sentiment. One finds in Plutarch the
*résumé* of the doctrine of a philosopher named Sylla, who, admitting,
as did Plato, that man is composed of spirit, soul, and body, said that
the body drew its origin from the earth, the soul from the moon, and the
spirit from the sun. <span id="fr_528"></span>[d](#fn_527) But without
disturbing ourselves for the present, with the origin of these three
parts, since assuredly the earth, the moon, and the sun, which this
philosopher has assigned them for principles, are things very difficult
to understand in themselves, let us be content with knowing, as I have
already said, that these

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

three great modifications which form the human Quaternary manifest
themselves by sensation, sentiment, and assent, and develop the
principal faculties of the instinct, the understanding, and the
intelligence. The instinct is the seat of common sense; the
understanding is that of reason; and the intelligence, that of sagacity
or wisdom. Men can never acquire any science, any real knowledge, if the
assent is not determined by favour of the intelligence which elects the
principle and places it with sagacity; for one can really know or
understand only that to which the intelligence has given consent. All
the results that the understanding, deprived of intelligence, can
procure by means of reason are only opinions, those of these results
which are rigorously demonstrated in the manner of the geometricians are
identities; common sense transported even into the understanding can
give only notions, the certainty of which, however founded it may be
upon experience, can never surpass that of physical sensation, whose
transient and limited authority is of no weight in the assent of
intelligible truths.

Let us venture now to divulge a secret of the mysteries to which
Pythagoras made allusion when he said: that not all kinds of wood are
fitting to make a Mercury; and notwithstanding the vulgar prejudice
which is opposed to this truth, let us affirm that animistic equality
among men is a chimera. I feel that here I am about to clash greatly
with theological ideas and to put myself in opposition to many brilliant
paradoxes that modern philosophers, more virtuous than wise, have raised
and sustained with more talent and reason than sagacity; but the force
of my subject draws me on and since I am explaining the doctrine of
Pythagoras, it is indeed necessary that I should say why Lysis, after
having examined and commended in detail all the human virtues in the
purgative part of his teachings, begins again a new instruction in the
unitive part and promises to lead one to divine virtues. This important
distinction

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

that he makes between these two kinds of virtues has been made by Plato,
Aristotle, Galen, and many others of the philosophers of
antiquity. <span id="fr_529"></span>[a](#fn_528) One of them, Macrobius,
to whom we owe the knowledge and explanation of many of the mystic
secrets, which, notwithstanding the extreme care exercised to conceal
them, were rumoured outside of the sanctuaries, has made a comparison
between the degrees of the initiation and those that one admits in the
exercise of the virtues; and he enumerates four. <span
id="fr_530"></span>[b](#fn_529) This number, which is related to the
universal Quaternary, has been the most constantly followed, although it
may have varied, however, from three to seven. The number *three* was
regarded by the ancients as the principle of nature, and the number
*seven* as its end. <span id="fr_531"></span>[c](#fn_530) The principal
degrees of initiation were, to the number of three, as the grades of the
apprentice, companion, and master are in Free Masonry today. From this
comes the epithet of Triple, given to the mysterious Hecate, and even to
Mithra, considered as the emblem of mystic knowledge. <span
id="fr_532"></span>[d](#fn_531) Sometimes three secondary degrees were
added to the three principal ones and were terminated by an
extraordinary revelation, which raising the initiate to the rank of
*Epopt*, or seer *par excellence*, gave him the true signification of
the degrees through which he had already passed <span
id="fr_533"></span>[e](#fn_532); showed him nature unveiled, <span
id="fr_534"></span>[f](#fn_533) and admitted him to the contemplation of
divine knowledge. <span id="fr_535"></span>[g](#fn_534) It was for the
Epopt alone that the last veil fell, and the sacred vestment which
covered the statue of the

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Goddess was
removed. This manifestation, called Epiphany, shed the most brilliant
light upon the darkness which until then had surrounded the initiate. It
was prepared, said the historians, by frightful tableaux with
alternatives of both terror and hope. <span
id="fr_536"></span>[a](#fn_535) The grade of Elect has replaced that of
Epopt among the Free Masons, without in any sense offering the same
results. The forms are indeed nearly preserved; but the substance has
disappeared. The Epopt of Eleusis, Samothrace, or Hierapolis was
regarded as the foremost of men, the favourite of the gods, and the
possessor of celestial treasures; the sun shone, in his sight, with a
purer brightness; and the sublime virtue that he had acquired in the
tests, more and more difficult, and the lessons more and more lofty,
gave him the faculty of discerning good and evil, truth and error, and
of making a free choice between them. <span
id="fr_537"></span>[b](#fn_536)

But if the various grades of initiation expressed symbolically the
different degrees of virtue to which men in general can attain, the
tests that one was made to pass through at each new grade, made known in
particular, whether the man who presented himself to obtain it, was
worthy or unworthy. These tests were at first sufficiently easy; but
they became increasingly difficult to such an extent that the life of
the new member was frequently in danger. One would know in that way to
what sort of man this life belonged, and verify by the crucible of
terror and of suffering, the temper of the soul and the claim of his
right to the truth. It is known that Pythagoras owed to his extreme
patience and to the courage with which he surmounted all the obstacles,
his initiation into the Egyptian mysteries. <span
id="fr_538"></span>[c](#fn_537) Those who attained as he did the last
degree of initiation were very rare; the greater number went no further
than the second grade and very few attained the third. Lessons

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

proportionate to their strength and to those of the faculties that had
been recognized as dominating in them were given; for this is the
essential point in this Examination, one learned in the sanctuaries to
divide the mass of humanity into three great classes, dominated by a
fourth more elevated, according to the relations that were established
between the faculties of men and the parts of the Universe to which they
corresponded. In the first were ranged the material or instinctive men;
in the second, the animistic, and in the third, the intellectual men.
Thus all men were by no means considered as equal among them. The
pretended equality which was made on the exterior was mere compliance to
the errors of the vulgar, who, having seized the authority in most of
the cities of Greece and Italy, forced the truth to conceal an exposure
which would have injured it. The Christian cult, raised upon the
extinction of all enlightenment, nourished in the hearts of slaves and
lowly citizens, sanctified in the course of time a precedent favourable
to its growth. Those, however, among the Christians who were called
gnostics, <span id="fr_539"></span>[a](#fn_538) on account of the
particular knowledge that they possessed, and especially the
Valentinians who boasted that they had preserved the knowledge of the
initiation, wished to make a public dogma of the secret of the mysteries
in this respect, pretending that the corruption of men being only the
effect of their ignorance and of their earthly attachment, it was only
necessary in order to save them, to enlighten them regarding their
condition and their original destination <span
id="fr_540"></span>[b](#fn_539); but the orthodox ones, who felt the
danger into which this doctrine was drawing them, condemned the authors
as heretics.

This condemnation, which satisfied the pride of the vulgar, did not
prevent the small number of sages remaining silent, faithful to the
truth. It is only necessary to open one’s eyes, and detaching them a
moment from Judea, to

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

see that the dogma of inequality among men had served as basis for the
civil and religious laws of all the peoples of the earth, from the
orient of Asia to the occidental limits of Africa and Europe.
Everywhere, four great established divisions under the name of Castes,
recalled the four principal degrees of initiation and retraced upon
humanity *en masse*, the Universal Quaternary. Egypt had, in this
respect, in very ancient times, given example to Greece <span
id="fr_541"></span>[a](#fn_540); for this Greece, so proud of her
liberty, or rather of her turbulent anarchy, had been at first subjected
to the common division, even as it is seen in Aristotle and
Strabo. <span id="fr_542"></span>[b](#fn_541) The Chaldeans were,
relative to the peoples of Assyria, <span
id="fr_543"></span>[c](#fn_542) only what the Magi were among the
Persians, <span id="fr_544"></span>[d](#fn_543) the Druids among the
Gauls, <span id="fr_545"></span>[e](#fn_544) and the Brahmans among the
Indians. It is quite well known that this last people, the Brahmans,
constitute the foremost and highest of the four castes of which the
whole nation is composed. The allegorical origin that religion gives to
these castes proves clearly the analogy of which I have spoken. The
following is what is found relative to this in one of the Shastras. "At
the first creation by Brahma, the Brahmans sprang from his mouth; the
Kshatrys issued from his arms; the Vaisyas from his thighs, and the
Soudras from his feet." It is said in another of these books containing
the cosmogony of the Banians, that the first man, called Pourou, having
had four sons named Brahma, Kshetri, Vaisa, and Souderi, God designated
them to be chiefs of the four tribes which he himself instituted. <span
id="fr_546"></span>[f](#fn_545) The sacred books of the Burmans, which
appear

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

anterior to those of the other Indian nations, establish the same
division. The Rahans, who fill the sacerdotal offices among these
peoples, teach a doctrine conformable to that of the mysteries. They say
that inequality among men is a necessary consequence of their past
virtues or past vices, and that they are born in a nation more or less
enlightened, in a caste, in a family, more or less illustrious,
according to their previous conduct. <span
id="fr_547"></span>[a](#fn_546) This is very close to the thought of
Pythagoras; but no one has expressed it with greater force and clearness
than Kong-Tse. I think I have no need to say that these two sages did
not copy each other. The assent that they gave to the same idea had its
source elsewhere than in sterile imitation.

The Chinese people, from time immemorial, have been divided into four
great classes, relative to the rank that men occupy in society,
following the functions that they execute therein, <span
id="fr_548"></span>[b](#fn_547) very nearly as do the Indians: but this
division, that long custom has rendered purely political, is looked upon
very differently by the philosophers. Man, according to them,
constitutes one of the three productive powers which compose the median
trinity of the Universe; for they consider the Universe, or the great
All, as the expression of a triple Trinity enveloped and dominated by
the primordial Unity: which constitutes for them a decade instead of a
Quaternary. This third power called *Yin*, that is to say, mankind, is
subdivided into three principal classes, which by means of the
intermediary classes admitted by Kong-Tse, produces the five classes
spoken of by this sage.

The first class, the most numerous, comprises \[he said\] that multitude
of men who act only by a sort of imitative instinct, doing today what
they did yesterday, in order to recommence tomorrow what they have done
today; and who, incapable of discerning in the distance the real and
substantial advantages, the

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

interest of highest importance, extract easily a little profit, a base
interest in the pettiest things, and have enough adroitness to procure
them. These men have an understanding as the others but this
understanding goes no further than the senses; they see and hear only
through the eyes and the ears of their bodies. Such are the people.

The second class is composed \[according to the same sage\] of men
instructed in the sciences, in letters and in the liberal arts. These
men have an object in view in whatever they undertake, and know the
different means by which the end can be accomplished; they have not
penetrated into the essence of things, but they know them well enough to
speak of them with ease and to give lessons to others; whether they
speak or whether they act, they can give reason for what they say or
what they do, comparing subjects among them and drawing just inferences
concerning what is harmful or profitable: these are the artists, the
*literati*, who are occupied with things wherein *reasoning* must enter.
This class can have an influence on customs and even on the government.

The third class \[continues Kong-Tse\] comprises those who in their
speech, in their actions, and in the whole of their conduct, never
deviate from what is prescribed by *right reason;* who do good without
any pretension whatsoever; but only because it is good; who never vary,
and show themselves the same in adversity as in fortune. These men speak
when it is necessary to speak, and are silent when it is necessary to be
silent. They are not satisfied with drawing the sciences from the
diverse channels destined to transmit them, but go back to the source.
These are the philosophers.

Those who never digress from the fixed and immutable rule which they
have traced out for themselves, who, with utmost exactness and a
constancy always the same, fulfill to the very least, their obligations,
who fight their passions, observe themselves unceasingly, and prevent
vices from developing; those finally, who speak no word which is not
measured and that may not be useful for instruction, and who fear
neither trouble nor labour in order to make *virtue* prosper in
themselves and in others, constitute the fourth class, which is that of
virtuous men.

The fifth class, finally \[adds Kong-Tse\], which is the loftiest

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

and sublimest, comprises the extraordinary men, who unite in their
persons the qualities of the spirit and heart, perfected by the blessed
habit of fulfilling voluntarily and joyfully, what nature and morals
impose jointly upon reasonable beings living in society. Imperturbable
in their mode of life, like unto the sun and the moon, the heavens and
the earth, they never cease their beneficent operations; they act by
*intelligence* and as *spirits* see without being seen. This class, very
few in number, can be called that of the Perfect ones, the Saints. <span
id="fr_549"></span>[a](#fn_548)

I have transcribed what has just been read without changing a single
word. If the reader has given to this extract the attention that it
merits, he will have seen the doctrine of Pythagoras such as I have
revealed and the important distinction between Instinct, Reason, and
Intelligence such as I have established; he will have seen the dogma of
the mysteries concerning the animistic inequality of men, of which I
have spoken, and will have easily recognized, in the right reason which
constitutes the third class according to the Chinese theosophist, the
pure reason which has directed the German philosopher in the
establishment of critical philosophy. This right reason, being quite
near to human virtues, is still very far from Wisdom which alone leads
to Truth. Nevertheless it can reach there, for nothing is impossible for
the Will of man, even as I have quite forcibly stated <span
id="fr_550"></span>[b](#fn_549); but it would be necessary for that, to
make acquisition of the divine virtues, and in the same manner that one
is raised from instinct to understanding by purification, to pass from
understanding to intelligence by perfection. Lysis offers the means: it
is by knowledge of oneself that he promises to lead one to this desired
end; he assures it, he invokes the name of Pythagoras himself:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_524"></span>[218:a](ogv35.htm#fr_525) In Greek τὸ
ἡγεμονικόν, that which dominates and rules, that which is intelligible.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[218:b](ogv35.htm#fr_526) In Greek τὸ φυσικόν,
that which pertains to generative nature, that which is physical, and
sentient.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[218:c](ogv35.htm#fr_527) In Greek τὸ λογικόν,
that which pertains to reasonable nature, that which is logical, the
thing which proves that another thing is. *Voyez* Platon, *in Tim.*, et
conférez avec Beausobre, *Hist. du Manich.*, t. ii., p. 174.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[218:d](ogv35.htm#fr_528) Plutar., *de Facie in
Orb. lun.*, p. 943.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[220:a](ogv35.htm#fr_529) The first kind of
virtue is called ἀνθωπίνη, human, and the second ἡρωικὴ καὶ δία, heroic
and divine. Attention should be given to these epithets which are
related to the three principal faculties of man. Aristot., *ad Nicom.*,
I. vii., c. 1; Plato, *in Theætet.*; Gallien, in *Cognit et Curai. morb.
anim.*, l. i., c. 3, et 6; Theod. Marcil, *in Aur. Carmin*.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[220:b](ogv35.htm#fr_530) In *Somn. Scip.*, c.
8.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[220:c](ogv35.htm#fr_531) Aristot., *de Cælo et
Mundo*, l. i.; Philo, *de Mund. opific.*

<span id="fn_531"></span>[220:d](ogv35.htm#fr_532) Pausan., *in
Corinth.*, p. 72; Tzetz., *in Schol.*

<span id="fn_532"></span>[220:e](ogv35.htm#fr_533) Suidas, in Εποπ;
Harpocr., *ibid*.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[220:f](ogv35.htm#fr_534) Clem. Alex., l. v.,
p. 582.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[220:g](ogv35.htm#fr_535) Psellus, *Ad Oracul.
Zoroastr.*

<span id="fn_535"></span>[221:a](ogv35.htm#fr_536) Meurs. Eleus., c. 12;
Dion. Chrysost., *Orat.* xii.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[221:b](ogv35.htm#fr_537) Sophocl. *apud*
Plutar., *De Audiend. Poet. Schol.*; Aristoph., *De Pace*.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[221:c](ogv35.htm#fr_538) Porphyr., *Vitâ
Pythag.*, p. 5.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[222:a](ogv35.htm#fr_539) γνῶσις, *savant*.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[222:b](ogv35.htm#fr_540) Epiph., l. i.;
Plucquet, *Dictionn. des Hérésies*, t. ii., p. 72.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[223:a](ogv35.htm#fr_541) Diod. Sicul., l. i.;
Herodot., l. ii.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[223:b](ogv35.htm#fr_542) Aristot., *Polit.*,
l. ii.; Strab., l. viii.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[223:c](ogv35.htm#fr_543) *Voyez* DANIEL, et
conférez avec Court de Gébelin, *Monde primitif*, t. viii., p. 9.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[223:d](ogv35.htm#fr_544) *Zend-Avesta*,
14<sup>e</sup> *hâ*, p. 127.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[223:e](ogv35.htm#fr_545) Pomp. Mela, iii., c.
2; César, l. vi., c. 14; Pelloutier, *Hist. des Celtes*, l. iv., ch. 1,
§ 27 et 30.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[223:f](ogv35.htm#fr_546) The first *Shastra*
is entitled *Djatimala*. I am ignorant of the title of the other, that I
cite from Henry Lord: *Discovery of the Banian Religion*, in Church,
*Collect*., vol. vi.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[224:a](ogv35.htm#fr_547) *Asiat. Research.*,
tom. vi., p. 254.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[224:b](ogv35.htm#fr_548) *Mémoir. concern. les
Chin.*, t. ii., p. 174 *et suiv*.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[226:a](ogv35.htm#fr_549) *Vie de Kong-Tzée*,
p. 237 *et suiv*.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[226:b](ogv35.htm#fr_550) *Voyez* le
12<sup>e</sup> Examen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25. The sacred Tetrad](ogv36)
