[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv43)  [Next](ogv45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 33. God! Thou couldst save them by opening their eyes.

Lysis here approaches openly one of the greatest difficulties of nature,
that which in all time has furnished to the skeptics and to the atheists
the weapons that they have believed most formidable. Hierocles has not
concealed it in

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

his Commentaries, and he expresses it in these terms: "If God is able to
bring back all men to virtue and to happiness, and if he does not will
to do so, is God therefore unjust and wicked? Or if he wills to bring
them back and if he is unable, is God therefore weak and
impotent?" <span id="fr_638"></span>[a](#fn_637) Long before Hierocles,
Epicurus seized upon this argument to support his system, and had
extended it without augmenting its force. His design had been to prove
by its means that, according as he had advanced it, God does not
interfere with the things of this world, and that there is,
consequently, no Providence. <span id="fr_639"></span>[b](#fn_638)
Lactantius, thinking that he was answering this, has quoted from
Epicurus and has afforded Bayle, the most learned and the most
formidable of modern skeptics, the occasion for demonstrating that,
until now, this terrible argument had remained unrefuted notwithstanding
all the efforts made for its overthrow.

This indefatigable reasoner said:

The evil exists; man is wicked and unhappy: everything proves this sad
truth. History is, properly speaking, only a miscellany of the crimes
and adversities of mankind. However, at intervals, there have been seen
shining some examples of virtue and happiness. There is, therefore, a
mixture of evils and of moral and physical goodness. . . . Now, if man
is the work of a sole principle, sovereignly good, sovereignly holy,
sovereignly potential, how is he exposed to the maladies of cold, heat,
hunger, thirst, pain, and sorrow? How has he so many wicked
inclinations? How does he commit so many crimes? Can the sovereign
sanctity produce a criminal creature? Can the sovereign bounty produce
an unfortunate creature? <span id="fr_640"></span>[c](#fn_639)

Bayle, content with his anti-providential declaration, believes that he
has triumphed over all the dogmatists of

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

the world; but whilst he recovers his breath, observe that he admits a
mixture of good and evil, and allow him to continue.

"Origen," he said, "asserts that evil has come from the wicked use of
the free will. And why has God allowed man to have so pernicious a free
will?" "Because, "Origen answers, "an intelligent creature who had not
enjoyed free will would have been immutable and immortal as God." What
pitiable reason! Is it that the glorified souls, the saints, are equal
to God, being predestined to good, and deprived of what is called *free
will*, which, according to Saint Augustine, is only the possibility of
evil when the divine grace does not incline man towards the good?" <span
id="fr_641"></span>[a](#fn_640)

Bayle, after several outbursts of this sort, finishes by declaring that
the way in which evil is introduced under the rule of a sovereign being,
infinitely good, infinitely potential, infinitely holy, is not only
inexplicable but even incomprehensible. <span
id="fr_642"></span>[b](#fn_641) Bayle is right on this point; also I
have always said, in the course of this work, that the origin of evil,
comprehensible or not, could never be divulged. But the matter of the
origin of evil is not the question here. Bayle was too good a reasoner
not to have felt it, not to have seen that the argument of Epicurus, and
all the elocution with which he furnished it, did not bear upon the
cause of evil itself, but upon its effects; which is quite different.
Epicurus did not demand that the origin of evil be explained to him, but
the local existence of its effects—that is to say, one should state
clearly to him, that if God was able and willing to take away the evil
from the world, or to prevent it from penetrating there, why he did not
do so. When any one’s house is the prey of flames, one is not so
insensate as to be concerned with knowing what the essence of the fire
is, and why it burns in general, but why it burns in particular; and
why, being able to extinguish it, one has not done so. Bayle, I repeat,
was too clever a logician not to have perceived this. This

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

distinction was too simple to have escaped him; but seeing that its very
simplicity had concealed it from the doctors of the Christian church, he
was content to affect an ignorance of it to his adversaries, to have the
pleasure, so precious to a skeptic such as he, of seeing them one after
another exhaust themselves upon the argument of Epicurus:

God, whether he wills to take away evil, and can not; whether he can and
does not will to; whether he does not will it nor can; whether he wills
it and can. If he wills it and can not, he is weak; which does not
accord with God. If he can and does not will it, he is wicked; which
accords with him no better. If he does not will it nor can, he is wicked
and weak, which could not be. If he can and wills it, that which alone
is worthy of his divinity, whence then come the evils? Or why does he
not take them away? <span id="fr_643"></span>[a](#fn_642)

Lactantius, to whom Bayle owed his argument, had thought to overthrow
it, by saying that God, being able to take away evil, did not will it;
so as to give to men, by its means, wisdom and virtue. <span
id="fr_644"></span>[b](#fn_643) But the skeptic philosopher had no
trouble to prove that this answer was worth nothing, and that the
doctrine that it contained was monstrous; since it was certain that God
was able to give wisdom and virtue without the means of evil; since he
had even given them, following the belief of Lactantius himself, and
that it was because he had renounced them that man had become subject to
evil. Saint Basil was no more fortunate than Lactantius. Vainly he
asserted that the free will, whence results evil, had been established
by God himself in the design that this All-powerful Being had for being
loved and freely served. Bayle, attacking him in his own faith, asked
him, if God is loved and served by force in Paradise, where the
glorified

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

souls do not enjoy the fatal privilege of being able to sin. <span
id="fr_645"></span>[a](#fn_644) And with the same blow with which he
struck him, he brought down Malebranche who had said the same
thing. <span id="fr_646"></span>[b](#fn_645) The downfall of
Malebranche, and the desire to avenge him, bestirred in vain a crowd of
audacious metaphysicians. Bayle pierced them one after another with the
weapons of Epicurus, whose steel they did not know, and died with the
glory of their having said the greatest piece of stupidity which could
be said upon a like matter: namely, that it was possible that God might
prescribe another end, in creating the world, than to make his creatures
happy. <span id="fr_647"></span>[c](#fn_646)

The death of Bayle did not extinguish the ardour that his works had
excited. Leibnitz, justly displeased with all that had been said,
thought he could answer the skeptic philosopher better; and raising
himself with a great force of genius to that pristine moment when God
formed the decree of producing the world, he represented the Being of
beings choosing among an infinity of worlds, all possible, all present
at his thought, the actual world, as most conformable to his attributes,
the most worthy of him, the best finally, the most capable of attaining
to the greatest and most excellent end that this all-perfect Being may
have been able to purpose. <span id="fr_648"></span>[d](#fn_647) But
what is this magnificent and worthy end which the Divinity has chosen,
this goal which not alone constitutes the actual world such as it is,
but which also presents it to the mind, according to the system of
Leibnitz, as the best of possible worlds? This philosopher does not
know.

We are not able \[he said\] to penetrate it, for we are too limited for
this; we can only infer, by reasoning with the insight that God has
given us, that his bounty only has been able to purpose, by creating the
greatest possible number of intelligent

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

creatures, by endowing them with as much knowledge, happiness, and
beauty as the Universe might admit without going away from the immutable
order established by his wisdom. <span id="fr_649"></span>[a](#fn_648)

Up to this point, the system of Leibnitz sustained itself, and was able
even to lead to a relative truth; but its work was not accomplished. It
was necessary to explain, following the demand of Epicurus so much
repeated by Bayle, how in this immutable order established by the divine
Wisdom in this best of worlds, that physical and moral evil make felt
such severe effects. The German philosopher, instead of stopping at
these effects, and stating the primordial cause, inaccessible to his
researches, still scorned it, as had all the adversaries of Bayle, and
asserted that physical and moral evils were necessary to maintain this
immutable order, and entered into the plan of this best of worlds. Fatal
assertion which overthrew his system instantly: for, how dares one to
say that evil is necessary, and above all necessary not only in what is
best, but in what is the best possible!

Now, whatever may be the primordial cause of Evil, concerning which I
can not nor do I wish to explain myself, until the triple veil, extended
over this formidable mystery by Moses, may have been raised, I will say,
according to the doctrine of Pythagoras and Plato, that its effects can
be neither necessary, nor irresistible since they are not immutable and
I will reply to the much-lauded argument of Epicurus, that by this very
thing they are neither necessary nor irresistible; God can and will
remove them and he does remove them.

And if certain disciples of Bayle, astonished by a reply so bold and so
new, asked me when and how God works so great a benefit, of which they
have perceived no traces, I will say to them: by time and by means of
perfectibility. Time is the instrument of Providence; perfectibility,
the plan of its work; Nature, the object of its labour; and Good,

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

its result. You know, and Bayle himself agrees, that there exists a
mixture of good and evil: and I repeat to you here what I have already
said <span id="fr_650"></span>[a](#fn_649); and I maintain that this
good emanates from Providence, and is its work, and replaces in the
sphere where it has been transported, an equivalent amount of evil which
it has transmuted into good; I maintain that this good continues
augmenting itself unceasingly and the evil which corresponds to it,
diminishing in an equal proportion; I maintain finally that, having left
absolute evil and having arrived at the point where you now are, you
will arrive by the same road and by the same means, that is, by favour
of time and of perfectibility, from the point where you are to absolute
Good, the crown of perfection. This is the answer to your question, When
and how does God take away evils? Still if you claim you cannot see any
of this, I will reply that it is not for you, arguing with the weakness
of your view, to deny the progress of Providence, you whose imperfect
senses mistake all the time even the subjects within your range, and for
whom the extremes are touching so forcibly, that it is impossible for
you to distinguish upon the same dial the movement of the needle which
traverses it in a cycle, from the movement of that which traverses it in
less than a second; one of these needles appearing to you immobile and
the other not existing for you. <span id="fr_651"></span>[b](#fn_650)

If you deny what I affirm, bring other proofs of your denial than your
weakness and cease, from the little corner where Nature has placed you,
presuming to judge its immensity. Still if you lack negative proofs,
wait a moment more, and you shall have from me affirmative proofs. But
if, going back, and wishing to sustain the argument of Epicurus which is
giving way, you believe that you will succeed by saying that this
philosopher had not asked, in the case where God was able and willed to
remove evils, how he removed them, but why he did not remove them; I
will reply

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

to you that this question is a pure sophism; that the how is implicitly
contained in the why, to which I have replied in affirming that God,
being able and willing to remove evils, removes them. And if you recall
an objection that I have already overthrown concerning the manner in
which he removes them, and that bringing you to judge of his ways, you
would assume that he ought to remove them, not in a lapse of time so
long that you would be unconscious of it, but in the twinkling of an
eye; I would reply that this way would be to you quite as imperceptible
as the other; and that furthermore, that which you demand exists, since
the lapse of time of which you complain, however long it may appear to
you, is less than the twinkling of an eye for the Being of beings who
employs it, being absolutely *nihil* compared to Eternity. And from
there I will take occasion to tell you that evil, in the way in which it
is manifest in the world, being a sort of malady, God, who alone can
cure it, knows also the sole remedy which may be applicable to it and
that this sole remedy is time.

It seems to me that however little attention you may have given to what
I have just said, you ought to be tempted to pass on from the knowledge
of the remedy to that of the malady; but it is in vain that you would
demand of me an explanation concerning its nature. This explanation is
not necessary to overthrow the argument of Epicurus and that is all that
I have wished to do. The rest depends upon you and I can only repeat
with Lysis:

"God! Thou couldst save them by opening their eyes."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_637"></span>[263:a](ogv44.htm#fr_638) *Aur. Carm.*, v.
62-77.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[263:b](ogv44.htm#fr_639) Lactant., *De Irâ
Dei*, c. 13, p. 548.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[263:c](ogv44.htm#fr_640) *Dict. crit.*, art.
MANICHÉENS, rem. D.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[264:a](ogv44.htm#fr_641) *Dict. crit.* art.
MARCIONITES, rem. E et G.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[264:b](ogv44.htm#fr_642) *Ibid*., art.
PAULICIENS, rem. E.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[265:a](ogv44.htm#fr_643) Bayle, *Dict. crit.*,
art. PAULICIENS, rem. E.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[265:b](ogv44.htm#fr_644) *De Irâ Dei*, c. 13,
p. 548.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[266:a](ogv44.htm#fr_645) Basilius, t. i., *In
Homil. quod Deus non sit auctor mali*, p. 369; Bayle. *Dict. crit.*,
art. MARCIONITES, rem. E et G.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[266:b](ogv44.htm#fr_646) *Traité de Morale*.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[266:c](ogv44.htm#fr_647) *Réponse à deux
object. de M. Bayle*, par Delaplacette, *in*-12, 1707.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[266:d](ogv44.htm#fr_648) *Essai de Théodicée*,
part iii., No. 405 *et suiv*.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[267:a](ogv44.htm#fr_649) *Essai de Théodicée*,
part. iii., No. 405 *et suiv*.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[268:a](ogv44.htm#fr_650) Ci-dessus,
25<sup>e</sup> Examen.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[268:b](ogv44.htm#fr_651) *Mém. de l’Acad. des
Sciences*, ann., 1765, p. 439.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 34. But No: ’Tis For the Humans of a Race Divine, to Discern
Error, and to See the Truth](ogv45)
