[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ogv47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564592766/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Golden Verses of Pythagoras*, by Fabre d'Olivet, \[1917\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 37. So that, ascending into radiant Ether, Midst the Immortals, thou shalt be thyself a God.

Here, said Hierocles, in terminating his commentaries, is the blissful
end of all efforts: here, according to Plato, is the hope which
enkindles, which sustains the ardour of him who fights in the career of
virtue: here, the inestimable prize which awaits him. <span
id="fr_670"></span>[b](#fn_669) It was the great object of the
mysteries, and so to speak, the great work of initiation. <span
id="fr_671"></span>[c](#fn_670) The initiate, said Sophocles, is not
only happy during his life, but even after his death he can promise
himself an eternal felicity. <span id="fr_672"></span>[d](#fn_671) His
soul purified by virtue, said Pindar, unfolds in those blessed regions
where reigns an eternal springtime. <span
id="fr_673"></span>[e](#fn_672) It goes on, said Socrates, attracted by
the celestial

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

element which has the greatest affinity with its nature, to become
united with the immortal Gods and to share their glory and their
immortality. <span id="fr_674"></span>[a](#fn_673) This deification was,
according to Pythagoras, the work of divine love; it was reserved for
him who had acquired truth through his intellectual faculties, virtue
through his animistic faculties, and purity through his instinctive
faculties. This purity, after the end of his material body, shone forth
and made itself known in the form of a luminous body, that the soul had
been given during its confinement in its gloomy body; for as I finish
these Examinations, I am seizing the only occasion which may still be
presented of saying that, this philosopher taught that the soul has a
body which is given according to his good or bad nature, by the inner
labour of his faculties. He called this body the subtle chariot of the
soul, and said that the mortal body is only the gross exterior. He adds,
"The care of the soul and its luminous body is, in practicing virtue, in
embracing truth and abstaining from all impure things." <span
id="fr_675"></span>[b](#fn_674)

This is the veritable aim of the symbolic abstinences that he
prescribes, even as Lysis insinuates moreover quite clearly in the lines
which make the subject of my preceding Examination, when he said that it
is necessary to abstain from the things which are injurious to the
development of the soul and to distinguish clearly these things.

Furthermore, Pythagoras believed that there existed celestial goodness
proportionate to each degree of virtue, and that there is for the souls,
different ranks according to the luminous body with which they are
clothed. The supreme happiness, according to him, belongs only to the
soul which has learned how to recover itself, by its intimate union with
the intelligence, whose essence, changing its nature, has become
entirely spiritual. It is necessary that this soul be raised to the
knowledge of universal truths, and that it should have found, as far as
it is possible for it, the

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Principle and the
end of all things. Then having attained to this high degree of
perfection, being drawn into this immutable region whose ethereal
element is no more subjected to the descending movement of generation,
it can be united by its knowledge to the Universal All, and reflect in
all its being the ineffable light with which the Being of beings, God
Himself, fills unceasingly the Immensity.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_669"></span>[276:b](ogv48.htm#fr_670) Hierocl., *Aur.
Carm.*, v. 70.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[276:c](ogv48.htm#fr_671) Prod., *In Tim.*, l.
v., p. 330

<span id="fn_671"></span>[276:d](ogv48.htm#fr_672) *Apud* Plutar., *De
Audiend. Pætis*.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[276:e](ogv48.htm#fr_673) Pind., *Olymp*.,
iii.; *Apud*, Plutar., *Consol. ad Apoll*.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[277:a](ogv48.htm#fr_674) Plat., *In Phædon*.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[277:b](ogv48.htm#fr_675) Hiérocl., *Aur.
Carm.*, v. 68.

 
