[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mt22)  [Next](mt24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428628649/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion*, by C.
Spurgeon Medhurst, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span id="an_ch_20"></span>

### CHAPTER XX.

Scholarship abandoned, sorrow vanishes. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md)

Yes and yea,—are they not almost alike? Goodness and evil,—are they not
akin? <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78.md)

Untrammeled and without limits—yet that may not be lightly esteemed
which all men reverence. <span id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_79.md)

The multitude are joyful and merry—as though feasting on a day of
sacrifice, or ascending a high tower in spring. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[4](#fn_80.md) I alone am anchored without giving any
sign <span id="fr_81"></span>[5](#fn_81.md)—like an infant, undeveloped.

My homeless heart wanders among the things of sense, as if it had
nowhere to stay.

The multitude have enough and to spare <span
id="fr_82"></span>[6](#fn_82.md)—I alone am as one who has lost something.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

Have I then the mind of a fool? Am I so very confused?

Ordinary men are bright enough. I alone am dull.

Ordinary men are full of excitement. I alone am heavy-hearted.

Boundless as the sea, drifting to and fro, as if without a place to
rest. <span id="fr_83"></span>[7](#fn_83.md)

All men have some purpose. I alone am thickheaded as a boor. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[8](#fn_84.md)

I am alone—differing from others, in that I reverence and seek the
Nursing Mother. <span id="fr_85"></span>[9](#fn_85.md)

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Says the *Theologia Germanica:* "He who is without the sense of sin must
be either Christ or the evil spirit." It is questionable, perhaps, if
such an affirmation would bear a. thorough philosophical sifting, but it
is certain that the consciousness of insufficiency and failure is the
first step towards the noble and worthy, as distinct from what is simply
innocent and pure, and that life is a failure which, drifting with the
crowd, knows nothing of aloneness, because it lacks stamina to resist
absorption.

Though, therefore, we find Lao-tzu in advance of his fellows, bewailing
that he is alone among men, we may be sure that he was not always so,
and that if he at the last stood

</div>

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

apart from his fellows, it was because he had exhausted the pleasures
the world was able to afford. Experience had made him wise, but how had
he attained this wisdom? By contemplation of the Tao, which for him took
the place of the Christ, who had not then come. He saw the promise,
greeted it from afar, and confessed himself a stranger and a pilgrim on
the earth. (See Heb. xi, 13.)

Is not the Christ "that side of the nature of God which has expressed
itself in creation?" (See Col. i, 16-17.) Even so for Lao-tzu the
"Nursing Mother," whom he reverenced, was the Tao manifested, the
Eternal revealed in his works. It is the contemplation of this sacred
mystery, the cross in the heart of God, that leads penitents to the
Father's feet. It was the contemplation of this same mystery, the
oneness of the divine with all human joys and sorrows, that condemned
Lao-tzu to the noble loneliness of which the present chapter is an echo.

If our reasoning be sound we see how the atonement occupies a natural
place in the scheme of things; and that all great souls, of all faiths,
have come to God by one road, viz., by perceiving the oneness of God
with men in their triumphs and failures. It was this insight into the
union of the finite with the infinite that made Lao Tzu alone in his
generation—"*I am alone, differing from others, in that I reverence and
seek the Nursing Mother*." It was this which enabled him to see below
the surface, to discover that in time, in earth, and in self there is
neither satisfaction, joy nor peace. And like all who have traveled this
road he paid the penalty of aloneness, lived on high planes of thought,
unexplored by his less advanced contemporaries. Such loneliness is,
however, its own reward. The electric wire derives its usefulness from
its insulation. An adulterated message would result from too close a
fellowship with men.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[36:1](mt23.htm#fr_77.md) Was not "the desire to
know" the very beginning of tears?

"A humble knowledge of thyself is a surer way to God than a deep search
after learning."—*Imitation of Christ*, bk. i. ch. 3.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[36:2](mt23.htm#fr_78.md) What use is there in
further talk of my way and your way, of this view and that? The right
and the wrong way are things which concern the minds only of those who
are groping in the dark. To the Sage sitting in the full light of
heaven, the difference between No and Yes is not much after all. These
are distinctions and things of prejudice, and he is not concerned with
them."—*W. R. Old* in *The Theosophic Review*, vol. xxxi., p. 68.

"Demon est Deus inversus." See *Secret Doctrine*, vol. i. section xi.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[36:3](mt23.htm#fr_79.md) Su Chêh explains this
passage to mean that though the Sage (Holy Man) has escaped from Maya,
or the illusion of Egoism, he does not on that account overlook the
distinctions of society, but gives honor to whom honor is due,
acknowledges authority, yet comes under the power of none. (Comp. *John*
viii, 37.)

<span id="fn_80"></span>[36:4](mt23.htm#fr_80.md) "Spring is the time of
the union of the male and female principles; all things are thus moved.
He who ascends a tower to gaze has his will as it were depraved."—*P. J.
Macglagan*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[36:5](mt23.htm#fr_81.md) Literally—"without
omens"—i.e., without indications from the sensuous world.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[36:6](mt23.htm#fr_82.md) "Superabundance, i.e., as
if they had ability and wisdom more than enough for themselves, on the
strength of which they there rush out in various lines of activity."—*P.
J. Macglagan*.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[37:7](mt23.htm#fr_83.md) Contrasting himself with
the recluses of his day Confucius said: "I am different from these. I
have no course for which I am predetermined and no course against which
I am predetermined." (*Conf. Ana.* xviii. ch. 8:5)

<span id="fn_84"></span>[37:8](mt23.htm#fr_84.md) See I. Cor. iv, 9-13.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[37:9](mt23.htm#fr_85.md)

<div style="margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%;">

"I have not so far left the coasts of life  
 To travel inland, that I cannot hear  
 That murmur of the outer Infinite  
 Which unweaned babies smile at in their sleep  
 When wondered at for smiling."  
                     E. B. Browning in *Aurora Leigh*.

</div>

The saddened tone of this chapter, so different from the general
character of the work, recalls one of the *Logia* discovered in Egypt by
Grenfell and Hunt in 1896—"Jesus saith, I stood in the midst of the
world, and in the flesh was I seen of them, and I found all men drunken
and none found I athirst among them, and my soul grieveth over the sons
of men, because they are blind in their heart." … *Sayings of our Lord*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](mt24.md)
