[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mt34)  [Next](mt36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428628649/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion*, by C.
Spurgeon Medhurst, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span id="an_ch_32"></span>

### CHAPTER XXXII.

Tao—the Eternally Nameless.

Though primordial simplicity is infinitesimal, none dare make it a
public servant.

Were princes and monarchs able to maintain it, all creation would
spontaneously submit. Heaven and earth harmonized, there would be an
abundance of nourishing agencies; the people unbidden, would co-operate
of their own accord.

Names arose when differentiation commenced; once there were names it
became important to know where to stop. This being known, danger ceased.

The Tao spread throughout the world, may be compared to mountain
rivulets and streams flowing towards the sea.

<div style="font-size: 90%">

One Life pervades all, the names by which men identify the phenomenal
aspects of The One being but attributes of That. Infinitesimal! It
defies analysis but is nevertheless The Force above all forces and in
all forces. Were the rulers of earth able to emulate It and so cease to
arouse opposition; were they able to maintain this Primordial
Simplicity, which being impersonal, generates no force with
self-gratification as its objective, everything would be harmonized, for
there would be no loss of effort, as there must inevitably be where the
full force of action is broken by the personal side wishes of its
generator. Then the intellectual and the emotional, the ratiocinative
and the spiritual, the aesthetic and the scientific, the strength of the
man and the tenderness of the woman, the experience of the adult and the
innocence of the child would be diffused into one grand, homogeneous,
all-comprehensive consciousness—the whole man, memory, imagination,
reason, co-ordinated and united in the worship of the Unseen. "The Tao
into whom," in the words of the Gîta, "all desires flow as rivulets flow
into the ocean, which is filled with water, but remaineth unmoved, would
be spread throughout the world."

</div>

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Yet the differences in creation, which have given rise to names, have
their uses—danger arises only when man stops at the name, instead of
passing on to the Nameless. "And He gave some to be apostles; and some
prophets; and some evangelists; and some pastors and teachers; for the
perfecting of the saints … till we all attain to the unity of the faith
… unto a full grown man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ." (Eph. iv, 11, 13.)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII](mt36.md)
