<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Mysticism](../../myst/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cjb07) 
[Next](cjb09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574NM/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Confessions of Jacob Boehme*, by Jacob Boehme, ed. W. Scott Palmer
\[1920\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

### CHAPTER VI

WHERE will you seek for God? Seek him in your soul that is proceeded out
of the eternal nature, the living fountain of forces wherein the divine
working stands.

O that I had but the pen of a man, and were able therewith to write down
the spirit of knowledge! I can but stammer of great mysteries like a
child that is beginning to speak; so very little can the earthly tongue
express of that which the spirit comprehends. Yet I will venture to try
whether I may incline some to seek the pearl of true knowledge, and
myself labour in the works of God in my paradisical garden of roses; for
the longing of the eternal nature-mother drives me on to write

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

and to exercise myself in this my knowledge.

No money, nor goods, nor art, nor power can bring you to the eternal
rest of the eternal paradise, but only the knowledge in which you may
steep your soul. That is the pearl which no thief can steal away; seek
after it and you will find the noble treasure.

Our skill and understanding are so cramped and narrowed that we have no
more any knowledge of paradise at all. And except we be born anew, the
veil of Moses lies continually before our eyes, and we suppose that was
paradise whereof he said: God placed Adam in the garden of Eden which he
had planted, that he might till it.

O beloved man, paradise is the divine Joy. It is the divine and
angelical Joy, yet it is not outside the place of this world. When I
speak of the fountain and joy of paradise, and of its substance, what it
is, I

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

have no similitude for it in this world; I stand in need of angelical
speech and knowledge to express it; and though I had them yet I could
never express it with this tongue. It is well understood in the mind,
when the soul rides in the chariot of the Spirit, but I cannot express
it with the tongue; yet will I stammer with the children till another
mouth be given me to speak with.

And seeing somewhat is lent me from the grace of the power of God, that
I might know the way to paradise, seeing also that it behoves everyone
to work the works of God in which he stands, I will not neglect my task
but will labour as much as I can on the way.

Although I shall scarce be able to spell out the letters in this so high
a way, yet my labour shall be enough that many will have to learn in it
all their life long. He that thinks he knows it well, he has not yet
learnt the first letter of paradise, for no

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Doctors are to be
found in this school, but only learners.

There is nothing that is nearer to you than heaven, paradise, and hell.
Unto which of them you are inclined and towards which of them you walk,
to that in this lifetime you are most near. There is a moving between
each two of them; and you have both movings in you. God beckons to you
in the one, and calls you; and the Devil beckons to you in the other,
and calls you; with whom you go, with him you enter in. The Devil has in
his hand power, honour, pleasure, and worldly happiness; and the root of
these is death and hell-fire. God has in his hands crosses, persecution,
misery, poverty, ignominy and sorrow; and the root of these is a fire
also. But in this fire there is a light, and in the light virtue and in
the virtue paradise. In paradise are the angels, and among the angels is
Joy. Dim and fleshly eyes cannot behold it; but when the Holy Ghost
comes into the soul

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

it is born anew in God, and then it becomes a child of paradise and has
the key of paradise, and sees into the midst thereof.

If you be born of God, then you understand God, paradise, the kingdom of
heaven and hell, the entrance thereinto of the creatures and the
creation of this world; but if not, then the veil is before your eyes as
it was before the eyes of Moses. Therefore saith Christ: *Seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you*.

If you do not understand this writing, seek the humble lowly Heart of
God, and that will bring a small seed from the tree of paradise into
your soul; and if you abide in patience then a great tree will grow out
of that seed, as you will think has come to pass with this author. For
he is to be esteemed as a very simple person, in comparison of the great
learned men; but Christ saith: My power is strong in the weak; yea
Father, it hath so pleased thee to hide these things from the wise and

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

prudent, and thou hast revealed them to babes and sucklings; the wisdom
of this world is foolishness in thy sight. And although now the children
of the world are wiser in their generation than the children of light,
yet their wisdom is but a corruptible thing, and this wisdom continues
eternally.

Seek for the noble pearl; it is much more precious than this whole
world; it will never more depart from you. Where the pearl is, there
will your heart be also; you need not in this life seek any further
after paradise, joy and heavenly delight; seek but the pearl, and when
you find that, then you find paradise and the kingdom of heaven.

I have perused many masterpieces of writing, hoping to find the high and
deep wisdom of God, the pearl of the understanding of man; but I could
find nothing of that which my soul lusted after. I have found very many
contrary opinions, and at

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

times I have found some who forbid me to search, but I cannot know with
what reason except it be that the blind grudge at the eyes of them that
see.

With all this my soul is become very disquiet within, and has been as
full of pain and anguish as a woman at her travail; and yet to no end
till I followed the words of Christ when he said: You must be born anew,
if you will see the kingdom of God. This at first confounded me; I
supposed that such a thing could not be done in this world, but only at
my departure out of this world. And then my soul was at first in
anguish, longing after the pearl; but, yielding itself, at last obtained
the jewel. Therefore I will write, for a memorial to myself and for a
light to them that seek. For Christ said: None lights a candle and puts
it under a bushel, but sets it upon a table that all that are in the
house may see by the light of it. To this end he gives the pearl of
divine wisdom and knowledge

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

to them that seek, that they should impart it to the desirous for their
healing, as he has very earnestly commanded.

Indeed Moses writes that God made man of the dust of the earth. And that
is the opinion of very many. I also should not have known how that was
to be understood, and I should not have learned it out of Moses, nor out
of the glosses put upon his words. The veil would have continued still
before my eyes, though I was much troubled thereby. But when I found the
pearl, then I looked Moses in the face, and found that he had wrote very
right, but that I had not rightly understood it.

Now the question is: What is God's image? Behold, and consider the
Deity, and then you will light upon it. God is not an animal man; and
man should be the image and similitude of God, wherein God may dwell.
God is a spirit; three principles are in him, that is, the sources and
powers of the darkness, of the light,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and of this world. He would make such an image as should have all these
three and so be rightly a similitude of himself. Therefore Moses may be
well understood to say that God created man and did not make him of a
lump of earth. But the forming power in which God created him is the
matrix of the earth, out of which the earth was generated; and the
matter in which he created him is a quintessence of the stars and
elements, and came forth from the heavenly matrix which is also the root
of the earth.

Now the soul stands in two gates, and touches two principles, the
eternal darkness and the eternal light of the Son of God, as God the
Father himself does. Thus it may be in heaven and in paradise, and enjoy
the unutterable joy of God the Father which he has in his Son, and it
may hear the inexpressible words of the Heart of God.

There the soul feeds on all the words of

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God, for these are
the food of its life; and it sings the paradisical songs of praise
concerning the pleasant fruit of paradise which grows in the divine
virtue and is the food of the heavenly and eternal body.

Can this be no joy and rejoicing? Should not that be a pleasant thing,
to eat heavenly bread with the many thousand sorts of angels, and to
rejoice in their communion and fellowship? What can possibly be named
which can be more pleasant? Where there is no fear, no anger, no death;
where every voice and speech is of the divine salvation, power, strength
and might; and this voice going forth into eternity. There is the place
where Paul heard words unutterable that no man can express.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](cjb09)

</div>
