<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Mysticism](../../myst/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cjb15.md) 
[Next](cjb17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574NM/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Confessions of Jacob Boehme*, by Jacob Boehme, ed. W. Scott Palmer
\[1920\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

WE cannot say that the outward world is God, or the speaking Word; or
that the outward man is God. That is only the expressed Word, which has
stiffened itself in union with the elements. I say, the inward world is
the heaven where God dwells; and the outward world is expressed out of
the inward, through the moving of the eternal speaking Word, and
enclosed between a beginning and an end.

The inward world abides in the eternal speaking Word. The eternal Word
speaks it into Being through Wisdom, out of its own powers, colours, and
virtue, as a great mystery from eternity. This Being is a breathing from
the Word in the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wisdom; it has the
power of generation in itself, and introduces itself into forms, after
the manner of the generation of the eternal Word, or, as I might say,
out of the Wisdom in the Word.

Therefore there is nothing nigh unto or far off from God; one world is
in the other and all are one as soul and body are in each other, and
time and eternity. The eternal speaking Word rules through and over all;
it works from eternity to eternity; and though it can neither be
apprehended nor conceived, yet its work is conceived, for this is the
formed Word, of which the working Word is the life.

The eternal speaking Word is the divine understanding or *sound*. That
which is brought forth from the love-desire into forms, that, I say, is
the natural and creaturely understanding and sound which was in the
Word; as it is said, In him was life, and that life was the light of
men.

The harmony of hearing, seeing, feeling.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

tasting, and smelling, is the true intellective life. When one power
enters into another, then they embrace each other in the sound; and when
they are become one they mutually awaken and know each other. In this
knowledge consists the true understanding, which, according to the
nature of the eternal wisdom, is immeasurable and abyssal, being of the
One which is All.

Therefore one only will, if it has divine light in it, may draw from
this fountain and behold infinity. From which contemplation this pen has
wrote.

In the light of God (which is called the kingdom of heaven) the sound is
wholly soft, pleasant, lovely and pure; yea, as a stillness in
comparison with our outward gross speaking and sounding. It is as if the
mind did play and melodize in a kingdom of joy within itself, and did
then hear in a most entire inward manner a sweet, pleasing melody and
tune; and

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

yet outwardly did neither hear nor understand it. For in the divine
light all is subtle, in manner as the thoughts play and make mutual
melody in one another.

And yet there is a real, intelligible, distinct sound and speech used by
the angels, according to their own property, in the kingdom of glory.
The powers of the formed and manifested Word, in their love-desire, do
introduce themselves, according to the property of all the powers, into
an external being, where, as in a mansion, they may act their love-play,
and so have somewhat wherewith and wherein mutually to play and melodize
one with another, in their wrestling sport of love.

God, who is a Spirit, has by and through his manifestation introduced
himself into distinct spirits, which are the voices of his eternal
pregnant harmony in the manifested Word of his great kingdom of joy:

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

they are God's instrument, in which his Spirit melodizes in his kingdom
of joy; they are angels, the flames of fire and light, in a living,
understanding dominion.

We are not to think that the holy angels dwell only above the stars
beyond the place of this world, as the outward reason, which knows
nothing of God, fancies. Indeed they dwell beyond the dominion of this
world, but the place of this world (although there is no place in
eternity), and also the place beyond this world, is all one to them. We
men see not the angels or the devils with our eyes; yet they are about
us and among us. The evil and the good angels dwell near one another,
and yet there is the greatest immense distance between them. For heaven
is in hell and hell is in heaven, and yet the one is not manifest to the
other. Although the Devil should go many millions of miles, desiring to
enter

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

heaven and to see it, yet he would still be in hell and not see it.

 

If evil was not known, joy would not be manifest. But if joy be
manifest, then is the eternal Word spoken in joy, to which end the Word,
with nature, has brought itself into a creation. Whosoever rightly sees
and understands this has no further question about any thing, for he
sees that he lives and subsists in God, and that he may further know and
will through him and speak what and how he will. Such a man seeks only
the estate of lowliness, that God may alone be accounted high.

My will-spirit, which now is in Christ's humanity, lives in Christ's
spirit, that shall in his power give sap to the dry tree, that it may
arise in the sound of the trumpet of the divine breath in Christ's
voice, which is also my voice in his breath, and spring afresh in
paradise. Paradise shall

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

be in me; all whatever God has and is shall appear in me as an image of
the divine world's being; all colours, powers and virtues of his eternal
Wisdom shall be manifest in me, as in his likeness. I shall be the
manifestation of the divine and spiritual world and an instrument of
God's Spirit, wherein he makes melody with himself, with this voice
which I myself am. I shall be his instrument, an organ of his expressed
Word and Voice; and not only I, but all my fellow-members in the
glorious choir and instrument of God. We are all strings in the concert
of his joy; the spirit from his mouth strikes the note and tune of our
strings.

Therefore God became man, that he might repair his glorious instrument
of praise, which would not sound according to the desire of his joy and
of his love. He would bring again the true love-sound into the strings;
he has brought the voice which sounds in his presence again into

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

us; he is become that which I am and has made me that which he is, so I
may say that in my humility I am in him his trumpet and the sound of his
instrument and his divine voice.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](cjb17.md)

</div>
