<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Mysticism](../../myst/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cjb17) 
[Next](cjb19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574NM/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Confessions of Jacob Boehme*, by Jacob Boehme, ed. W. Scott Palmer
\[1920\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

### CHAPTER XVI

ALL sorrow, anguish, and fear concerning spiritual things, whereby a man
is dejected and terrified in himself, proceedeth from the soul. The
outward spirit, which is from the stars and elements, is not thus
disturbed and perplexed; because it liveth in its own matrix from which
it had its birth. But the poor soul is entered into a strange lodging,
into the spirit of this world, which is not its proper home. Whereby
that fair creature is obscured and defaced, and is also held captive
therein, as in a dark dungeon.

The soul is in its first being a magical fire-source from God's nature.
It is an intense and incessant desire after the divine Light.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

So then, the soul, being of itself a hungry magical fire-spirit,
desireth spiritual virtue in order to sustain and preserve thereby its
fire-life and allay the hunger of its source.

But seeing that the hungry soul, from the mother's womb, is involved in
the spirit of the great world and its own temperament; therefore it
feedeth, immediately from its birth, yea, even in the mother's womb, of
the spirit of this world. The soul eateth spiritual food according to
its temperament; it is the kindling of its fire. The fuel of its fire
must be either its temperament or a divine sustenance from God.

Hence we may understand the cause of that infinite variety which there
is in the wills and actions of men. Of whatever the soul eateth,
wherewith its fire-life is fed, according: to that the soul's life is
led and o governed.

If it goes out from its own temperament

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

into God's love-fire, into the heavenly substantiality which is
Christ's, then it eateth of Christ and of the meekness of the light of
his majesty, wherein is the fountain of eternal life.

From thence the soul getteth a divine will, and bringeth the body to do
that which, according to its natural inclination and the spirit of this
world, it would not do. In such a soul the temperament ruleth not; it
bears sway only over the outward body. Such a man hath a continual
longing after God.

Oftentimes when his soul eateth of the divine love-essence, it bringeth
to him an exulting triumph, and a divine taste into the temperament
itself. So that the whole body is thereby affected and even trembleth
for joy, being lifted up to such a degree of divine sensation, as if it
was on the very borders of paradise.

But this rapturous state rarely continueth long. The soul is soon
clouded with somewhat

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

of another nature from the spirit of this world, of which it maketh a
lookingglass wherein it begins to speculate with its outward
imagination. Thus it goeth out from the Spirit of God and is often
bemired in the dirt of the world, if the Virgin of Divine Wisdom doth
not call it back again to repent and return to its first love. Then, if
the soul washeth itself anew in the water of eternal life, through
earnest repentance, it becometh renewed again in the love-fire of God's
meekness and in the Holy Spirit, as a new child; and beginneth again to
drink of that water and recovereth at length its life in God.

There is no temperament in which the Devil's will and suggestions may be
more clearly discovered, if the soul be once enlightened, than in the
melancholy, as the tempted, who have resolutely and successfully stormed
his stronghold, very well know.

O how subtilly and maliciously doth the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Devil spread his
nets for such a soul, as a fowler for the birds! Oftentimes he
terrifieth it in its prayers, especially in the night, when it is dark,
injecting his suggestions into it and filling it with fearful
apprehensions that the wrath of God is ready to seize and destroy it.
Thus he maketh a show as if he had power over the soul of the man, and
it was his property, whereas he hath not power to touch a hair of his
head. Unless the soul itself despaireth, and by that means giveth itself
up to him, he dareth not spiritually and really to seize or even touch
it.

He hath more than one temptation for the melancholy soul. For, if he
cannot persuade it absolutely to despair and so to give itself up to him
that way, he bringeth it, when over-burthened with fears and sad
apprehensions about its present state and future doom, and impatient
under the weight thereof, to thoughts and designs of self-murder. He
dareth not destroy a

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

man; the man himself must do that. For the soul hath freedom. If it
resisteth the Devil and will not do as he counselleth, then, however he
may tempt, yet hath he not power to touch even the outward and sinful
body.

The trouble of mind here spoken of is rather a subject of God's pity
than of wrath. He will not break the bruised reed, nor extinguish the
smoking flax. Our Lord Jesus Christ, in his blessed call and promise,
saith, Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, so shall ye find rest unto your souls.

This yoke of Christ is no other than the Cross of nature and providence.
This is the yoke which a man is required to take up and carry after
Christ with patience, and with full submission thereto. Then the
affliction, whatever it be, is so far from

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

hurting the soul that it doeth it much good. For while it standeth in
the house of sorrow it is not in the house of sin, or in the pride,
pomp, and pleasure of the world. God holdeth it with tribulation, as
with a father's restraint, from the sinful pleasure of this world.

The troubled soul is apt to perplex and torment itself because it cannot
open by its desire the spring of divine joy in the heart. It sigheth,
lamenteth, and feareth that God will have nothing to do with it, because
it cannot feel the comfort of his visible presence.

Before the time of my illumination and high knowledge it was just so
with me. I went through a long and sore conflict before I obtained my
noble garland. Then did I first learn to know how God dwelleth not in
the outward fleshly heart, but in the centre of the soul in himself, in
his own principle.

Then also I first perceived in my inward

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

spirit that it was God himself who had drawn me to him in and by desire.
Which I understood not before, but thought the good desire had been my
proper own and that God was far distant from us men. But afterwards I
clearly found, and rejoiced to find, how it is that God is so gracious
to us. Therefore I write this for an example and a caution to others,
not in the least to give way to despair when the Comforter delayeth his
coming, but rather to think of the consolatory encouragement given in
David's psalm, Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the
morning.

It hath fared no otherwise with the greatest saints of God. They were
forced to wrestle long and earnestly for the noble garland. With which
indeed no man will be crowned unless he strive for it and overcome.

It is indeed laid up in the soul, but if a man will put on that crown in
the time of

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

this mortal life he must wrestle for it. Then, if he doth not obtain it
in this world, yet he will certainly receive it after he has put off
this earthly tabernacle. For Christ saith, In the world ye shall have
anxiety and trouble, but in me peace. And, Be of good comfort, I have
overcome the world.

 

I have neither pen that can write nor words that can express what the
exceeding sweet grace of God in Christ is. I myself have found it by
experience in this my way and course, and therefore certainly know that
I have a sure ground from which I write. And I would from the bottom of
my heart most willingly impart the same to my brethren in the love of
Christ, who, if they will follow my faithful child-like counsels, will
find by experience in themselves from whence it is that my simple mind
knows and understands great mysteries.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](cjb19)

</div>
