[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota01)  [Next](wota03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### I.

<span class="smallcaps">Zertoulem</span> spake unto the multitude and
said: Inasmuch as ye are led by the desire to gratify selfish
propensities are ye excluded from the higher light which is the natural
birthright of every soul.

Be ye seekers after the higher truths of the spirit, not content with
the vain babblings of men who are puffed up with their own
self-conceits.

He that overcomes the flesh, not by crucifixion and mortification, but
by sublimation, that leadeth to the complete purification of this house
in which spirit dwells, shall become a leader among men, and shall know
all things in heaven and earth.

Knowledge is not always gained of books,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

for oft-times these are misleading and unsatisfactory. Spirit must speak
to spirit, and soul must vibrate responsive to the inner harmonies of
the universe of God.

He who seeks of the spirit shall find the royal road that leadeth to the
great garner house where is stored the rich fruitage of the ages.

Be not deceived of men who occupy the chief seats in the synagogues and
universities of the outer world, for these are puffed up with their own
self-conceits.

They conceive of theories, then search the universe that they may find
facts that seem to prove their verity.

They go no deeper than the outer husk of the external universe. Like
children, they play with these cast-off shells. Out of these things are
builded the sciences and religions of the world.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

The teachings of the great masters have been misunderstood and
misapplied. The world has been too engrossed with material things to
read aright the lessons given.

Only the things of the spirit are permanent. All outward things are
transitory and fleeting. Vain pomp and glory of the world without life,
ye flaunt your gaudy rags before eyes whose spiritual vision is sealed.
Ye have no dominion over him who is baptized of the spirit.

He rises glorified and exalted into the atmosphere of gods.

He reflects no light of sun or star, but glows and shines with the
inexhaustible light of spirit.

He acknowledges no leadership, either of book car man, but follows the
star of his own destiny.

To, him is given the broadest liberty, for the wings of his spirit, at
last, have been unfettered,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

and now they cleave the ethers of infinite space.

The glory of the rapidly dying East, the wealth of El Dorados, flicker,
fade and are lost in this newer glory and wealth of the spirit,
exhaustless and undying.

I that speak unto ye am as deathless as the <span
class="smallcaps">Unspeakable One</span>. I assist at the birth of
worlds and universes. I am my own star of destiny.

What I am ye also may become. Through the gateway of suffering and
poverty ye must be led until the spirit asserts itself.

Know then your oneness with the Infinite, and claim the royal birthright
that is thine inheritance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II](wota03)
