[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota16)  [Next](wota18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### XVI.

<span class="smallcaps">One</span> asked the Master: What shall be the
nature of our homes in the world of the Lomkatos?

Just then Zertoulem came near to a shallow pool of water, and he stooped
and picked up a pebble from his path and cast it into the water, and it
sank out of sight in the slimy ooze at its bottom.

Then he turned toward the one who asked the question and replied as
follows:

Behold, how the stone cast from my hand into the pool makes for itself a
place in the slime and ooze under the water. Ye might at first think
that my hand gave it the bed in which it should lie, but this is so only
in seeming. My hand imparted the force that hurled the stone into the
water, but the stone

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

formed and shaped its own bed. The stone was spherical in shape and the
bed in which it lies adapted itself to the shape of the stone. If the
stone had been rough or angular in shape, its abiding place would have
been the same.

Now, it was neither my hand, nor the force behind the hand that shaped
the bed in which the stone lies. But, as ye can readily perceive, it was
the stone that shaped its own bed.

Now, in speaking of the Lomkatos, the superficial observer might say,
Inasmuch as Omn takes the spirit out of the terrestrial life, he must of
necessity make the home in which it shall abide. How unwise this
conclusion! Omn simply takes hence the spirit, but the power that hurls
the spirit out of the physical body does not determine either the house
or world in which it shall dwell.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

If I ride in the chariot, neither the chariot nor the horse determines
the direction I shall go. My spirit determines this and guides the horse
and chariot accordingly.

So is it with the Lomkatos. The houses in which they dwell are moulded
out of the deeds and thoughts that gave prominence to the lives they
lived here.

Truly, we ought to be familiar with the nature of that world into which
we shall be called to enter, for it has been builded up out of our
desires and motives.

Special acts have greater effects upon the bodies of the Lomkatos than
upon the worlds in which they shall live.

Desires and motives are the stuffs out of which their worlds are
builded.

A world undesired and toward which no strong motive draws the soul would
prove most unprofitable to the Lomkatos.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

As the object of that life is not for sense gratification, but for
intellectual and spiritual growth, it needs must follow close upon the
confines of this terrestrial life and yet prove more fully adapted to
all the soul's needs.

Easy are the gradations that lead upward in the land to which they have
gone.

Well may it be called the land where all the desires of the soul are
fulfilled, the land where the motives that underlaid the acts of the
past become the stepping stones of the spirit.

Each one of the Lomkatos becomes the architect of his own home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII](wota18.md)
