[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota04)  [Next](wota06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

### IV.

<span class="smallcaps">Thus</span> spake Zertoulem: Worlds age; suns
grow cold and cease to give forth light; both return to chaos whence
they had birth.

Their substance never ceases to exist; but the form it had been
compelled to take is no more in the external world.

There are only two conditions of life, although the manifestations may
be infinite—the External, or outer, and the Internal.

The first is the realm of shadows, reflections of spirit as it passes
across the great stage of Infinite Action.

The second is the realm of the real—the spirit that vitalizes all
things.

Awful beyond description the spectacle of dead world or sun rushing
madly onward into the wide opening arms of chaos.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

Sublime beyond description the birth of a sun out from the dark clouds
of chaos and night.

With quickened vision the seer sees beyond world or sun the all-powerful
arms of spirit that hurled to destruction or quickened into life.

Over the formless he beholds a sphere of pure amethyst light.
Innumerable rays flash from this sphere, grasping the dead atoms and
impregnating them with life. The atoms thus vitalized rush together and
a sun is born into the universe.

Beyond the sphere of light the seer beholds the form of the Archangel.
But his eyes are still veiled, for it is not given to mortal to behold
all the glory of those who stand nearest to the Infinite Omn.

All power belongs to spirit. Here lies all that is permanent. Elsewhere
all is fleeting and delusive.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

He who sets his heart on earthly things is unwise, for these in time
must return to the formless.

Rather think of those imperishable things of the spirit, for these abide
with thee evermore.

Too great love of earthly things deadens all the nobler instincts of the
spirit.

Much earthly possessions anchor the spirit to the earth. These
impedimenta must be removed before spirit can spread its wings for
flight into the Higher Heavens.

Infinite possibilities slumber in every human soul. These are wrought
out through many incarnations.

Ye may have already trod the dust of many worlds.

But he of little faith says: If this be true why do I not recall
previous embodiments?

In answer, Zertoulem would say: Many do dimly see as in a glass the
faint shadows of

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

past experiences. But life holds within itself the results of all
experiences.

It is wise to assert what the spirit perceives; and he who is ready to
receive will accept.

The prophet speaks for all men—but all men are not yet ready to receive
his words.

Be patient, if the world receives not thy message; if it be of the
spirit, thou canst afford to bide thy time, for sooner or later the
world will listen for thy voice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V](wota06)
