[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota49)  [Next](wota51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

### XLIX.

<span class="smallcaps">Well</span> dost thou ask, oh, Neontu, How can
we deal with these conditions? How free the unfortunate one of the
parasites that have attached themselves to him? First, bear in mind this
great truth: <span class="smallcaps">Occult Science never interferes
with effects, but always seeks for the causes that lie behind
them</span>. The inner life, the realm of thoughts, emotions and
desires, is of so great importance, since hence proceed all external
conditions, that it demands from us more than a passing notice. Here
centre all the forces that build up and replenish the physical body.
Right thought, right emotion, right desire, must give a well-developed,
properly nourished and well balanced physical body. Perversion of
thought, emotion or

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

desire gives the opposite. Out from the process of thinking spring the
mental images with which we are surrounded. These images are our
constant attendants. They take on the color and aspect of our thoughts.
Our outward lives may be apparently pure; we may walk in the pathway
that the world terms that of virtue, and yet know absolutely nothing of
what real virtue and goodness consists. The mental images may assume the
libidinous features of earth's most depraved, and with such images, the
creations of our own thoughts, may we feed the smouldering fires of
lust. Thus may the emotions and desires be turned from their legitimate
channels. On the side of the lower self man is linked with all beneath
him, while on the side of the Higher Self he claims kinship with angels
and archangels. It is right here on the side of the

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

lower self that man lays himself open to attacks from the evilly
disposed. There must be not only bodily purity, but also mental purity,
if we would be invulnerable to such attacks. On the side of the Higher
Self man opens doors to divine possibilities, which are revealed in the
realm of the interior good. If this one thought is fully grasped, thy
questions, oh, Neontu, are completely answered. Lower conditions are
never dealt with successfully on their own plane. One must deal either
from above or within. To grapple with these conditions one must realize
that he stands where neither the arrows of malice nor envy can reach
him. His whole being must be charged with the knowledge of his
superiority.

The unfortunate can be reached and res, cued from the meshes that have
been woven around him, but it is necessary that his spirit

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

shall be reached, awakened from its lethargy, and the mind encouraged to
call into existence new images whose countenances shall reflect only
love and goodness.

If thou art conscious of thy divine powers, and revolving in thine own
orbit, possessed of right thoughts, right emotions and right desires,
none can ever injure thee. Only those who have not found their rightful
place in the universe and are not fully aware of their own powers are
subject to the influence of those winds that blow across the marsh lands
of the astral realms.

Be as firm and as unyielding in what thou knowest to be right as Truth
itself; keep thy whole life near to the ideal thou hast set up before
thee; let love lead thee ever with her gentle, yet firm, hand along the
pathway that makes for true righteousness; then mayst thou walk forth as
a god among men, fearing

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

no evil, unharmed even in the midst of the vilest and most malicious of
earth's children, for thou hast found the <span
class="smallcaps">Perfect Way</span> that leads to complete mastery of
all things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: L](wota51)
