[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota13)  [Next](wota15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

### XIII.

<span class="smallcaps">Let</span> not thy heart be troubled; thou
believest in God, believe also in thyself.

Think not I speak of the outward, the transitory and fleeting, but of
that which is as permanent as the Eternal One.

Thine own self is changeless, deathless, and in expression ever new.

The expression is not thyself, more than the coat is the real man.

Yet the coat is impregnated with the individuality of the man.

Likewise the expression hints of that which caused it to be.

Beautiful, indeed, are the clouds at the rising and setting of mighty
Thā.

Yet are they but a feeble expression of the ineffable glory that caused
them to be.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

Beautiful, indeed, may be these temples which are one of the expressions
of the inner self, but it is not for mortal pen to portray the beauty
and glory that creates.

Infinite are the possibilities of thyself. Dost think the works of art
beautiful? Genius has produced them all.

What, then, is genius but the awakening of thyself?

Sleep, and the world sleeps with thee! Awake, and the world echoes and
reëchoes the voiceless song of the soul.

Admire the sculptured form, the painted canvas, the evoked harmonies of
the musician, and think that these may all come out of thyself, even as
they have come out of other selves.

No genius has yet sounded the depths, nor scaled the heights of the
soul's possibilities. Say not when ye look at the products of art:

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I would that I had
created thee! Rather, become thou the creator, not of what thou seest in
the external world, but of that which until thou camest this way had not
been given outward expression.

Thyself hast been stultified by the teaching of the ages.

The cry has gone up from valley and mountain top: Conform! Conform!
Paint as painted the masters. And even music, the most wayward child of
human genius, hath been confined within the narrow walls of man-made
rules. Only they who have scorned all rules have reached the heights and
ravished the souls of men with celestial harmonies.

Listen well; be sure thou catchest the low-breathed intonations of
thyself—and then voice them to the world.

What matters it if thy voice is not heard amid the Babel sounds of
earth? If thou art

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

true to thyself, thy voice shall still speak on in the world, and they
for whom it hath a message shall hear and receive.

Thyself shalt call to thee thine own.

Be not impatient with others who fail to grasp the import of thy
message, but still be true to thyself and speak right on, and thy
thought shall yet help to shape the destiny of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV](wota15)
