[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota29)  [Next](wota31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### XXIX.

<span class="smallcaps">As</span> in the wild-wood there is a great
variety of form, color and odor of the flowers we meet with, so is it
with the auras of human beings.

Some of the flowers are regular and beautiful in form, others irregular,
and some few apparently distorted.

So is it with auras of individuals; some are exquisitely beautiful in
design, others very commonplace, and still others almost without form.

Some of the flowers in color rival the rainbow, others are modest and
nearly neutral, while still others are murky and dark.

We have already seen that it is the same with the auras of human beings.

Among the flowers there are those that

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

emit odors that are ravishing and almost entrancing, others are pungent,
and still others are repulsive.

It is even so of human auras.

The so-called criminal, brutal and sensual class emit odors
characteristic of the individuals, which are repulsive in their nature.

Many individuals of strong character, yet not specially inclined either
to Intellectuality or Spirituality, emit a pungent odor possessing in no
great degree either the power to attract or repel.

The intellectually inclined emit an odor very similar to that of the
modest little flower known as mignonette.

And those highly developed spiritually emit odors that exert a magic
spell upon all who come within the sphere of their influence.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

These characteristic odors are not of the outer, physical body, but
belong to the sphere of human auras.

There are undertones or musical notes to be discovered in connection
with these auras.

Those who have not yet awakened to the knowledge of the better-self send
forth discordant notes that ever fail to blend and to produce harmony.

There are those who live quiet, peaceful, unassuming and unpretentious
lives, the waves of whose auras are ever vibrating with low, soft and
sweet melody.

There are also those grand souls, ever struggling upward, ever breaking
away from all restraints, ever promoting the higher interests of
humanity, these are surrounded by auras vibrating with the grand,
triumphal notes of victory.

With physical eyes you may not behold

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

all these colors and forms; with physical ears you may not catch all
these notes,—for in the universe there are forms and colors invisible to
the physical eye of man, and notes either too low or too high to be
heard by his external ears.

These truths can appeal, then, only to the spiritually awakened, for
these have both heard and seen many things all unknown and unperceived
by those who have not risen above the valley mists of materiality.

Then, oh, Neontu, let the real Neontu, not that which appears or seems
to be the Neontu, assert itself, and thou shalt be led out of the world
of shadows, into the world of light, where all things may be revealed
unto the waiting spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXX](wota31)
