[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wota41)  [Next](wota43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0008BCE64/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wisdom of the Ages*, by George A. Fuller, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### XLI.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Master continued: The new religion
lightens every labor and will give rest to the weary ones of earth.

Does it not also reveal the fact that much of the labor of the world is
both unnecessary and a hindrance to man's true spiritual growth?

Under the influence of this religion man should be led to want fewer
things that belong to the external world, and only those things that
conduce to the growth of his spiritual nature.

Under the new order of things works of art shall no longer be considered
as either superfluities or luxuries simply to adorn the homes of wealth.

For then everything made by man will

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

be a work of art. There can be no valid excuse for the existence of that
which is ugly.

The time will come when it will be an unpardonable sin to create that
which is not a work of art.

Man's labor becomes irksome only when he is forced to create that which
is distasteful to him.

When everything that falls from his hands is a thing of beauty, his
labor becomes one of love, and never rests heavily upon him.

Both the monotony and drudgery of everyday life oppress him.

Rest comes not in ceasing from labor, but from the doing of that which
gives joy and satisfaction to the real self.

The new religion, taking a deep interest in the welfare of all mankind,
seeks through art to elevate all.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

In every one it reveals the God within, but, alas, too often looking out
through stained-glass windows.

In time the stains shall all be removed from the windows, and then the
real self in all its beauty shall stand revealed.

Until man's earthly condition is greatly improved we must look for
spiritual illumination only in the few.

So long as man is looked upon merely as an animal, with no life save
that of the physical, these conditions cannot be greatly altered.

All reform starts in the realm of the spiritual, and there, also, is
found the greatest battleground of the opposition.

Not only the recognition of man's spiritual nature is a necessity of the
hour, but also the recognition of the source of opposing forces and
elements that antagonize

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

everything that leads to the betterment of his condition.

The wise men, or seers, of Tlaskanata held that there were seven
distinct and separate parts which united formed a human being.
Commencing at the outward and proceeding towards the centre these parts
arrange themselves after this plan:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The Physical Body.

2\. The Vital Spark, or Life.

3\. The Ethereal Form.

4\. The Double Self, or, Will and Emotions.

5\. The Mind—the home of Thoughts, Ideas, and Associations.

6\. The Soul—that which as an Individuality is unaffected by death.

7\. The breath of Omn.

</div>

In the self-centred one these separate parts are blended into the most
perfect harmony.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

The esoteric, or inner, meaning of religion stands revealed only unto
those who realize this perfect harmony.

Those who are loaded down with the degrees of universities are generally
too heavily weighted with the refuse ballast of the ages to rise to that
altitude of soul-life where the secrets of Nature and of man alike are
revealed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLII](wota43)
