[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa01)  [Next](soa03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Deep-Sea Soundings

In the first place, then, the testimony of the deep-sea soundings may be
summarized in a few words. Thanks chiefly to the expeditions of the
British and American gun boats, "Challenger" and "Dolphin" (though
Germany also was associated in this scientific exploration) the bed of
the whole Atlantic Ocean is now mapped out, with the result that an
immense bank or ridge of great elevation is shown to exist in
mid-Atlantic. This ridge stretches in a southwesterly direction from
about fifty degrees north towards the coast of South America, then in a
south-easterly direction towards the coast of Africa, changing its
direction again about Ascension Island, and running due south to Tristan
d'Acunha. The ridge rises almost sheer about 9,000 feet from the ocean
depths around it, while the Azores, St. Paul, Ascension, and Tristan
d'Acunha are the peaks of this land which still remain above water. A
line of 3,500 fathoms, or say 21,000 feet, is required to sound the
deepest parts of the Atlantic, but the higher parts of the ridge are
only a hundred to a few hundred fathoms beneath the sea.

The soundings too showed that the ridge is covered with volcanic
*débris* of which traces are to be found right across the ocean to the
American coasts. Indeed the fact that the ocean bed, particularly about
the Azores, has been the scene of volcanic disturbance on a gigantic
scale, and that too within a quite measurable period of geologic time,
is conclusively proved by the investigations made during the above-named
expeditions.

Mr. Starkie Gardner is of opinion that in the Eocene times the British
Islands formed part of a larger island or continent stretching into the
Atlantic, and "that a great tract of land formerly existed where the sea
now is, and that Cornwall, the Scilly and Channel Islands, Ireland and
Brittany are the remains of its highest summits."\[1\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Distribution of Fauna and Flora](soa03.md)
