[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa07)  [Next](soa09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Occult Records

But enough space has now been devoted to the fragments of evidence--all
more or less convincing--which the world so far has been in possession
of. Those interested in pursuing any special line of investigation are
referred to the various works above named or quoted.

The subject in hand must now be dealt with. Drawn as they have been from
contemporary records which were compiled in and handed down through the
ages we have to deal with, the facts here collected are based upon no
assumption or conjecture. The writer may have failed fully to comprehend
the facts, and so may have partially misstated them. But the original
records are open for investigation to the duly qualified, and those who
are disposed to undertake the necessary training may obtain the powers
to check and verify.

But even were *all* the occult records open to our inspection, it should
be realized how fragmentary must be the sketch that attempts to
summarize in a few pages the history of races and of nations extending
over at least many hundreds of thousands of years. However, any details
on such a subject--disconnected though they are--must be new, and should
therefore be interesting to the world at large.

Among the records above referred to there are maps of the world at
various periods of its history and it has been the great privilege of
the writer to be allowed to obtain copies--more or less complete--of
four of these. All four represent Atlantis and the surrounding lands at
different epochs of their history.

These epochs correspond approximately with the periods that lay between
the catastrophes referred to above, and into the periods thus
represented by the four maps the records of the Atlantean Race will
naturally group themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Map Period](soa09)
