[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa06)  [Next](soa08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Testimony of Ancient Writers

It only remains now to summarize some of the evidence obtainable from
ancient writers, from early race traditions, and from archaic
flood-legends.

Aelian in his *Varia Historia*,\[1\] states that Theopompus (400 B.C.)
recorded an interview between the King of Phrygia and Silenus, in which
the latter referred to the existence of a great continent beyond the
Atlantic, larger than Asia, Europe and Libya together.

Proclus quotes an extract from an ancient writer who refers to the
islands in the sea beyond the Pillars of Hercules (Straits of
Gibraltar), and says that the inhabitants of one of these islands had a
tradition from their ancestors of an extremely large island called
Atlantis, which for a long time ruled over all the islands of the
Atlantic Ocean.

Marcellus speaks of seven islands in the Atlantic, and states that their
inhabitants preserve the memory of a much greater island, Atlantis,
"which had for a long time exercised dominion over the smaller ones."

Diodorus Siculus relates that the Phoenicians discovered "a large island
in the Atlantic Ocean beyond the Pillars of Hercules several days' sail
from the coast of Africa."

But the greatest authority on this subject is Plato. In the *Timaeus* he
refers to the island continent, while the *Critias* or *Atlanticus* is
nothing less than a detailed account of the history, arts, manners and
customs of

\[1. Lib. iii., ch. xviii.\]

the people. In the *Timaeus* he refers to "a mighty warlike power,
rushing from the Atlantic sea and spreading itself with hostile fury
over all Europe and Asia. For at that time the Atlantic sea was
navigable and had an island before that mouth which is called by you the
Pillars of Hercules. But this island was greater than both Libya and all
Asia together, and afforded an easy passage to other neighbouring
islands, as it was likewise easy to pass from those islands to all the
continents which border on this Atlantic sea."

There is so much of value in the *Critias* that it is not easy to
choose, but the following extract is given, as it bears on the material
resources of the country: "They had likewise everything provided for
them which both in a city and every other place is sought after as
useful for the purposes of life. And they were supplied indeed with many
things from foreign countries, on account of their extensive empire; but
the island afforded them the greater part of everything of which they
stood in need. In the first place the island supplied them with such
things as are dug out of mines in a solid state, and with such as are
melted: and orichalcum, which is now but seldom mentioned, but then was
much celebrated, was dug out of the earth in many parts of the island,
and was considered as the most honourable of all metals except gold.
Whatever, too, the woods afforded for builders the island produced in
abundance. There were likewise sufficient pastures there for tame and
savage animals; together with a prodigious number of elephants. For
there were pastures for all such animals as are fed in lakes and rivers;
on mountains and in plains. And in like manner there was sufficient
aliment for the largest and most voracious kind of animals. Besides
this, whatever of odoriferous the earth nourishes at present, whether
roots, or grass, or wood, or juices, or gums, flowers or fruits-these
the island produced and produced them well."

The Gauls possessed traditions of Atlantis which were collected by the
Roman historian, Timagenes, who lived in the first century, B.C. Three
distinct peoples apparently dwelt in Gaul. First, the indigenous
population (probably the remains of a Lemurian race), second, the
invaders from the distant island of Atlantis, and third, the Aryan
Gauls.\*

The Toltecs of Mexico traced themselves back to a starting-point called
Atlan or Aztlan; the Aztecs also claimed to come from Aztlan.\[2\]

The Popul Vuh\[3\] speaks of a visit paid by three sons of the King of
the Quiches to a land "in the east on the shores of the sea whence their
fathers had come," from which they brought back amongst other things "a
system of writing."\[4\]

Amongst the Indians of North America there is a very general legend that
their forefathers came from a land "toward the sun-rising." The Iowa and
Dakota Indians, according to Major J. Lind, believed that "all the
tribes of Indians were formerly one and dwelt together *on an island* .
. . towards the sunrise." They crossed the sea from thence "in huge

\[1. See *Pre-Adamites*, p. 380.

2\. See Bancroft's *Native Races*, vol. v. pp. 221 and 321.

3\. Page 294.

4\. See also Bancroft, Vol. V., p. 553.\]

skiffs in which the Dakotas of old floated for weeks, finally gaining
dry land."

The Central American books state that a part of the American continent
extended far into the Atlantic Ocean, and that this region was destroyed
by a series of frightful cataclysms at long intervals apart. Three of
these are frequently referred to.\[1\] It is a curious confirmation that
the Celts of Britain had a legend that part of their country once
extended far into the Atlantic and was destroyed. Three catastrophes are
mentioned in the Welsh traditions.

Quetzalcoatl, the Mexican Deity, is said to have come from "the distant
east." He is described as a white man with a flowing beard. (N.B.-The
Indians of North and South America are beardless.) He originated letters
and regulated the Mexican calendar. After having taught them many
peaceful arts and lessons he sailed away *to the east* in a canoe made
of serpent skins.\[2\] The same story is told of Zamna, the author of
civilization in Yucatan.

The marvellous uniformity of the flood legends on all parts of the
globe, alone remains to be dealt with. Whether these are some archaic
versions of the story of the lost Atlantis and its submergence, or
whether they are echoes of a great cosmic parable once taught and held
in reverence in some common centre whence they have reverberated
throughout the world, does not immediately concern us. Sufficient for
our purpose is it to show the universal acceptation of these legends. It
would be needless waste of time and space

\[1. See Baldwin's *Ancient America*, p. 176.

2\. See Short's *North Americans of Antiquity*, pp. 268-271.\]

to go over these flood stories one by one. Suffice it to say, that in
India, Chaldea, Babylon, Media, Greece, Scandinavia, China, amongst the
Jews and amongst the Celtic tribes of Britain, the legend is absolutely
identical in all essentials. Now turn to the west and what do we find?
The same story in its every detail preserved amongst the Mexicans (each
tribe having its own version), the people of Guatemala, Honduras, Peru,
and almost every tribe of North American Indians. It is puerile to
suggest that mere coincidence can account for this fundamental identity.

The following quotation from Le Plongeon's translation of the famous
Troano MS., which may be seen in the British Museum, will appropriately
bring this part of the subject to a close. The Troano MS. appears to
have been written about 3,500 years ago, among the Mayas of Yucatan, and
the following is its description of the catastrophe that submerged the
island of Poseidonis:--"In the year 6 Kan, on the 11th Muluc in the
month Zac, there occurred terrible earthquakes, which continued without
interruption until the 13th Chuen. The country of the hills of mud, the
land of Mu was sacrificed: being twice upheaved it suddenly disappeared
during the night, the basin being continually shaken by volcanic forces.
Being confined, these caused the land to sink and to r' se several times
and in various places. At last the surface gave way and ten countries
were torn asunder and scattered. Unable to stand the force of the
convulsions, they sank with their 64,000,000 of inhabitants 8060 years
before the writing of this book."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Occult Records](soa08)
