[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa14)  [Next](soa16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Rmoahal Race

Now the period represented by Map No. 1 shows the land surface of the
earth as it existed about one million years ago, but the Rmoahal race
came into existence between four and five million years ago, at which
period large portions of the great southern continent of Lemuria still
existed, while the continent of Atlantis had not assumed the proportions
it ultimately attained. It was upon a spur of this Lemurian land that
the Rmoahal race was born. Roughly it may be located at latitude 7º
north and longitude 5º west, which a reference to any modern atlas will
show to lie on the Ashanti coast of to-day. It was a hot, moist country,
where huge antediluvian animals lived in reedy swamps and dank forests.
The Rmoahals were a dark race--their complexion being a sort of mahogany
black. Their height in these early days was about ten or twelve
feet--truly a race of giants--but through the centuries their stature
gradually dwindled, as did that of all the races in turn, and later on
we shall find they had shrunk to the stature of the "Furfooz man." They
ultimately migrated to the southern shores of Atlantis, were they were
engaged in constant warfare with the sixth and seventh sub-races of the
Lemurians then inhabiting that country. A large part of the tribe
eventually moved north, while the remainder settled down and
intermarried with these black Lemurian aborigines. The result was that
at the period we are dealing with--the first map period--there was no
pure blood left in the south, and as we shall see it was from these dark
races who inhabited the equatorial provinces, and the extreme south of
the continent, that the Toltec conquerors subsequently drew their
supplies of slaves. The remainder of the race, however, reached the
extreme north-eastern promontories contiguous with Iceland, and dwelling
there for untold generations, they gradually became lighter in colour,
until at the date of the first map period we find them a tolerably fair
people. Their descendants eventually became subject, at least nominally,
to the Semite kings.

That they dwelt there for untold generations is not meant to imply that
their occupation was unbroken, for stress of circumstances at intervals
of time drove them south. The cold of the glacial epochs of course
operated alike with the other races, but the few words to be said on
this subject may as well come in here.

Without going into the question of the different rotations which this
earth performs, or the varying degrees of eccentricity of its orbit, a
combination of which is sometimes held to be the cause of the glacial
epochs, it is a fact--and one already recognized by some
astronomers--that a minor glacial epoch occurs about every 30,000 years.
But in addition to these, there were two occasions in the history of
Atlantis when the ice-belt desolated not merely the northern regions,
but, invading the bulk of the continent, forced all life to migrate to
equatorial lands. The first of these was in process during the Rmoahal
days, about 3,000,000 years ago, while the second took place in the
Toltec ascendency about 850,000 years ago.

With reference to all glacial epochs it should be stated that though the
inhabitants of northern lands were forced to settle during the winter
far south of the ice-belt, there yet were great districts to which in
summer they could return, and where for the sake of the hunting they
encamped until driven south again by the winter cold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tlavatli Race](soa16.md)
