[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa22)  [Next](soa24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sorcery versus the

Good Law

After about 100,000 years of this golden age the degeneracy and decay of
the race set in. Many of the tributary kings, and large numbers of the
priests and people ceased to use their faculties and powers in
accordance with the laws made by their Divine rulers, whose precepts and
advice were now disregarded. Their connection with the Occult Hierarchy
was broken. Personal aggrandisement, the attainment of wealth and
authority, the humiliation and ruin of their enemies became more and
more the objects towards which their occult powers were directed: and
thus turned from their lawful use, and practised for all sorts of
selfish and malevolent purposes, they inevitably led to what we must
call by the name of sorcery.

Surrounded as this word is with the odium which credulity on the one
hand and imposture on the other have, during many centuries of
superstition and ignorance, gradually caused it to be associated, let us
consider for a moment its real meaning, and the terrible effects which
its practice is ever destined to bring on the world.

Partly through their psychic faculties, which were not yet quenched in
the depths of materiality to which the race afterwards descended, and
partly through their scientific attainments during this culmination of
Atlantean civilization, the most intellectual and energetic members of
the race gradually obtained more and more insight into the working of
Nature's laws, and more and more control over some of her hidden forces.
Now the desecration of this knowledge and its use for selfish ends is
what constitutes sorcery. The awful effects, too, of such desecration
are well enough exemplified in the terrible catastrophes that overtook
the race. For when once the black practice was inaugurated it was
destined to spread in ever-widening circles. The higher spiritual
guidance being thus withdrawn, the Kamic principle, which being the
fourth, naturally reached its zenith during the Fourth Root Race,
asserted itself more and more in humanity. Lust, brutality and ferocity
were all on the increase, and the animal nature in man was approaching
its most degraded expression. It was a moral question which from the
very earliest times divided the Atlantean Race into two hostile camps,
and what was begun in the Rmoahal times was terribly accentuated in the
Toltec era. The battle of Armageddon is fought over and over again in
every age of the world's history.

No longer submitting to the wise rule of the Initiate emperors, the
followers of the "black arts" rose in rebellion and set up a rival
emperor, who after much struggle and fighting drove the white emperor
from his capital, the "City of the Golden Gates," and established
himself on his throne.

The white emperor, driven northward, re-established himself in a city
originally founded by the Tlavatli on the southern edge of the
mountainous district, but which was now the seat of one of the tributary
Toltec kings. This king gladly welcomed the white emperor and placed the
city at his disposal. A few more of the tributary kings also remained
loyal to him, but most transferred their allegiance to the new emperor
reigning at the old capital. These, however, did not long remain
faithful. Constant assertions of independence were made by the tributary
kings, and continual battles were fought in different parts of the
empire, the practice of sorcery being largely resorted to, to supplement
the powers of destruction possessed by the armies.

These events took place about 50,000 years before the first great
catastrophe.

From this time onwards things went from bad to worse. The sorcerers used
their powers more and more recklessly, and greater and greater numbers
of people acquired and practised these terrible "black arts."

Then came the awful retribution when millions upon millions perished.
The great "City of the Golden Gates" had by this time become a perfect
den of iniquity. The waves swept over it and destroyed its inhabitants,
and the "black" emperor and his dynasty fell to rise no more. The
emperor of the north as well as the initiated priests throughout the
whole continent had long been fully aware of the evil days at hand, and
subsequent pages will tell of the many priest-led emigrations which
preceded this catastrophe, as well as those of later date.

The continent was now terribly rent. But the actual amount of territory
submerged by no means represented the damage done, for tidal waves swept
over great tracts of land and left them desolate swamps. Whole provinces
were rendered barren, and remained for generations in an uncultivated
and desert condition.

The remaining population too had received a terrible warning. It was
taken to heart, and sorcery was for a time less prevalent among them. A
long period elapsed before any new powerful rule was established. We
shall eventually find a Semite dynasty of sorcerers enthroned in the
"City of the Golden Gates," but no Toltec power rose to eminence during
the second map period. There were considerable Toltec populations still,
but little of the pure blood remained on the mother continent.

On the island of Ruta however, in the third map period, a Toltec dynasty
again rose to power and ruled through its tributary kings a large
portion of the island. This dynasty was addicted to the black craft,
which it must be understood became more and more prevalent during all
the four periods, until it culminated in the inevitable catastrophe,
which to a great extent purified the earth of the monstrous evil. It
must also be borne in mind that down to the very end when Poseidonis
disappeared an Initiate emperor or king--or at least one acknowledging
the "good law"--held sway in some part of the island continent, acting
under the guidance of the Occult Hierarchy in controlling where possible
the evil sorcerers, and in guiding and instructing the small minority
who were still willing to lead pure and wholesome lives. In later days
this "white" king was as a rule elected by the priests-the handful, that
is, who still followed the "good law."

Little more remains to be said about the Toltecs. In Poseidonis the
population of the whole island was more or less mixed. Two kingdoms and
one small republic in the west divided the island between them. The
northern portion was ruled by an Initiate king. In the south too the
hereditary principle had given way to election by the people. Exclusive
race-dynasties were at an end, but kings of Toltec blood occasionally
rose to power both in the north and south, the northern kingdom being
constantly encroached upon by its southern rival, and more and more of
its territory annexed.

Having dealt at some length with the state of things under the Toltecs,
the leading political characteristics of the four following sub-races
need not long detain us, for none of them reached the heights of
civilization that the Toltecs did--in fact the degeneration of the race
had set in.

It seems to have been some sort of feudal system that the natural bent
of the Turanian race tended to develop. Each chief was supreme on his
own territory, and the king was only *primus inter pares*. The chiefs
who formed his council occasionally murdered their king and set up one
of their own number in his place. They were a turbulent and lawless
race--brutal and cruel also. The fact that at some periods of their
history regiments of women took part in their wars is significant of the
last named characteristics.

But the strange experiment they made in social life which, but for its
political origin, would more naturally have been dealt with under
"manners and customs," is the most interesting fact in their record.
Being continually worsted in war with their Toltec neighbours, knowing
themselves to be greatly outnumbered, and desiring above all things
increase of population, laws were passed, by which every man was
relieved from the direct burden of maintaining his family. The State
took charge of and provided for the children, and they were looked upon
as its property. This naturally tended to increase the birth-rate
amongst the Turanians, and the ceremony of marriage came to be
disregarded. The ties of family life, and the feeling of parental love
were of course destroyed, and the scheme having been found to be a
failure, was ultimately given up. Other attempts at finding socialistic
solutions of economical problems which still vex us to-day, were tried
and abandoned by this race.

The original Semites, who were a quarrelsome marauding and energetic
race, always leant towards a patriarchal form of government. Their
colonists, who generally took to the nomadic life, almost exclusively
adopted this form, but as we have seen they developed a considerable
empire in the days of the second map period, and possessed the great
"City of the Golden Gates." They ultimately, however, had to give way
before the growing power of the Akkadians.

It was in the third map period, about 100,000 years ago, that the
Akkadians finally overthrew the Semite power. The 6th sub-race were a
much more law-abiding people than their predecessors. Traders and
sailors, they lived in settled communities, and naturally produced an
oligarchical form of government. A peculiarity of theirs, of which
Sparta is the only modern example, was the dual system of two kings
reigning in one city. As a result probably of their sea-going taste, the
study of the stars became a characteristic pursuit, and this race made
great advances both in astronomy and astrology.

The Mongolian people were an improvement on their immediate ancestors of
the brutal Turanian stock. Born as they were on the wide steppes of
Eastern Siberia, they never had any touch with the mother-continent, and
owing, doubtless, to their environment, they became a nomadic people.
More psychic and more religious than the Turanians from whom they
sprang, the form of government towards which they gravitated required a
suzerain in the background who should be supreme both as a territorial
ruler and as a chief high priest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Emigrations](soa24)
