[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa24)  [Next](soa26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# First Settlement in Egypt

Egypt must now be referred to, and the consideration of this subject
should let in a flood of light upon its early history. Although the
first settlement in that country was not in the strict sense of the term
a colony , it was from the Toltec race that was subsequently drawn the
first great body of emigrants intended to mix with and dominate the
aboriginal people.

In the first instance it was the transfer of a great Lodge of Initiates.
This took place about 100,000 years ago. The golden age of the Toltecs
was long past. The first great catastrophe had taken place. The moral
degradation of the people and the consequent practice of the "black
arts" were becoming more accentuated and widely spread. Purer
surroundings for the White Lodge were needed. Egypt was isolated and was
thinly peopled, and therefore Egypt was chosen. The settlement so made
answered its purpose, and undisturbed by adverse conditions the Lodge of
Initiates for nearly 200,000 years did its work.

About 210,000 years ago, when the time was ripe, the Occult Lodge
founded an empire--the first "Divine Dynasty" of Egypt--and began to
teach the people. Then it was that the first great body of colonists was
brought from Atlantis, and some time during the ten thousand years that
led up to the second catastrophe, the two great Pyramids of Gizeh were
built, partly to provide permanent Halls of Initiation, but also to act
as treasure-house and shrine for some great talisman of power during the
submergence which the Initiates knew to be impending. Map No. 3 shows
Egypt at that date as under water. It remained so for a considerable
period, but on its re-emergence it was again peopled by the descendants
of many of its old inhabitants who had retired to the Abyssinian
mountains (shown in Map No. 3 as an island) as well as by fresh bands of
Atlantean colonists from various parts of the world. A considerable
immigration of Akkadians then helped to modify the Egyptian type. This
is the era of the second "Divine Dynasty" of Egypt--the rulers of the
country being again Initiated Adepts.

The catastrophe of 80,000 years ago again laid the country under water,
but this time it was only a temporary wave. When it receded the third
"Divine Dynasty"--that mentioned by Manetho--began its rule, and it was
under the early kings of this dynasty that the great Temple of Karnak
and many of the more ancient buildings still standing in Egypt were
constructed. In fact with the exception of the two pyramids no building
in Egypt predates the catastrophe of 80,000 years ago.

The final submergence of Poseidonis sent another tidal wave over Egypt.
This too, was only a temporary calamity, but it brought the Divine
Dynasties to an end, for the Lodge of Initiates had transferred its
quarters to other lands.

Various points here left untouched have already been dealt with in the
*Transaction of the London Lodge*, "The Pyramids and Stonehenge."

The Turanians who in the first map period had colonized the northern
parts of the land lying immediately to the east of Atlantis, occupied in
the second map period its southern shores (which included the present
Morocco and Algeria). We also find them wandering eastwards, and both
the east and west coasts of the central Asian sea were Peopled by them.
Bands of them ultimately moved still further east, and the nearest
approximation to the type of this race is to-day to be found in the
inland Chinese. A curious freak of destiny must be recorded about one of
their western offshoots. Dominated all through the centuries by their
more powerful Toltec neighbours, it was yet reserved for a small branch
of the Turanian stock to conquer and replace the last great empire that
the Toltecs raised, for the brutal and barely civilized Aztecs were of
pure Turanian blood.

The Semite emigrations were of two kinds, first, those which were
controlled by the natural impulse of the race: second, that special
emigration which was effected under the direct guidance of the Manu;
for, strange as it may seem, it was not from the Toltecs but from this
lawless and turbulent, though vigorous and energetic, sub-race that was
chosen the nucleus destined to be developed into our great Fifth or
Aryan Race. The reason, no doubt, lay in the Mânasic characteristic with
which the number five is always associated. The sub-race of that number
was inevitably developing its physical brain power and intellect,
although at the expense of the psychic perceptions, while that same
development of intellect to infinitely higher levels is at once the
glory and the destined goal of our Fifth Root Race.

Dealing first with the natural emigrations we find that in the second
map period while still leaving powerful nations on the mother continent,
the Semites had spread both west and east--west to the lands now forming
the United States, and thus accounting for the Semitic type to be found
in some of the Indian races, and east to the northern shores of the
neighbouring continent, which combined all there then was of Europe,
Africa and Asia. The type of the ancient Egyptians, as well as of other
neighbouring nations, was to some extent modified by this original
Semite blood; but with the exception of the Jews, the only
representatives of comparatively unmixed race at the present day are the
lighter coloured Kabyles of the Algerian mountain.

The tribes resulting from the segregation effected by the Manu for the
formation of the new Root Race eventually found their way to the
southern shores of the Central Asian sea, and there the first great
Aryan kingdom was established. When the Transaction dealing with the
origin of a Root Race comes to be written, it will be seen that many of
the peoples we are accustomed to call Semitic are really Aryan in blood.
The world will also be enlightened as to what constitutes the claim of
the Hebrews to be considered a "chosen people." Shortly it may be stated
that they constitute an abnormal and unnatural link between the Fourth
and Fifth Root Races {sic}.\[1\]

The Akkadians, though eventually becoming supreme rulers on the mother
continent of Atlantis, owed their birthplace as we have seen in the
second map period, to the neighbouring continent-that part occupied by
the basin of the Mediterranean

\[1. See W. Williamson's *The Great Law*, pp. 243-5.\]

about the present island of Sardinia being their special home. From this
centre they spread eastwards, occupying what eventually became the
shores of the Levant, and reaching as far as Persia and Arabia. As we
have seen, they also helped to people Egypt. The early Etruscans, the
Phoenicians, including the Carthaginians and the Shumero-Akkads, were
branches of this race, while the Basques of to-day have probably more of
the Akkadian than of any other blood which flows in their veins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Stonehenge](soa26.md)
