[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa25)  [Next](soa27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Stonehenge

A reference to the early inhabitants of our own islands may
appropriately be made here, for it was in the early Akkadian days, about
100,000 years ago, that the colony of Initiates who founded Stonehenge
landed on these shores--"these shores" being, of course, the shores of
the Scandinavian part of the continent of Europe, as shown in Map No. 3.
The initiated priests and their followers appear to have belonged to a
very early strain of the Akkadian race--they were taller, fairer, and
longer headed than the aborigines of the country, who were a very mixed
race, but mostly degenerate remnants of the Rmoahals. As readers of the
*Transaction of the London Lodge* on the "Pyramids and Stonehenge," will
know, the rude simplicity of Stonehenge was intended as a protest
against the extravagant ornament and over-decoration of the existing
temples in Atlantis, where the debased worship of their own images was
being carried on by the inhabitants.

The Mongolians, as we have seen, never had any touch with the
mother-continent. Born on the wide plains of Tartary, their emigrations
for long found ample scope within those regions; but more than once
tribes of Mongol descent have overflowed from northern Asia to America,
across Behring's Straits, and the last of such emigrations--that of the
Kitans, some 1,300 years ago--has left traces which some western savants
have been able to follow. The presence of Mongolian blood in some tribes
of North American Indians has also been recognized by various writers on
ethnology. The Hungarians and Malays are both known to be offshoots of
this race, ennobled in the one case by a strain of Aryan blood, degraded
in the other by mixture with the effete Lemurians. But the interesting
fact about the Mongolians is that its last family race is still in full
force-it has not in fact yet reached its zenith--and the Japanese nation
has still got history to give to the world. \[1\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Arts and Sciences](soa27.md)
