[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa23)  [Next](soa25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Emigrations

Three causes contributed to produce emigrations. The Turanian race, as
we have seen, was from its very start imbued with the spirit of
colonizing, which it carried out on a considerable scale. The Semites
and Akkadians were also to a certain extent colonizing races.

Then, as time went on and population tended more and more to outrun the
limits of subsistence, necessity operated with the least well-to-do in
every race alike, and drove them to seek for a livelihood in less
thickly populated countries. For it should be realized that when the
Atlanteans reached their zenith in the Toltec era, the proportion of
population to the square mile on the continent of Atlantis probably
equalled, even if it did not exceed, our modern experience in England
and Belgium. It is at all events certain that the vacant spaces
available for colonizing were very much larger in that age than in ours,
while the total population of the world, which at the present moment is
probably not more than twelve hundred to fifteen hundred millions,
amounted in those days to the big figure of about two thousand millions.

Lastly, there were the priest-led emigrations which took place prior to
each catastrophe--and there were many more of these than the four great
ones referred to above. The initiated kings and priests who followed the
"good law" were aware beforehand of the impending calamities. Each one,
therefore, naturally became a centre of prophetic warning, and
ultimately a leader of a band of colonists. It may be noted here that in
later days the rulers of the country deeply resented these priest-led
emigrations, as tending to impoverish and depopulate their kingdoms, and
it became necessary for the emigrants to get on board ship secretly
during the night.

In roughly tracing the lines of emigration followed by each sub-race in
turn, we shall of necessity ultimately reach the lands which their
respective descendants to-day occupy.

For the earliest emigrations we must go back to the Rmoahal days. It
will be remembered that that portion of the race which inhabited the
northeastern coasts alone retained its purity of blood. Harried on their
southern borders and driven further north by the Tlavatli warriors, they
began to overflow to the neighbouring land to the east, and to the still
nearer promontory of Greenland. In the second map period no pure
Rmoahals were left on the then reduced mother-continent but the northern
promontory of the continent then rising on the west was occupied by
them, as well as the Greenland cape already mentioned, and the western
shores of the great Scandinavian island. There was also a colony on the
land lying north of the central Asian sea.

Brittany and Picardy then formed part of the Scandinavian island, while
the island itself became in the third map period part of the growing
continent of Europe. Now it is in France that remains of this race have
been found in the quaternary strata, and the brachycephalous, or
round-headed specimen known as the "Furfooz man," may be taken as a fair
average of the type of the race in its decay.

Many times forced to move south by the rigours of a glacial epoch, many
times driven north by the greed of their more powerful neighbours, the
scattered and degraded remnants of this race may be found to-day in the
modern Lapps, though even here there was some infusion of other blood.
And so it comes to pass that these faded and stunted specimens of
humanity are the lineal descendants of the black race of giants who
arose on the equatorial lands of Lemuria well nigh five million years
ago.

The Tlavatli colonists seem to have spread out towards every point of
the compass. By the time of the second map period their descendants were
settled on the western shores of the then growing American continent
(California) as well as on its extreme southern coasts (Rio de Janeiro).
We also find them occupying the eastern shores of the Scandinavian
island, while numbers of them sailed across the ocean, rounded the coast
of Africa, and reached India. There, mixing with the indigenous Lemurian
population, they formed the Dravidian race. In later days this in its
turn received an infusion of Aryan or Fifth Race blood, from which
results the complexity of type found in India to-day. In fact we have
here a very fair example of the extreme difficulty of deciding any
question of race upon merely physical evidence, for it would be quite
possible to have Fifth Race egos incarnate among the Brahmans, Fourth
Race egos among the lower castes, and some lingering Third Race among
the hill tribes.

By the time of the fourth map period we find a Tlavatli people occupying
the southern parts of South America, from which it may be inferred that
the Patagonians probably had remote Tlavatli ancestry.

Remains of this race, as of the Rmoahals, have been found in the
quaternary strata of Central Europe, and the dolichocephalous
"Cro-Magnon man"\[1\] may be taken as an average specimen of the race in
its decadence, while the "Lake-Dwellers" of Switzerland formed an even
earlier and not quite pure offshoot. The only people who can be cited as
fairly pure-blooded specimens of the race at the present day are some of
the brown tribes of Indians of South America. The Burmese and Siamese
have also Tlavatli blood in their veins, but in their case it was

\[1. Students of' geology and palaeontology {sic} will know that these
sciences regard the "Cro-Magnon man'' as prior to the "Furfooz," and
seeing that the two races ran alongside each other for vast periods of
time, it may quite well be that the individual ''Cro-Magnon" skeleton,
though representative of the second race, was deposited in the
quarternary {sic} strata thousands of years before the individual
Furfooz man lived on the earth.\]

mixed with, and therefore dominated by, the nobler stock of one of the
Aryan sub-races.

We now come to the Toltecs. It was chiefly to the West that their
emigrations tended, and the neighbouring coasts of the American
continent were in the second map period peopled by a pure Toltec race,
the greater part of those left on the mother-continent being then of
very mixed blood. It was on the continents of North and South America
that this race spread abroad and flourished, and on which thousands of
years later were established the empires of Mexico and Peru. The
greatness of these empires is a matter of history, or at least of
tradition supplemented by such evidence as is afforded by magnificent
architectural remains. It may here be noted that while the Mexican
empire was for centuries great and powerful in all that is usually
regarded as power and greatness in our civilization of to-day, it never
reached the height attained by the Peruvians about 14,000 years ago
under their Inca sovereigns, for as regards the general well-being of
the people, the justice and beneficence of the government, the equitable
nature of the land tenure, and the pure and religious life of the
inhabitants, the Peruvian empire of those days might be considered a
traditional though faint echo of the golden age of the Toltecs on the
mother-continent of Atlantis.

The average Red Indian of North or South America is the best
representative to-day of the Toltec people, but of course bears no
comparison with the highly civilized individual of the race at its
zenith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Settlement in Egypt](soa25.md)
