[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa33)  [Next](soa35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Food

A custom which differs considerably from our own must be instanced next,
in their choice of food. It is an unpleasant subject, but can scarcely
be passed over . The flesh of the animals they usually discarded, while
the parts which among us are avoided as food, were by them devoured. The
blood also they drank--often hot from the animal--and various cooked
dishes were also made of it.

It must not, however, be thought that they were without the lighter, and
to us, more palatable, kinds of food. The seas and rivers provided them
with fish, the flesh of which they ate, though often in such an advanced
stage of decomposition as would be to us revolting. The different grains
were largely cultivated, of which were made bread and cakes. They also
had milk, fruit and vegetables.

A small minority of the inhabitants, it is true, never adopted the
revolting customs above referred to. This was the case with the Adept
kings and emperors and the initiated priesthood throughout the whole
empire. They were entirely vegetarian in their habits, but though many
of the emperor's counsellors and the officials about the court affected
to prefer the purer diet, they often indulged in secret their grosser
tastes.

Nor were strong drinks unknown in those days. Fermented liquor of a very
potent sort was at one time much in vogue. But it was so apt to make
those who drank it dangerously excited that a law was passed absolutely
forbidding its consumption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Weapons](soa35)
