[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](soa37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Religion

The only subject that now remains to be dealt with is the evolution of
religious ideas. Between the spiritual aspiration of a rude but simple
race and the degraded ritual of an intellectually cultured but
spiritually dead people, lies a gulf which only the term religion, used
in its widest acceptation, can span. Nevertheless, it is this
consecutive process of generation and degeneration which has to be
traced in the history of the Atlantean people.

It will be remembered that the government under which the Rmoahals came
into existence, was described as the most perfect conceivable, for it
was the Manu himself who acted as their king. The memory of this divine
ruler was naturally preserved in the annals of the race, and in due time
he came to be regarded as a god, among a people who were naturally
psychic, and had consequently glimpses of those states of consciousness
which transcend our ordinary waking condition. Retaining these higher
attributes it was only natural that this primitive people should adopt a
religion which, though in no way representative of any exalted
philosophy, was of a type far from ignoble. In later days this phase of
religious belief passed into a kind of ancestor-worship.

The Tlavatli, while inheriting the traditional reverence and worship for
the Manu, were taught by Adept instructors of the existence of a Supreme
Being whose symbol was recognised as the sun. They thus developed a sort
of sun worship, for the practice of which they repaired to the
hill-tops. There they built great circles of upright monoliths. These
were intended to be symbolical of the sun's yearly course, but they were
also used for astronomical purposes--being placed so that, to one
standing at the high altar, the sun would rise at the winter solstice
behind one of these monoliths, at the vernal equinox behind another, and
so on throughout the year. Astronomical observations of a still more
complex character connected with the more distant constellations were
also helped by these stone circles.

We have already seen under the head of emigrations how a later
sub-race--the Akkadians--in the erection of Stonehenge, reverted to this
primitive building of monoliths.

Endowed though the Tlavatli were with somewhat greater capacity for
intellectual development than the previous sub-race, their cult was
still of a very primitive type.

With the wider diffusion of knowledge in the days of the Toltecs, and
more especially with the establishment later on of an initiated
priesthood and an Adept emperor, increased opportunities were offered to
the people for the attainment of a truer conception of the divine. The
few who were ready to take full advantage of the teaching offered, after
having been tried and tested, were doubtless admitted into the ranks of
the priesthood, which then constituted an immense occult fraternity.
With these, however, who had so outstripped the mass of humanity, as to
be ready to begin the progress of the occult path, we are not here
concerned, the religions practised by the inhabitants of Atlantis
generally being the subject of our investigation.

The power to rise to philosophic heights of thought was of course
wanting to the masses of those days, as it is similarly wanting to the
great majority of the inhabitants of the world to-day. The nearest
approach which the most gifted teacher could make in attempting to
convey any idea of the nameless and all-pervading essence of the Cosmos
was necessarily imparted in the form of symbols, and the sun naturally
enough was the first symbol adopted. As in our own days too, the more
cultivated and spiritually-minded would see through the symbol, and
might sometimes rise on the wings of devotion to the Father of our
spirits, that

"Motive and centre of our soul's desire,  
Object and refuge of our journey's end,"

while the grosser multitude would see nothing but the symbol, and would
worship it, as the carved Madonna or the wooden image of the Crucified
One is to-day worshipped throughout Catholic Europe.

Sun and fire worship then became the cult for the celebration of which
magnificent temples were reared throughout the length and breadth of the
continent of Atlantis, but more especially in the great "City of the
Golden Gates"--the temple-service being performed by retinues of priests
endowed by the State for that purpose.

In those early days no image of the Deity was permitted. The sun-disk
was considered the only appropriate emblem of the godhead, and as such
was used in every temple, a golden disk being generally placed so as to
catch the first rays of the rising sun at the vernal equinox or at the
summer solstice.

An interesting example of the almost unalloyed survival of this worship
of the sun-disk may be instanced in the Shinto ceremonies of Japan. All
other representation of Deity is, in this faith, regarded as impious,
and even the circular mirror of polished metal is hidden from the vulgar
gaze save on ceremonial occasions. Unlike the gorgeous temple
decorations of Atlantis, however, the Shinto temples are characterized
by an entire absence of decoration--the exquisite finish of the plain
wood-work being unrelieved by any carving, paint or varnish.

But the sun-disk did not always remain the only permissible emblem of
Deity. The image of a man--an archetypal man--was in after days placed
in the temples and adored as the highest representation of the divine.
In some ways this might be considered a reversion to the Rmoahal worship
of the Manu. Even then the religion was comparatively pure, and the
occult fraternity of the "Good Law" of course did their utmost to keep
alive in the hearts of the people the spiritual life.

The evil days, however, were drawing near when no altruistic idea should
remain to redeem the race from the abyss of selfishness in which it was
destined to be overwhelmed. The decay of the ethical idea was the
necessary prelude to the perversion of the spiritual. The hand of every
man fought for himself alone, and his knowledge was used for purely
selfish ends, till it became an established belief that there was
nothing in the universe greater or higher than themselves. Each man was
his own "Law, and Lord and God," and the very worship of the temples
ceased to be the worship of any ideal, but became the mere adoration of
man as he was known and seen to be. As is written in the *Book of
Dzyan*, "Then the Fourth became tall with pride. We are the kings it was
said; we are the Gods.... They built huge cities. Of rare earths and
metals they built, and out of the fires vomited, out of the white stone
of the mountains and of the black stone, they cut their own images in
their size and likeness, and worshipped them." Shrines were placed in
temples in which the statue of each man, wrought in gold or silver, or
carved in stone or wood, was adored by himself. The richer men kept
whole trains of priests in their employ for the cult and care of their
shrines, and offerings were made to these statues as to gods. The
apotheosis of self could go no further.

It must be remembered that every true religious idea that has ever
entered into the mind of man, has been consciously suggested to him by
the divine Instructors or the Initiates of the White Lodge, who
throughout all the ages have been the guardians of the divine mysteries,
and of the facts of the supersensual states of consciousness.

Mankind generally has but slowly become capable of assimilating a few of
these divine ideas, while the monstrous growths and hideous distortions
to which every religion on earth stands as witness, must be traced to
man's own lower nature. It would seem indeed that he has not always even
been fit to be entrusted with knowledge as to the mere symbols under
which were veiled the light of Deity, for in the days of the Turanian
Supremacy some of this knowledge was wrongfully divulged.

We have seen how the life and light giving attributes of the sun were in
early times used as the symbol to bring before the minds of the people
all that they were capable of conceiving of the great First Cause. But
other symbols of far deeper and more real significance were known and
guarded within the ranks of the priesthood. One of these was the
conception of a Trinity in Unity. The Trinities of most sacred
significance were never divulged to the people, but the Trinity
personifying the cosmic powers of the universe as Creator, Preserver,
and Destroyer, became publicly known in some irregular manner in the
Turanian days. This idea was still further materialized and degraded by
the Semites into a strictly anthropomorphic Trinity consisting of
father, mother and child.

A further and rather terrible development of the Turanian times must
still be referred to. With the practice of sorcery many of the
inhabitants had, of course, become aware of the existence of powerful
elementals--creatures who had been called into being, or at least
animated by their own powerful wills, which being directed towards
maleficent ends, naturally produced elementals of power and malignity.
So degraded had then become man's feelings of reverence and worship,
that they actually began to adore these semi-conscious creations of
their own malignant thought. The ritual with which these beings were
worshipped was bloodstained from the very start, and of course every
sacrifice offered at their shrines gave vitality and persistence to
these vampire-like creations--so much so, that even to the present day
in various parts of the world, the elementals formed by the powerful
will of these old Atlantean sorcerers still continue to exact their
tribute from unoffending village communities.

Though inaugurated and widely practised by the brutal Turanians, this
blood-stained ritual seems never to have spread to any extent among the
other sub-races, though human sacrifices appear to have been not
uncommon among some branches of the Semites.

In the great Toltec empire of Mexico the sun-worship of their
forefathers was still the national religion, while the bloodless
offerings to their beneficent Deity, Quetzalcoatl, consisted merely of
flowers and fruit. It was only with the coming of the savage Aztecs that
the harmless Mexican ritual was supplemented with the blood of human
sacrifices, which drenched the altars of their war-god, Huitzilopochtli,
and the tearing out of the hearts of the victims on the summit of the
Teocali may be regarded as a direct survival of the elemental -worship
of their Turanian ancestors in Atlantis.

It will be seen then that as in our own days, the religious life of the
people embraced the most varied forms of belief and worship. From the
small minority who aspired to initiation, and had touch with the higher
spiritual life--who knew that good will towards all men, control of
thought, and purity of life and action were the necessary preliminaries
to the attainment of the highest states of consciousness and the widest
realms of vision--innumerable phases led down through the more or less
blind worship of cosmic powers, or of anthropomorphic gods, to the
degraded but most widely extended ritual in which each man adored his
own image, and to the blood stained rites of the elemental worship.

It must be remembered throughout that we are dealing with the Atlantean
race only, so that any reference would be out of place that bore on the
still more degraded fetish-worship that even then existed--as it still
does--amongst the debased representatives of the Lemurian peoples.

All through the centuries then, the various rituals composed to
celebrate these various forms of worship were carried on, till the final
submergence of Poseidonis, by which time the countless hosts of
Atlantean emigrants had already established on foreign lands the various
cults of the mother-continent.

To trace the rise and follow the progress in detail of the archaic
religions, which in historic times have blossomed into such diverse and
antagonistic forms, would be an undertaking of great difficulty, but the
illumination it would throw on matters of transcendent importance may
some day induce the attempt.

In conclusion, it would be vain to attempt to summarize what is already
too much of a summary. Rather let us hope that the foregoing may lend
itself as the text from which may be developed histories of the many
offshoots of the various sub-races-histories which may analytically
examine political and social developments which have been here touched
on in the most fragmentary manner.

One word, however, may still be said about that evolution of the
race--that progress which all creation, with mankind at its head, is
ever destined to achieve century by century, millennium by millennium,
manvantara by manvantara, and kalpa by kalpa.

The descent of spirit into matter--those two poles of the one eternal
substance--is the process which occupies the first half of every cycle.
Now the period we have been contemplating in the foregoing pages--the
period during which the Atlantean race was running its course--was the
very middle or turning point of this present manvantara.

The process of evolution which in our present Fifth Race has now set
in--the return, that is, of matter into spirit--had in those days
revealed itself in but a few isolated individual cases--forerunners of
the resurrection of the spirit.

But the problem, which all who have given the subject any amount of
consideration must have felt to be still awaiting a solution, is the
surprising contrast in the attributes of the Atlantean race. Side by
side with their brutal passions, their degraded animal propensities,
were their psychic faculties, their godlike intuition.

Now the solution of this apparently insoluble enigma lies in the fact
that the building of the bridge had only then been begun--the bridge of
Manas, or mind, destined to unite in the perfected individual the upward
surging forces of the animal and the downward cycling spirit of the God.
The animal kingdom of to-day exhibits a field of nature where the
building of that bridge has not yet been begun, and even among mankind
in the days of Atlantis the connection was so slight that the spiritual
attributes had but little controlling power over the lower animal
nature. The touch of mind they had was sufficient to add zest to the
gratification of the senses, but was not enough to vitalize the still
dormant spiritual faculties, which in the perfected individual will have
to become the absolute monarch. Our metaphor of the bridge may carry us
a little further if we consider it as now in process of construction,
but as destined to remain incomplete for mankind in general for untold
millenniums--in fact, until Humanity has completed another circle of the
seven planets and the great Fifth Round is half way through its course.

Though it was during the latter half of the Third Root Race and the
beginning of the Fourth that the Manasaputra descended to endow with
mind the bulk of Humanity who were still without the spark, yet so
feebly burned the light all through the Atlantean days that few could be
said to have attained to the powers of abstract thought. On the other
hand, the functioning of the mind on concrete things came well within
their grasp, and as we have seen it was in the practical concerns of
their every-day life, especially when their psychic faculties were
directed towards the same objects, that they achieved such remarkable
and stupendous results.

It must also be remembered that Kama, the fourth principle, naturally
obtained its culminating development in the Fourth Race. This would
account for the depths of animal grossness to which they sank, whilst
the approach of the cycle to its nadir inevitably accentuated this
downward movement, so that there is little to be surprised at in the
gradual loss by the race of the psychic faculties, and in its descent to
selfishness and materialism.

Rather should all this be regarded as part of the great cyclic process
in obedience to the eternal law.

We have all gone through those evil days, and the experiences we then
accumulated go to make up the characters we now possess.

But a brighter sun now shines on the Aryan race than that which lit the
path of their Atlantean forefathers. Less dominated by the passions of
the senses, more open to the influence of mind, the men of our race have
obtained and are obtaining a firmer grasp of knowledge, a wider range of
intellect. This upward arc of the great manvantaric cycle will naturally
lead increasing numbers towards the entrance of the Path, and will lend
more and more attraction to the transcendent opportunities it offers for
the continued strengthening and purification of the character-
strengthening and purification no longer directed by mere spasmodic
effort, and continually interrupted by misleading attractions, but
guided and guarded at every step by the Masters of Wisdom, so that the
upward climb when once begun should no longer be halting and uncertain,
but lead direct to the glorious goal.

The psychic faculties too, and the godlike intuition, lost for a time
but still the rightful heritage of the race, only await the individual
effort of reattainment, to give to the character still deeper insight
and more transcendent powers. So shall the ranks of the Adept
instructors--the Masters of Wisdom--be ever strengthened and recruited,
and even amongst us today there must certainly be some,
indistinguishable save by the deathless enthusiasm with which they are
animated, who will, before the next Root Race is established on this
planet, stand themselves as Masters of Wisdom to help the race in its
upward progress.
