[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Americana](../../index.md) 
[9/11](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ch03)  [Next](ch05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 4

RESPONSES TO AL QAEDA'S INITIAL ASSAULTS

#### 4.1 BEFORE THE BOMBINGS IN KENYA AND TANZANIA

Although the 1995 National Intelligence Estimate had warned of a new
type of terrorism, many officials continued to think of terrorists as
agents of states (Saudi Hezbollah acting for Iran against Khobar Towers)
or as domestic criminals (Timothy McVeigh in Oklahoma City).As we
pointed out in chapter 3, the White House is not a natural locus for
program management. Hence, government efforts to cope with terrorism
were essentially the work of individual agencies.

President Bill Clinton's counterterrorism Presidential Decision
Directives in 1995 (no. 39) and May 1998 (no. 62) reiterated that
terrorism was a national security problem, not just a law enforcement
issue. They reinforced the authority of the National Security Council
(NSC) to coordinate domestic as well as foreign counterterrorism
efforts, through Richard Clarke and his interagency Counterterrorism
Security Group (CSG). Spotlighting new concerns about unconventional
attacks, these directives assigned tasks to lead agencies but did not
differentiate types of terrorist threats. Thus, while Clarke might prod
or push agencies to act, what actually happened was usually decided at
the State Department, the Pentagon, the CIA, or the Justice Department.
The efforts of these agencies were sometimes energetic and sometimes
effective. Terrorist plots were disrupted and individual terrorists were
captured. But the United States did not, before 9/11, adopt as a clear
strategic objective the elimination of al Qaeda.

**Early Efforts against Bin Ladin**  
Until 1996, hardly anyone in the U.S. government understood that Usama
Bin Ladin was an inspirer and organizer of the new terrorism. In 1993,
the CIA noted that he had paid for the training of some Egyptian
terrorists in Sudan. The State Department detected his money in aid to
the Yemeni terrorists who set a bomb in an attempt to kill U.S. troops
in Aden in 1992. State Department sources even saw suspicious links with
Omar Abdel Rahman, the "Blind Sheikh" in the New York area, commenting
that Bin Ladin seemed "committed to financing 'Jihads' against 'anti
Islamic' regimes worldwide." After the department designated Sudan a
state sponsor of terrorism in 1993, it put Bin Ladin on its TIPOFF
watchlist, a move that might have prevented his getting a visa had he
tried to enter the United States. As late as 1997, however, even the
CIA's Counterterrorist Center continued to describe him as an "extremist
financier."<sup>1</sup>

In 1996, the CIA set up a special unit of a dozen officers to analyze
intelligence on and plan operations against Bin Ladin. David Cohen, the
head of the CIA's Directorate of Operations, wanted to test the idea of
having a "virtual station"-a station based at headquarters but
collecting and operating against a subject much as stations in the field
focus on a country. Taking his cue from National Security Advisor
Anthony Lake, who expressed special interest in terrorist finance, Cohen
formed his virtual station as a terrorist financial links unit. He had
trouble getting any Directorate of Operations officer to run it; he
finally recruited a former analyst who was then running the Islamic
Extremist Branch of the Counterterrorist Center. This officer, who was
especially knowledgeable about Afghanistan, had noticed a recent stream
of reports about Bin Ladin and something called al Qaeda, and suggested
to Cohen that the station focus on this one individual. Cohen agreed.
Thus was born the Bin Ladin unit.<sup>2</sup>

In May 1996, Bin Ladin left Sudan for Afghanistan. A few months later,
as the Bin Ladin unit was gearing up, Jamal Ahmed al Fadl walked into a
U.S. embassy in Africa, established his bona fides as a former senior
employee of Bin Ladin, and provided a major breakthrough of intelligence
on the creation, character, direction, and intentions of al Qaeda.
Corroborating evidence came from another walk-in source at a different
U.S. embassy. More confirmation was supplied later that year by
intelligence and other sources, including material gathered by FBI
agents and Kenyan police from an al Qaeda cell in Nairobi.<sup>3</sup>

By 1997, officers in the Bin Ladin unit recognized that Bin Ladin was
more than just a financier. They learned that al Qaeda had a military
committee that was planning operations against U.S. interests worldwide
and was actively trying to obtain nuclear material. Analysts assigned to
the station looked at the information it had gathered and "found
connections everywhere," including links to the attacks on U.S. troops
in Aden and Somalia in 1992 and 1993 and to the Manila air plot in the
Philippines in 1994-1995.<sup>4</sup>

The Bin Ladin station was already working on plans for offensive
operations against Bin Ladin. These plans were directed at both physical
assets and sources of finance. In the end, plans to identify and attack
Bin Ladin's money sources did not go forward.<sup>5</sup>

In late 1995, when Bin Ladin was still in Sudan, the State Department
and the CIA learned that Sudanese officials were discussing with the
Saudi government the possibility of expelling Bin Ladin. U.S. Ambassador
Timothy Carney encouraged the Sudanese to pursue this course. The
Saudis, however, did not want Bin Ladin, giving as their reason their
revocation of his citizenship.<sup>6</sup>

Sudan's minister of defense, Fatih Erwa, has claimed that Sudan offered
to hand Bin Ladin over to the United States. The Commission has found no
credible evidence that this was so. Ambassador Carney had instructions
only to push the Sudanese to expel Bin Ladin. Ambassador Carney had no
legal basis to ask for more from the Sudanese since, at the time, there
was no indictment out-standing.<sup>7</sup>

The chief of the Bin Ladin station, whom we will call "Mike," saw Bin
Ladin's move to Afghanistan as a stroke of luck. Though the CIA had
virtually abandoned Afghanistan after the Soviet withdrawal, case
officers had reestablished old contacts while tracking down Mir Amal
Kansi, the Pakistani gunman who had murdered two CIA employees in
January 1993.These contacts contributed to intelligence about Bin
Ladin's local movements, business activities, and security and living
arrangements, and helped provide evidence that he was spending large
amounts of money to help the Taliban. The chief of the Counterterrorist
Center, whom we will call "Jeff," told Director George Tenet that the
CIA's intelligence assets were "near to providing real-time information
about Bin Ladin's activities and travels in Afghanistan." One of the
contacts was a group associated with particular tribes among
Afghanistan's ethnic Pashtun community.<sup>8</sup>

By the fall of 1997, the Bin Ladin unit had roughed out a plan for these
Afghan tribals to capture Bin Ladin and hand him over for trial either
in the United States or in an Arab country. In early 1998, the
cabinet-level Principals Committee apparently gave the concept its
blessing.<sup>9</sup>

On their own separate track, getting information but not direction from
the CIA, the FBI's New York Field Office and the U.S. Attorney for the
Southern District of New York were preparing to ask a grand jury to
indict Bin Ladin. The Counterterrorist Center knew that this was
happening.<sup>10</sup> The eventual charge, conspiring to attack U.S.
defense installations, was finally issued from the grand jury in June
1998-as a sealed indictment. The indictment was publicly disclosed in
November of that year.

When Bin Ladin moved to Afghanistan in May 1996, he became a subject of
interest to the State Department's South Asia bureau. At the time, as
one diplomat told us, South Asia was seen in the department and the
government generally as a low priority. In 1997, as Madeleine Albright
was beginning her tenure as secretary of state, an NSC policy review
concluded that the United States should pay more attention not just to
India but also to Pakistan and Afghanistan.<sup>11</sup> With regard to
Afghanistan, another diplomat said, the United States at the time had
"no policy."<sup>12</sup>

In the State Department, concerns about India-Pakistan tensions often
crowded out attention to Afghanistan or Bin Ladin. Aware of instability
and growing Islamic extremism in Pakistan, State Department officials
worried most about an arms race and possible war between Pakistan and
India. After May 1998, when both countries surprised the United States
by testing nuclear weapons, these dangers became daily first-order
concerns of the State Department.<sup>13</sup>

In Afghanistan, the State Department tried to end the civil war that had
continued since the Soviets' withdrawal. The South Asia bureau believed
it might have a carrot for Afghanistan's warring factions in a project
by the Union Oil Company of California (UNOCAL) to build a pipeline
across the country. While there was probably never much chance of the
pipeline actually being built, the Afghan desk hoped that the prospect
of shared pipeline profits might lure faction leaders to a conference
table. U.S. diplomats did not favor the Taliban over the rival factions.
Despite growing concerns, U.S. diplomats were willing at the time, as
one official said, to "give the Taliban a chance."<sup>14</sup>

Though Secretary Albright made no secret of thinking the Taliban
"despicable," the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Bill
Richardson, led a delegation to South Asia-including Afghanistan-in
April 1998. No U.S. official of such rank had been to Kabul in decades.
Ambassador Richardson went primarily to urge negotiations to end the
civil war. In view of Bin Ladin's recent public call for all Muslims to
kill Americans, Richardson asked the Taliban to expel Bin Ladin. They
answered that they did not know his whereabouts. In any case, the
Taliban said, Bin Ladin was not a threat to the United
States.<sup>15</sup>

In sum, in late 1997 and the spring of 1998, the lead U.S. agencies each
pursued their own efforts against Bin Ladin. The CIA's Counterterrorist
Center was developing a plan to capture and remove him from Afghanistan.
Parts of the Justice Department were moving toward indicting Bin Ladin,
making possible a criminal trial in a New York court. Meanwhile, the
State Department was focused more on lessening Indo-Pakistani nuclear
tensions, ending the Afghan civil war, and ameliorating the Taliban's
human rights abuses than on driving out Bin Ladin. Another key actor,
Marine General Anthony Zinni, the commander in chief of the U.S. Central
Command, shared the State Department's view.<sup>16</sup>

**The CIA Develops a Capture Plan**  
Initially, the DCI's Counterterrorist Center and its Bin Ladin unit
considered a plan to ambush Bin Ladin when he traveled between Kandahar,
the Taliban capital where he sometimes stayed the night, and his primary
residence at the time, Tarnak Farms. After the Afghan tribals reported
that they had tried such an ambush and failed, the Center gave up on it,
despite suspicions that the tribals' story might be fiction. Thereafter,
the capture plan focused on a nighttime raid on Tarnak
Farms.<sup>17</sup>

A compound of about 80 concrete or mud-brick buildings surrounded by a
10-foot wall, Tarnak Farms was located in an isolated desert area on the
outskirts of the Kandahar airport. CIA officers were able to map the
entire site, identifying the houses that belonged to Bin Ladin's wives
and the one where Bin Ladin himself was most likely to sleep. Working
with the tribals, they drew up plans for the raid. They ran two complete
rehearsals in the United States during the fall of 1997.<sup>18</sup>

By early 1998, planners at the Counterterrorist Center were ready to
come back to the White House to seek formal approval. Tenet apparently
walked National Security Advisor Sandy Berger through the basic plan on
February 13. One group of tribals would subdue the guards, enter Tarnak
Farms stealthily, grab Bin Ladin, take him to a desert site outside
Kandahar, and turn him over to a second group. This second group of
tribals would take him to a desert landing zone already tested in the
1997 Kansi capture. From there, a CIA plane would take him to New York,
an Arab capital, or wherever he was to be arraigned. Briefing papers
prepared by the Counterterrorist Center acknowledged that hitches might
develop. People might be killed, and Bin Ladin's supporters might
retaliate, perhaps taking U.S. citizens in Kandahar hostage. But the
briefing papers also noted that there was risk in not acting. "Sooner or
later," they said, "Bin Ladin will attack U.S. interests, perhaps using
WMD \[weapons of mass destruction\]."<sup>19</sup>

Clarke's Counterterrorism Security Group reviewed the capture plan for
Berger. Noting that the plan was in a "very early stage of development,"
the NSC staff then told the CIA planners to go ahead and, among other
things, start drafting any legal documents that might be required to
authorize the covert action. The CSG apparently stressed that the raid
should target Bin Ladin himself, not the whole compound.<sup>20</sup>

The CIA planners conducted their third complete rehearsal in March, and
they again briefed the CSG. Clarke wrote Berger on March 7 that he saw
the operation as "somewhat embryonic" and the CIA as "months away from
doing anything."<sup>21</sup>

"Mike" thought the capture plan was "the perfect operation." It required
minimum infrastructure. The plan had now been modified so that the
tribals would keep Bin Ladin in a hiding place for up to a month before
turning him over to the United States-thereby increasing the chances of
keeping the U.S. hand out of sight. "Mike" trusted the information from
the Afghan network; it had been corroborated by other means, he told us.
The lead CIA officer in the field, Gary Schroen, also had confidence in
the tribals. In a May 6 cable to CIA headquarters, he pronounced their
planning "almost as professional and detailed . . . as would be done by
any U.S. military special operations element." He and the other officers
who had worked through the plan with the tribals judged it "about as
good as it can be." (By that, Schroen explained, he meant that the
chance of capturing or killing Bin Ladin was about 40 percent.) Although
the tribals thought they could pull off the raid, if the operation were
approved by headquarters and the policymakers, Schroen wrote there was
going to be a point when "we step back and keep our fingers crossed that
the \[tribals\] prove as good (and as lucky) as they think they will
be."<sup>22</sup>

Military officers reviewed the capture plan and, according to "Mike,"
"found no showstoppers." The commander of Delta Force felt
"uncomfortable" with having the tribals hold Bin Ladin captive for so
long, and the commander of Joint Special Operations Forces, Lieutenant
General Michael Canavan, was worried about the safety of the tribals
inside Tarnak Farms. General Canavan said he had actually thought the
operation too complicated for the CIA-"out of their league"-and an
effort to get results "on the cheap." But a senior Joint Staff officer
described the plan as "generally, not too much different than we might
have come up with ourselves." No one in the Pentagon, so far as we know,
advised the CIA or the White House not to proceed.<sup>23</sup>

In Washington, Berger expressed doubt about the dependability of the
tribals. In his meeting with Tenet, Berger focused most, however, on the
question of what was to be done with Bin Ladin if he were actually
captured. He worried that the hard evidence against Bin Ladin was still
skimpy and that there was a danger of snatching him and bringing him to
the United States only to see him acquitted.<sup>24</sup>

On May 18, CIA's managers reviewed a draft Memorandum of Notification
(MON), a legal document authorizing the capture operation. A 1986
presidential finding had authorized worldwide covert action against
terrorism and probably provided adequate authority. But mindful of the
old "rogue elephant" charge, senior CIA managers may have wanted
something on paper to show that they were not acting on their own.

Discussion of this memorandum brought to the surface an unease about
paramilitary covert action that had become ingrained, at least among
some CIA senior managers. James Pavitt, the assistant head of the
Directorate of Operations, expressed concern that people might get
killed; it appears he thought the operation had at least a slight flavor
of a plan for an assassination. Moreover, he calculated that it would
cost several million dollars. He was not prepared to take that money
"out of hide," and he did not want to go to all the necessary
congressional committees to get special money. Despite Pavitt's
misgivings, the CIA leadership cleared the draft memorandum and sent it
on to the National Security Council.<sup>25</sup>

Counterterrorist Center officers briefed Attorney General Janet Reno and
FBI Director Louis Freeh, telling them that the operation had about a 30
percent chance of success. The Center's chief, "Jeff," joined John
O'Neill, the head of the FBI's New York Field Office, in briefing Mary
Jo White, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, and
her staff. Though "Jeff" also used the 30 percent success figure, he
warned that someone would surely be killed in the operation. White's
impression from the New York briefing was that the chances of capturing
Bin Ladin alive were nil.<sup>26</sup>

From May 20 to 24, the CIA ran a final, graded rehearsal of the
operation, spread over three time zones, even bringing in personnel from
the region. The FBI also participated. The rehearsal went well. The
Counterterrorist Center planned to brief cabinet-level principals and
their deputies the following week, giving June 23 as the date for the
raid, with Bin Ladin to be brought out of Afghanistan no later than July
23.<sup>27</sup>

On May 20, Director Tenet discussed the high risk of the operation with
Berger and his deputies, warning that people might be killed, including
Bin Ladin. Success was to be defined as the exfiltration of Bin Ladin
out of Afghanistan.<sup>28</sup> A meeting of principals was scheduled
for May 29 to decide whether the operation should go ahead.

The principals did not meet. On May 29, "Jeff" informed "Mike" that he
had just met with Tenet, Pavitt, and the chief of the Directorate's Near
Eastern Division. The decision was made not to go ahead with the
operation. "Mike" cabled the field that he had been directed to "stand
down on the operation for the time being." He had been told, he wrote,
that cabinet-level officials thought the risk of civilian
casualties-"collateral damage"-was too high. They were concerned about
the tribals' safety, and had worried that "the purpose and nature of the
operation would be subject to unavoidable misinterpretation and
misrepresentation-and probably recriminations-in the event that Bin
Ladin, despite our best intentions and efforts, did not
survive."<sup>29</sup>

Impressions vary as to who actually decided not to proceed with the
operation. Clarke told us that the CSG saw the plan as flawed. He was
said to have described it to a colleague on the NSC staff as
"half-assed" and predicted that the principals would not approve it.
"Jeff " thought the decision had been made at the cabinet level. Pavitt
thought that it was Berger's doing, though perhaps on Tenet's advice.
Tenet told us that given the recommendation of his chief operations
officers, he alone had decided to "turn off" the operation. He had
simply informed Berger, who had not pushed back. Berger's recollection
was similar. He said the plan was never presented to the White House for
a decision.<sup>30</sup>

The CIA's senior management clearly did not think the plan would work.
Tenet's deputy director of operations wrote to Berger a few weeks later
that the CIA assessed the tribals' ability to capture Bin Ladin and
deliver him to U.S. officials as low. But working-level CIA officers
were disappointed. Before it was canceled, Schroen described it as the
"best plan we are going to come up with to capture \[Bin Ladin\] while
he is in Afghanistan and bring him to justice."<sup>31</sup> No capture
plan before 9/11 ever again attained the same level of detail and
preparation. The tribals' reported readiness to act diminished. And Bin
Ladin's security precautions and defenses became more elaborate and
formidable.

At this time, 9/11 was more than three years away. It was the duty of
Tenet and the CIA leadership to balance the risks of inaction against
jeopardizing the lives of their operatives and agents. And they had
reason to worry about failure: millions of dollars down the drain; a
shoot-out that could be seen as an assassination; and, if there were
repercussions in Pakistan, perhaps a coup. The decisions of the U.S.
government in May 1998 were made, as Berger has put it, from the vantage
point of the driver looking through a muddy windshield moving forward,
not through a clean rearview mirror.<sup>32</sup>

**Looking for Other Options**  
The Counterterrorist Center continued to track Bin Ladin and to
contemplate covert action. The most hopeful possibility seemed now to
lie in diplomacy- but not diplomacy managed by the Department of State,
which focused primarily on India-Pakistan nuclear tensions during the
summer of 1998.The CIA learned in the spring of 1998 that the Saudi
government had quietly disrupted Bin Ladin cells in its country that
were planning to attack U.S. forces with shoulder-fired missiles. They
had arrested scores of individuals, with no publicity. When thanking the
Saudis, Director Tenet took advantage of the opening to ask them to help
against Bin Ladin. The response was encouraging enough that President
Clinton made Tenet his informal personal representative to work with the
Saudis on terrorism, and Tenet visited Riyadh in May and again in early
June.<sup>33</sup>

Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah, who had taken charge from the ailing King
Fahd, promised Tenet an all-out secret effort to persuade the Taliban to
expel Bin Ladin so that he could be sent to the United States or to
another country for trial. The Kingdom's emissary would be its
intelligence chief, Prince Turki bin Faisal. Vice President Al Gore
later added his thanks to those of Tenet, both making clear that they
spoke with President Clinton's blessing. Tenet reported that it was
imperative to get an indictment against Bin Ladin. The New York grand
jury issued its sealed indictment a few days later, on June 10.Tenet
also recommended that no action be taken on other U.S. options, such as
the covert action plan.<sup>34</sup>

Prince Turki followed up in meetings during the summer with Mullah Omar
and other Taliban leaders. Apparently employing a mixture of possible
incentives and threats, Turki received a commitment that Bin Ladin would
be expelled, but Mullah Omar did not make good on this
promise.<sup>35</sup>

On August 5, Clarke chaired a CSG meeting on Bin Ladin. In the
discussion of what might be done, the note taker wrote, "there was a
dearth of bright ideas around the table, despite a consensus that the
\[government\] ought to pursue every avenue it can to address the
problem."<sup>36</sup>

#### 4.2 CRISIS:AUGUST 1998

On August 7, 1998, National Security Advisor Berger woke President
Clinton with a phone call at 5:35 A.M. to tell him of the almost
simultaneous bombings of the U.S. embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar
es Salaam, Tanzania. Suspicion quickly focused on Bin Ladin. Unusually
good intelligence, chiefly from the yearlong monitoring of al Qaeda's
cell in Nairobi, soon firmly fixed responsibility on him and his
associates.<sup>37</sup>

Debate about what to do settled very soon on one option: Tomahawk cruise
missiles. Months earlier, after cancellation of the covert capture
operation, Clarke had prodded the Pentagon to explore possibilities for
military action. On June 2, General Hugh Shelton, the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, had directed General Zinni at Central Command to
develop a plan, which he had submitted during the first week of July.
Zinni's planners surely considered the two previous times the United
States had used force to respond to terrorism, the 1986 strike on Libya
and the 1993 strike against Iraq. They proposed firing Tomahawks against
eight terrorist camps in Afghanistan, including Bin Ladin's compound at
Tarnak Farms.<sup>38</sup> After the embassy attacks, the Pentagon
offered this plan to the White House.

The day after the embassy bombings, Tenet brought to a principals
meeting intelligence that terrorist leaders were expected to gather at a
camp near Khowst, Afghanistan, to plan future attacks. According to
Berger, Tenet said that several hundred would attend, including Bin
Ladin. The CIA described the area as effectively a military cantonment,
away from civilian population centers and overwhelmingly populated by
jihadists. Clarke remembered sitting next to Tenet in a White House
meeting, asking Tenet "You thinking what I'm thinking?" and his nodding
"yes."<sup>39</sup> The principals quickly reached a consensus on
attacking the gathering. The strike's purpose was to kill Bin Ladin and
his chief lieutenants.<sup>40</sup>

Berger put in place a tightly compartmented process designed to keep all
planning secret. On August 11, General Zinni received orders to prepare
detailed plans for strikes against the sites in Afghanistan. The
Pentagon briefed President Clinton about these plans on August 12 and
14.Though the principals hoped that the missiles would hit Bin Ladin,
NSC staff recommended the strike whether or not there was firm evidence
that the commanders were at the facilities.<sup>41</sup>

Considerable debate went to the question of whether to strike targets
outside of Afghanistan, including two facilities in Sudan. One was a
tannery believed to belong to Bin Ladin. The other was al Shifa, a
Khartoum pharmaceutical plant, which intelligence reports said was
manufacturing a precursor ingredient for nerve gas with Bin Ladin's
financial support. The argument for hitting the tannery was that it
could hurt Bin Ladin financially. The argument for hitting al Shifa was
that it would lessen the chance of Bin Ladin's having nerve gas for a
later attack.<sup>42</sup>

Ever since March 1995, American officials had had in the backs of their
minds Aum Shinrikyo's release of sarin nerve gas in the Tokyo subway.
President Clinton himself had expressed great concern about chemical and
biological terrorism in the United States. Bin Ladin had reportedly been
heard to speak of wanting a "Hiroshima" and at least 10,000 casualties.
The CIA reported that a soil sample from the vicinity of the al Shifa
plant had tested positive for EMPTA, a precursor chemical for VX, a
nerve gas whose lone use was for mass killing. Two days before the
embassy bombings, Clarke's staff wrote that Bin Ladin "has invested in
and almost certainly has access to VX produced at a plant in
Sudan."<sup>43</sup> Senior State Department officials believed that
they had received a similar verdict independently, though they and
Clarke's staff were probably relying on the same report. Mary McCarthy,
the NSC senior director responsible for intelligence programs, initially
cautioned Berger that the "bottom line" was that "we will need much
better intelligence on this facility before we seriously consider any
options." She added that the link between Bin Ladin and al Shifa was
"rather uncertain at this point." Berger has told us that he thought
about what might happen if the decision went against hitting al Shifa,
and nerve gas was used in a New York subway two weeks
later.<sup>44</sup>

By the early hours of the morning of August 20, President Clinton and
all his principal advisers had agreed to strike Bin Ladin camps in
Afghanistan near Khowst, as well as hitting al Shifa. The President took
the Sudanese tannery off the target list because he saw little point in
killing uninvolved people without doing significant harm to Bin Ladin.
The principal with the most qualms regarding al Shifa was Attorney
General Reno. She expressed concern about attacking two Muslim countries
at the same time. Looking back, she said that she felt the "premise kept
shifting."<sup>45</sup>

Later on August 20, Navy vessels in the Arabian Sea fired their cruise
missiles. Though most of them hit their intended targets, neither Bin
Ladin nor any other terrorist leader was killed. Berger told us that an
after-action review by Director Tenet concluded that the strikes had
killed 20-30 people in the camps but probably missed Bin Ladin by a few
hours. Since the missiles headed for Afghanistan had had to cross
Pakistan, the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs was sent to meet with
Pakistan's army chief of staff to assure him the missiles were not
coming from India. Officials in Washington speculated that one or
another Pakistani official might have sent a warning to the Taliban or
Bin Ladin.<sup>46</sup>

The air strikes marked the climax of an intense 48-hour period in which
Berger notified congressional leaders, the principals called their
foreign counterparts, and President Clinton flew back from his vacation
on Martha's Vineyard to address the nation from the Oval Office. The
President spoke to the congressional leadership from Air Force One, and
he called British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Pakistani Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif, and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak from the White
House.<sup>47</sup> House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Senate Majority
Leader Trent Lott initially supported the President. The next month,
Gingrich's office dismissed the cruise missile attacks as
"pinpricks."<sup>48</sup>

At the time, President Clinton was embroiled in the Lewinsky scandal,
which continued to consume public attention for the rest of that year
and the first months of 1999. As it happened, a popular 1997 movie, *Wag
the Dog*, features a president who fakes a war to distract public
attention from a domestic scandal. Some Republicans in Congress raised
questions about the timing of the strikes. Berger was particularly
rankled by an editorial in the *Economis*t that said that only the
future would tell whether the U.S. missile strikes had "created 10,000
new fanatics where there would have been none."<sup>49</sup>

Much public commentary turned immediately to scalding criticism that the
action was too aggressive. The Sudanese denied that al Shifa produced
nerve gas, and they allowed journalists to visit what was left of a
seemingly harmless facility. President Clinton, Vice President Gore,
Berger, Tenet, and Clarke insisted to us that their judgment was right,
pointing to the soil sample evidence. No independent evidence has
emerged to corroborate the CIA's assessment.<sup>50</sup> Everyone
involved in the decision had, of course, been aware of President
Clinton's problems. He told them to ignore them. Berger recalled the
President saying to him "that they were going to get crap either way, so
they should do the right thing."<sup>51</sup> All his aides testified to
us that they based their advice solely on national security
considerations. We have found no reason to question their statements.
The failure of the strikes, the "wag the dog" slur, the intense
partisanship of the period, and the nature of the al Shifa evidence
likely had a cumulative effect on future decisions about the use of
force against Bin Ladin. Berger told us that he did not feel any sense
of constraint.<sup>52</sup> The period after the August 1998 embassy
bombings was critical in shaping U.S. policy toward Bin Ladin. Although
more Americans had been killed in the 1996 Khobar Towers attack, and
many more in Beirut in 1983, the overall loss of life rivaled the worst
attacks in memory. More ominous, perhaps, was the demonstration of an
operational capability to coordinate two nearly simultaneous attacks on
U.S. embassies in different countries. Despite the availability of
information that al Qaeda was a global network, in 1998 policymakers
knew little about the organization. The reams of new information that
the CIA's Bin Ladin unit had been developing since 1996 had not been
pulled together and synthesized for the rest of the government. Indeed,
analysts in the unit felt that they were viewed as alarmists even within
the CIA. A National Intelligence Estimate on terrorism in 1997 had only
briefly mentioned Bin Ladin, and no subsequent national estimate would
authoritatively evaluate the terrorism danger until after 9/11.
Policymakers knew there was a dangerous individual, Usama Bin Ladin,
whom they had been trying to capture and bring to trial. Documents at
the time referred to Bin Ladin "and his associates" or Bin Ladin and his
"network." They did not emphasize the existence of a structured
worldwide organization gearing up to train thousands of potential
terrorists.<sup>53</sup>

In the critical days and weeks after the August 1998 attacks, senior
policy-makers in the Clinton administration had to reevaluate the threat
posed by Bin Ladin. Was this just a new and especially venomous version
of the ordinary terrorist threat America had lived with for decades, or
was it radically new, posing a danger beyond any yet experienced?

Even after the embassy attacks, Bin Ladin had been responsible for the
deaths of fewer than 50 Americans, most of them overseas. An NSC staffer
working for Richard Clarke told us the threat was seen as one that could
cause hundreds of casualties, not thousands.<sup>54</sup> Even officials
who acknowledge a vital threat intellectually may not be ready to act on
such beliefs at great cost or at high risk.

Therefore, the government experts who believed that Bin Ladin and his
network posed such a novel danger needed a way to win broad support for
their views, or at least spotlight the areas of dispute. The
Presidential Daily Brief and the similar, more widely circulated daily
reports for high officials-consisting mainly of brief reports of
intelligence "news" without much analysis or con-text-did not provide
such a vehicle. The national intelligence estimate has often played this
role, and is sometimes controversial for this very reason. It played no
role in judging the threat posed by al Qaeda, either in 1998 or later.

In the late summer and fall of 1998, the U.S. government also was
worrying about the deployment of military power in two other ongoing
conflicts. After years of war in the Balkans, the United States had
finally committed itself to significant military intervention in
1995-1996. Already maintaining a NATO-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia,
U.S. officials were beginning to consider major combat operations
against Serbia to protect Muslim civilians in Kosovo from ethnic
cleansing. Air strikes were threatened in October 1998;a full-scale NATO
bombing campaign against Serbia was launched in March 1999.<sup>55</sup>

In addition, the Clinton administration was facing the possibility of
major combat operations against Iraq. Since 1996, the UN inspections
regime had been increasingly obstructed by Saddam Hussein. The United
States was threatening to attack unless unfettered inspections could
resume. The Clinton administration eventually launched a large-scale set
of air strikes against Iraq, Operation Desert Fox, in December 1998.
These military commitments became the context in which the Clinton
administration had to consider opening another front of military
engagement against a new terrorist threat based in Afghanistan.

**A Follow-On Campaign?**  
Clarke hoped the August 1998 missile strikes would mark the beginning of
a sustained campaign against Bin Ladin. Clarke was, as he later
admitted, "obsessed" with Bin Ladin, and the embassy bombings gave him
new scope for pursuing his obsession. Terrorism had moved high up among
the President's concerns, and Clarke's position had elevated
accordingly. The CSG, unlike most standing interagency committees, did
not have to report through the Deputies Committee. Although such a
reporting relationship had been prescribed in the May 1998 presidential
directive (after expressions of concern by Attorney General Reno, among
others), that directive contained an exception that permitted the CSG to
report directly to the principals if Berger so elected. In practice, the
CSG often reported not even to the full Principals Committee but instead
to the so-called Small Group formed by Berger, consisting only of those
principals cleared to know about the most sensitive issues connected
with counterterrorism activities concerning Bin Ladin or the Khobar
Towers investigation.<sup>56</sup>

For this inner cabinet, Clarke drew up what he called
"Political-Military Plan Delenda." The Latin *delenda*, meaning that
something "must be destroyed," evoked the famous Roman vow to destroy
its rival, Carthage.The overall goal of Clarke's paper was to
"immediately eliminate any significant threat to Americans" from the
"Bin Ladin network."<sup>57</sup>The paper called for diplomacy to deny
Bin Ladin sanctuary; covert action to disrupt terrorist activities, but
above all to capture Bin Ladin and his deputies and bring them to trial;
efforts to dry up Bin Ladin's money supply; and preparation for
follow-on military action. The status of the document was and remained
uncertain. It was never formally adopted by the principals, and
participants in the Small Group now have little or no recollection of
it. It did, however, guide Clarke's efforts.

The military component of Clarke's plan was its most fully articulated
element. He envisioned an ongoing campaign of strikes against Bin
Ladin's bases in Afghanistan or elsewhere, whenever target information
was ripe. Acknowledging that individual targets might not have much
value, he cautioned Berger not to expect ever again to have an assembly
of terrorist leaders in his sights. But he argued that rolling attacks
might persuade the Taliban to hand over Bin Ladin and, in any case,
would show that the action in August was not a "one-off" event. It would
show that the United States was committed to a relentless effort to take
down Bin Ladin's network.<sup>58</sup>

Members of the Small Group found themselves unpersuaded of the merits of
rolling attacks. Defense Secretary William Cohen told us Bin Ladin's
training camps were primitive, built with "rope ladders"; General
Shelton called them "jungle gym" camps. Neither thought them worthwhile
targets for very expensive missiles. President Clinton and Berger also
worried about the *Economist'*s point-that attacks that missed Bin Ladin
could enhance his stature and win him new recruits. After the United
States launched air attacks against Iraq at the end of 1998 and against
Serbia in 1999, in each case provoking worldwide criticism, Deputy
National Security Advisor James Steinberg added the argument that
attacks in Afghanistan offered "little benefit, lots of blowback against
\[a\] bomb-happy U.S."<sup>59</sup>

During the last week of August 1998, officials began considering
possible follow-on strikes. According to Clarke, President Clinton was
inclined to launch further strikes sooner rather than later. On August
27, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Walter Slocombe advised
Secretary Cohen that the available targets were not promising. The
experience of the previous week, he wrote, "has only confirmed the
importance of defining a clearly articulated rationale for military
action" that was effective as well as justified. But Slocombe worried
that simply striking some of these available targets did not add up to
an effective strategy.<sup>60</sup>

Defense officials at a lower level, in the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict, tried to
meet Slocombe's objections. They developed a plan that, unlike Clarke's,
called not for particular strikes but instead for a broad change in
national strategy and in the institutional approach of the Department of
Defense, implying a possible need for large-scale operations across the
whole spectrum of U.S. military capabilities. It urged the department to
become a lead agency in driving a national counterterrorism strategy
forward, to "champion a national effort to take up the gauntlet that
international terrorists have thrown at our feet." The authors expressed
concern that "we have not fundamentally altered our philosophy or our
approach" even though the terrorist threat had grown. They outlined an
eight-part strategy "to be more proactive and aggressive." The future,
they warned, might bring "horrific attacks," in which case "we will have
no choice nor, unfortunately, will we have a plan." The assistant
secretary, Allen Holmes, took the paper to Slocombe's chief deputy, Jan
Lodal, but it went no further. Its lead author recalls being told by
Holmes that Lodal thought it was too aggressive. Holmes cannot recall
what was said, and Lodal cannot remember the episode or the paper at
all.<sup>61</sup>

#### 4.3 DIPLOMACY

After the August missile strikes, diplomatic options to press the
Taliban seemed no more promising than military options. The United
States had issued a formal warning to the Taliban, and also to Sudan,
that they would be held directly responsible for any attacks on
Americans, wherever they occurred, carried out by the Bin Ladin network
as long as they continued to provide sanctuary to it.<sup>62</sup>

For a brief moment, it had seemed as if the August strikes might have
shocked the Taliban into thinking of giving up Bin Ladin. On August 22,
the reclusive Mullah Omar told a working-level State Department official
that the strikes were counterproductive but added that he would be open
to a dialogue with the United States on Bin Ladin's presence in
Afghanistan.<sup>63</sup> Meeting in Islamabad with William Milam, the
U.S. ambassador to Pakistan, Taliban delegates said it was against their
culture to expel someone seeking sanctuary but asked what would happen
to Bin Ladin should he be sent to Saudi Arabia.<sup>64</sup>

Yet in September 1998, when the Saudi emissary, Prince Turki, asked
Mullah Omar whether he would keep his earlier promise to expel Bin
Ladin, the Taliban leader said no. Both sides shouted at each other,
with Mullah Omar denouncing the Saudi government. Riyadh then suspended
its diplomatic relations with the Taliban regime. (Saudi Arabia,
Pakistan, and the United Arab Emirates were the only countries that
recognized the Taliban as the legitimate government of Afghanistan.)
Crown Prince Abdullah told President Clinton and Vice President Gore
about this when he visited Washington in late September. His account
confirmed reports that the U.S. government had received
independently.<sup>65</sup>

Other efforts with the Saudi government centered on improving
intelligence sharing and permitting U.S. agents to interrogate prisoners
in Saudi custody. The history of such cooperation in 1997 and 1998 had
been strained.<sup>66</sup> Several officials told us, in particular,
that the United States could not get direct access to an important al
Qaeda financial official, Madani al Tayyib, who had been detained by the
Saudi government in 1997.<sup>67</sup> Though U.S. officials repeatedly
raised the issue, the Saudis provided limited information. In his
September 1998 meeting with Crown Prince Abdullah, Vice President Gore,
while thanking the Saudi government for their responsiveness, renewed
the request for direct U.S. access to Tayyib.<sup>68</sup> The United
States never obtained this access.

An NSC staff-led working group on terrorist finances asked the CIA in
November 1998 to push again for access to Tayyib and to see "if it is
possible to elaborate further on the ties between Usama bin Ladin and
prominent individuals in Saudi Arabia, including especially the Bin
Ladin family."<sup>69</sup> One result was two NSC-led interagency trips
to Persian Gulf states in 1999 and 2000. During these trips the NSC,
Treasury, and intelligence representatives spoke with Saudi officials,
and later interviewed members of the Bin Ladin family, about Usama's
inheritance. The Saudis and the Bin Ladin family eventually helped in
this particular effort and U.S. officials ultimately learned that Bin
Ladin was not financing al Qaeda out of a personal
inheritance.<sup>70</sup> But Clarke was frustrated about how little the
Agency knew, complaining to Berger that four years after "we first asked
CIA to track down \[Bin Ladin\]'s finances" and two years after the
creation of the CIA's Bin Ladin unit, the Agency said it could only
guess at how much aid Bin Ladin gave to terrorist groups, what were the
main sources of his budget, or how he moved his money.<sup>71</sup>

The other diplomatic route to get at Bin Ladin in Afghanistan ran
through Islamabad. In the summer before the embassy bombings, the State
Department had been heavily focused on rising tensions between India and
Pakistan and did not aggressively challenge Pakistan on Afghanistan and
Bin Ladin. But State Department counterterrorism officials wanted a
stronger position; the department's acting counterterrorism coordinator
advised Secretary Albright to designate Pakistan as a state sponsor of
terrorism, noting that despite high-level Pakistani assurances, the
country's military intelligence service continued "activities in support
of international terrorism" by supporting attacks on civilian targets in
Kashmir. This recommendation was opposed by the State Department's South
Asia bureau, which was concerned that it would damage already sensitive
relations with Pakistan in the wake of the May 1998 nuclear tests by
both Pakistan and India. Secretary Albright rejected the recommendation
on August 5, 1998, just two days before the embassy
bombings.<sup>72</sup> She told us that, in general, putting the
Pakistanis on the terrorist list would eliminate any influence the
United States had over them.<sup>73</sup> In October, an NSC
counterterrorism official noted that Pakistan's pro-Taliban military
intelligence service had been training Kashmiri jihadists in one of the
camps hit by U.S. missiles, leading to the death of
Pakistanis.<sup>74</sup>

After flying to Nairobi and bringing home the coffins of the American
dead, Secretary Albright increased the department's focus on
counterterrorism. According to Ambassador Milam, the bombings were a
"wake-up call," and he soon found himself spending 45 to 50 percent of
his time working the Taliban-Bin Ladin portfolio.<sup>75</sup> But
Pakistan's military intelligence service, known as the ISID
(Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate), was the Taliban's primary
patron, which made progress difficult.

Additional pressure on the Pakistanis-beyond demands to press the
Taliban on Bin Ladin-seemed unattractive to most officials of the State
Department. Congressional sanctions punishing Pakistan for possessing
nuclear arms prevented the administration from offering incentives to
Islamabad.<sup>76</sup> In the words of Deputy Secretary of State Strobe
Talbott, Washington's Pakistan policy was "stick-heavy." Talbott felt
that the only remaining sticks were additional sanctions that would have
bankrupted the Pakistanis, a dangerous move that could have brought
"total chaos" to a nuclear-armed country with a significant number of
Islamic radicals.<sup>77</sup>

The Saudi government, which had a long and close relationship with
Pakistan and provided it oil on generous terms, was already pressing
Sharif with regard to the Taliban and Bin Ladin. A senior State
Department official concluded that Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah put "a
tremendous amount of heat" on the Pakistani prime minister during the
prince's October 1998 visit to Pakistan.<sup>78</sup>

The State Department urged President Clinton to engage the Pakistanis.
Accepting this advice, President Clinton invited Sharif to Washington,
where they talked mostly about India but also discussed Bin Ladin. After
Sharif went home, the President called him and raised the Bin Ladin
subject again. This effort elicited from Sharif a promise to talk with
the Taliban.<sup>79</sup>

Mullah Omar's position showed no sign of softening. One intelligence
report passed to Berger by the NSC staff quoted Bin Ladin as saying that
Mullah Omar had given him a completely free hand to act in any country,
though asking that he not claim responsibility for attacks in Pakistan
or Saudi Arabia. Bin Ladin was described as grabbing his beard and
saying emotionally, "By Allah, by God, the Americans will still be
amazed.The so-called United States will suffer the same fate as the
Russians. Their state will collapse, too."<sup>80</sup>

Debate in the State Department intensified after December 1998, when
Michael Sheehan became counterterrorism coordinator. A onetime special
forces officer, he had worked with Albright when she was ambassador to
the United Nations and had served on the NSC staff with Clarke. He
shared Clarke's obsession with terrorism, and had little hesitation
about locking horns with the regional bureaus. Through every available
channel, he repeated the earlier warning to the Taliban of the possible
dire consequences-including military strikes-if Bin Ladin remained their
guest and conducted additional attacks. Within the department, he argued
for designating the Taliban regime a state sponsor of terrorism. This
was technically difficult to do, for calling it a state would be
tantamount to diplomatic recognition, which the United States had thus
far withheld. But Sheehan urged the use of any available weapon against
the Taliban. He told us that he thought he was regarded in the
department as "a one-note Johnny nutcase."<sup>81</sup>

In early 1999, the State Department's counterterrorism office proposed a
comprehensive diplomatic strategy for all states involved in the
Afghanistan problem, including Pakistan. It specified both carrots and
hard-hitting sticks- among them, certifying Pakistan as uncooperative on
terrorism. Albright said the original carrots and sticks listed in a
decision paper for principals may not have been used as "described on
paper" but added that they were used in other ways or in varying
degrees. But the paper's author, Ambassador Sheehan, was frustrated and
complained to us that the original plan "had been watered down to the
point that nothing was then done with it."<sup>82</sup>

The cautiousness of the South Asia bureau was reinforced when, in May
1999, Pakistani troops were discovered to have infiltrated into an
especially mountainous area of Kashmir. A limited war began between
India and Pakistan, euphemistically called the "Kargil crisis," as India
tried to drive the Pakistani forces out. Patience with Pakistan was
wearing thin, inside both the State Department and the NSC. Bruce
Riedel, the NSC staff member responsible for Pakistan, wrote Berger that
Islamabad was "behaving as a rogue state in two areas-backing
Taliban/UBL terror and provoking war with India."<sup>83</sup>

Discussion within the Clinton administration on Afghanistan then
concentrated on two main alternatives. The first, championed by Riedel
and Assistant Secretary of State Karl Inderfurth, was to undertake a
major diplomatic effort to end the Afghan civil war and install a
national unity government. The second, favored by Sheehan, Clarke, and
the CIA, called for labeling the Taliban a terrorist group and
ultimately funneling secret aid to its chief foe, the Northern Alliance.
This dispute would go back and forth throughout 1999 and ultimately
become entangled with debate about enlisting the Northern Alliance as an
ally for covert action.<sup>84</sup>

Another diplomatic option may have been available: nurturing Afghan
exile groups as a possible moderate governing alternative to the
Taliban. In late 1999, Washington provided some support for talks among
the leaders of exile Afghan groups, including the ousted Rome-based King
Zahir Shah and Hamid Karzai, about bolstering anti-Taliban forces inside
Afghanistan and linking the Northern Alliance with Pashtun groups. One
U.S. diplomat later told us that the exile groups were not ready to move
forward and that coordinating fractious groups residing in Bonn, Rome,
and Cyprus proved extremely difficult.<sup>85</sup>

Frustrated by the Taliban's resistance, two senior State Department
officials suggested asking the Saudis to offer the Taliban $250 million
for Bin Ladin. Clarke opposed having the United States facilitate a
"huge grant to a regime as heinous as the Taliban" and suggested that
the idea might not seem attractive to either Secretary Albright or First
Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton-both critics of the Taliban's record on
women's rights.<sup>86</sup> The proposal seems to have quietly died.

Within the State Department, some officials delayed Sheehan and Clarke's
push either to designate Taliban-controlled Afghanistan as a state
sponsor of terrorism or to designate the regime as a foreign terrorist
organization (thereby avoiding the issue of whether to recognize the
Taliban as Afghanistan's government). Sheehan and Clarke prevailed in
July 1999, when President Clinton issued an executive order effectively
declaring the Taliban regime a state sponsor of terrorism.<sup>87</sup>
In October, a UN Security Council Resolution championed by the United
States added economic and travel sanctions.<sup>88</sup>

With UN sanctions set to come into effect in November, Clarke wrote
Berger that "the Taliban appear to be up to something."<sup>89</sup>
Mullah Omar had shuffled his "cabinet" and hinted at Bin Ladin's
possible departure. Clarke's staff thought his most likely destination
would be Somalia; Chechnya seemed less appealing with Russia on the
offensive. Clarke commented that Iraq and Libya had previously discussed
hosting Bin Ladin, though he and his staff had their doubts that Bin
Ladin would trust secular Arab dictators such as Saddam Hussein or
Muammar Qadhafi. Clarke also raised the "remote possibility" of Yemen,
which offered vast uncontrolled spaces. In November, the CSG discussed
whether the sanctions had rattled the Taliban, who seemed "to be looking
for a face-saving way out of the Bin Ladin issue."<sup>90</sup>

In fact none of the outside pressure had any visible effect on Mullah
Omar, who was unconcerned about commerce with the outside world. Omar
had virtually no diplomatic contact with the West, since he refused to
meet with non-Muslims. The United States learned that at the end of
1999, the Taliban Council of Ministers unanimously reaffirmed that their
regime would stick by Bin Ladin. Relations between Bin Ladin and the
Taliban leadership were sometimes tense, but the foundation was deep and
personal.<sup>91</sup> Indeed, Mullah Omar had executed at least one
subordinate who opposed his pro-Bin Ladin policy.<sup>92</sup>

The United States would try tougher sanctions in 2000.Working with
Russia (a country involved in an ongoing campaign against Chechen
separatists, some of whom received support from Bin Ladin), the United
States persuaded the United Nations to adopt Security Council Resolution
1333, which included an embargo on arms shipments to the Taliban, in
December 2000.<sup>93</sup> The aim of the resolution was to hit the
Taliban where it was most sensitive- on the battlefield against the
Northern Alliance-and criminalize giving them arms and providing
military "advisers," which Pakistan had been doing.<sup>94</sup> Yet the
passage of the resolution had no visible effect on Omar, nor did it halt
the flow of Pakistani military assistance to the Taliban.<sup>95</sup>

U.S. authorities had continued to try to get cooperation from Pakistan
in pressing the Taliban to stop sheltering Bin Ladin. President Clinton
contacted Sharif again in June 1999, partly to discuss the crisis with
India but also to urge Sharif, "in the strongest way I can," to persuade
the Taliban to expel Bin Ladin.<sup>96</sup> The President suggested
that Pakistan use its control over oil supplies to the Taliban and over
Afghan imports through Karachi. Sharif suggested instead that Pakistani
forces might try to capture Bin Ladin themselves. Though no one in
Washington thought this was likely to happen, President Clinton gave the
idea his blessing.<sup>97</sup>

The President met with Sharif in Washington in early July. Though the
meeting's main purpose was to seal the Pakistani prime minister's
decision to withdraw from the Kargil confrontation in Kashmir, President
Clinton complained about Pakistan's failure to take effective action
with respect to the Taliban and Bin Ladin. Sharif came back to his
earlier proposal and won approval for U.S. assistance in training a
Pakistani special forces team for an operation against Bin Ladin. Then,
in October 1999, Sharif was deposed by General Pervez Musharraf, and the
plan was terminated.<sup>98</sup>

At first, the Clinton administration hoped that Musharraf's coup might
create an opening for action on Bin Ladin. A career military officer,
Musharraf was thought to have the political strength to confront and
influence the Pakistani military intelligence service, which supported
the Taliban. Berger speculated that the new government might use Bin
Ladin to buy concessions from Washington, but neither side ever
developed such an initiative.<sup>99</sup>

By late 1999, more than a year after the embassy bombings, diplomacy
with Pakistan, like the efforts with the Taliban, had, according to
Under Secretary of State Thomas Pickering, "borne little
fruit."<sup>100</sup>

#### 4.4 COVERT ACTION

As part of the response to the embassy bombings, President Clinton
signed a Memorandum of Notification authorizing the CIA to let its
tribal assets use force to capture Bin Ladin and his associates. CIA
officers told the tribals that the plan to capture Bin Ladin, which had
been "turned off" three months earlier, was back on. The memorandum also
authorized the CIA to attack Bin Ladin in other ways. Also, an executive
order froze financial holdings that could be linked to Bin
Ladin.<sup>101</sup>

The counterterrorism staff at CIA thought it was gaining a better
understanding of Bin Ladin and his network. In preparation for briefing
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on September 2,Tenet was
told that the intelligence community knew more about Bin Ladin's network
"than about any other top tier terrorist organization."<sup>102</sup>

The CIA was using this knowledge to disrupt a number of Bin
Ladin-associated cells. Working with Albanian authorities, CIA
operatives had raided an al Qaeda forgery operation and another
terrorist cell in Tirana. These operations may have disrupted a planned
attack on the U.S. embassy in Tirana, and did lead to the rendition of a
number of al Qaeda-related terrorist operatives. After the embassy
bombings, there were arrests in Azerbaijan, Italy, and Britain. Several
terrorists were sent to an Arab country. The CIA described working with
FBI operatives to prevent a planned attack on the U.S. embassy in
Uganda, and a number of suspects were arrested. On September 16, Abu
Hajer, one of Bin Ladin's deputies in Sudan and the head of his computer
operations and weapons procurement, was arrested in Germany. He was the
most important Bin Ladin lieutenant captured thus far. Clarke commented
to Berger with satisfaction that August and September had brought the
"greatest number of terrorist arrests in a short period of time that we
have ever arranged/facilitated."<sup>103</sup>

Given the President's August Memorandum of Notification, the CIA had
already been working on new plans for using the Afghan tribals to
capture Bin Ladin. During September and October, the tribals claimed to
have tried at least four times to ambush Bin Ladin. Senior CIA officials
doubted whether any of these ambush attempts had actually occurred. But
the tribals did seem to have success in reporting where Bin Ladin
was.<sup>104</sup>

This information was more useful than it had been in the past; since the
August missile strikes, Bin Ladin had taken to moving his sleeping place
frequently and unpredictably and had added new bodyguards. Worst of all,
al Qaeda's senior leadership had stopped using a particular means of
communication almost immediately after a leak to the *Washington
Times*.<sup>105</sup> This made it much more difficult for the National
Security Agency to intercept his conversations. But since the tribals
seemed to know where Bin Ladin was or would be, an alternative to
capturing Bin Ladin would be to mark his location and call in another
round of missile strikes.

On November 3, the Small Group met to discuss these problems, among
other topics. Preparing Director Tenet for a Small Group meeting in
mid-November, the Counterterrorist Center stressed, "At this point we
cannot predict when or if a capture operation will be executed by our
assets."<sup>106</sup>

U.S. counterterrorism officials also worried about possible domestic
attacks. Several intelligence reports, some of dubious sourcing,
mentioned Washington as a possible target. On October 26, Clarke's CSG
took the unusual step of holding a meeting dedicated to trying "to
evaluate the threat of a terrorist attack in the United States by the
Usama bin Ladin network."<sup>107</sup>The CSG members were "urged to be
as creative as possible in their thinking" about preventing a Bin Ladin
attack on U.S. territory. Participants noted that while the FBI had been
given additional resources for such efforts, both it and the CIA were
having problems exploiting leads by tracing U.S. telephone numbers and
translating documents obtained in cell disruptions abroad. The Justice
Department reported that the current guidelines from the Attorney
General gave sufficient legal authority for domestic investigation and
surveillance.<sup>108</sup>

Though intelligence gave no clear indication of what might be afoot,
some intelligence reports mentioned chemical weapons, pointing toward
work at a camp in southern Afghanistan called Derunta. On November 4,
1998, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York
unsealed its indictment of Bin Ladin, charging him with conspiracy to
attack U.S. defense installations. The indictment also charged that al
Qaeda had allied itself with Sudan, Iran, and Hezbollah. The original
sealed indictment had added that al Qaeda had "reached an understanding
with the government of Iraq that al Qaeda would not work against that
government and that on particular projects, specifically including
weapons development, al Qaeda would work cooperatively with the
Government of Iraq."<sup>109</sup> This passage led Clarke, who for
years had read intelligence reports on Iraqi-Sudanese cooperation on
chemical weapons, to speculate to Berger that a large Iraqi presence at
chemical facilities in Khartoum was "probably a direct result of the
Iraq-Al Qida agreement." Clarke added that VX precursor traces found
near al Shifa were the "exact formula used by Iraq."<sup>110</sup>This
language about al Qaeda's "understanding" with Iraq had been dropped,
however, when a superseding indictment was filed in November
1998.<sup>111</sup>

On Friday, December 4, 1998, the CIA included an article in the
Presidential Daily Brief describing intelligence, received from a
friendly government, about a threatened hijacking in the United States.
This article was declassified at our request.

The same day, Clarke convened a meeting of his CSG to discuss both the

<table width="100%" data-border="1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><br />
<em>The following is the text of an item from the Presidential Daily Brief received by President William J. Clinton on December 4, 1998. Redacted material is indicated in brackets.</em></p>
<p>SUBJECT: Bin Ladin Preparing to Hijack US Aircraft and Other Attacks</p>
<p>1. Reporting [-] suggests Bin Ladin and his allies are preparing for attacks in the US, including an aircraft hijacking to obtain the release of Shaykh 'Umar 'Abd al-Rahman, Ramzi Yousef, and Muhammad Sadiq 'Awda. One source quoted a senior member of the Gama'at al-Islamiyya (IG) saying that, as of late October, the IG had completed planning for an operation in the US on behalf of Bin Ladin, but that the operation was on hold.A senior Bin Ladin operative from Saudi Arabia was to visit IG counterparts in the US soon thereafter to discuss options-perhaps including an aircraft hijacking.</p>
<ul>
<li>IG leader Islambuli in late September was planning to hijack a US airliner during the "next couple of weeks" to free 'Abd al-Rahman and the other prisoners, according to what may be a different source.</li>
<li>The same source late last month said that Bin Ladin might implement plans to hijack US aircraft before the beginning of Ramadan on 20 December and that two members of the operational team had evaded security checks during a recent trial run at an unidentified New York airport. [-]</li>
</ul>
<p>2. Some members of the Bin Ladin network have received hijack training, according to various sources, but no group directly tied to Bin Ladin's al-Qa'ida organization has ever carried out an aircraft hijacking.Bin Ladin could be weighing other types of operations against US aircraft.Accord-ing to [-] the IG in October obtained SA-7 missiles and intended to move them from Yemen into Saudi Arabia to shoot down an Egyptian plane or, if unsuccessful, a US military or civilian aircraft.</p>
<ul>
<li>A [-] in October told us that unspecified "extremist elements" in Yemen had acquired SA-7s. [-]</li>
</ul>
<p>3. [-] indicate the Bin Ladin organization or its allies are moving closer to implementing anti-US attacks at unspecified locations, but we do not know whether they are related to attacks on aircraft. A Bin Ladin associate in Sudan late last month told a colleague in Kandahar that he had shipped a group of containers to Afghanistan. Bin Ladin associates also talked about the movement of containers to Afghanistan before the East Africa bombings.</p>
<ul>
<li>In other [-] Bin Ladin associates last month discussed picking up a package in Malaysia. One told his colleague in Malaysia that "they" were in the "ninth month [of pregnancy]."</li>
<li>An alleged Bin Ladin supporter in Yemen late last month remarked to his mother that he planned to work in "commerce" from abroad and said his impending "marriage," which would take place soon, would be a "surprise.""Commerce" and "marriage" often are codewords for terrorist attacks. [-]</li>
</ul></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

hijacking concern and the antiaircraft missile threat. To address the
hijacking warning, the group agreed that New York airports should go to
maximum security starting that weekend. They agreed to boost security at
other East coast airports. The CIA agreed to distribute versions of the
report to the FBI and FAA to pass to the New York Police Department and
the airlines. The FAA issued a security directive on December 8, with
specific requirements for more intensive air carrier screening of
passengers and more oversight of the screening process, at all three New
York City area airports.<sup>112</sup>

The intelligence community could learn little about the source of the
information. Later in December and again in early January 1999, more
information arrived from the same source, reporting that the planned
hijacking had been stalled because two of the operatives, who were
sketchily described, had been arrested near Washington, D.C. or New
York. After investigation, the FBI could find no information to support
the hijack threat; nor could it verify any arrests like those described
in the report. The FAA alert at the New York area airports ended on
January 31, 1999.<sup>113</sup>

On December 17, the day after the United States and Britain began their
Desert Fox bombing campaign against Iraq, the Small Group convened to
discuss intelligence suggesting imminent Bin Ladin attacks on the U.S.
embassies in Qatar and Ethiopia. The next day, Director Tenet sent a
memo to the President, the cabinet, and senior officials throughout the
government describing reports that Bin Ladin planned to attack U.S.
targets very soon, possibly over the next few days, before Ramadan
celebrations began. Tenet said he was "greatly concerned."<sup>114</sup>

With alarms sounding, members of the Small Group considered ideas about
how to respond to or prevent such attacks. Generals Shelton and Zinni
came up with military options. Special Operations Forces were later told
that they might be ordered to attempt very high-risk in-and-out raids
either in Khartoum, to capture a senior Bin Ladin operative known as Abu
Hafs the Mauritanian-who appeared to be engineering some of the plots-or
in Kandahar, to capture Bin Ladin himself. Shelton told us that such
operations are not risk free, invoking the memory of the 1993 "Black
Hawk down" fiasco in Mogadishu.<sup>115</sup>

The CIA reported on December 18 that Bin Ladin might be traveling to
Kandahar and could be targeted there with cruise missiles. Vessels with
Tomahawk cruise missiles were on station in the Arabian Sea, and could
fire within a few hours of receiving target data.<sup>116</sup>

On December 20, intelligence indicated Bin Ladin would be spending the
night at the Haji Habash house, part of the governor's residence in
Kandahar. The chief of the Bin Ladin unit, "Mike," told us that he
promptly briefed Tenet and his deputy, John Gordon. From the field, the
CIA's Gary Schroen advised: "Hit him tonight-we may not get another
chance." An urgent teleconference of principals was
arranged.<sup>117</sup>

The principals considered a cruise missile strike to try to kill Bin
Ladin. One issue they discussed was the potential collateral damage-the
number of innocent bystanders who would be killed or wounded. General
Zinni predicted a number well over 200 and was concerned about damage to
a nearby mosque. The senior intelligence officer on the Joint Staff
apparently made a different calculation, estimating half as much
collateral damage and not predicting damage to the mosque. By the end of
the meeting, the principals decided against recommending to the
President that he order a strike. A few weeks later, in January 1999,
Clarke wrote that the principals had thought the intelligence only half
reliable and had worried about killing or injuring perhaps 300 people.
Tenet said he remembered doubts about the reliability of the source and
concern about hitting the nearby mosque. "Mike" remembered Tenet telling
him that the military was concerned that a few hours had passed since
the last sighting of Bin Ladin and that this persuaded everyone that the
chance of failure was too great.<sup>118</sup>

Some lower-level officials were angry. "Mike" reported to Schroen that
he had been unable to sleep after this decision. "I'm sure we'll regret
not acting last night," he wrote, criticizing the principals for
"worrying that some stray shrapnel might hit the Habash mosque and
'offend' Muslims." He commented that they had not shown comparable
sensitivity when deciding to bomb Muslims in Iraq. The principals, he
said, were "obsessed" with trying to get others-Saudis, Pakistanis,
Afghan tribals-to "do what we won't do." Schroen was disappointed too.
"We should have done it last night," he wrote. "We may well come to
regret the decision not to go ahead."<sup>119</sup> The Joint Staff's
deputy director for operations agreed, even though he told us that later
intelligence appeared to show that Bin Ladin had left his quarters
before the strike would have occurred. Missing Bin Ladin, he said,
"would have caused us a hell of a problem, but it was a shot we should
have taken, and we would have had to pay the price.<sup>120</sup>

The principals began considering other, more aggressive covert
alternatives using the tribals. CIA officers suggested that the tribals
would prefer to try a raid rather than a roadside ambush because they
would have better control, it would be less dangerous, and it played
more to their skills and experience. But everyone knew that if the
tribals were to conduct such a raid, guns would be blazing. The current
Memorandum of Notification instructed the CIA to capture Bin Ladin and
to use lethal force only in self-defense. Work now began on a new
memorandum that would give the tribals more latitude. The intention was
to say that they could use lethal force if the attempted capture seemed
impossible to complete successfully.<sup>121</sup>

Early drafts of this highly sensitive document emphasized that it
authorized only a capture operation. The tribals were to be paid only if
they captured Bin Ladin, not if they killed him. Officials throughout
the government approved this draft. But on December 21, the day after
principals decided not to launch the cruise missile strike against
Kandahar, the CIA's leaders urged strengthening the language to allow
the tribals to be paid whether Bin Ladin was captured *or* killed.
Berger and Tenet then worked together to take this line of thought even
further.<sup>122</sup>

They finally agreed, as Berger reported to President Clinton, that an
extraordinary step was necessary. The new memorandum would allow the
killing of Bin Ladin if the CIA and the tribals judged that capture was
not feasible (a judgment it already seemed clear they had reached). The
Justice Department lawyer who worked on the draft told us that what was
envisioned was a group of tribals assaulting a location, leading to a
shoot-out. Bin Ladin and others would be captured if possible, but
probably would be killed. The administration's position was that under
the law of armed conflict, killing a person who posed an imminent threat
to the United States would be an act of self-defense, not an
assassination. On Christmas Eve 1998, Berger sent a final draft to
President Clinton, with an explanatory memo. The President approved the
document.<sup>123</sup>

Because the White House considered this operation highly sensitive, only
a tiny number of people knew about this Memorandum of Notification.
Berger arranged for the NSC's legal adviser to inform Albright, Cohen,
Shelton, and Reno. None was allowed to keep a copy. Congressional
leaders were briefed, as required by law. Attorney General Reno had sent
a letter to the President expressing her concern: she warned of possible
retaliation, including the targeting of U.S. officials. She did not pose
any legal objection. A copy of the final document, along with the
carefully crafted instructions that were to be sent to the tribals, was
given to Tenet.<sup>124</sup>

A message from Tenet to CIA field agents directed them to communicate to
the tribals the instructions authorized by the President: the United
States preferred that Bin Ladin and his lieutenants be captured, but if
a successful capture operation was not feasible, the tribals were
permitted to kill them. The instructions added that the tribals must
avoid killing others unnecessarily and must not kill or abuse Bin Ladin
or his lieutenants if they surrendered. Finally, the tribals would not
be paid if this set of requirements was not met.<sup>125</sup>

The field officer passed these instructions to the tribals word for
word. But he prefaced the directions with a message: "From the American
President down to the average man in the street, we want him \[Bin
Ladin\] stopped." If the tribals captured Bin Ladin, the officer assured
them that he would receive a fair trial under U.S. law and be treated
humanely. The CIA officer reported that the tribals said they "fully
understand the contents, implications and the spirit of the message" and
that that their response was, "We will try our best to capture Bin Ladin
alive and will have no intention of killing or harming him on purpose."
The tribals explained that they wanted to prove that their standards of
behavior were more civilized than those of Bin Ladin and his band of
terrorists. In an additional note addressed to Schroen, the tribals
noted that if they were to adopt Bin Ladin's ethics, "we would have
finished the job long before," but they had been limited by their
abilities and "by our beliefs and laws we have to
respect."<sup>126</sup>

Schroen and "Mike" were impressed by the tribals' reaction. Schroen
cabled that the tribals were not in it for the money but as an
investment in the future of Afghanistan. "Mike" agreed that the tribals'
reluctance to kill was not a "showstopper." "From our view," he wrote,
"that seems in character and fair enough."<sup>127</sup>

Policymakers in the Clinton administration, including the President and
his national security advisor, told us that the President's intent
regarding covert action against Bin Ladin was clear: he wanted him dead.
This intent was never well communicated or understood within the CIA.
Tenet told the Commission that except in one specific case (discussed
later), the CIA was authorized to kill Bin Ladin only in the context of
a capture operation. CIA senior managers, operators, and lawyers
confirmed this understanding. "We always talked about how much easier it
would have been to kill him," a former chief of the Bin Ladin unit
said.<sup>128</sup>

In February 1999, another draft Memorandum of Notification went to
President Clinton. It asked him to allow the CIA to give exactly the
same guidance to the Northern Alliance as had just been given to the
tribals: they could kill Bin Ladin if a successful capture operation was
not feasible. On this occasion, however, President Clinton crossed out
key language he had approved in December and inserted more ambiguous
language. No one we interviewed could shed light on why the President
did this. President Clinton told the Commission that he had no
recollection of why he rewrote the language.<sup>129</sup>

Later in 1999, when legal authority was needed for enlisting still other
collaborators and for covering a wider set of contingencies, the lawyers
returned to the language used in August 1998, which authorized force
only in the context of a capture operation. Given the closely held
character of the document approved in December 1998, and the subsequent
return to the earlier language, it is possible to understand how the
former White House officials and the CIA officials might disagree as to
whether the CIA was ever authorized by the President to kill Bin
Ladin.<sup>130</sup>

The dispute turned out to be somewhat academic, as the limits of
available legal authority were not tested. Clarke commented to Berger
that "despite 'expanded' authority for CIA's sources to engage in direct
action, they have shown no inclination to do so." He added that it was
his impression that the CIA thought the tribals unlikely to act against
Bin Ladin and hence relying on them was "unrealistic."<sup>131</sup>
Events seemed to bear him out, since the tribals did not stage an attack
on Bin Ladin or his associates during 1999.

The tribals remained active collectors of intelligence, however,
providing good but not predictive information about Bin Ladin's
whereabouts. The CIA also tried to improve its intelligence reporting on
Bin Ladin by what Tenet's assistant director for collection, the
indefatigable Charles Allen, called an "all-out, all-agency,
seven-days-a-week" effort.<sup>132</sup> The effort might have had an
effect. On January 12, 1999, Clarke wrote Berger that the CIA's
confidence in the tribals' reporting had increased. It was now higher
than it had been on December 20.<sup>133</sup>

In February 1999, Allen proposed flying a U-2 mission over Afghanistan
to build a baseline of intelligence outside the areas where the tribals
had coverage. Clarke was nervous about such a mission because he
continued to fear that Bin Ladin might leave for someplace less
accessible. He wrote Deputy National Security Advisor Donald Kerrick
that one reliable source reported Bin Ladin's having met with Iraqi
officials, who "may have offered him asylum." Other intelligence sources
said that some Taliban leaders, though not Mullah Omar, had urged Bin
Ladin to go to Iraq. If Bin Ladin actually moved to Iraq, wrote Clarke,
his network would be at Saddam Hussein's service, and it would be
"virtually impossible" to find him. Better to get Bin Ladin in
Afghanistan, Clarke declared.<sup>134</sup> Berger suggested sending one
U-2 flight, but Clarke opposed even this. It would require Pakistani
approval, he wrote; and "Pak\[istan's\] intel\[ligence service\] is in
bed with" Bin Ladin and would warn him that the United States was
getting ready for a bombing campaign: "Armed with that knowledge, old
wily Usama will likely boogie to Baghdad."<sup>135</sup> Though told
also by Bruce Riedel of the NSC staff that Saddam Hussein wanted Bin
Ladin in Baghdad, Berger conditionally authorized a single U-2 flight.
Allen meanwhile had found other ways of getting the information he
wanted. So the U-2 flight never occurred.<sup>136</sup>

#### 4.5 SEARCHING FOR FRESH OPTIONS

**"Boots on the Ground?"**  
Starting on the day the August 1998 strikes were launched, General
Shelton had issued a planning order to prepare follow-on strikes and
think beyond just using cruise missiles.<sup>137</sup> The initial
strikes had been called Operation Infinite Reach. The follow-on plans
were given the code name Operation Infinite Resolve.

At the time, any actual military action in Afghanistan would have been
carried out by General Zinni's Central Command. This command was
therefore the locus for most military planning. Zinni was even less
enthusiastic than Cohen and Shelton about follow-on cruise missile
strikes. He knew that the Tomahawks did not always hit their targets.
After the August 20 strikes, President Clinton had had to call Pakistani
Prime Minister Sharif to apologize for a wayward missile that had killed
several people in a Pakistani village. Sharif had been understanding,
while commenting on American "overkill."<sup>138</sup>

Zinni feared that Bin Ladin would in the future locate himself in
cities, where U.S. missiles could kill thousands of Afghans. He worried
also lest Pakistani authorities not get adequate warning, think the
missiles came from India, and do something that everyone would later
regret. Discussing potential repercussions in the region of his military
responsibility, Zinni said, "It was easy to take the shot from
Washington and walk away from it. We had to live there."<sup>139</sup>

Zinni's distinct preference would have been to build up counterterrorism
capabilities in neighboring countries such as Uzbekistan. But he told us
that he could not drum up much interest in or money for such a purpose
from Washington, partly, he thought, because these countries had
dictatorial governments.<sup>140</sup>

After the decision-in which fear of collateral damage was an important
factor-not to use cruise missiles against Kandahar in December 1998,
Shelton and officers in the Pentagon developed plans for using an AC-130
gunship instead of cruise missile strikes. Designed specifically for the
special forces, the version of the AC-130 known as "Spooky" can fly in
fast or from high altitude, undetected by radar; guided to its zone by
extraordinarily complex electronics, it is capable of rapidly firing
precision-guided 25, 40, and 105 mm projectiles. Because this system
could target more precisely than a salvo of cruise missiles, it had a
much lower risk of causing collateral damage. After giving Clarke a
briefing and being encouraged to proceed, Shelton formally directed
Zinni and General Peter Schoomaker, who headed the Special Operations
Command, to develop plans for an AC-130 mission against Bin Ladin's
headquarters and infrastructure in Afghanistan. The Joint Staff prepared
a decision paper for deployment of the Special Operations
aircraft.<sup>141</sup>

Though Berger and Clarke continued to indicate interest in this option,
the AC-130s were never deployed. Clarke wrote at the time that Zinni
opposed their use, and John Maher, the Joint Staff's deputy director of
operations, agreed that this was Zinni's position. Zinni himself does
not recall blocking the option. He told us that he understood the
Special Operations Command had never thought the intelligence good
enough to justify actually moving AC-130s into position. Schoomaker
says, on the contrary, that he thought the AC-130 option
feasible.<sup>142</sup>

The most likely explanation for the two generals' differing
recollections is that both of them thought serious preparation for any
such operations would require a long-term redeployment of Special
Operations forces to the Middle East or South Asia. The AC-130s would
need bases because the aircraft's unrefueled range was only a little
over 2,000 miles. They needed search-and-rescue backup, which would have
still less range. Thus an AC-130 deployment had to be embedded in a
wider political and military concept involving Pakistan or other
neighboring countries to address issues relating to basing and
overflight. No one ever put such an initiative on the table. Zinni
therefore cautioned about simply ordering up AC-130 deployments for a
quick strike; Schoomaker planned for what he saw as a practical strike
option; and the underlying issues were not fully engaged. The Joint
Staff decision paper was never turned into an interagency policy paper.

The same was true for the option of using ground units from the Special
Operations Command. Within the command, some officers-such as
Schoomaker-wanted the mission of "putting boots on the ground" to get at
Bin Ladin and al Qaeda. At the time, Special Operations was designated
as a "supporting command," not a "supported command": that is, it
supported a theater commander and did not prepare its own plans for
dealing with al Qaeda. Schoomaker proposed to Shelton and Cohen that
Special Operations become a supported command, but the proposal was not
adopted. Had it been accepted, he says, he would have taken on the al
Qaeda mission instead of deferring to Zinni. Lieutenant General William
Boykin, the current deputy under secretary of defense for intelligence
and a founding member of Delta Force, told us that "opportunities were
missed because of an unwillingness to take risks and a lack of vision
and understanding."<sup>143</sup>

President Clinton relied on the advice of General Shelton, who informed
him that without intelligence on Bin Ladin's location, a commando raid's
chance of failure was high. Shelton told President Clinton he would go
forward with "boots on the ground" if the President ordered him to do
so; however, he had to ensure that the President was completely aware of
the large logistical problems inherent in a military
operation.<sup>144</sup>

The Special Operations plans were apparently conceived as another quick
strike option-an option to insert forces after the United States
received actionable intelligence. President Clinton told the Commission
that "if we had had really good intelligence about . . . where \[Usama
Bin Ladin\] was, I would have done it." Zinni and Schoomaker did make
preparations for possible very high risk in-and-out operations to
capture or kill terrorists. Cohen told the Commission that the notion of
putting military personnel on the ground without some reasonable
certitude that Bin Ladin was in a particular location would have
resulted in the mission's failure and the loss of life in a fruitless
effort.<sup>145</sup> None of these officials was aware of the ambitious
plan developed months earlier by lower-level Defense officials.

In our interviews, some military officers repeatedly invoked the analogy
of Desert One and the failed 1980 hostage rescue mission in
Iran.<sup>146</sup> They were dubious about a quick strike approach to
using Special Operations Forces, which they thought complicated and
risky. Such efforts would have required bases in the region, but all the
options were unappealing. Pro-Taliban elements of Pakistan's military
might warn Bin Ladin or his associates of pending operations. With
nearby basing options limited, an alternative was to fly from ships in
the Arabian Sea or from land bases in the Persian Gulf, as was done
after 9/11. Such operations would then have to be supported from long
distances, overflying the airspace of nations that might not have been
supportive or aware of U.S. efforts.<sup>147</sup>

However, if these hurdles were addressed, and if the military could then
operate regularly in the region for a long period, perhaps
clandestinely, it might attempt to gather intelligence and wait for an
opportunity. One Special Operations commander said his view of
actionable intelligence was that if you "give me the action, I will give
you the intelligence."<sup>148</sup> But this course would still be
risky, in light both of the difficulties already mentioned and of the
danger that U.S. operations might fail disastrously. We have found no
evidence that such a long-term political-military approach for using
Special Operations Forces in the region was proposed to or analyzed by
the Small Group, even though such capability had been honed for at least
a decade within the Defense Department.

Therefore the debate looked to some like bold proposals from civilians
meeting hypercaution from the military. Clarke saw it this way. Of the
military, he said to us, "They were very, very, very
reluctant."<sup>149</sup> But from another perspective, poorly informed
proposals for bold action were pitted against experienced professional
judgment. That was how Secretary of Defense Cohen viewed it. He said to
us: "I would have to place my judgment call in terms of, do I believe
that the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, former commander of Special
Forces command, is in a better position to make a judgment on the
feasibility of this than, perhaps, Mr. Clarke?"<sup>150</sup>

Beyond a large-scale political-military commitment to build up a covert
or clandestine capability using American personnel on the ground, either
military or CIA, there was a still larger option that could have been
considered-invading Afghanistan itself. Every official we questioned
about the possibility of an invasion of Afghanistan said that it was
almost unthinkable, absent a provocation such as 9/11, because of poor
prospects for cooperation from Pakistan and other nations and because
they believed the public would not support it. Cruise missiles were and
would remain the only military option on the table.

**The Desert Camp, February 1999**  
Early in 1999, the CIA received reporting that Bin Ladin was spending
much of his time at one of several camps in the Afghan desert south of
Kandahar. At the beginning of February, Bin Ladin was reportedly located
in the vicinity of the Sheikh Ali camp, a desert hunting camp being used
by visitors from a Gulf state. Public sources have stated that these
visitors were from the United Arab Emirates.<sup>151</sup>

Reporting from the CIA's assets provided a detailed description of the
hunting camp, including its size, location, resources, and security, as
well as of Bin Ladin's smaller, adjacent camp.<sup>152</sup> Because
this was not in an urban area, missiles launched against it would have
less risk of causing collateral damage. On February 8, the military
began to ready itself for a possible strike.<sup>153</sup> The next day,
national technical intelligence confirmed the location and description
of the larger camp and showed the nearby presence of an official
aircraft of the United Arab Emirates. But the location of Bin Ladin's
quarters could not be pinned down so precisely.<sup>154</sup> The CIA
did its best to answer a host of questions about the larger camp and its
residents and about Bin Ladin's daily schedule and routines to support
military contingency planning. According to reporting from the tribals,
Bin Ladin regularly went from his adjacent camp to the larger camp where
he visited the Emiratis; the tribals expected him to be at the hunting
camp for such a visit at least until midmorning on February
11.<sup>155</sup> Clarke wrote to Berger's deputy on February 10 that
the military was then doing targeting work to hit the main camp with
cruise missiles and should be in position to strike the following
morning.<sup>156</sup> Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert appears to
have been briefed on the situation.<sup>157</sup>

No strike was launched. By February 12 Bin Ladin had apparently moved
on, and the immediate strike plans became moot.<sup>158</sup> According
to CIA and Defense officials, policymakers were concerned about the
danger that a strike would kill an Emirati prince or other senior
officials who might be with Bin Ladin or close by. Clarke told us the
strike was called off after consultations with Director Tenet because
the intelligence was dubious, and it seemed to Clarke as if the CIA was
presenting an option to attack America's best counterterrorism ally in
the Gulf. The lead CIA official in the field, Gary Schroen, felt that
the intelligence reporting in this case was very reliable; the Bin Ladin
unit chief, "Mike," agreed. Schroen believes today that this was a lost
opportunity to kill Bin Ladin before 9/11.<sup>159</sup>

Even after Bin Ladin's departure from the area, CIA officers hoped he
might return, seeing the camp as a magnet that could draw him for as
long as it was still set up. The military maintained readiness for
another strike opportunity.<sup>160</sup> On March 7, 1999, Clarke
called a UAE official to express his concerns about possible
associations between Emirati officials and Bin Ladin. Clarke later wrote
in a memorandum of this conversation that the call had been approved at
an interagency meeting and cleared with the CIA.<sup>161</sup> When the
former Bin Ladin unit chief found out about Clarke's call, he questioned
CIA officials, who denied having given such a clearance.<sup>162</sup>
Imagery confirmed that less than a week after Clarke's phone call the
camp was hurriedly dismantled, and the site was deserted.<sup>163</sup>
CIA officers, including Deputy Director for Operations Pavitt, were
irate. "Mike" thought the dismantling of the camp erased a possible site
for targeting Bin Ladin.<sup>164</sup>

The United Arab Emirates was becoming both a valued counterterrorism
ally of the United States and a persistent counterterrorism problem.
From 1999 through early 2001, the United States, and President Clinton
personally, pressed the UAE, one of the Taliban's only travel and
financial outlets to the outside world, to break off its ties and
enforce sanctions, especially those relating to flights to and from
Afghanistan.<sup>165</sup> These efforts achieved little before 9/11.

In July 1999, UAE Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Hamdan bin Zayid
threatened to break relations with the Taliban over Bin
Ladin.<sup>166</sup> The Taliban did not take him seriously, however.
Bin Zayid later told an American diplomat that the UAE valued its
relations with the Taliban because the Afghan radicals offered a
counterbalance to "Iranian dangers" in the region, but he also noted
that the UAE did not want to upset the United States.<sup>167</sup>

**Looking for New Partners**  
Although not all CIA officers had lost faith in the tribals'
capabilities-many judged them to be good reporters-few believed they
would carry out an ambush of Bin Ladin. The chief of the
Counterterrorist Center compared relying on the tribals to playing the
lottery.<sup>168</sup> He and his associates, supported by Clarke,
pressed for developing a partnership with the Northern Alliance, even
though doing so might bring the United States squarely behind one side
in Afghanistan's long-running civil war.

The Northern Alliance was dominated by Tajiks and drew its strength
mainly from the northern and eastern parts of Afghanistan. In contrast,
Taliban members came principally from Afghanistan's most numerous ethnic
group, the Pashtuns, who are concentrated in the southern part of the
country, extending into the North-West Frontier and Baluchistan
provinces of Pakistan.<sup>169</sup>

Because of the Taliban's behavior and its association with Pakistan, the
Northern Alliance had been able at various times to obtain assistance
from Russia, Iran, and India. The alliance's leader was Afghanistan's
most renowned military commander, Ahmed Shah Massoud. Reflective and
charismatic, he had been one of the true heroes of the war against the
Soviets. But his bands had been charged with more than one massacre, and
the Northern Alliance was widely thought to finance itself in part
through trade in heroin. Nor had Massoud shown much aptitude for
governing except as a ruthless warlord. Nevertheless, Tenet told us
Massoud seemed the most interesting possible new ally against Bin
Ladin.<sup>170</sup>

In February 1999, Tenet sought President Clinton's authorization to
enlist Massoud and his forces as partners. In response to this request,
the President signed the Memorandum of Notification whose language he
personally altered. Tenet says he saw no significance in the President's
changes. So far as he was concerned, it was the language of August 1998,
expressing a preference for capture but accepting the possibility that
Bin Ladin could not be brought out alive. "We were plowing the same
ground," Tenet said.<sup>171</sup>

CIA officers described Massoud's reaction when he heard that the United
States wanted him to capture and not kill Bin Ladin. One characterized
Massoud's body language as "a wince." Schroen recalled Massoud's
response as "You guys are crazy-you haven't changed a bit." In Schroen's
opinion, the capture proviso inhibited Massoud and his forces from going
after Bin Ladin but did not completely stop them.<sup>172</sup> The
idea, however, was a long shot. Bin Ladin's usual base of activity was
near Kandahar, far from the front lines of Taliban operations against
the Northern Alliance.

**Kandahar, May 1999**  
It was in Kandahar that perhaps the last, and most likely the best,
opportunity arose for targeting Bin Ladin with cruise missiles before
9/11. In May 1999, CIA assets in Afghanistan reported on Bin Ladin's
location in and around Kandahar over the course of five days and nights.
The reporting was very detailed and came from several sources. If this
intelligence was not "actionable," working-level officials said at the
time and today, it was hard for them to imagine how any intelligence on
Bin Ladin in Afghanistan would meet the standard. Communications were
good, and the cruise missiles were ready. "This was in our strike zone,"
a senior military officer said. "It was a fat pitch, a home run." He
expected the missiles to fly. When the decision came back that they
should stand down, not shoot, the officer said, "we all just slumped."
He told us he knew of no one at the Pentagon or the CIA who thought it
was a bad gamble. Bin Ladin "should have been a dead man" that night, he
said.<sup>173</sup>

Working-level CIA officials agreed. While there was a conflicting
intelligence report about Bin Ladin's whereabouts, the experts
discounted it. At the time, CIA working-level officials were told by
their managers that the strikes were not ordered because the military
doubted the intelligence and worried about collateral damage. Replying
to a frustrated colleague in the field, the Bin Ladin unit chief wrote:
"having a chance to get \[Bin Ladin\] three times in 36 hours and
foregoing the chance each time has made me a bit angry.... \[T\]he DCI
finds himself alone at the table, with the other princip\[als\]
basically saying 'we'll go along with your decision Mr. Director,' and
implicitly saying that the Agency will hang alone if the attack doesn't
get Bin Ladin."<sup>174</sup> But the military officer quoted earlier
recalled that the Pentagon had been willing to act. He told us that
Clarke informed him and others that Tenet assessed the chance of the
intelligence being accurate as 50-50. This officer believed that Tenet's
assessment was the key to the decision.<sup>175</sup>

Tenet told us he does not remember any details about this episode,
except that the intelligence came from a single uncorroborated source
and that there was a risk of collateral damage. The story is further
complicated by Tenet's absence from the critical principals meeting on
this strike (he was apparently out of town); his deputy, John Gordon,
was representing the CIA. Gordon recalled having presented the
intelligence in a positive light, with appropriate caveats, but stating
that this intelligence was about as good as it could get.<sup>176</sup>

Berger remembered only that in all such cases, the call had been
Tenet's. Berger felt sure that Tenet was eager to get Bin Ladin. In his
view, Tenet did his job responsibly. "George would call and say, 'We
just don't have it,'" Berger said.<sup>177</sup>

The decision not to strike in May 1999 may now seem hard to understand.
In fairness, we note two points: First, in December 1998, the
principals' wariness about ordering a strike appears to have been
vindicated: Bin Ladin left his room unexpectedly, and if a strike had
been ordered he would not have been hit. Second, the administration, and
the CIA in particular, was in the midst of intense scrutiny and
criticism in May 1999 because faulty intelligence had just led the
United States to mistakenly bomb the Chinese embassy in Belgrade during
the NATO war against Serbia. This episode may have made officials more
cautious than might otherwise have been the case.<sup>178</sup>

From May 1999 until September 2001, policymakers did not again actively
consider a missile strike against Bin Ladin.<sup>179</sup> The
principals did give some further consideration in 1999 to more general
strikes, reviving Clarke's "Delenda" notion of hitting camps and
infrastructure to disrupt al Qaeda's organization. In the first months
of 1999, the Joint Staff had developed broader target lists to undertake
a "focused campaign" against the infrastructure of Bin Ladin's network
and to hit Taliban government sites as well. General Shelton told us
that the Taliban targets were "easier" to hit and more
substantial.<sup>180</sup>

Part of the context for considering broader strikes in the summer of
1999 was renewed worry about Bin Ladin's ambitions to acquire weapons of
mass destruction. In May and June, the U.S. government received a flurry
of ominous reports, including more information about chemical weapons
training or development at the Derunta camp and possible attempts to
amass nuclear material at Herat.<sup>181</sup>

By late June, U.S. and other intelligence services had concluded that al
Qaeda was in pre-attack mode, perhaps again involving Abu Hafs the
Mauritanian. On June 25, at Clarke's request, Berger convened the Small
Group in his office to discuss the alert, Bin Ladin's WMD programs, and
his location. "Should we pre-empt by attacking UBL facilities?" Clarke
urged Berger to ask his colleagues.<sup>182</sup>

In his handwritten notes on the meeting paper, Berger jotted down the
presence of 7 to 11 families in the Tarnak Farms facility, which could
mean 60-65 casualties. Berger noted the possible "slight impact" on Bin
Ladin and added, "if he responds, we're blamed."<sup>183</sup> The NSC
staff raised the option of waiting until after a terrorist attack, and
then retaliating, including possible strikes on the Taliban. But Clarke
observed that Bin Ladin would probably empty his camps after an
attack.<sup>184</sup>

The military route seemed to have reached a dead end. In December 1999,
Clarke urged Berger to ask the principals to ask themselves: "Why have
there been no real options lately for direct US military
action?"<sup>185</sup>There are no notes recording whether the question
was discussed or, if it was, how it was answered.

Reports of possible attacks by Bin Ladin kept coming in throughout 1999.
They included a threat to blow up the FBI building in Washington, D.C.
In September, the CSG reviewed a possible threat to a flight out of Los
Angeles or New York.<sup>186</sup> These warnings came amid dozens of
others that flooded in.

With military and diplomatic options practically exhausted by the summer
of 1999, the U.S. government seemed to be back where it had been in the
summer of 1998-relying on the CIA to find some other option. That
picture also seemed discouraging. Several disruptions and renditions
aimed against the broader al Qaeda network had succeeded.<sup>187</sup>
But covert action efforts in Afghanistan had not been fruitful.

In mid-1999, new leaders arrived at the Counterterrorist Center and the
Bin Ladin unit. The new director of CTC, replacing "Jeff," was Cofer
Black. The new head of the section that included the Bin Ladin unit was
"Richard." Black, "Richard," and their colleagues began working on a new
operational strategy for attacking al Qaeda; their starting point was to
get better intelligence, relying more on the CIA's own sources and less
on the tribals.<sup>188</sup>

In July 1999, President Clinton authorized the CIA to work with several
governments to capture Bin Ladin, and extended the scope of efforts to
Bin Ladin's principal lieutenants. The President reportedly also
authorized a covert action under carefully limited circumstances which,
if successful, would have resulted in Bin Ladin's death.<sup>189</sup>
Attorney General Reno again expressed concerns on policy grounds. She
was worried about the danger of retaliation. The CIA also developed the
short-lived effort to work with a Pakistani team that we discussed
earlier, and an initiative to work with Uzbekistan. The Uzbeks needed
basic equipment and training. No action could be expected before March
2000, at the earliest.<sup>190</sup>

In fall 1999, DCI Tenet unveiled the CIA's new Bin Ladin strategy. It
was called, simply, "the Plan." The Plan proposed continuing disruption
and rendition operations worldwide. It announced a program for hiring
and training better officers with counterterrorism skills, recruiting
more assets, and trying to penetrate al Qaeda's ranks. The Plan aimed to
close gaps in technical intelligence collection (signal and imagery) as
well. In addition, the CIA would increase contacts with the Northern
Alliance rebels fighting the Taliban.<sup>191</sup>

With a new operational strategy, the CIA evaluated its capture options.
None scored high marks. The CIA had no confidence in the Pakistani
effort. In the event that Bin Ladin traveled to the Kandahar region in
southern Afghanistan, the tribal network there was unlikely to attack a
heavily guarded Bin Ladin; the Counterterrorist Center rated the chance
of success at less than 10 percent. To the northwest, the Uzbeks might
be ready for a cross-border sortie in six months; their chance of
success was also rated at less than 10 percent.<sup>192</sup>

In the northeast were Massoud's Northern Alliance forces-perhaps the
CIA's best option. In late October, a group of officers from the
Counterterrorist Center flew into the Panjshir Valley to meet up with
Massoud, a hazardous journey in rickety helicopters that would be
repeated several times in the future. Massoud appeared committed to
helping the United States collect intelligence on Bin Ladin's activities
and whereabouts and agreed to try to capture him if the opportunity
arose. The Bin Ladin unit was satisfied that its reporting on Bin Ladin
would now have a second source. But it also knew that Massoud would act
against Bin Ladin only if his own interests and those of the United
States intersected. By early December, the CIA rated this possibility at
less than 15 percent.<sup>193</sup>

Finally, the CIA considered the possibility of putting U.S. personnel on
the ground in Afghanistan. The CIA had been discussing this option with
Special Operations Command and found enthusiasm on the working level but
reluctance at higher levels. CIA saw a 95 percent chance of Special
Operations Command forces capturing Bin Ladin if deployed-but less than
a 5 percent chance of such a deployment. Sending CIA officers into
Afghanistan was to be considered "if the <u>gain</u> clearly outweighs
the <u>risk</u>"-but at this time no such gains presented themselves to
warrant the risk.<sup>194</sup>

As mentioned earlier, such a protracted deployment of U.S. Special
Operations Forces into Afghanistan, perhaps as part of a team joined to
a deployment of the CIA's own officers, would have required a major
policy initiative (probably combined with efforts to secure the support
of at least one or two neighboring countries) to make a long-term
commitment, establish a durable presence on the ground, and be prepared
to accept the associated risks and costs. Such a military plan was never
developed for interagency consideration before 9/11.As 1999 came to a
close, the CIA had a new strategic plan in place for capturing Bin
Ladin, but no option was rated as having more than a 15 percent chance
of achieving that objective.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Al Qaeda Aims at the American Homeland](ch05.md)
