[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Myths/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](vob00)  [Next](vob02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### INTRODUCTION

THE old-Irish tale which is here edited and fully translated <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) for the first time, has come down to us in
seven MSS. of different age and varying value. It is unfortunate that
the oldest copy (U), that contained on p. 121*a* of the *Leabhar na
hUidhre*, a MS. written about 1100 A.D., is a mere fragment, containing
but the very end of the story from *lil in chertle dia dernaind* (§ 62
of my edition) to the conclusion. The other six MSS. all belong to a
much later age, the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries
respectively. Here follow a list and description of these MSS.:--

By R I denote a copy contained in the well-known Bodleian vellum quarto,
marked Rawlinson B. 512, fo. 119a, 1-120b, 2. For a detailed description
of this codex, see the Rolls edition of the Tripartite Life, vol. i. pp.
xiv.-xlv. As the folios containing the copy of our text belong to that
portion of the MS. which begins with the *Baile in Scáil* (fo. 101*a*),
it is very probable that, like this tale, they were copied from the lost
book of Dubdálethe, bishop of

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Armagh from 1049
to 1064. See Rev. Celt. xi. p. 437. The copy was made by a careful and
accurate scribe of the fifteenth or possibly the fourteenth century. The
spelling is but slightly modernised, the old-Irish forms are well
preserved, and on the whole it must be said that, of all MSS., R
supplies us with the best text. Still, it is by no means perfect, and is
not seldom corrected by MSS. of far inferior value. Thus, in § 4 it has
the faulty *cethror* for *cetheoir*; in § 25 *dib* for the dissyllabic
*diib*; in § 61, the senseless *namna* instead of *nammá*. The scribe
has also carelessly omitted two stanzas (46 and 62).

The MS. which comes next in importance I designate B. It is contained on
pp. 57-61 of the vellum quarto classed Betham 145, belonging to the
Royal Irish Academy. I am indebted to Mr. P. M. MacSweeney for a most
accurate transcript of this MS. When I had an opportunity of comparing
his copy with the original, I found hardly any discrepancies between the
two. B was written in the fifteenth century, I think, by a scribe named
Tornae, who, though he tells us in a marginal note <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md). that he had not for a long time had any
practice in writing, did his task remarkably well. He modernises a good
deal in spelling, but generally leaves the old-Irish forms intact. Thus
we owe to him the preservation of such original forms as the genitives
*fino* (13), *datho* (8. 13), *glano* (3. 12), of *étsecht* (13), etc.

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

H denotes a copy contained in the British Museum MS. Harleian 5280, fo.
43a--44b. For a description of this important MS., which was written in
the sixteenth century, see *Hibernica Minora* (Anecdota Oxoniensia,
Mediæval and Modern series--Part VIII.), pp. v and vi. In this copy the
spelling and forms are considerably, but by no means consistently,
modernised. In a few cases H has preserved the original reading as
against the corruptions of all or most of the other MSS. Thus it has
*cetheoir* (4), *muir glan* (35), *moitgretha* (8), etc.

E is a copy contained on fo. 11*b*, 2--13*a*, 2 of the British Museum
MS. Egerton 88, a small vellum folio, written in the sixteenth century.
The text is largely modernised and swarms with mistakes and corruptions.
By sheer good luck the scribe sometimes leaves the old forms intact, as
when he writes *órdi* 14, *adig* 21, *Ildadig* 22, *mrecht* 24.

S is contained in the Stockholm Irish MS., p.p. 2-8. I am indebted to
Mr. Whitley Stokes for a loan of his transcript of the whole MS. S is
deficient at the end, breaking off with the words amh*al* bid atalam
nob*eth* tresna hilcetaib bliadan (65). It is of very inferior value,
being modernised almost throughout in spelling and forms, and full of
corrupt readings, which I have not always thought it worth while to
reproduce in ray footnotes.

L is the copy contained in the well-known MS. belonging to Trinity
College, Dublin, marked H. 2. 16, and commonly called the Yellow Book of
Lecan, col. 395-399 This MS. dates from the fourteenth century. It is of
most unequal

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

value. The scribe, in his endeavour to make the original, mostly
unintelligible to him, yield some sense, constantly alters in the most
reckless and arbitrary manner. At other times he puts down whole lines
of mere gibberish. A good instance of his method is the following
rendering of the 34th quatrain:

Is ar muir nglan dochíu innoe  
inata Bran bres agnæ  
is mag mell dimuig a scoth  
damsa i carput da roth.

As in the case of S, I have not thought it necessary to give all the
variants of L. Yet in a few instances even L has by a mere chance
preserved original readings abandoned by the other scribes, *e.g.* *isa
tír* (6a), *ind nathir* (45), *bledhin* (62).

The six MSS. here enumerated, though frequently varying in details,
offer on the whole an identical text, and have clearly sprung from one
and the same source. For even the vagaries of L turn out on closer
inspection to be mere variants of the same original text. Under these
circumstances it was a comparatively easy task to reconstruct a critical
text. In nearly every case the original reading was preserved by one MS.
or another. Thus almost every form in my edition is supported by MS.
authority. In the very few cases where I have thought it right to
deviate from all the MSS., this has been pointed out in the notes. Still
I am far from flattering myself that I have succeeded in restoring

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

the text to its original purity. In some cases, fortunately not many,
the readings of all the MSS. seemed hopelessly corrupt. See *e.g.* my
remarks on *dorearuasat*, 48; *aill erfind*, 22; *cach ági*, at *sáibsi
ceni*, 45. In other cases it is doubtful whether I have preferred the
right reading. Thus, in to, I may have been too rash in adopting the
reading of L, *cen indgás* instead of *fri indgás* of the rest.
Considering the tendency of L to alter a less common expression into a
familiar one, as well as the consensus of all the other MSS., I would
now retain *fri* and translate it by 'with.' For this use of the
preposition, cf. *fri imḟochid*, p. 85, 3. Again, I cannot claim that
the text, as it now stands, represents the actual language of any
particular period, containing as it does middle-Irish forms by the side
of old-Irish ones. Such a mixture of linguistic forms is, however, not
of my own making, but is an inherent peculiarity of most of our older
texts, fully explained by the way in which they have been handed down.

But before I speak of this, I will try to determine as nearly as
possible the time at which the Voyage of Bran was originally written
down.

If we had any investigations into the history of the Irish language
besides the excellent history of the Deponent lately published by
Professor Strachan, it would probably be possible to determine with
accuracy the time in which a particular text was composed. At present we
must be content with much less certain and definite statements, often
leaving a. margin of a century on either side.

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the case of
old-Irish, it is mainly by comparing the language of a given text with
that of the continental glosses that we arrive at anything like a
trustworthy conclusion, and this I propose to do in the present case.

There are a large number of forms in the Voyage of Bran as old as any to
be found in the Würzburg glosses. The oldest part of these glosses,
Professor Thurneysen, the most careful and cool-headed of observers,
does not hesitate to ascribe to the seventh century. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md)

I now subjoin a list of these oldest forms, leaving aside anything of a
doubtful or unexplained nature.

First. as to sounds and their representation, the following archaic
forms and spellings are noticeable:

Final *e*, early broadened to *æ*, *ae*, later *a*: *sube*, 8;
*comamre*, so: *móramre*, 29: *labre*, 29: *blédne* (later *blíadna*),
55, 58.

Final *i*, early broadened to *ai*: *adamri*, *cadli*, 11; *órdi*, 14;
*crédumi*, 14; also *blédin* (later *bliadain*), 62; *adig* (later
*adaig*), 24; *athir*, 45, 57; *i* for infected *a*: *Ildadig*, 24.

Initial *m* before *r*: *mrath*, 9; *mrecht*, 23, 24; *mruig*, 9, 23,
24, 54.

*ld* for later *ll*: *meld*, 14, 39; *inmeldag*, 41.

*éu* for *éo*: *céul*, 9, 18, etc.

*ói* for later *óe*: *cróib*, 3; *óin*, 13 *tróithad*, 30.

Also, perhaps, *b* for *f* in *graibnid*, 23; *airbitiud*, 18; and *oa*
for *úa*: *sloag*, 17 (R), *cloais*, 9, etc.

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

In the declension, notice the neuter nouns *a rígthech*, 1; *a céol*, 2;
*am-mag*, 5; *am-muir*, 12; *muir glan*, without nasal infection later
added by analogy with neuter *o*-stems, 17, 28, 30; *fris’ tóibgel
tonnat*, 2; *cusa cluchemag*, 20; *isa tír*, 62, etc. The following
genitives sing. of *i*-stems occur: *glano*, 3, 12; *mora*, 37; of
*u*-stems: *betho*, 27; *fedo*, 42; *fino*, 13: *datho*, 8, 13; the
datives sing. of *o*-stems: *láur*, 1; *Braun*, 2; the accusatives
plural: *rúna*, 52; *nime*, 28: *muire*. 48; *tedman*, 21; the genitive
plural: *dúle*, 44.

In the article the full form *inna* is of constant occurrence. In the
poetry it is twice shortened to *’na* in the gen. plur. (26, 30).

Among prepositions, notice such a form as *dóu*, 29, 32, 51; the use of
*íar* with the dative. 26, 32; the careful distinction between *di* and
*do*.

But it is in the verbal system that the archaic character of the
language appears to greatest advantage. The distinction between conjunct
and absolute as well as between dependent and independent forms is
preserved throughout.

Present indicative, sg. 1: *atchíu*, 15--sg. 2: *immerái*, 37;
*forsn-aicci*, 38; *nad aicci*, 19; *nofethi*, 49--sg. 3: *mescid*, 16:
*canid*, 18; *graibnid*, 23; *forsnig*, 6, 12; *dosnig*, 12, 22;
*comérig*, 17; *tormaig*, 18: *foafeid*, 22; *immaréid*, 33; *frisbein*,
16; *frisseill*, 59; *forosna*, 16; *consna*, 5; *immustimerchel*, 19;
*taitni* (dep.), 6; *tibri* (dep.), 35; *donaidbri*; 17--pl. 3:
*lingit*, 38; *bruindit*, 36; *taircet* (dep.), 14, 40; *ní frescet*,
18, 23 *immataitnet*, 4; *taitnet* (dep.), 40; *taitnet* 

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (independent!), 8,
36; *congairet*, 7; *forclechtat*, 5; *foslongat*, 4; *frisferat*, 21;
*forsngairet*, 7.

Present subjunctive, sg. 3: *tróithad*, 30; *imraad*, 60 ; *étsed*, 29.

T-preterite, sg. 3: *dorúasat*, 27 *ronort*, 46.

Reduplicated preterite, sg. 3: *ruchúala*, 20.

S-future, sg. 3: *silis*, 55; *conlee*, 51; *adfí*, 52. Secondary
s-fut., sg. 2: *rista*, 30.

Reduplicated future, sg. 1: *fochicher*, 56; *arungén*, 57--sg. 3:
*gébid*, 26; *adndidma*, 51; *timgéra*, 59.

E-future, sg. 2: *ricfe*, 60--sg. 3: *glanfad*, 28; *dercfid*, 55;
*ticfa* (independent!). 26, 48; *rothicfa*, 49; *móithfe*, 52;
*fuglóisfe*, 48; *ícfes*, 28.

Imperative, sg. 2: *tuit*, 30; *tinscan*, 30.

Verbal nouns: *étsecht*, 13, 24; *óol*, 13; *imram*, 17; *airbitiud*,
18.

The following passive forms occur: pres. ind. pl., *agtar*, 54; sec.
pers. sg., *atchetha*, 12, 39; red. fut. sg., *gébthir*, 57; *gérthair*,
51; pret. sg., *adfét*, 29; *atfess*, 29; s-fut. sg., *festar*, 26.

As to old syntactic usage, notice the adjective and substantive
attributes placed before the noun, 4, 13, 19, 29, 43.

Lastly, I would draw attention to the use of the following words as
dissyllabic, though as most of them continue to be so used as late as
the tenth century, such use is not in itself proof of great antiquity.

*bíi*, 9; *bíaid*, 50, 53, 55; *bías*, 27. Cf. Salt. na Rann, ll. 8021,
8202; Trip. Life, pp. 70, 22; 222, 4, 6, etc. But

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

their use as monosyllables is far more frequent in Salt. na Rann. See
ll. 835, 1076, 1599, 1951, 1952, 2043, 2047, 3275, 3320, 3353, 5046,
6255, 6325.

*cía*, 'mist,' 11.

*criad*, gen. of *cré*, 'clay,' 50, as in the dat. *criaid*, Salt. 7683,
7769. Monosyllabic in Salt. 394 (leg. criaid), 8230.

*día*, 'God,' 48. Cf. l. 18 in Sanctán's hymn:

*friscéra Día dúlech*.

and Salt. 1905, 2013, 2685, 5359, 7157, 7969, 8074. Monosyllabic in
Salt. 649, 1917, 1950, 2742, 3121, 3308, 7976.

*diib*, 'of them,' 25; as in Salt. 375 (*sic* leg.), 437. But
monosyllabic in Salt. 4975, 4985, 5461, 5417, 5869, 7704.

*fia*, 11.

*fóe*, 'under her,' 6.

*óol*, 'drinking,' 13. Cf. *oc óul* in the Milan glosses (Ascoli);
*d’óol*, Salt. 1944.

*úain*, 'lambs,' 38.

It will be observed that the above forms are taken almost exclusively
from the poetry. The prose, though it preserves a large number of
undoubtedly old-Irish forms, also contains a good deal of what is
clearly of middle-Irish origin, more particularly in the verbal forms.
The use of preterites without the particle *ro* has been recognised by
Thurneysen, <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) whom I mainly follow here,
as a decidedly later phenomenon. It occurs in *birt*, 31; *asbert*, 62,
63 (bis), 64, instead of old-Ir. *asrubart*, and in a large number of

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

s-preterites such as *fóidis*, 61; *gabais*, 63; *scríbais*, 66;
*celebrais*, 66; *sloindsi*, 62. We find *dobert* 2, instead of old-Ir.
*dorat*, and *dobreth* 62, instead of *doratad*. The late *cachain*
occurs three times (2. 32, 65), for old-Ir. *cechuin*.

Such Middle-Irish forms, which all MSS. without exception contain, show
that the original from which our MSS. are in the first instance derived,
cannot have been written much earlier than the tenth century. Bearing
this in mind, together with the occurrence of the seventh century
old-Irish forms side by side with these later ones, as well as with the
fact that the poetry contains none of the latter, we arrive at the
following conclusions as to the history of our text.

The Voyage of Bran was originally written down in the seventh
century. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) From this original, sometime
in the tenth century, a copy was made, in which the language of the
poetry, protected by the laws of metre and assonance, was left almost
intact, while the prose was subjected to a process of partial
modernisation, which most affected the verbal forms. From this tenth
century copy all our MSS. are derived.

In conclusion, I would draw attention to the loan-words occurring in our
tale. These are all of Latin origin. <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md)
They naturally fall into two groups, an older one of words

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

borrowed at the period of the first contact of the Irish with Roman
civilisation, before the introduction of Christianity; a later one of
words that came into Irish with Christianity. To the first group belong
*aball*, 'abella'? 23; *arggat*, 'argentum,' 23, 14, 22; *drauc*.
'draco.' 13; *dracon*, 'dracontium.' 12. 58; *fín*, 'vinum,' 13, 14;
*fine*, 'ab eo quod est vinea.' Corm., 43; *port*, 'portus,' 62.

Of words of the second group we find: *cór*, 'chorus,' 18; *corp*,
'corpus,' 46, 50; *líth*, 46, through Welsh *llith* from Lat. lectio;
*mías*, 'mensa,' with the meaning 'dish,' 62; *peccad*, 'peccatum,' 41;
*praind*, 'prandium,' 62; *oceon*, 'oceanus,' 25; *scríbaim*, 'scribo,'
66.

 

It remains for me to express my gratitude to those who have taken a
friendly interest in the production of this little book, and who have in
various ways given me advice and assistance; above all to Mr. Whitley
Stokes, to whom I am indebted for many weighty suggestions, as well as
for the loan of valuable transcripts; to the Rev. Richard Henebry, Mr.
Alfred Nutt, and Mr. P. M. MacSweeney, and to my kind friends and
colleagues, Mr. John Sampson, and Prof. John Strachan.

KUNO MEYER.

 

UNIVERSITY COLLEGE,  
      LIVERPOOL.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vii:1](vob01.htm#fr_0.md) An abstract and partial
translation of the Voyage of Bran was given by Professor Zimmer in the
*Zeitschrift für deutsches Alterthum*, vol. xxxiii. pp. 257-261.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[viii:1](vob01.htm#fr_1.md) This note is found at
the bottom of p. 57 and runs thus: Messe Tornae 7 ni *fetur* ca f*a*d o
doscriuh*us* oenlini roime sin, *i.e.* I am Torre, and I do not know how
long ago it is since I wrote a single line.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xii:1](vob01.htm#fr_2.md) 'Die Vorlage der
Würzburger Glossen kann unbedenklich ins 7. Jahrh. datiert
werden.'--Rev. Celt. vi. p. 319.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xv:1](vob01.htm#fr_3.md) See Rev. Celt. vi., pp.
322 and 328.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xvi:1](vob01.htm#fr_4.md) Prof. Zimmer also claims
our text for this century. His words are (l.c., p. 261): 'Der Text
gehört zum ältesten was uns von irischer profanlitteratur erhalten ist:
seine sprache ist sicher so alt wie die ältesten altirischen glosses; er
kann also noch dem 7. jh. angehören.'

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xvi:2](vob01.htm#fr_5.md) With reference to Prof.
Zimmer's well-known theory as to the Norse origin of Ir. *fían* and its
derivatives, I may mention that the word *fénnid* occurs in 56.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Voyage of Bran](vob02.md)
