[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020102)  [Next](1020104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.30"></span>

<span id="iv.III.30-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.30-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—Of the Connection of the Wars
Which with Great Severity and Frequency Followed One Another Before the
Advent of Christ.</span>

<span id="iv.III.30-p2"></span>With what effrontery, then, with what
assurance, with what impudence, with what folly, or rather insanity, do
they refuse to impute these disasters to their own gods, and impute the
present to our Christ!  These bloody civil wars, more distressing, by
the avowal of their own historians, than any foreign wars, and which
were pronounced to be not merely calamitous, but absolutely ruinous to
the republic, began long before the coming of Christ, and gave birth to
one another; so that a concatenation of unjustifiable causes led from
the wars of Marius and Sylla to those of Sertorius and Cataline, of whom
the one was proscribed, the other brought up by Sylla; from this to the
war of Lepidus and Catulus, of whom the one wished to rescind, the other
to defend the acts of Sylla; from this to the war of Pompey and Cæsar,
of whom Pompey had been a partisan of Sylla, whose power he equalled or
even surpassed, while Cæsar condemned Pompey’s power because it was not
his own, and yet exceeded it when Pompey <span id="page_62">p. 62</span>
<span id="iv.III.30-Page_62"></span> was defeated and slain.  From him
the chain of civil wars extended to the second Cæsar, afterwards called
Augustus, and in whose reign Christ was born.  For even Augustus himself
waged many civil wars; and in these wars many of the foremost men
perished, among them that skilful manipulator of the republic, Cicero. 
Caius \[Julius\] Cæsar, when he had conquered Pompey, though he used his
victory with clemency, and granted to men of the opposite faction both
life and honors, was suspected of aiming at royalty, and was
assassinated in the curia by a party of noble senators, who had
conspired to defend the liberty of the republic.  His power was then
coveted by Antony, a man of very different character, polluted and
debased by every kind of vice, who was strenuously resisted by Cicero on
the same plea of defending the liberty of the republic.  At this
juncture that other Cæsar, the adopted son of Caius, and afterwards, as
I said, known by the name of Augustus, had made his *début* as a young
man of remarkable genius.  This youthful Cæsar was favored by Cicero, in
order that his influence might counteract that of Antony; for he hoped
that Cæsar would overthrow and blast the power of Antony, and establish
a free state,—so blind and unaware of the future was he:  for that very
young man, whose advancement and influence he was fostering, allowed
Cicero to be killed as the seal of an alliance with Antony, and
subjected to his own rule the very liberty of the republic in defence of
which he had made so many orations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](1020104)
