[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020326)  [Next](1020328.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.23"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.23-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.23-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—Of the Error in Which the Doctrine
of Origen is Involved.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.23-p2"></span>But it is much more surprising that some
even of those who, with ourselves, believe that there is one only source
of all things, and that no nature which is not divine can exist unless
originated by that Creator, have yet refused to accept with a good and
simple faith this so good and simple a reason of the world’s creation,
that a good God made it good; and that the things created, being
different from God, were inferior to Him, and yet were good, being
created by none other than He.  But they say that souls, though not,
indeed, parts of God, but created by Him, sinned by abandoning God;
that, in proportion to their various sins, they merited different
degrees of debasement from heaven to earth, and diverse bodies as
prison-houses; and that this is the world, and this the cause of its
creation, not the production of good things, but the restraining of
evil.  Origen is justly blamed for holding this opinion.  For in the
books which he entitles <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XI.23-p2.1"></span>περὶ αρχῶν</span>, that is, *Of Origins*, this
is his sentiment, this his utterance.  And I can <span id="page_218">p.
218</span> <span id="iv.XI.23-Page_218"></span> not sufficiently express
my astonishment, that a man so erudite and well versed in ecclesiastical
literature, should not have observed, in the first place, how opposed
this is to the meaning of this authoritative Scripture, which, in
recounting all the works of God, regularly adds, “And God saw that it
was good;” and, when all were completed, inserts the words, “And God saw
everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very good.” <span
id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495.md)   Was it not obviously meant to be
understood that there was no other cause of the world’s creation than
that good creatures should be made by a good God?  In this creation, had
no one sinned, the world would have been filled and beautified with
natures good without exception; and though there is sin, all things are
not therefore full of sin, for the great majority of the heavenly
inhabitants preserve their nature’s integrity.  And the sinful will
though it violated the order of its own nature, did not on that account
escape the laws of God, who justly orders all things for good.  For as
the beauty of a picture is increased by well-managed shadows, so, to the
eye that has skill to discern it, the universe is beautified even by
sinners, though, considered by themselves, their deformity is a sad
blemish.

<span id="iv.XI.23-p4"></span>In the second place, Origen, and all who
think with him, ought to have seen that if it were the true opinion that
the world was created in order that souls might, for their sins, be
accommodated with bodies in which they should be shut up as in houses of
correction, the more venial sinners receiving lighter and more ethereal
bodies, while the grosser and graver sinners received bodies more crass
and grovelling, then it would follow that the devils, who are deepest in
wickedness, ought, rather than even wicked men, to have earthly bodies,
since these are the grossest and least ethereal of all.  But in point of
fact, that we might see that the deserts of souls are not to be
estimated by the qualities of bodies, the wickedest devil possesses an
ethereal body, while man, wicked, it is true, but with a wickedness
small and venial in comparison with his, received even before his sin a
body of clay.  And what more foolish assertion can be advanced than that
God, by this sun of ours, did not design to benefit the material
creation, or lend lustre to its loveliness, and therefore created one
single sun for this single world, but that it so happened that one soul
only had so sinned as to deserve to be enclosed in such a body as it
is?  On this principle, if it had chanced that not one, but two, yea, or
ten, or a hundred had sinned similarly, and with a like degree of guilt,
then this world would have one hundred suns.  And that such is not the
case, is due not to the considerate foresight of the Creator, contriving
the safety and beauty of things material, but rather to the fact that so
fine a quality of sinning was hit upon by only one soul, so that it
alone has merited such a body.  Manifestly persons holding such opinions
should aim at confining, not souls of which they know not what they say,
but themselves, lest they fall, and deservedly, far indeed from the
truth.  And as to these three answers which I formerly recommended when
in the case of any creature the questions are put, Who made it? By what
means? Why? that it should be replied, God, By the Word, Because it was
good,—as to these three answers, it is very questionable whether the
Trinity itself is thus mystically indicated, that is, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, or whether there is some good reason for this
acceptation in this passage of Scripture,—this, I say, is questionable,
and one can’t be expected to explain everything in one volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_495"></span>[218:496](1020327.htm#fr_495.md) <span
id="iv.XI.23-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.23-p3"></span> [Gen.
1.31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031.md)<span id="iv.XI.23-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1020328.md)
