[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020574)  [Next](1020576) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—How Varro, by Removing All the
Differences Which Do Not Form Sects, But are Merely Secondary Questions,
Reaches Three Definitions of the Chief Good, of Which We Must Choose
One.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.2-p2"></span>The same may be said of those three kinds
of life, the life of studious leisure and search after truth, the life
of easy engagement in affairs, and the life in which both these are
mingled.  When it is asked, which of these should be adopted, this
involves no controversy about the end of good, but inquires which of
these three puts a man in the best position for finding and retaining
the supreme good.  For this good, as soon as a man finds it, makes him
happy; but lettered leisure, or public business, or the alternation of
these, do not necessarily constitute happiness.  Many, in fact, find it
possible to adopt one or other of these modes of life, and yet to miss
what makes a man happy.  The question, therefore, regarding the supreme
good and the supreme evil, and which distinguishes sects of philosophy,
is one; and these questions concerning the social life, the doubt of the
Academy, the dress and food of the Cynics, the three modes of life—the
active, the contemplative, and the mixed—these are different questions,
into none of which the question of the chief good enters.  And
therefore, as Marcus Varro multiplied the sects to the number of 288 (or
whatever larger number he chose) by introducing these four differences
derived from the social life, the New Academy, the Cynics, and the
threefold form of life, so, by removing these differences as having no
bearing on the supreme good, and as therefore not constituting what can
properly be called sects, he returns to those twelve schools which
concern themselves with inquiring what that good is which makes man
happy, and he shows that one of these is true, the rest false.  In other
words, he dismisses the distinction founded on the threefold mode of
life, and so decreases the whole number by two-thirds, reducing the
sects to ninety-six.  Then, putting aside the Cynic peculiarities, the
number decreases by a half, to forty-eight.  Taking away next the
distinction occasioned by the hesitancy of the New Academy, the number
is again halved, and reduced to twenty-four.  Treating in a similar way
the diversity introduced by the consideration of the social life, there
are left but twelve, which this difference had doubled to twenty-four. 
Regarding these twelve, no reason can be assigned why they should not be
called sects.  For in them the sole inquiry is regarding the supreme
good and the ultimate evil,—that is to say, regarding the supreme good,
for this being found, the opposite evil is thereby found.  Now, to make
these twelve sects, he multiplies by three these four things—pleasure,
repose, pleasure and repose combined, and the primary objects of nature
which Varro calls *primigenia*.  For as these four things are sometimes
subordinated to virtue, so that they seem to be desired not for their
own sake, but for virtue’s sake; sometimes preferred to it, so that
virtue seems to be necessary not on its own account, but in order to
attain these things; sometimes joined with it, so that both they and
virtue are desired for their own sakes,—we must multiply the four by
three, and thus we get twelve sects.  But from those four things Varro
eliminates three—pleasure, repose, <span id="page_400">p. 400</span>
<span id="iv.XIX.2-Page_400"></span> pleasure and repose combined—not
because he thinks these are not worthy of the place assigned them, but
because they are included in the primary objects of nature.  And what
need is there, at any rate, to make a threefold division out of these
two ends, pleasure and repose, taking them first severally and then
conjunctly, since both they, and many other things besides, are
comprehended in the primary objects of nature?  Which of the three
remaining sects must be chosen?  This is the question that Varro dwells
upon.  For whether one of these three or some other be chosen, reason
forbids that more than one be true.  This we shall afterwards see; but
meanwhile let us explain as briefly and distinctly as we can how Varro
makes his selection from these three, that is, from the sects which
severally hold that the primary objects of nature are to be desired for
virtue’s sake, that virtue is to be desired for their sake, and that
virtue and these objects are to be desired each for their own sake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020576)
