[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020255)  [Next](1020257.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX.9"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IX.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Whether the Intercession of the
Demons Can Secure for Men the Friendship of the Celestial Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.IX.9-p2"></span>How, then, can men hope for a favorable
introduction to the friendship of the gods by such mediators as these,
who are, like men, defective in that which is the better part of every
living creature, viz., the soul, and who resemble the gods only in the
body, which is the inferior part?  For a living creature or animal
consists of soul and body, and of these two parts the soul is
undoubtedly the better; even though vicious and weak, it is obviously
better than even the soundest and strongest body, for the greater
excellence of its nature is not reduced to the level of the body even by
the pollution of vice, as gold, even when tarnished, is more precious
than the purest silver or lead.  And yet these mediators, by whose
interposition things human and divine are to be harmonized, have an
eternal body in common with the gods, and a vicious soul in common with
men,—as if the religion by which these demons are to unite gods and men
were a bodily, and not a spiritual matter.  What wickedness, then, or
punishment has suspended these false and deceitful mediators, as it were
head downwards, so that their inferior part, their body, is linked to
the gods above, and their superior part, the soul, bound to men beneath;
united to the celestial gods by the part that serves, and miserable,
together with the inhabitants of earth, by the part that rules?  For the
body is the servant, as Sallust says:  “We use the soul to rule, the
body to obey;” <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346.md) adding, “the one
we have in common with the gods, the other with the brutes.”  For he was
here speaking of men; and they have, like the brutes, a mortal body. 
These demons, whom our philosophic friends have provided for us as
mediators with the gods, may indeed say of the soul and body, the one we
have in common with the gods, the other with men; but, as I said, they
are as it were suspended and bound head downwards, having the slave, the
body, in common with the gods, the master, the soul, in common with
miserable men,—their inferior part exalted, their superior part
depressed.  And therefore, if any one supposes that, because they are
not subject, like terrestrial animals, to the separation of soul and
body by death, they therefore resemble the gods in their eternity, their
body must not be considered a chariot of an eternal triumph, but rather
the chain of an eternal punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_346"></span>[171:347](1020256.htm#fr_346.md) <span
id="iv.IX.9-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.9-p3"></span> *Cat. Conj.*i.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020257.md)
