[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020756)  [Next](1020758.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xx"></span>

<span id="v.v.xx-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—The Superstitious Nature of Human
Institutions.</span>

<span id="v.v.xx-p2"></span>30.  All the arrangements made by men for
the making and worshipping of idols are superstitious, pertaining as
they do either to the worship of what is created or of some part of it
as God, or to consultations and arrangements about signs and leagues
with devils, such, for example, as are employed in the magical arts, and
which the poets are accustomed not so much to teach as to celebrate. 
And to this class belong, but with a bolder reach of deception, the
books of the haruspices and augurs.  In this class we must place also
all amulets and cures which the medical art condemns, whether these
consist in incantations, or in marks which they call *characters*, or in
hanging or tying on or even dancing in a fashion certain articles, not
with reference to the condition of the body, but to certain signs hidden
or manifest; and these remedies they call by the less offensive name of
*physica*, so as to appear not to be engaged in superstitious
observances, but to be taking advantage of the forces of nature. 
Examples of these are the earrings on the top of each ear, or the rings
of ostrich bone on the fingers, or telling you when you hiccup to hold
your left thumb in your right hand.

<span id="v.v.xx-p3"></span>31.  To these we may add thousands of the
most frivolous practices, that are to be observed if any part of the
body should jump, or if, when friends are walking arm-in-arm, a stone,
or a dog, or a boy, should come between them.  And the kicking of a
stone, as if it were a divider of friends, does less harm than to cuff
an innocent boy if he happens to run between men who are walking side by
side.  But it is delightful that the boys are sometimes avenged by the
dogs; for frequently men are so superstitious as to venture upon
striking a dog who has run between them,—not with impunity however, for
instead of a superstitious remedy, the dog sometimes makes his assailant
run in hot haste for a real surgeon.  To this class, too, belong the
following rules:  To tread upon the threshold when you go out in front
of the house; to go back to bed if any one should sneeze when you are
putting on your slippers; to return home if you stumble when going to a
place; when your clothes are eaten by mice, to be more frightened at the
prospect of coming misfortune than grieved by your present loss.  Whence
that witty saying of Cato, who, when consulted by a man who told him
that the mice had eaten his boots, replied, “That is not strange, but it
would have been very strange indeed if the boots had eaten the mice.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020758.md)
