[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020679)  [Next](1020681) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.19"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—That All Bodily Blemishes Which
Mar Human Beauty in This Life Shall Be Removed in the Resurrection, the
Natural Substance of the Body Remaining, But the Quality and Quantity of
It Being Altered So as to Produce Beauty.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.19-p2"></span>What am I to say now about the hair and
nails?  Once it is understood that no part of the body shall so perish
as to produce deformity in the body, it is at the same time understood
that such things as would have produced a deformity by their excessive
proportions shall be added to the total bulk of the body, not to parts
in which the beauty of the proportion would thus be marred.  Just as if,
after making a vessel of clay, one wished to make it over again of the
same clay, it would not be necessary that the same portion of the clay
which had formed the handle should again form the new handle, or that
what had formed the bottom should again do so, but only that the whole
clay should go to make up the whole new vessel, and that no part of it
should be left unused.  Wherefore, if the hair that has been cropped and
the nails that have been cut would cause a deformity were they to be
restored to their places, they shall not be restored; and yet no one
will lose these parts at the resurrection, for they shall be changed
into the same flesh, their substance being so altered as to preserve the
proportion of the various parts of the body.  However, what our Lord
said, “Not a hair of your head shall perish,” might more suitably be
interpreted of the number, and not of the length of the hairs, as He
elsewhere says, “The hairs of your head are all numbered.” <span
id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646)   Nor would I say this because I
suppose that any part naturally belonging to the body can perish, but
that whatever deformity was in it, and served to exhibit the penal
condition in which we mortals are, should be restored in such a way
that, while the substance is entirely preserved, the deformity shall
perish.  For if even a human workman, who has, for some reason, made a
deformed statue, can recast it and make it very beautiful, and this
without suffering any part of the substance, but only the deformity to
be lost,—if he can, for example, remove some unbecoming or
disproportionate part, not by cutting off and separating this part from
the whole, but by so breaking down and mixing up the whole as to get rid
of the blemish without diminishing the quantity of his material,—shall
we not think as highly of the almighty Worker?  Shall He not be able to
remove and abolish all deformities of the human body, whether common
ones or rare and monstrous, which, though in keeping with this miserable
life, are yet not to be thought of in connection with that future
blessedness; and shall He not be able so to remove them that, while the
natural but unseemly blemishes are put an end to, the natural substance
shall suffer no diminution?

<span id="iv.XXII.19-p4"></span>And consequently overgrown and emaciated
persons need not fear that they shall be in heaven of such a figure as
they would not be even in this world if they could help it.  For all
bodily beauty consists in the proportion of the parts, together with a
certain agreeableness of color.  Where there is no proportion, the eye
is offended, either because there is something awanting, or too small,
or too large.  And thus there shall be no deformity resulting from want
of proportion in that state in which all that is wrong is corrected, and
all that is defective supplied from resources the Creator wots of, and
all that is excessive removed without destroying the integrity of the
substance.  And as for the pleasant color, how conspicuous shall it be
where “the just shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
Father!” <span id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647)   This brightness we
must rather <span id="page_498">p. 498</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.19-Page_498"></span> believe to have been concealed from the
eyes of the disciples when Christ rose, than to have been awanting.  For
weak human eyesight could not bear it, and it was necessary that they
should so look upon Him as to be able to recognize Him.  For this
purpose also He allowed them to touch the marks of His wounds, and also
ate and drank,—not because He needed nourishment, but because He could
take it if He wished.  Now, when an object, though present, is invisible
to persons who see other things which are present, as we say that that
brightness was present but invisible by those who saw other things, this
is called in Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XXII.19-p5.2"></span> ἀορασία</span>; and our Latin translators,
for want of a better word, have rendered this *cæcitas* (blindness) in
the book of Genesis.  This blindness the men of Sodom suffered when they
sought the just Lot’s gate and could not find it.  But if it had been
blindness, that is to say, if they could see nothing, then they would
not have asked for the gate by which they might enter the house, but for
guides who might lead them away.

<span id="iv.XXII.19-p6"></span>But the love we bear to the blessed
martyrs causes us, I know not how, to desire to see in the heavenly
kingdom the marks of the wounds which they received for the name of
Christ, and possibly we shall see them.  For this will not be a
deformity, but a mark of honor, and will add lustre to their appearance,
and a spiritual, if not a bodily beauty.  And yet we need not believe
that they to whom it has been said, “Not a hair of your head shall
perish,” shall, in the resurrection, want such of their members as they
have been deprived of in their martyrdom.  But if it will be seemly in
that new kingdom to have some marks of these wounds still visible in
that immortal flesh, the places where they have been wounded or
mutilated shall retain the scars without any of the members being lost. 
While, therefore, it is quite true that no blemishes which the body has
sustained shall appear in the resurrection, yet we are not to reckon or
name these marks of virtue blemishes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[497:1647](1020680.htm#fr_1646) <span
id="iv.XXII.19-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.19-p3"></span> [Luke
12.7](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#007)<span
id="iv.XXII.19-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[497:1648](1020680.htm#fr_1647) <span
id="iv.XXII.19-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.19-p5"></span> [Matt.
13.43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span
id="iv.XXII.19-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020681)
