[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020752)  [Next](1020754) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—The Knowledge Both of Language and
Things is Helpful for the Understanding of Figurative
Expressions.</span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p2"></span>23.  In the case of figurative signs,
again, if ignorance of any of them should chance to bring the reader to
a stand-still, their meaning is to be traced partly by the knowledge of
languages, partly by the knowledge of things.  The pool of Siloam, for
example, where the man whose eyes our Lord had anointed with clay made
out of spittle was commanded to wash, has a figurative significance, and
undoubtedly conveys a secret sense; but yet if the evangelist had not
interpreted that name, <span id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792) a
meaning so important would lie unnoticed.  And we cannot doubt that, in
the same way, many Hebrew names which have not been interpreted by the
writers of those books, would, if any one could interpret them, be of
great value and service in solving the enigmas of Scripture.  And a
number of men skilled in that language have conferred no small benefit
on posterity by explaining all these words without reference to their
place in Scripture, and telling us what Adam means, what Eve, what
Abraham, what Moses, and also the names of places, what Jerusalem
signifies, or Sion, or Sinai, or Lebanon, or Jordan, and whatever other
names in that language we are not acquainted with.  And when these names
have been investigated and explained, many figurative expressions in
Scripture become clear.

<span id="v.v.xvi-p4"></span>24.  Ignorance of things, too, renders
figurative expressions obscure, as when we do not know the nature of the
animals, or minerals, or plants, which are frequently referred to in
Scripture by way of comparison.  The fact so well known about the
serpent, for example, that to protect its head it will present its whole
body to its assailants—how much light it throws upon the meaning of our
Lord’s command, that we should be wise as serpents; <span
id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793) that is to say, that for the sake
of our head, which is Christ, we should willingly offer our body to the
persecutors, lest the Christian faith should, as it were, be destroyed
in us, if to save the body we deny our God!  Or again, the statement
that the serpent gets rid of its old skin by squeezing itself through a
narrow hole, and thus acquires new strength—how appropriately it fits in
with the direction to imitate the wisdom of the serpent, and to put off
the old man, as the apostle says, that we may put on the new; <span
id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794) and to put it off, too, by coming
through a narrow place, according to the saying of our Lord, “Enter ye
in at the strait gate!” <span id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795)   As,
then, knowledge of the nature of the serpent throws light upon many
metaphors which Scripture is accustomed to draw from that animal, so
ignorance of other animals, which are no less frequently mentioned by
way of comparison, is a very great drawback to the reader.  And so in
regard to minerals and plants:  knowledge of the carbuncle, for
instance, which shines in the dark, throws light upon many of the dark
places in books too, where it is used metaphorically; and ignorance of
the beryl or the adamant often shuts the doors of knowledge.  And the
only reason why we find it easy to understand that perpetual peace is
indicated by the olive branch which the dove brought with it when it
returned to the ark, <span id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796) is that
we know both that the smooth touch of olive oil is not easily spoiled by
a fluid of another kind, and that the tree itself is an evergreen. 
Many, again, by reason of their ignorance of hyssop, not knowing the
virtue it has in cleansing the lungs, nor the power it is said to have
of piercing rocks with its roots, although it is a small and
insignificant plant, cannot make out why it is said, “Purge me with
hyssop, and I shall be clean.” <span
id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797)

<span id="v.v.xvi-p10"></span>25.  Ignorance of numbers, too, prevents
us from understanding things that are set down in Scripture in a
figurative and mystical way.  A candid mind, if I may so speak, cannot
but be anxious, for example, to ascertain what is meant by the fact that
Moses and Elijah, and our Lord Himself, all fasted for forty days. <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798)   And except by knowledge of and
reflection upon the number, the difficulty of explaining the figure
involved in this action cannot be got over.  For the number contains ten
four times, indicating the knowledge of all things, and that knowledge
interwoven with time.  For both the diurnal and the annual revolutions
are accomplished in periods numbering four each; the diurnal in the
hours of the morning, the noontide, the evening, and the night; the
annual in the spring, summer, autumn, and winter months.  Now while we
live in time, we must abstain and fast from all joy in time, for the
sake of that eternity in which we wish to live; al <span
id="page_544">p. 544</span> <span id="v.v.xvi-Page_544"></span> though
by the passage of time we are taught this very lesson of despising time
and seeking eternity.  Further, the number ten signifies the knowledge
of the Creator and the creature, for there is a trinity in the Creator;
and the number seven indicates the creature, because of the life and the
body.  For the life consists of three parts, whence also God is to be
loved with the whole heart, the whole soul, and the whole mind; and it
is very clear that in the body there are four elements of which it is
made up.  In this number ten, therefore, when it is placed before us in
connection with time, that is, when it is taken four times we are
admonished to live unstained by, and not partaking of, any delight in
time, that is, to fast for forty days.  Of this we are admonished by the
law personified in Moses, by prophecy personified in Elijah, and by our
Lord Himself, who, as if receiving the witness both of the law and the
prophets, appeared on the mount between the other two, while His three
disciples looked on in amazement.  Next, we have to inquire in the same
way, how out of the number forty springs the number fifty, which in our
religion has no ordinary sacredness attached to it on account of the
Pentecost, and how this number taken thrice on account of the three
divisions of time, before the law, under the law, and under grace, or
perhaps on account of the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and
the Trinity itself being added over and above, has reference to the
mystery of the most Holy Church, and reaches to the number of the one
hundred and fifty-three fishes which were taken after the resurrection
of our Lord, when the nets were cast out on the right-hand side of the
boat. <span id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799)   And in the same way,
many other numbers and combinations of numbers are used in the sacred
writings, to convey instruction under a figurative guise, and ignorance
of numbers often shuts out the reader from this instruction.

<span id="v.v.xvi-p13"></span>26.  Not a few things, too, are closed
against us and obscured by ignorance of music.  One man, for example,
has not unskillfully explained some metaphors from the difference
between the psaltery and the harp. <span
id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800)   And it is a question which it is
not out of place for learned men to discuss, whether there is any
musical law that compels the psaltery of ten chords to have just so many
strings; or whether, if there be no such law, the number itself is not
on that very account the more to be considered as of sacred
significance, either with reference to the ten commandments of the law
(and if again any question is raised about that number, we can only
refer it to the Creator and the creature), or with reference to the
number ten itself as interpreted above.  And the number of years the
temple was in building, which is mentioned in the gospel <span
id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801) —viz., forty-six—has a certain
undefinable musical sound, and when referred to the structure of our
Lord’s body, in relation to which the temple was mentioned, compels many
heretics to confess that our Lord put on, not a false, but a true and
human body.  And in several places in the Holy Scriptures we find both
numbers and music mentioned with honor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[543:1793](1020753.htm#fr_1792) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p3"></span> [John
9.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#007)<span id="v.v.xvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[543:1794](1020753.htm#fr_1793) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p5"></span> [Matt.
10.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="v.v.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[543:1795](1020753.htm#fr_1794) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p6"></span> [Eph.
4.22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span id="v.v.xvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[543:1796](1020753.htm#fr_1795) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p7"></span> [Matt.
7.13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)<span id="v.v.xvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[543:1797](1020753.htm#fr_1796) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p8"></span> [Gen.
8.11](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#011)<span id="v.v.xvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[543:1798](1020753.htm#fr_1797) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p9"></span> [Ps.
51.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)<span id="v.v.xvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[543:1799](1020753.htm#fr_1798) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p11"></span> [Exod.
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018), [1 Kings
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008), [Matt.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002)<span id="v.v.xvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[544:1800](1020753.htm#fr_1799) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p12"></span> [John
21.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#011)<span id="v.v.xvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[544:1801](1020753.htm#fr_1800) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p14"></span> [Ps.
33.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002)<span id="v.v.xvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[544:1802](1020753.htm#fr_1801) <span
id="v.v.xvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p15"></span> [John
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#020)<span id="v.v.xvi-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020754)
