[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020370)  [Next](1020372.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIII.4"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.4-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIII.4-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—Why Death, the Punishment of Sin,
is Not Withheld from Those Who by the Grace of Regeneration are Absolved
from Sin.</span>

<span id="iv.XIII.4-p2"></span>If, moreover, any one is solicitous about
this point, how, if death be the very punishment of sin, they whose
guilt is cancelled by grace do yet suffer death, this difficulty has
already been handled and solved in our other work which we have written
on the baptism of infants. <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581.md)  
There it was said that the parting of soul and body was left, though its
connection with sin was removed, for this reason, that if the
immortality of the body followed immediately upon the sacrament of
regeneration, faith itself would be thereby enervated.  For faith is
then only faith when it waits in hope for what is not yet seen in
substance.  And by the vigor and conflict of faith, at least in times
past, was the fear of death overcome.  Specially was this conspicuous in
the holy martyrs, who could have had no victory, no glory, to whom there
could not even have been any conflict, if, after the layer of
regeneration, saints could not suffer bodily death. <span
id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span id="iv.XIII.4-Page_247"></span> Who
would not, then, in company with the infants presented for baptism, run
to the grace of Christ, that so he might not be dismissed from the
body?  And thus faith would not be tested with an unseen reward; and so
would not even be faith, seeking and receiving an immediate recompense
of its works.  But now, by the greater and more admirable grace of the
Saviour, the punishment of sin is turned to the service of
righteousness.  For then it was proclaimed to man, “If thou sinnest,
thou shall die;” now it is said to the martyr, “Die, that thou sin
not.”  Then it was said, “If ye trangress the commandments, ye shall
die;” now it is said, “If ye decline death, ye transgress the
commandment.”  That which was formerly set as an object of terror, that
men might not sin, is now to be undergone if we would not sin.  Thus, by
the unutterable mercy of God, even the very punishment of wickedness has
become the armor of virtue, and the penalty of the sinner becomes the
reward of the righteous.  For then death was incurred by sinning, now
righteousness is fulfilled by dying.  In the case of the holy martyrs it
is so; for to them the persecutor proposes the alternative, apostasy or
death.  For the righteous prefer by believing to suffer what the first
transgressors suffered by not believing.  For unless they had sinned,
they would not have died; but the martyrs sin if they do not die.  The
one died because they sinned, the others do not sin because they die. 
By the guilt of the first, punishment was incurred; by the punishment of
the second, guilt is prevented.  Not that death, which was before an
evil, has become something good, but only that God has granted to faith
this grace, that death, which is the admitted opposite to life, should
become the instrument by which life is reached.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_581"></span>[246:582](1020371.htm#fr_581.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.4-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.4-p3"></span> *De Baptismo Parvulorum* is the second
half of the title of the book, *de Peccatorum Meritis et Remissione.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1020372.md)
