[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020054)  [Next](1020056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.12"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—That the Romans, by Refusing to
the Poets the Same License in Respect of Men Which They Allowed Them in
the Case of the Gods, Showed a More Delicate Sensitiveness Regarding
Themselves than Regarding the Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.12-p2"></span>The Romans, however, as Scipio boasts in
that same discussion, declined having their conduct and good name
subjected to the assaults and slanders of the poets, and went so far as
to make it a capital crime if any one should dare to compose such
verses.  This was a very honorable course to pursue, so far as they
themselves were concerned, but in respect of the gods it was proud and
irreligious:  for they knew that the gods not only tolerated, but
relished, being lashed by the injurious expressions of the poets, and
yet they themselves would not suffer this same handling; and what their
ritual prescribed as acceptable to the gods, their law prohibited as
injurious to themselves.  How then, Scipio, do you praise the Romans for
refusing this license to the poets, so that no citizen could be
calumniated, while you know that the gods were not included under this
protection?  Do you count your senate-house worthy of so much higher a
regard than the Capitol?  Is the one city of Rome more valuable in your
eyes than the whole heaven of gods, that you prohibit your poets from
uttering any injurious words against a citizen, though they may with
impunity cast what imputations they please upon the gods, without the
interference of senator, censor, prince, or pontiff?  It was, forsooth,
intolerable that Plautus or Nævus should attack Publius and Cneius
Scipio, insufferable that Cæcilius should lampoon Cato; but quite proper
that your Terence should encourage youthful lust by the wicked example
of supreme Jove.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020056)
