[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020751)  [Next](1020753) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xv"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Among Versions a Preference is Given
to the Septuagint and the Itala.</span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p2"></span>22.  Now among translations themselves the
Italian (*Itala*) <span id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790) is to be
preferred to the others, for it keeps closer to the words without
prejudice to clearness of expression.  And to correct the Latin we must
use the Greek versions, among which the authority of the Septuagint is
pre-eminent as far as the Old Testament is concerned; for it is reported
through all the more learned churches that the seventy translators
enjoyed so much of the presence and power of the Holy Spirit in their
work of translation, that among that number of men there was but one
voice.  And if, as is reported, and as many not unworthy of confidence
assert, <span id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791) they were separated
during the work of translation, each man being in a cell by himself, and
yet nothing was found in the manuscript of any one of them that was not
found in the same words and in the same order of words in all the rest,
who dares put anything in comparison with an authority like this, not to
speak of preferring anything to it?  And even if they conferred together
with the result that a unanimous agreement sprang out of the common
labor and judgment of them all; even so, it would not be right or
becoming for any one man, whatever his experience, to aspire to correct
the unanimous opinion of many venerable and learned men.  Wherefore,
even if anything is found in the original Hebrew in a different form
from that in which these men have expressed it, I think we must give way
to the dispensation of Providence which used these men to bring it
about, that books which the Jewish race were unwilling, either from
religious scruple or from jealousy, to make known to other nations,
were, with the assistance of the power of King Ptolemy, made known so
long beforehand to the nations which in the future were to believe in
the Lord.  And thus it is possible that they translated in such a way as
the Holy Spirit, who worked in them and had given them all one voice,
thought most suitable for the Gentiles.  But nevertheless, as I said
above, a comparison of those translators also who have kept most closely
to the words, is often not without value as a help to the clearing up of
the meaning.  The Latin texts, therefore, of the Old Testament are, as I
was about to say, to be corrected if necessary by the authority of the
Greeks, and especially by that of those who, <span id="page_543">p.
543</span> <span id="v.v.xv-Page_543"></span> though they were seventy
in number, are said to have translated as with one voice.  As to the
books of the New Testament, again, if any perplexity arises from the
diversities of the Latin texts, we must of course yield to the Greek,
especially those that are found in the churches of greater learning and
research.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[542:1791](1020752.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="v.v.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p3"></span> The translation here referred to is the
*Vetus Latina*, as revised by the Church of Northern Italy in the fourth
century, prior to the final recension of Jerome, commonly called the
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[542:1792](1020752.htm#fr_1791) <span
id="v.v.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xv-p4"></span> Among these are Justin Martyr, Irenæus, and
Clemens Alexandrinus.  Comp. Augustin, *De Civ. Dei*, xviii. 43, and
*Epp.* 71 and 75.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1020753)
