[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020456)  [Next](1020458.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.8"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Whether Certain Monstrous Races of
Men are Derived from the Stock of Adam or Noah’s Sons.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.8-p2"></span>It is also asked whether we are to believe
that certain monstrous races of men, spoken of in secular history, <span
id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882.md) have sprung from Noah’s sons, or
rather, I should say, from that one man from whom they themselves were
descended.  For it is reported that some have one eye in the middle of
the forehead; some, feet turned backwards from the heel; some, a double
sex, the right breast like a man, the left like a woman, and that they
alternately beget and bring forth:  others are said to have no mouth,
and to breathe only through the nostrils; others are but a cubit high,
and are therefore called by the Greeks “Pigmies:” <span
id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883.md)   they say that in some places the
women conceive in their fifth year, and do not live beyond their
eighth.  So, too, they tell of a race who have two feet but only one
leg, and are of marvellous swiftness, though they do not bend the knee: 
they are called Skiopodes, because in the hot weather they lie down on
their backs and shade themselves with their feet.  Others are said to
have no head, and their eyes in their shoulders; and other <span
id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span id="iv.XVI.8-Page_315"></span> human
or quasi-human races are depicted in mosaic in the harbor esplanade of
Carthage, on the faith of histories of rarities.  What shall I say of
the Cynocephali, whose dog-like head and barking proclaim them beasts
rather than men?  But we are not bound to believe all we hear of these
monstrosities.  But whoever is anywhere born a man, that is, a rational,
mortal animal, no matter what unusual appearance he presents in color,
movement, sound, nor how peculiar he is in some power, part, or quality
of his nature, no Christian can doubt that he springs from that one
protoplast.  We can distinguish the common human nature from that which
is peculiar, and therefore wonderful.

<span id="iv.XVI.8-p5"></span>The same account which is given of
monstrous births in individual cases can be given of monstrous races. 
For God, the Creator of all, knows where and when each thing ought to
be, or to have been created, because He sees the similarities and
diversities which can contribute to the beauty of the whole.  But He who
cannot see the whole is offended by the deformity of the part, because
he is blind to that which balances it, and to which it belongs.  We know
that men are born with more than four fingers on their hands or toes on
their feet:  this is a smaller matter; but far from us be the folly of
supposing that the Creator mistook the number of a man’s fingers, though
we cannot account for the difference.  And so in cases where the
divergence from the rule is greater.  He whose works no man justly finds
fault with, knows what He has done.  At Hippo-Diarrhytus there is a man
whose hands are crescent-shaped, and have only two fingers each, and his
feet similarly formed.  If there were a race like him, it would be added
to the history of the curious and wonderful.  Shall we therefore deny
that this man is descended from that one man who was first created?  As
for the Androgyni, or Hermaphrodites, as they are called, though they
are rare, yet from time to time there appears persons of sex so
doubtful, that it remains uncertain from which sex they take their name;
though it is customary to give them a masculine name, as the more
worthy.  For no one ever called them Hermaphroditesses.  Some years ago,
quite within my own memory, a man was born in the East, double in his
upper, but single in his lower half—having two heads, two chests, four
hands, but one body and two feet like an ordinary man; and he lived so
long that many had an opportunity of seeing him.  But who could
enumerate all the human births that have differed widely from their
ascertained parents?  As, therefore, no one will deny that these are all
descended from that one man, so all the races which are reported to have
diverged in bodily appearance from the usual course which nature
generally or almost universally preserves, if they are embraced in that
definition of man as rational and mortal animals, unquestionably trace
their pedigree to that one first father of all.  We are supposing these
stories about various races who differ from one another and from us to
be true; but possibly they are not:  for if we were not aware that apes,
and monkeys, and sphinxes are not men, but beasts, those historians
would possibly describe them as races of men, and flaunt with impunity
their false and vainglorious discoveries.  But supposing they are men of
whom these marvels are recorded, what if God has seen fit to create some
races in this way, that we might not suppose that the monstrous births
which appear among ourselves are the failures of that wisdom whereby He
fashions the human nature, as we speak of the failure of a less perfect
workman?  Accordingly, it ought not to seem absurd to us, that as in
individual races there are monstrous births, so in the whole race there
are monstrous races.  Wherefore, to conclude this question cautiously
and guardedly, either these things which have been told of some races
have no existence at all; or if they do exist, they are not human races;
or if they are human, they are descended from Adam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_882"></span>[314:883](1020457.htm#fr_882.md) <span
id="iv.XVI.8-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.8-p3"></span> Pliny, *Hist. Nat*. vii. 2; Aulus
Gellius, *Noct. Att.* ix. 4.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[314:884](1020457.htm#fr_883.md) <span
id="iv.XVI.8-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.8-p4"></span> From <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XVI.8-p4.1"></span>πυγμή</span>, a cubit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020458.md)
