[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020409)  [Next](1020411) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.18"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.18-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.18-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—Of the Shame Which Attends All
Sexual Intercourse.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.18-p2"></span>Lust requires for its consummation
darkness and secrecy; and this not only when un <span id="page_277">p.
277</span> <span id="iv.XIV.18-Page_277"></span> lawful intercourse is
desired, but even such fornication as the earthly city has legalized. 
Where there is no fear of punishment, these permitted pleasures still
shrink from the public eye.  Even where provision is made for this lust,
secrecy also is provided; and while lust found it easy to remove the
prohibitions of law, shamelessness found it impossible to lay aside the
veil of retirement.  For even shameless men call this shameful; and
though they love the pleasure, dare not display it.  What! does not even
conjugal intercourse, sanctioned as it is by law for the propagation of
children, legitimate and honorable though it be, does it not seek
retirement from every eye?  Before the bridegroom fondles his bride,
does he not exclude the attendants, and even the paranymphs, and such
friends as the closest ties have admitted to the bridal chamber?  The
greatest master of Roman eloquence says, that all right actions wish to
be set in the light, *i.e*., desire to be known.  This right action,
however, has such a desire to be known, that yet it blushes to be seen. 
Who does not know what passes between husband and wife that children may
be born?  Is it not for this purpose that wives are married with such
ceremony?  And yet, when this well-understood act is gone about for the
procreation of children, not even the children themselves, who may
already have been born to them, are suffered to be witnesses.  This
right action seeks the light, in so far as it seeks to be known, but yet
dreads being seen.  And why so, if not because that which is by nature
fitting and decent is so done as to be accompanied with a
shame-begetting penalty of sin?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1020411)
