[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020100)  [Next](1020102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.28"></span>

<span id="iv.III.28-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.28-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—Of the Victory of Sylla, the
Avenger of the Cruelties of Marius.</span>

<span id="iv.III.28-p2"></span>Then followed the victory of Sylla, the
so-called avenger of the cruelties of Marius.  But not only was his
victory purchased with great bloodshed; but when hostilities were
finished, hostility survived, and the subsequent peace was bloody as the
war.  To the former and still recent massacres of the elder Marius, the
younger Marius and Carbo, who belonged to the same party, added greater
atrocities.  For when Sylla approached, and they despaired not only of
victory, but of life itself, they made a promiscuous massacre of friends
and foes.  And, not satisfied with staining every corner of Rome with
blood, they besieged the senate, and led forth the senators to death
from the curia as from a prison.  Mucius Scævola the pontiff was slain
at the altar of Vesta, which he had clung to because <span
id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span id="iv.III.28-Page_61"></span> no spot
in Rome was more sacred than her temple; and his blood well-nigh
extinguished the fire which was kept alive by the constant care of the
virgins.  Then Sylla entered the city victorious, after having
slaughtered in the Villa Publica, not by combat, but by an order, 7000
men who had surrendered, and were therefore unarmed; so fierce was the
rage of peace itself, even after the rage of war was extinct.  Moreover,
throughout the whole city every partisan of Sylla slew whom he pleased,
so that the number of deaths went beyond computation, till it was
suggested to Sylla that he should allow some to survive, that the
victors might not be destitute of subjects.  Then this furious and
promiscuous licence to murder was checked, and much relief was expressed
at the publication of the proscription list, containing though it did
the death-warrant of two thousand men of the highest ranks, the
senatorial and equestrian.  The large number was indeed saddening, but
it was consolatory that a limit was fixed; nor was the grief at the
numbers slain so great as the joy that the rest were secure.  But this
very security, hard-hearted as it was, could not but bemoan the
exquisite torture applied to some of those who had been doomed to die. 
For one was torn to pieces by the unarmed hands of the executioners; men
treating a living man more savagely than wild beasts are used to tear an
abandoned corpse.  Another had his eyes dug out, and his limbs cut away
bit by bit, and was forced to live a long while, or rather to die a long
while, in such torture.  Some celebrated cities were put up to auction,
like farms; and one was collectively condemned to slaughter, just as an
individual criminal would be condemned to death.  These things were done
in peace when the war was over, not that victory might be more speedily
obtained, but that, after being obtained, it might not be thought
lightly of.  Peace vied with war in cruelty, and surpassed it:  for
while war overthrew armed hosts, peace slew the defenceless.  War gave
liberty to him who was attacked, to strike if he could; peace granted to
the survivors not life, but an unresisting death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](1020102.md)
