[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020689)  [Next](1020691.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.29"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.29-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29.—Of the Beatific Vision.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p2"></span>And now let us consider, with such
ability as God may vouchsafe, how the saints shall be employed when they
are clothed in immortal and spiritual bodies, and when the flesh shall
live no longer in a fleshly but a spiritual fashion.  And indeed, to
tell the truth, I am at a loss to understand the nature of that
employment, or, shall I rather say, repose and ease, for it has never
come within the range of my bodily senses.  And if I should speak of my
mind or understanding, what is our understanding in comparison of its
excellence?  For then shall be that “peace of God which,” as the apostle
says, “passeth all understanding,” <span
id="fr_1668"></span>[1669](#fn_1668.md) —that is to say, all human, and
perhaps all angelic understanding, but certainly not the divine.  That
it passeth ours there is no doubt; but if it passeth that of the
angels,—and he who says “all understanding” seems to make no exception
in their favor,—then we must understand him to mean that neither we nor
the angels can understand, as God understands, the peace which God
Himself enjoys.  Doubtless this passeth all understanding but His own. 
But as we shall one day be made to participate, according to our slender
capacity, in His peace, both in ourselves, and with our neighbor, and
with God our chief good, in this respect the angels understand the peace
of God in their own measure, and men too, though now far behind them,
whatever spiritual advance they have made.  For we must remember how
great a man he was who said, “We know in part, and we prophesy in part,
until that which is perfect is come;” <span
id="fr_1669"></span>[1670](#fn_1669.md) and “Now we see through a glass,
darkly; but then face to face.” <span
id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670.md)   Such also is now the vision of
the holy angels, who are also called our angels, because we, being
rescued out of the power of darkness, and receiving the earnest of the
Spirit, are translated into the kingdom of Christ, and already begin to
belong to those angels with whom we shall enjoy that holy and most
delightful city of God of which we have now written so much.  Thus,
then, the angels of God are our angels, as Christ is God’s and also
ours.  They are God’s, because they have not abandoned Him; they are
ours, because we are their fellow-citizens.  The Lord Jesus also said,
“See that ye despise not one of these little ones:  for I say unto you,
That in heaven their angels do always see the face of my Father which is
in heaven.” <span id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671.md)   As, then, they
see, so shall we also see; but not yet do we thus see.  Wherefore the
apostle uses the words cited a little ago, “Now we see through a glass,
darkly; but then face to face.”  This vision is reserved as the reward
of our faith; and of it the Apostle John also says, “When He shall
appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is.” <span
id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672.md)   By “the face” of God we are to
understand His manifestation, and not a part of the body similar to that
which in our bodies we call by that name.

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p8"></span>And so, when I am asked how the saints
shall be employed in that spiritual body, I do not say what I see, but I
say what I believe, according to that which I read in the psalm, “I
believed, therefore have I spoken.” <span
id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673.md)   I say, then, they shall in the
body see God; but whether they shall see Him by means of the body, as
now we see the sun, moon, stars, sea, earth, and all that is in it, that
is a difficult question.  For it is hard to say that the saints shall
then have such bodies that they shall not be able to shut and open their
eyes as they please; while it is harder still to say that every one who
shuts his eyes shall lose the vision of God.  For if the prophet Elisha,
though at a distance, saw his servant Gehazi, who thought that his
wickedness would escape his master’s observation and accepted gifts from
Naaman the Syrian, whom the prophet had cleansed from his foul leprosy,
how much more shall the saints in the spiritual body see all things, not
only though their eyes be shut, but though they themselves be at a great
distance?  For then shall be “that which is perfect,” of which the
apostle says, “We know in part, and we prophesy in part; but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done
away.”  Then, that he <span id="page_508">p. 508</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.29-Page_508"></span> may illustrate as well as possible, by
a simile, how superior the future life is to the life now lived, not
only by ordinary men, but even by the foremost of the saints, he says,
“When I was a child, I understood as a child, I spake as a child, I
thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish
things.  Now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face:  now
I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known.” <span
id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674.md)   If, then, even in this life, in
which the prophetic power of remarkable men is no more worthy to be
compared to the vision of the future life than childhood is to manhood,
Elisha, though distant from his servant, saw him accepting gifts, shall
we say that when that which is perfect is come, and the corruptible body
no longer oppresses the soul, but is incorruptible and offers no
impediment to it, the saints shall need bodily eyes to see, though
Elisha had no need of them to see his servant?  For, following the
Septuagint version, these are the prophet’s words:  “Did not my heart go
with thee, when the man came out of his chariot to meet thee, and thou
tookedst his gifts?” <span id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675.md)   Or, as
the presbyter Jerome rendered it from the Hebrew, “Was not my heart
present when the man turned from his chariot to meet thee?”  The prophet
said that he saw this with his heart, miraculously aided by God, as no
one can doubt.  But how much more abundantly shall the saints enjoy this
gift when God shall be all in all?  Nevertheless the bodily eyes also
shall have their office and their place, and shall be used by the spirit
through the spiritual body.  For the prophet did not forego the use of
his eyes for seeing what was before them, though he did not need them to
see his absent servant, and though he could have seen these present
objects in spirit, and with his eyes shut, as he saw things far distant
in a place where he himself was not.  Far be it, then, from us to say
that in the life to come the saints shall not see God when their eyes
are shut, since they shall always see Him with the spirit.

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p12"></span>But the question arises, whether, when
their eyes are open, they shall see Him with the bodily eye?  If the
eyes of the spiritual body have no more power than the eyes which we now
possess, manifestly God cannot be seen with them.  They must be of a
very different power if they can look upon that incorporeal nature which
is not contained in any place, but is all in every place.  For though we
say that God is in heaven and on earth, as He, Himself says by the
prophet, “I fill heaven and earth,” <span
id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676.md) we do not mean that there is one
part of God in heaven and another part on earth; but He is all in heaven
and all on earth, not at alternate intervals of time, but both at once,
as no bodily nature can be.  The eye, then, shall have a vastly superior
power,—the power not of keen sight, such as is ascribed to serpents or
eagles, for however keenly these animals see, they can discern nothing
but bodily substances,—but the power of seeing things incorporeal. 
Possibly it was this great power of vision which was temporarily
communicated to the eyes of the holy Job while yet in this mortal body,
when he says to God, “I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear;
but now mine eye seeth Thee:  wherefore I abhor myself, and melt away,
and count myself dust and ashes;” <span
id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677.md) although there is no reason why we
should not understand this of the eye of the heart, of which the apostle
says, “Having the eyes of your heart illuminated.” <span
id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678.md)   But that God shall be seen with
these eyes no Christian doubts who believingly accepts what our God and
Master says, “Blessed are the pure in heart:  for they shall see
God.” <span id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679.md)   But whether in the
future life God shall also be seen with the bodily eye, this is now our
question.

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p17"></span>The expression of Scripture, “And all
flesh shall see the salvation of God,” <span
id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680.md) may without difficulty be
understood as if it were said, “And every man shall see the Christ of
God.”  And He certainly was seen in the body, and shall be seen in the
body when He judges quick and dead.  And that Christ is the salvation of
God, many other passages of Scripture witness, but especially the words
of the venerable Simeon, who, when he had received into his hands the
infant Christ, said, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace,
according to Thy word:  for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation.” <span
id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681.md)   As for the words of the
above-mentioned Job, as they are found in the Hebrew manuscripts, “And
in my flesh I shall see God,” <span id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682.md)
no doubt they were a prophecy of the resurrection of the flesh; yet he
does not say “by the flesh.”  And indeed, if he had said this, it would
still be possible that Christ was meant by “God;” for Christ shall be
seen by the flesh in the flesh.  But even understanding it of God, it is
only equivalent to saying, I shall be in the flesh when I see God.  Then
the apostle’s expression, “face to face,” <span
id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683.md) does not oblige us to believe that
we shall see God by the bodily face in which are the eyes of the body,
for we shall see Him without intermission in spirit.  And if the apostle
had not <span id="page_509">p. 509</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.29-Page_509"></span> referred to the face of the inner man,
he would not have said, “But we, with unveiled face beholding as in a
glass the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image, from
glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684.md)   In the same sense we understand
what the Psalmist sings, “Draw near unto Him, and be enlightened; and
your faces shall not be ashamed.” <span
id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685.md)   For it is by faith we draw near
to God, and faith is an act of the spirit, not of the body.  But as we
do not know what degree of perfection the spiritual body shall
attain,—for here we speak of a matter of which we have no experience,
and upon which the authority of Scripture does not definitely
pronounce,—it is necessary that the words of the Book of Wisdom be
illustrated in us:  “The thoughts of mortal men are timid, and our
fore-castings uncertain.” <span id="fr_1686"></span>[1687](#fn_1686.md)

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p25"></span>For if that reasoning of the
philosophers, by which they attempt to make out that intelligible or
mental objects are so seen by the mind, and sensible or bodily objects
so seen by the body, that the former cannot be discerned by the mind
through the body, nor the latter by the mind itself without the body,—if
this reasoning were trustworthy, then it would certainly follow that God
could not be seen by the eye even of a spiritual body.  But this
reasoning is exploded both by true reason and by prophetic authority. 
For who is so little acquainted with the truth as to say that God has no
cognisance of sensible objects?  Has He therefore a body, the eyes of
which give Him this knowledge?  Moreover, what we have just been
relating of the prophet Elisha, does this not sufficiently show that
bodily things can be discerned by the spirit without the help of the
body?  For when that servant received the gifts, certainly this was a
bodily or material transaction, yet the prophet saw it not by the body,
but by the spirit.  As, therefore, it is agreed that bodies are seen by
the spirit, what if the power of the spiritual body shall be so great
that spirit also is seen by the body?  For God is a spirit.  Besides,
each man recognizes his own life—that life by which he now lives in the
body, and which vivifies these earthly members and causes them to
grow—by an interior sense, and not by his bodily eye; but the life of
other men, though it is invisible, he sees with the bodily eye.  For how
do we distinguish between living and dead bodies, except by seeing at
once both the body and the life which we cannot see save by the eye? 
But a life without a body we cannot see thus.

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p26"></span>Wherefore it may very well be, and it
is thoroughly credible, that we shall in the future world see the
material forms of the new heavens and the new earth in such a way that
we shall most distinctly recognize God everywhere present and governing
all things, material as well as spiritual, and shall see Him, not as now
we understand the invisible things of God, by the things which are
made, <span id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687.md) and see Him darkly, as
in a mirror, and in part, and rather by faith than by bodily vision of
material appearances, but by means of the bodies we shall wear and which
we shall see wherever we turn our eyes.  As we do not believe, but see
that the living men around us who are exercising vital functions are
alive, though we cannot see their life without their bodies, but see it
most distinctly by means of their bodies, so, wherever we shall look
with those spiritual eyes of our future bodies, we shall then, too, by
means of bodily substances behold God, though a spirit, ruling all
things.  Either, therefore, the eyes shall possess some quality similar
to that of the mind, by which they may be able to discern spiritual
things, and among these God,—a supposition for which it is difficult or
even impossible to find any support in Scripture,—or, which is more easy
to comprehend, God will be so known by us, and shall be so much before
us, that we shall see Him by the spirit in ourselves, in one another, in
Himself, in the new heavens and the new earth, in every created thing
which shall then exist; and also by the body we shall see Him in every
body which the keen vision of the eye of the spiritual body shall
reach.  Our thoughts also shall be visible to all, for then shall be
fulfilled the words of the apostle, “Judge nothing before the time,
until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the thoughts of the heart, and then
shall every one have praise of God.” <span
id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[507:1669](1020690.htm#fr_1668.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p3"></span> [Phil.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.XXII.29-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[507:1670](1020690.htm#fr_1669.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.XXII.29-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[507:1671](1020690.htm#fr_1670.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[507:1672](1020690.htm#fr_1671.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p6"></span> [Matt.
18.10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[507:1673](1020690.htm#fr_1672.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p7"></span> [1 John
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.XXII.29-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[507:1674](1020690.htm#fr_1673.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p9"></span> [Ps.
116.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[508:1675](1020690.htm#fr_1674.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p10"></span> [1 Cor.
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[508:1676](1020690.htm#fr_1675.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p11"></span> [2 Kings
5.26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[508:1677](1020690.htm#fr_1676.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p13"></span> [Jer.
23.24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[508:1678](1020690.htm#fr_1677.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p14"></span> [Job
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.XXII.29-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[508:1679](1020690.htm#fr_1678.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p15"></span> [Eph.
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[508:1680](1020690.htm#fr_1679.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p16"></span> [Matt.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[508:1681](1020690.htm#fr_1680.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p18"></span> [Luke
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[508:1682](1020690.htm#fr_1681.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p19"></span> [Luke
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029.md),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[508:1683](1020690.htm#fr_1682.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p20"></span> [Job
19.26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p20.1"></span>.  \[Rev. Vers.; “from my flesh,” with the
margin:  “without my flesh.”—P.S.\]

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[508:1684](1020690.htm#fr_1683.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[509:1685](1020690.htm#fr_1684.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p22"></span> [2 Cor.
3.18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[509:1686](1020690.htm#fr_1685.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p23"></span> [Ps.
34.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[509:1687](1020690.htm#fr_1686.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p24"></span> [Wisd.
9.14](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[509:1688](1020690.htm#fr_1687.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p27"></span> [Rom.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[509:1689](1020690.htm#fr_1688.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.29-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.29-p28"></span> [1 Cor.
4.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.29-p28.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](1020691.md)
