[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020287)  [Next](1020289) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.17"></span>

<span id="iv.X.17-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.17-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—Concerning the Ark of the Covenant,
and the Miraculous Signs Whereby God Authenticated the Law and the
Promise.</span>

<span id="iv.X.17-p2"></span>On this account it was that the law of God,
given by the disposition of angels, and which commanded that the one God
of gods alone receive sacred worship, to the exclusion of all others,
was deposited in the ark, called the ark of the testimony.  By this name
it is sufficiently indicated, not that God, who was worshipped by all
those rites, was shut up and enclosed in that place, though His
responses emanated from it along with signs appreciable by the senses,
but that His will was declared from that throne.  The law itself, too,
was engraven on tables of stone, and, as I have said, deposited in the
ark, which the priests carried with due reverence during the sojourn in
the wilderness, along with the tabernacle, which was in like manner
called the tabernacle of the testimony; and there was then an
accompanying sign, which appeared as a cloud by day and as a fire by
night; when the cloud moved, the camp was shifted, and where it stood
the camp was pitched.  Besides these signs, and the voices which
proceeded from the place where the ark was, there were other miraculous
testimonies to the law.  For when the ark was carried across Jordan, on
the entrance to the land of promise, the upper part of the river stopped
in its course, and the lower part flowed on, so as to present both to
the ark and the people dry ground to pass over.  Then, when it was
carried seven times round the first hostile and polytheistic city they
came to, its walls suddenly fell down, though assaulted by no hand,
struck by no battering-ram.  Afterwards, too, when they were now
resident in the land of promise, and the ark had, in punishment of their
sin, been taken by their enemies, its captors triumphantly placed it in
the temple of their favorite god, and left it shut up there, but, on
opening the temple next day, they found the image they used to pray to
fallen to the ground and shamefully shattered.  Then, being them <span
id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span id="iv.X.17-Page_192"></span> selves
alarmed by portents, and still more shamefully punished, they restored
the ark of the testimony to the people from whom they had taken it.  And
what was the manner of its restoration?  They placed it on a wagon, and
yoked to it cows from which they had taken the calves, and let them
choose their own course, expecting that in this way the divine will
would be indicated; and the cows without any man driving or directing
them, steadily pursued the way to the Hebrews, without regarding the
lowing of their calves, and thus restored the ark to its worshippers. 
To God these and such like wonders are small, but they are mighty to
terrify and give wholesome instruction to men.  For if philosophers, and
especially the Platonists, are with justice esteemed wiser than other
men, as I have just been mentioning, because they taught that even these
earthly and insignificant things are ruled by Divine Providence,
inferring this from the numberless beauties which are observable not
only in the bodies of animals, but even in plants and grasses, how much
more plainly do these things attest the presence of divinity which
happen at the time predicted, and in which that religion is commended
which forbids the offering of sacrifice to any celestial, terrestrial,
or infernal being, and commands it to be offered to God only, who alone
blesses us by His love for us, and by our love to Him, and who, by
arranging the appointed times of those sacrifices, and by predicting
that they were to pass into a better sacrifice by a better Priest,
testified that He has no appetite for these sacrifices, but through them
indicated others of more substantial blessing,—and all this not that He
Himself may be glorified by these honors, but that we may be stirred up
to worship and cleave to Him, being inflamed by His love, which is our
advantage rather than His?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1020289)
