[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020180)  [Next](1020182.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.12"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—That When Once the Vanity of the
Gods of the Nations Has Been Exposed, It Cannot Be Doubted that They are
Unable to Bestow Eternal Life on Any One, When They Cannot Afford Help
Even with Respect to the Things Of this Temporal Life.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.12-p2"></span>Now, since there are three theologies,
which the Greeks call respectively mythical, physical, and political,
and which may be called in Latin fabulous, natural, and civil; and since
neither from the fabulous, which even the worshippers of many and false
gods have themselves most freely censured, nor from the civil, of which
that is convicted of being a part, or even worse than it, can eternal
life be hoped for from any of these theologies,—if any one thinks that
what has been said in this book is not enough for him, let him also add
to it the many and various dissertations concerning God as the giver of
felicity, contained in the former books, especially the fourth one.

<span id="iv.VI.12-p3"></span>For to what but to felicity should men
consecrate themselves, were felicity a goddess?  However, as it is not a
goddess, but a gift of God, to what God but the giver of happiness ought
we to consecrate ourselves, who piously love eternal life, in which
there is true and full felicity?  But I think, from what has been said,
no one ought to doubt that none of those gods is the giver of happiness,
who are worshipped with such shame, and who, if they are not so
worshipped, are more shamefully enraged, and thus confess that they are
most foul spirits.  Moreover, how can he give eternal life who cannot
give happiness?  For we mean by eternal life that life where there is
endless happiness.  For if the soul live in eternal punishments, by
which also those unclean spirits shall be tormented, that is rather
eternal death than eternal life.  For there is no greater or worse death
than when death never dies.  But because the soul from its very nature,
being created immortal, cannot be without some kind of life, its utmost
death is alienation from the life of God in an eternity of punishment. 
So, then, He only who gives true happiness gives eternal life, that is,
an endlessly happy life.  And since those gods whom this civil theology
worships have been proved to be unable to give this happiness, they
ought not to be worshipped on account of those temporal and terrestrial
things, as we showed in the five former books, much less on account of
eternal life, which is to be after death, as we have sought to show in
this one book especially, whilst the other books also lend it their
co-operation.  But since the strength of inveterate habit has its roots
very deep, if any one thinks that I have not disputed sufficiently to
show that this civil theology ought to be rejected and shunned, let him
attend to another book which, with God’s help, is to be joined to this
one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII](1020182.md)
