[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020319)  [Next](1020321) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.16"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.16-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.16-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—Of the Ranks and Differences of
the Creatures, Estimated by Their Utility, or According to the Natural
Gradations of Being.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.16-p2"></span>For, among those beings which exist, and
which are not of God the Creator’s essence, those which have life are
ranked above those which have none; those that have the power of
generation, or even of desiring, above those which want this faculty. 
And, among things that have life, the sentient are higher than those
which have no sensation, as animals are ranked above trees.  And, among
the sentient, the intelligent are above those that have not
intelligence,—men, *e.g*., above cattle.  And, among the intelligent,
the immortal such as the angels, above the mortal, such as men.  These
are the gradations according to the order of nature; but according to
the utility each man finds in a thing, there are various standards of
value, so that it comes to pass that we prefer some things that have no
sensation to some sentient beings.  And so strong is this preference,
that, had we the power, we would abolish the latter from nature
altogether, whether in ignorance of the place they hold in nature, or,
though we know it, sacrificing them to our own convenience.  Who,
*e.g*., would not rather have bread in his house than mice, gold than
fleas?  But there is little to wonder at in this, seeing that even when
valued by men themselves (whose nature is certainly of the highest
dignity), more is often given for a horse than for a slave, for a jewel
than for a maid.  Thus the reason of one contemplating nature prompts
very different judgments from those dictated by the necessity of the
needy, or the desire of the voluptuous; for the former considers what
value a thing in itself has in the scale of creation, while necessity
considers how it meets its need; reason looks for what the mental light
will judge to be true, while pleasure looks for what pleasantly
titilates the bodily sense.  But of such consequence in rational natures
is the weight, so to speak, of will and of love, that though in the
order of nature angels rank above men, yet, by the scale of justice,
good men are of greater value than bad angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020321)
