[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020619)  [Next](1020621) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.18"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.18-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.18-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—What the Apostle Peter Predicted
Regarding the Last Judgment.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.18-p2"></span>Let us now see what the Apostle Peter
predicted concerning this judgment.  “There shall come,” he says, “in
the last days scoffers. . . . Nevertheless we, according to His promise,
look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth
righteousness.” <span id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402)   There is
nothing said here about the resurrection of the dead, but enough
certainly regarding the destruction of this world.  And by his reference
to the deluge he seems as it were to suggest to us how far we should
believe the ruin of the world will extend in the end of the world.  For
he says that the world which then was perished, and not only the earth
itself, but also the heavens, by which we understand the air, the place
and room of which was occupied by the water.  Therefore the whole, or
almost the whole, of the gusty atmosphere (which he calls heaven, or
rather the heavens, meaning the earth’s atmosphere, and not the upper
air in which sun, moon, and stars are set) was turned into moisture, and
in this way perished together with the earth, whose former appearance
had been destroyed by the deluge.  “But the heavens and the earth which
are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against
the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.”  Therefore the
heavens and the earth, or the world which was preserved from the water
to stand in place of that world which perished in the flood, is itself
reserved to fire at last in the day of the judgment and perdition of
ungodly men.  He does not hesitate to affirm that in this great change
men also shall perish:  their nature, however, shall notwithstanding
continue, though in eternal punishments.  Some one will perhaps put the
question, If after judgment is pronounced the world itself is to burn,
where shall the saints be during the conflagration, and before it is
replaced by a new heavens and a new earth, since somewhere they must be,
because they have material bodies?  We may reply that they shall be in
the upper regions into which the flame of that conflagration shall not
ascend, as neither did the water of the flood; for they shall have such
bodies that they shall be wherever they wish.  Moreover, when they have
become immortal and incorruptible, they shall not greatly dread the
blaze of that conflagration, as the corruptible and mortal bodies of the
three men were able to live unhurt in the blazing furnace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[437:1403](1020620.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="iv.XX.18-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.18-p3"></span> [2 Pet.
3.3-13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003)<span
id="iv.XX.18-p3.1"></span>.  The whole passage is quoted by Augustin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1020621)
