[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020259)  [Next](1020261.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX.13"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.13-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IX.13-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—How the Demons Can Mediate Between
Gods and Men If They Have Nothing in Common with Both, Being Neither
Blessed Like the Gods, Nor Miserable Like Men.</span>

<span id="iv.IX.13-p2"></span>If, now, we endeavor to find between these
opposites the mean occupied by the demons, there can be no question as
to their local position; for, between the highest and lowest place,
there is a place which is rightly considered and called the middle
place.  The other two qualities remain, and to them we must give greater
care, that we may see whether they are altogether foreign to the demons,
or how they are so bestowed upon them without infringing upon their
mediate position.  We may dismiss the idea that they are foreign to
them.  For we cannot say that the demons, being rational animals, are
neither blessed nor wretched, as we say of the beasts and plants, which
are void of feeling and reason, or as we say of the middle place, that
it is neither the highest nor the lowest.  The demons, being rational,
must be either miserable or blessed.  And, in like manner, we cannot say
that they are neither mortal nor immortal; for all living things either
live eternally or end life in death.  Our author, besides, stated that
the demons are eternal.  What remains for us to suppose, then, but that
these mediate beings are assimilated to the gods in one of the two
remaining qualities, and to men in the other?  For if they received both
from above, or both from beneath, they should no longer be mediate, but
either rise to the gods above, or sink to men beneath.  Therefore, as it
has been demonstrated that they must possess these two qualities, they
will hold their middle place if they receive one from each party. 
Consequently, as they cannot receive their eternity from beneath,
because it is not there to receive, they must get it from above; and
accordingly they have no choice but to complete their mediate position
by accepting misery from men.

<span id="iv.IX.13-p3"></span>According to the Platonists, then, the
gods, who occupy the highest place, enjoy eternal blessedness, or
blessed eternity; men, who occupy the lowest, a mortal misery, or a
miserable mortality; and the demons, who occupy the mean, a miserable
eternity, or an eternal misery.  As to those five things which Apu <span
id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span id="iv.IX.13-Page_173"></span> leius
included in his definition of demons, he did not show, as he promised,
that the demons are mediate.  For three of them, that their nature is
animal, their mind rational, their soul subject to passions, he said
that they have in common with men; one thing, their eternity, in common
with the gods; and one proper to themselves, their aerial body.  How,
then, are they intermediate, when they have three things in common with
the lowest, and only one in common with the highest?  Who does not see
that the intermediate position is abandoned in proportion as they tend
to, and are depressed towards, the lowest extreme?  But perhaps we are
to accept them as intermediate because of their one property of an
aerial body, as the two extremes have each their proper body, the gods
an ethereal, men a terrestrial body, and because two of the qualities
they possess in common with man they possess also in common with the
gods, namely, their animal nature and rational mind.  For Apuleius
himself, in speaking of gods and men, said, “You have two animal
natures.”  And Platonists are wont to ascribe a rational mind to the
gods.  Two qualities remain, their liability to passion, and their
eternity,—the first of which they have in common with men, the second
with the gods; so that they are neither wafted to the highest nor
depressed to the lowest extreme, but perfectly poised in their
intermediate position.  But then, this is the very circumstance which
constitutes the eternal misery, or miserable eternity, of the demons. 
For he who says that their soul is subject to passions would also have
said that they are miserable, had he not blushed for their worshippers. 
Moreover, as the world is governed, not by fortuitous haphazard, but, as
the Platonists themselves avow, by the providence of the supreme God,
the misery of the demons would not be eternal unless their wickedness
were great.

<span id="iv.IX.13-p4"></span>If, then, the blessed are rightly styled
*eudemons*, the demons intermediate between gods and men are not
eudemons.  What, then, is the local position of those good demons, who,
above men but beneath the gods, afford assistance to the former,
minister to the latter?  For if they are good and eternal, they are
doubtless blessed.  But eternal blessedness destroys their intermediate
character, giving them a close resemblance to the gods, and widely
separating them from men.  And therefore the Platonists will in vain
strive to show how the good demons, if they are both immortal and
blessed, can justly be said to hold a middle place between the gods, who
are immortal and blessed, and men, who are mortal and miserable.  For if
they have both immortality and blessedness in common with the gods, and
neither of these in common with men, who are both miserable and mortal,
are they not rather remote from men and united with the gods, than
intermediate between them.  They would be intermediate if they held one
of their qualities in common with the one party, and the other with the
other, as man is a kind of mean between angels and beasts,—the beast
being an irrational and mortal animal, the angel a rational and immortal
one, while man, inferior to the angel and superior to the beast, and
having in common with the one mortality, and with the other reason, is a
rational and mortal animal.  So, when we seek for an intermediate
between the blessed immortals and miserable mortals, we should find a
being which is either mortal and blessed, or immortal and miserable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1020261.md)
