[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020829)  [Next](1020831.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.12"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—The Aim of the Orator, According
to Cicero, is to Teach, to Delight, and to Move.  Of These, Teaching is
the Most Essential.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.12-p2"></span>27.  Accordingly a great orator has truly
said that “an eloquent man must speak so as to teach, to delight, and to
persuade.” <span id="fr_1950"></span>[1951](#fn_1950.md)   Then he adds: 
“To teach is a necessity, to delight is a beauty, to persuade is a
triumph.” <span id="fr_1951"></span>[1952](#fn_1951.md)   Now of these
three, the one first mentioned, the teaching, which is a matter of
necessity, depends on what we say; the other two on the way we say it. 
He, then, who speaks with the purpose of teaching should not suppose
that he has said what he has to say as long as he is not understood; for
although what he has said be intelligible to himself it is not said at
all to the man who does not understand it.  If, however, he is
understood, he has said his say, whatever may have been his manner of
saying it.  But if he wishes to delight or persuade his hearer as well,
he will not accomplish that end by putting his thought in any shape no
matter what, but for that purpose the style of speaking is a matter of
importance.  And as the hearer must be pleased in order to secure his
attention, so he must be persuaded in order to move him to action.  And
as he is pleased if you speak with sweetness and elegance, so he is
persuaded if he be drawn by your promises, and awed by your threats; if
he reject what you condemn, and embrace what you commend; if he grieve
when you heap up objects for grief, and rejoice when you point out an
object for joy; if he pity those whom you present to him as objects of
pity, and shrink from those whom you set before him as men to be feared
and shunned.  I need not go over all the other things that can be done
by powerful eloquence to move the minds of the hearers, not telling them
what they ought to do, but urging them to do what they already know
ought to be done.

<span id="v.IV_1.12-p5"></span>28.  If, however, they do not yet know
this, they must of course be instructed before they can be moved.  And
perhaps the mere knowledge of their duty will have such an effect that
there will be no need to move them with greater strength of eloquence. 
Yet when this is needful, it ought to be done.  And it is needful when
people, knowing what they ought to do, do it not.  Therefore, to teach
is a necessity.  For what men know, it is in their own hands either to
do or not to do.  But who would say that it is their duty to do what
they do not know?  On the same principle, to persuade is not a
necessity:  for it is not always called for; as, for example, when the
hearer yields his assent to one who simply teaches or gives pleasure. 
For this reason also to persuade is a triumph, because it is possible
that a man may be taught and delighted, and yet not give his consent. 
And what will be the use of gaining the first two ends if we fail in the
third?  Neither is it a necessity to give pleasure; for when, in the
course of an address, the truth is clearly pointed out (and this is the
true function of teaching), it is not the fact, nor is it the intention,
that the style of speech should make the truth pleasing, or that the
style should of itself give pleasure; but the truth itself, when
exhibited in its naked simplicity, gives pleasure, because it is the
truth.  And hence even falsities are frequently a source of pleasure
when they are brought to light and exposed.  It is not, of course, their
falsity that gives pleasure; but as it is true that they are false, the
speech which shows this to be true gives pleasure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[583:1951](1020830.htm#fr_1950.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.12-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.12-p3"></span> Cicero, *Orator.* 21:  “*Est igitur
eloquens qui ita dicet, ut probei, ut delectet, ut flectat.*”  Not
quoted accurately by Augustin.

<span id="fn_1951"></span>[583:1952](1020830.htm#fr_1951.md) <span
id="v.IV_1.12-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.12-p4"></span> “*Probare, necessitatis est; delectare,
suavitatis; flectere, victoriæ.*”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020831.md)
