[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020484)  [Next](1020486) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.36"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.36-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.36-p1.1"></span>Chapter 36.—Of the Oracle and Blessing Which
Isaac Received, Just as His Father Did, Being Beloved for His
Sake.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.36-p2"></span>Isaac also received such an oracle as his
father had often received.  Of this oracle it is thus written:  “And
there was a famine over the land, beside the first famine that was in
the days of Abraham.  And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the
Philistines unto Gerar.  And the Lord appeared unto him, and said, Go
not down into Egypt; but dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of. 
And abide in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee: 
unto thee and unto thy seed I will give all this land; and I will
establish mine oath, which I sware unto Abraham thy father:  and I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed
all this land:  and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed; because that Abraham thy father obeyed my voice, and kept my
precepts, my commandments, my righteousness, and my laws.” <span
id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954)   This patriarch neither had another
wife, nor any concubine, but was content with the twin-children begotten
by one act of generation.  He also was afraid, when he lived among
strangers, of being brought into danger owing to the beauty of his wife,
and did like his father in calling her his sister, and not telling that
she was his wife; for she was his near blood-relation by the father’s
and mother’s side.  She also remained untouched by the strangers, when
it was known she was his wife.  Yet we ought not to prefer him to his
father because he knew no woman besides his one wife.  For beyond doubt
the merits of his father’s faith and obedience were greater, inasmuch as
God says it is for his sake He does Isaac good:  “In thy seed,” He says,
“shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because that Abraham thy
father obeyed my voice, and kept my precepts, my commandments, my
statutes, and my laws.”  And again in another oracle He says, “I am the
God of Abraham thy father:  fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless
thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham’s sake.” <span
id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955)   So that we must understand how
chastely Abraham acted, because imprudent men, who seek some support for
their own wickedness in the Holy Scriptures, think he acted through
lust.  We may also learn this, not to compare men by single good things,
but to consider everything in each; for it may happen that one man has
something in his life and character in which he excels another, and it
may be far more excellent than that in which the other excels him.  And
thus, according to sound and true judgment, while continence is
preferable to marriage, yet a believing married man is better than a
continent unbeliever; for the unbeliever is not only less praiseworthy,
but is even highly detestable.  We must conclude, then, that both are
good; yet so as to hold that the married man who is most faithful and
most obedient is certainly better than the continent man whose faith and
obedience are less.  But if equal in other things, who would hesitate to
prefer the continent man to the married?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_954"></span>[331:955](1020485.htm#fr_954) <span
id="iv.XVI.36-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.36-p3"></span> [Gen.
26.1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XVI.36-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[331:956](1020485.htm#fr_955) <span
id="iv.XVI.36-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.36-p4"></span> [Gen.
26.24](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#024)<span
id="iv.XVI.36-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 37](1020486)
