[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020179)  [Next](1020181) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.11"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—What Seneca Thought Concerning the
Jews.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.11-p2"></span>Seneca, among the other superstitions of
civil theology, also found fault with the sacred things of the Jews, and
especially the sabbaths, affirming that they act uselessly in keeping
those seventh days, whereby they lose through idleness about the seventh
part of their life, and also many things which demand immediate
attention are damaged.  The Christians, however, who were already most
hostile to the Jews, he did not dare to mention, either for praise or
blame, lest, if he praised them, he should do so against the ancient
custom of his country, or, perhaps, if he should blame them, he should
do so against his own will.

<span id="iv.VI.11-p3"></span>When he was speaking concerning those
Jews, he said, “When, meanwhile, the customs of that most accursed
nation have gained such strength that they have been now received in all
lands, the conquered have given <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="iv.VI.11-Page_121"></span> laws to the conquerors.”  By these words
he expresses his astonishment; and, not knowing what the providence of
God was leading him to say, subjoins in plain words an opinion by which
he showed what he thought about the meaning of those sacred
institutions:  “For,” he says, “those, however, know the cause of their
rites, whilst the greater part of the people know not why they perform
theirs.”  But concerning the solemnities of the Jews, either why or how
far they were instituted by divine authority, and afterwards, in due
time, by the same authority taken away from the people of God, to whom
the mystery of eternal life was revealed, we have both spoken elsewhere,
especially when we were treating against the Manichæans, and also intend
to speak in this work in a more suitable place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020181)
