[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020559)  [Next](1020561.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.42"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.42-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.42-p1.1"></span>Chapter 42.—By What Dispensation of God’s
Providence the Sacred Scriptures of the Old Testament Were Translated
Out of Hebrew into Greek, that They Might Be Made Known to All the
Nations.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.42-p2"></span>One of the Ptolemies, kings of Egypt,
desired to know and have these sacred books.  For after Alexander of
Macedon, who is also styled the Great, had by his most wonderful, but by
no means enduring power, subdued the whole of Asia, yea, almost the
whole world, partly by force of arms, partly by <span id="page_386">p.
386</span> <span id="iv.XVIII.42-Page_386"></span> terror, and, among
other kingdoms of the East, had entered and obtained Judea also, on his
death his generals did not peaceably divide that most ample kingdom
among them for a possession, but rather dissipated it, wasting all
things by wars.  Then Egypt began to have the Ptolemies as her kings. 
The first of them, the son of Lagus, carried many captive out of Judea
into Egypt.  But another Ptolemy, called Philadelphus, who succeeded
him, permitted all whom he had brought under the yoke to return free;
and more than that, sent kingly gifts to the temple of God, and begged
Eleazar, who was the high priest, to give him the Scriptures, which he
had heard by report were truly divine, and therefore greatly desired to
have in that most noble library he had made.  When the high priest had
sent them to him in Hebrew, he afterwards demanded interpreters of him,
and there were given him seventy-two, out of each of the twelve tribes
six men, most learned in both languages, to wit, the Hebrew and Greek
and their translation is now by custom called the Septuagint.  It is
reported, indeed, that there was an agreement in their words so
wonderful, stupendous, and plainly divine, that when they had sat at
this work, each one apart (for so it pleased Ptolemy to test their
fidelity), they differed from each other in no word which had the same
meaning and force, or, in the order of the words; but, as if the
translators had been one, so what all had translated was one, because in
very deed the one Spirit had been in them all.  And they received so
wonderful a gift of God, in order that the authority of these Scriptures
might be commended not as human but divine, as indeed it was, for the
benefit of the nations who should at some time believe, as we now see
them doing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 43](1020561.md)
