[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020240)  [Next](1020242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.22"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—That We Must, Notwithstanding
the Opinion of Apuleius, Reject the Worship of Demons.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.22-p2"></span>None of these four alternatives, then,
is to be chosen; for we dare not suppose such unbecoming things
concerning the gods as the adoption of any one of them would lead us to
think.  It remains, therefore, that no credence whatever is to be given
to the opinion of Apuleius and the other philosophers of the same
school, namely, that the demons act as messengers and interpreters
between the gods and men to carry our petitions from us to the gods, and
to bring back to us the help of the gods.  On the contrary, we must
believe them to be spirits most eager to inflict harm, utterly alien
from righteousness, swollen with pride, pale with envy, subtle in
deceit; who dwell indeed in this air as in a prison, in keeping with
their own character, because, cast down from the height of the higher
heaven, they have been condemned to dwell in this element as the just
reward of irretrievable transgression.  But, though the air is situated
above the earth and the waters, they are not on that account superior in
merit to men, who, though they do not surpass them as far as their
earthly bodies are concerned, do nevertheless far excel them through
piety of mind,—they having made choice of the true God as their helper. 
Over many, however, who are manifestly unworthy of participation in the
true religion, they tyrannize as over captives whom they have
subdued,—the greatest part of whom they have persuaded of their divinity
by wonderful and lying signs, consisting either of deeds or of
predictions.  Some, nevertheless, who have more attentively and
diligently considered their vices, they have not been able to persuade
that they are gods, and so have feigned themselves to be messengers
between the gods and men.  Some, indeed, have thought that not even this
latter honor ought to be acknowledged as belonging to them, not
believing that they were gods, because they saw that they were wicked,
whereas the gods, according to their view, are all good.  Nevertheless
they dared not say that they were wholly unworthy of all divine honor,
for fear of offending the multitude, by whom, through inveterate
superstition, the demons were served by the performance of many rites,
and the erection of many temples.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020242)
