[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020176)  [Next](1020178) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.8"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Concerning the Interpretations,
Consisting of Natural Explanations, Which the Pagan Teachers Attempt to
Show for Their Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.8-p2"></span>But all these things, they say, have
certain physical, that is, natural interpretations, showing their
natural meaning; as though in this disputation we were seeking physics
and not theology, which is the account, not of nature, but of God.  For
although He who is the true God is God, not by opinion, but by nature,
nevertheless all nature is not God; for there is certainly a nature of
man, of a beast, of a tree, of a stone,—none of which is God.  For if,
when the question is concerning the mother of the gods, that from which
the whole system of interpretation starts certainly is, that the mother
of the gods is the earth, why do we make further inquiry? why do we
carry our investigation through all the rest of it?  What can more
manifestly favor them who say that all those gods were men?  For they
are earth-born in the sense that the earth is their mother.  But in the
true theology the earth is the work, not the mother, of God.  But in
whatever way their sacred rites may be interpreted, and whatever
reference they may have to the nature of things, it is not according to
nature, but contrary to nature, that men should be effeminates.  This
disease, this crime, this abomination, has a recognized place among
those sacred things, though even depraved men will scarcely be compelled
by torments to confess they are guilty of it.  Again, if these sacred
rites, which are proved to be fouler than scenic abominations, are
excused and justified on the ground that they have their own
interpretations, by which they are shown to symbolize the nature of
things, why are not the poetical things in like manner excused and
justified?  For many have interpreted even these in like fashion, to
such a degree that even that which they say is the most monstrous and
most horrible,—namely, that Saturn devoured his own children,—has been
interpreted by some of them to mean that length of time, which is
signified by the name of Saturn, consumes whatever it begets; or that,
as the same Varro thinks, Saturn belongs to seeds which fall back again
into the earth from whence they spring.  And so one interprets it in one
way, and one in another.  And the same is to be said of all the rest of
this theology.

<span id="iv.VI.8-p3"></span>And, nevertheless, it is called the
fabulous theology, and is censured, cast off, rejected, <span
id="page_117">p. 117</span> <span id="iv.VI.8-Page_117"></span> together
with all such interpretations belonging to it.  And not only by the
natural theology, which is that of the philosophers, but also by this
civil theology, concerning which we are speaking, which is asserted to
pertain to cities and peoples, it is judged worthy of repudiation,
because it has invented unworthy things concerning the gods.  Of which,
I wot, this is the secret:  that those most acute and learned men, by
whom those things were written, understood that both theologies ought to
be rejected,—to wit, both that fabulous and this civil one,—but the
former they dared to reject, the latter they dared not; the former they
set forth to be censured, the latter they showed to be very like it; not
that it might be chosen to be held in preference to the other, but that
it might be understood to be worthy of being rejected together with it. 
And thus, without danger to those who feared to censure the civil
theology, both of them being brought into contempt, that theology which
they call natural might find a place in better disposed minds; for the
civil and the fabulous are both fabulous and both civil.  He who shall
wisely inspect the vanities and obscenities of both will find that they
are both fabulous; and he who shall direct his attention to the scenic
plays pertaining to the fabulous theology in the festivals of the civil
gods, and in the divine rites of the cities, will find they are both
civil.  How, then, can the power of giving eternal life be attributed to
any of those gods whose own images and sacred rites convict them of
being most like to the fabulous gods, which are most openly reprobated,
in forms, ages, sex, characteristics, marriages, generations, rites; in
all which things they are understood either to have been men, and to
have had their sacred rites and solemnities instituted in their honor
according to the life or death of each of them, the demons suggesting
and confirming this error, or certainly most foul spirits, who, taking
advantage of some occasion or other, have stolen into the minds of men
to deceive them?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020178)
