[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020386)  [Next](1020388) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIII.20"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIII.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—That the Flesh Now Resting in
Peace Shall Be Raised to a Perfection Not Enjoyed by the Flesh of Our
First Parents.</span>

<span id="iv.XIII.20-p2"></span>Thus the souls of departed saints are
not affected by the death which dismisses them from their bodies,
because their flesh rests in hope, no matter what indignities it
receives after sensation is gone.  For they do not desire that their
bodies be forgotten, as Plato thinks fit, but rather, because they
remember what has been promised by Him who deceives no man, and who gave
them security for the safe keeping even of the hairs of their head, they
with a longing patience wait in hope of the resurrection of their
bodies, in which they have suffered many hardships, and are now to
suffer never again.  For if they did not “hate their own flesh,” when
it, with its native infirmity, opposed their will, and had to be
constrained by the spiritual law, how much more shall they love it, when
it shall even itself have become spiritual!  For as, when the spirit
serves the flesh, it is fitly called carnal, so, when the flesh serves
the spirit, it will justly be called spiritual.  Not that it is
converted into spirit, as some fancy from the words, “It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption,” <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) but because it is subject to the
spirit with a perfect and marvellous readiness of obedience, and
responds in all things to the will that has entered on immortality,—
<span id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span id="iv.XIII.20-Page_256"></span>
all reluctance, all corruption, and all slowness being removed.  For the
body will not only be better than it was here in its best estate of
health, but it will surpass the bodies of our first parents ere they
sinned.  For, though they were not to die unless they should sin, yet
they used food as men do now, their bodies not being as yet spiritual,
but animal only.  And though they decayed not with years, nor drew
nearer to death,—a condition secured to them in God’s marvellous grace
by the tree of life, which grew along with the forbidden tree in the
midst of Paradise,—yet they took other nourishment, though not of that
one tree, which was interdicted not because it was itself bad, but for
the sake of commending a pure and simple obedience, which is the great
virtue of the rational creature set under the Creator as his Lord.  For,
though no evil thing was touched, yet if a thing forbidden was touched,
the very disobedience was sin.  They were, then, nourished by other
fruit, which they took that their animal bodies might not suffer the
discomfort of hunger or thirst; but they tasted the tree of life, that
death might not steal upon them from any quarter, and that they might
not, spent with age, decay.  Other fruits were, so to speak, their
nourishment, but this their sacrament.  So that the tree of life would
seem to have been in the terrestrial Paradise what the wisdom of God is
in the spiritual, of which it is written, “She is a tree of life to them
that lay hold upon her.” <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_604"></span>[255:605](1020387.htm#fr_604) <span
id="iv.XIII.20-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.20-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
15.42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042)<span
id="iv.XIII.20-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[256:606](1020387.htm#fr_605) <span
id="iv.XIII.20-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.20-p4"></span> [Prov.
3.18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.XIII.20-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020388)
