[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020053)  [Next](1020055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.11"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—That the Greeks Admitted Players
to Offices of State, on the Ground that Men Who Pleased the Gods Should
Not Be Contemptuously Treated by Their Fellows.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.11-p2"></span>It was a part of this same
reasonableness of the Greeks which induced them to bestow upon the
actors of these same plays no inconsiderable civic honors.  In the
above-mentioned book of the *De Republica*, it is mentioned that
Aeschines, a very eloquent Athenian, who had been a tragic actor in his
youth, became a statesman, and that the Athenians again and again sent
another tragedian, Aristodemus, as their plenipotentiary to Philip.  For
they judged it unbecoming to condemn and treat as infamous persons those
who were the chief actors in the scenic entertainments which they saw to
be so pleasing to the gods.  No doubt this was immoral of the Greeks,
but there can be as little doubt they acted in conformity with the
character of their gods; for how could they have presumed to protect the
conduct of the citizens from being cut to pieces by the tongues of poets
and players, who were allowed, and even enjoined by the gods, to tear
their divine reputation to tatters?  And how could they hold in contempt
the men who acted in the theatres those dramas which, as they had
ascertained, gave pleasure to the gods whom they worshipped?  Nay, how
could they but grant to them the highest civic honors?  On what plea
could they honor the priests who offered for them acceptable sacrifices
to the gods, if they branded with infamy the actors who in behalf of the
people gave to the gods that pleasure or honour which they demanded, and
which, according to the account of the priests, they were angry at not
receiving.  Labeo, <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) whose
learning makes him an authority on such points, is of opinion that <span
id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span id="iv.II_1.11-Page_29"></span> the
distinction between good and evil deities should find expression in a
difference of worship; that the evil should be propitiated by bloody
sacrifices and doleful rites, but the good with a joyful and pleasant
observance, as, *e.g*. (as he says himself), with plays, festivals, and
banquets. <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102)   All this we shall,
with God’s help, hereafter discuss.  At present, and speaking to the
subject on hand, whether all kinds of offerings are made
indiscriminately to all the gods, as if all were good (and it is an
unseemly thing to conceive that there are evil gods; but these gods of
the pagans are all evil, because they are not gods, but evil spirits),
or whether, as Labeo thinks, a distinction is made between the offerings
presented to the different gods the Greeks are equally justified in
honoring alike the priests by whom the sacrifices are offered, and the
players by whom the dramas are acted, that they may not be open to the
charge of doing an injury to all their gods, if the plays are pleasing
to all of them, or (which were still worse) to their good gods, if the
plays are relished only by them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[28:102](1020054.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iv.II_1.11-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.11-p3"></span> Labeo, a jurist of the time of
Augustus, learned in law and antiquities, and the author of several
works much prized by his own and some succeeding ages.  The two articles
in Smith’s Dictionary on Antistius and Cornelius Labeo should be read.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[29:103](1020054.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iv.II_1.11-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.11-p4"></span> *Lectisternia*, feasts in which the
images of the gods were laid on pillows in the streets, and all kinds of
food set before them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020055)
