[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020261)  [Next](1020263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX.15"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.15-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IX.15-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Of the Man Christ Jesus, the
Mediator Between God and Men.</span>

<span id="iv.IX.15-p2"></span>But if, as is much more probable and
credible, it must needs be that all men, so long as they are mortal, are
also miserable, we must seek an intermediate who is not only man, but
also God, that, by the interposition of His blessed mortality, He may
bring men out of their mortal misery to a blessed immortality.  In this
intermediate two things are requisite, that He become mortal, and that
He do not continue mortal.  He did become mortal, not rendering the
divinity of the Word infirm, but assuming the infirmity of flesh. 
Neither did He continue mortal in the flesh, but raised it from the
dead; for it is the very fruit of His <span id="page_174">p. 174</span>
<span id="iv.IX.15-Page_174"></span> mediation that those, for the sake
of whose redemption He became the Mediator, should not abide eternally
in bodily death.  Wherefore it became the Mediator between us and God to
have both a transient mortality and a permanent blessedness, that by
that which is transient He might be assimilated to mortals, and might
translate them from mortality to that which is permanent.  Good angels,
therefore, cannot mediate between miserable mortals and blessed
immortals, for they themselves also are both blessed and immortal; but
evil angels can mediate, because they are immortal like the one party,
miserable like the other.  To these is opposed the good Mediator, who,
in opposition to their immortality and misery, has chosen to be mortal
for a time, and has been able to continue blessed in eternity.  It is
thus He has destroyed, by the humility of His death and the benignity of
His blessedness, those proud immortals and hurtful wretches, and has
prevented them from seducing to misery by their boast of immortality
those men whose hearts He has cleansed by faith, and whom He has thus
freed from their impure dominion.

<span id="iv.IX.15-p3"></span>Man, then, mortal and miserable, and far
removed from the immortal and the blessed, what medium shall he choose
by which he may be united to immortality and blessedness?  The
immortality of the demons, which might have some charm for man, is
miserable; the mortality of Christ, which might offend man, exists no
longer.  In the one there is the fear of an eternal misery; in the
other, death, which could not be eternal, can no longer be feared, and
blessedness, which is eternal, must be loved.  For the immortal and
miserable mediator interposes himself to prevent us from passing to a
blessed immortality, because that which hinders such a passage, namely,
misery, continues in him; but the mortal and blessed Mediator interposed
Himself, in order that, having passed through mortality, He might of
mortals make immortals (showing His power to do this in His own
resurrection), and from being miserable to raise them to the blessed
company from the number of whom He had Himself never departed.  There
is, then, a wicked mediator, who separates friends, and a good Mediator,
who reconciles enemies.  And those who separate are numerous, because
the multitude of the blessed are blessed only by their participation in
the one God; of which participation the evil angels being deprived, they
are wretched, and interpose to hinder rather than to help to this
blessedness, and by their very number prevent us from reaching that one
beatific good, to obtain which we need not many but one Mediator, the
uncreated Word of God, by whom all things were made, and in partaking of
whom we are blessed.  I do not say that He is Mediator because He is the
Word, for as the Word He is supremely blessed and supremely immortal,
and therefore far from miserable mortals; but He is Mediator as He is
man, for by His humanity He shows us that, in order to obtain that
blessed and beatific good, we need not seek other mediators to lead us
through the successive steps of this attainment, but that the blessed
and beatific God, having Himself become a partaker of our humanity, has
afforded us ready access to the participation of His divinity.  For in
delivering us from our mortality and misery, He does not lead us to the
immortal and blessed angels, so that we should become immortal and
blessed by participating in their nature, but He leads us straight to
that Trinity, by participating in which the angels themselves are
blessed.  Therefore, when He chose to be in the form of a servant, and
lower than the angels, that He might be our Mediator, He remained higher
than the angels, in the form of God,—Himself at once the way of life on
earth and life itself in heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1020263)
