[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020226)  [Next](1020228.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.8"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—That the Platonists Hold the First
Rank in Moral Philosophy Also.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.8-p2"></span>The remaining part of philosophy is
morals, or what is called by the Greeks <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.VIII.8-p2.1"></span>ἠθική</span>, in which is discussed the
question concerning the chief good,—that which will leave us nothing
further to seek in order to be blessed, if only we make all our actions
refer to it, and seek it not for the sake of something else, but for its
own sake.  Therefore it is called the end, because we wish other things
on account of it, but itself only for its own sake.  This beatific good,
therefore, according to some, comes to a man from the body, according to
others, from the mind, and, according to others, from both together. 
For they saw that man himself consists of soul and body; and therefore
they believed that from either of these two, or from both together,
their well-being must proceed, consisting in a certain final good, which
could render them blessed, and to which they might refer all their
actions, not requiring anything ulterior to which to refer that good
itself.  This is why those who have added a third kind of good things,
which they call extrinsic,—as honor, glory, wealth, and the like,—have
not regarded them as part of the final good, that is, to be sought after
for their own sake, but as things which are to be sought for the sake of
something else, affirming that this kind of good is good to the good,
and evil to the evil.  Wherefore, whether they have sought the good of
man from the mind or from the body, or from both together, it is still
only from man <span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="iv.VIII.8-Page_150"></span> they have supposed that it must be
sought.  But they who have sought it from the body have sought it from
the inferior part of man; they who have sought it from the mind, from
the superior part; and they who have sought it from both, from the whole
man.  Whether therefore, they have sought it from any part, or from the
whole man, still they have only sought it from man; nor have these
differences, being three, given rise only to three dissentient sects of
philosophers, but to many.  For diverse philosophers have held diverse
opinions, both concerning the good of the body, and the good of the
mind, and the good of both together.  Let, therefore, all these give
place to those philosophers who have not affirmed that a man is blessed
by the enjoyment of the body, or by the enjoyment of the mind, but by
the enjoyment of God,—enjoying Him, however, not as the mind does the
body or itself, or as one friend enjoys another, but as the eye enjoys
light, if, indeed, we may draw any comparison between these things.  But
what the nature of this comparison is, will, if God help me, be shown in
another place, to the best of my ability.  At present, it is sufficient
to mention that Plato determined the final good to be to live according
to virtue, and affirmed that he only can attain to virtue who knows and
imitates God,—which knowledge and imitation are the only cause of
blessedness.  Therefore he did not doubt that to philosophize is to love
God, whose nature is incorporeal.  Whence it certainly follows that the
student of wisdom, that is, the philosopher, will then become blessed
when he shall have begun to enjoy God.  For though he is not necessarily
blessed who enjoys that which he loves (for many are miserable by loving
that which ought not to be loved, and still more miserable when they
enjoy it), nevertheless no one is blessed who does not enjoy that which
he loves.  For even they who love things which ought not to be loved do
not count themselves blessed by loving merely, but by enjoying them. 
Who, then, but the most miserable will deny that he is blessed, who
enjoys that which he loves, and loves the true and highest good?  But
the true and highest good, according to Plato, is God, and therefore he
would call him a philosopher who loves God; for philosophy is directed
to the obtaining of the blessed life, and he who loves God is blessed in
the enjoyment of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020228.md)
