[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020132)  [Next](1020134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.28"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.28-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.28-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—Whether the Worship of the Gods
Has Been of Service to the Romans in Obtaining and Extending the
Empire.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.28-p2"></span>Therefore such gods, who are propitiated
by such honors, or rather are impeached by them (for it is a greater
crime to delight in having such things said of them falsely, than even
if they could be said truly), could never by any means have been able to
increase and preserve the Roman empire.  For if they could have done it,
they would rather have bestowed so grand a gift on the Greeks, who, in
this kind of divine things,—that is, in scenic plays,—have worshipped
them more honorably and worthily, although they have not exempted
themselves from those slanders of the poets, by whom they saw the gods
torn in pieces, giving them licence to ill-use any man they pleased, and
have not deemed the scenic players themselves to be base, but have held
them worthy even of distinguished honor.  But just as the Romans were
able to have gold money, although they did not worship a god Aurinus, so
also they could have silver and brass coin, and yet worship neither
Argentinus nor his father Aesculanus; and so of all the rest, which it
would be irksome for me to detail.  It follows, therefore, both that
they could not by any means attain such dominion if the true God was
unwilling; and that if these gods, false and many, were unknown or
contemned, and He alone was known and worshipped with sincere faith and
virtue, they would both have a better kingdom here, whatever might be
its extent, and whether they might have one here or not, would
afterwards receive an eternal kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](1020134)
