[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020390)  [Next](1020392.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIII.24"></span> <span id="page_259">p. 259</span> <span
id="iv.XIII.24-Page_259"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIII.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—How We Must Understand that
Breathing of God by Which “The First Man Was Made a Living Soul,” And
that Also by Which the Lord Conveyed His Spirit to His Disciples When He
Said, “Receive Ye the Holy Ghost.”</span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p2"></span>Some have hastily supposed from the
words, “God breathed into Adam’s nostrils the breath of life, and man
became a living soul, <span id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623.md) ” that a
soul was not then first given to man, but that the soul already given
was quickened by the Holy Ghost.  They are encouraged in this
supposition by the fact that the Lord Jesus after His resurrection
breathed on His disciples, and said, “Receive ye the Holy Spirit.” <span
id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624.md)   From this they suppose that the same
thing was effected in either case, as if the evangelist had gone on to
say, And they became living souls.  But if he had made this addition, we
should only understand that the Spirit is in some way the life of souls,
and that without Him reasonable souls must be accounted dead, though
their bodies seem to live before our eyes.  But that this was not what
happened when man was created, the very words of the narrative
sufficiently show:  “And God made man dust of the earth;” which some
have thought to render more clearly by the words, “And God formed man of
the clay of the earth.”  For it had before been said that “there went up
a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground,” <span
id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625.md) in order that the reference to clay,
formed of this moisture and dust, might be understood.  For on this
verse there immediately follows the announcement, “And God created man
dust of the earth;” so those Greek manuscripts have it from which this
passage has been translated into Latin.  But whether one prefers to read
“*created*” or “*formed*,” where the Greek reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIII.24-p5.2"></span>ἔπλασεν</span>, is of
little importance; yet “*formed*” is the better rendering.  But those
who preferred “created” thought they thus avoided the ambiguity arising
from the fact, that in the Latin language the usage obtains that those
are said to form a thing who frame some feigned and fictitious thing. 
This man, then, who was created of the dust of the earth, or of the
moistened dust or clay,—this “dust of the earth” (that I may use the
express words of Scripture) was made, as the apostle teaches, an
animated body when he received a soul.  This man, he says, “was made a
living soul;” that is, this fashioned dust was made a living soul.

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p6"></span>They say, Already he had a soul, else he
would not be called a man; for man is not a body alone, nor a soul
alone, but a being composed of both.  This, indeed, is true, that the
soul is not the whole man, but the better part of man; the body not the
whole, but the inferior part of man; and that then, when both are
joined, they receive the name of man, which, however, they do not
severally lose even when we speak of them singly.  For who is prohibited
from saying, in colloquial usage, “That man is dead, and is now at rest
or in torment,” though this can be spoken only of the soul; or “He is
buried in such and such a place,” though this refers only to the body? 
Will they say that Scripture follows no such usage?  On the contrary, it
so thoroughly adopts it, that even while a man is alive, and body and
soul are united, it calls each of them singly by the name “*man*,”
speaking of the soul as the “inward man,” and of the body as the
“outward man,” <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626.md) as if there were
two men, though both together are indeed but one.  But we must
understand in what sense man is said to be in the image of God, and is
yet dust, and to return to the dust.  The former is spoken of the
rational soul, which God by His breathing, or, to speak more
appropriately, by His inspiration, conveyed to man, that is, to his
body; but the latter refers to his body, which God formed of the dust,
and to which a soul was given, that it might become a living body, that
is, that man might become a living soul.

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p8"></span>Wherefore, when our Lord breathed on His
disciples, and said, “Receive ye the Holy Ghost,” He certainly wished it
to be understood that the Holy Ghost was not only the Spirit of the
Father, but of the only begotten Son Himself.  For the same Spirit is,
indeed, the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, making with them the
trinity of Father, Son, and Spirit, not a creature, but the Creator. 
For neither was that material breath which proceeded from the mouth of
His flesh the very substance and nature of the Holy Spirit, but rather
the intimation, as I said, that the Holy Spirit was common to the Father
and to the Son; for they have not each a separate Spirit, but both one
and the same.  Now this Spirit is always spoken of in sacred Scripture
by the Greek word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XIII.24-p8.1"></span>πνεῦμα</span>, as the Lord, too, named Him
in the place cited when He gave Him to His disciples, and intimated the
gift by the breathing of His lips; and there does not occur to me any
place in the whole Scriptures where He is otherwise named.  But in this
passage where it is said, “And the Lord formed man dust of the earth,
and breathed, or inspired, into his face the breath of life;” the Greek
has not <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XIII.24-p8.2"></span>πνεῦμα</span>, the usual word for the Holy
Spirit, but <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XIII.24-p8.3"></span>πνοή</span>, a word more <span
id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span id="iv.XIII.24-Page_260"></span>
frequently used of the creature than of the Creator; and for this reason
some Latin interpreters have preferred to render it by “breath” rather
than “spirit.”  For this word occurs also in the Greek in [Isa.
7.16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.XIII.24-p8.4"></span>
where God says, “I have made all breath,” meaning, doubtless, all souls.
Accordingly, this word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XIII.24-p8.5"></span>πνοή</span> is sometimes rendered “breath,”
sometimes “spirit,” sometimes “inspiration,” sometimes “aspiration,”
sometimes “soul,” even when it is used of God.  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIII.24-p8.6"></span>Πνεῦμα</span>, on the
other hand, is uniformly rendered “spirit,” whether of man, of whom the
apostle says, “For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit
of man which is in him?” <span id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627.md) or of
beast, as in the book of Solomon, “Who knoweth the spirit of man that
goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the
earth?” <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628.md) or of that physical
spirit which is called wind, for so the Psalmist calls it:  “Fire and
hail; snow and vapors; stormy wind;” <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629.md) or of the uncreated Creator Spirit, of
whom the Lord said in the gospel, “Receive ye the Holy Ghost,”
indicating the gift by the breathing of His mouth; and when He says, “Go
ye and baptize all nations in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost,” <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630.md) words which
very expressly and excellently commend the Trinity; and where it is
said, “God is a Spirit;” <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631.md) and in
very many other places of the sacred writings.  In all these quotations
from Scripture we do not find in the Greek the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIII.24-p13.2"></span>πνοή</span> used, but
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIII.24-p13.3"></span>πνεῦμα</span>,
and in the Latin, not *flatus*, but *spiritus*.  Wherefore, referring
again to that place where it is written, “He inspired,” or to speak more
properly, “breathed into his face the breath of life,” even though the
Greek had not used <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XIII.24-p13.4"></span>πνοή</span> (as it has) but <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIII.24-p13.5"></span>πνεῦμα</span>, it would
not on that account necessarily follow that the Creator Spirit, who in
the Trinity is distinctively called the Holy Ghost, was meant, since, as
has been said, it is plain that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XIII.24-p13.6"></span>πνεῦμα</span> is used not only of the
Creator, but also of the creature.

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p14"></span>But, say they, when the Scripture used
the word “spirit,” <span id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632.md) it would not
have added “of life” unless it meant us to understand the Holy Spirit;
nor, when it said, “Man became a soul,” would it also have inserted the
word “living” unless that life of the soul were signified which is
imparted to it from above by the gift of God.  For, seeing that the soul
by itself has a proper life of its own, what need, they ask, was there
of adding living, save only to show that the life which is given it by
the Holy Spirit was meant?  What is this but to fight strenuously for
their own conjectures, while they carelessly neglect the teaching of
Scripture?  Without troubling themselves much, they might have found in
a preceding page of this very book of Genesis the words, “Let the earth
bring forth the living soul,” <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633.md)
when all the terrestrial animals were created.  Then at a slight
interval, but still in the same book, was it impossible for them to
notice this verse, “All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all
that was in the dry land, died,” by which it was signified that all the
animals which lived on the earth had perished in the deluge?  If, then,
we find that Scripture is accustomed to speak both of the “living soul”
and the “spirit of life” even in reference to beasts; and if in this
place, where it is said, “All things which have the spirit of life,” the
word <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIII.24-p16.2"></span>πνοή</span>,
not <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XIII.24-p16.3"></span>πνεῦμα</span>, is used; why may we not say,
What need was there to add “living,” since the soul cannot exist without
being alive? or, What need to add “of life” after the word spirit?  But
we understand that Scripture used these expressions in its ordinary
style so long as it speaks of animals, that is, animated bodies, in
which the soul serves as the residence of sensation; but when man is
spoken of, we forget the ordinary and established usage of Scripture,
whereby it signifies that man received a rational soul, which was not
produced out of the waters and the earth like the other living
creatures, but was created by the breath of God.  Yet this creation was
ordered that the human soul should live in an animal body, like those
other animals of which the Scripture said, “Let the earth produce every
living soul,” and regarding which it again says that in them is the
breath of life, where the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XIII.24-p16.4"></span>πνοή</span> and not <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIII.24-p16.5"></span>πνεῦμα</span> is used
in the Greek, and where certainly not the Holy Spirit, but their spirit,
is signified under that name.

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p17"></span>But, again, they object that breath is
understood to have been emitted from the mouth of God; and if we believe
that is the soul, we must consequently acknowledge it to be of the same
substance, and equal to that wisdom, which says, “I come out of the
mouth of the Most High.” <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634.md)  
Wisdom, indeed, does not say it was breathed out of the mouth of God,
but proceeded out of it.  But as we are able, when we breathe, to make a
breath, not of our own human nature, but of the surrounding air, which
we inhale and exhale as we draw our breath and breathe again, so
almighty God was able to make breath, not of His own nature, nor of the
creature beneath Him, but even of nothing; and this breath, when He
communicated it to man’s body, He is most <span id="page_261">p.
261</span> <span id="iv.XIII.24-Page_261"></span> appropriately said to
have breathed or inspired,—the Immaterial breathing it also immaterial,
but the Immutable not also the immutable; for it was created, He
uncreated.  Yet that these persons who are forward to quote Scripture,
and yet know not the usages of its language, may know that not only what
is equal and consubstantial with God is said to proceed out of His
mouth, let them hear or read what God says:  “So then because thou art
lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my
mouth.” <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635.md)

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p20"></span>There is no ground, then, for our
objecting, when the apostle so expressly distinguishes the animal body
from the spiritual—that is to say, the body in which we now are from
that in which we are to be.  He says, “It is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body.  There is a natural body, and there is a
spiritual body.  And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a
living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit.  Howbeit that
was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and
afterward that which is spiritual.  The first man is of the earth,
earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven.  As is the earthy, such
are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they
also that are heavenly.  And as we have borne the image of the earthy,
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.” <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636.md)   Of all which words of his we have
previously spoken.  The animal body, accordingly, in which the apostle
says that the first man Adam was made, was not so made that it could not
die at all, but so that it should not die unless he should have sinned. 
That body, indeed, which shall be made spiritual and immortal by the
quickening Spirit shall not be able to die at all; as the soul has been
created immortal, and therefore, although by sin it may be said to die,
and does lose a certain life of its own, namely, the Spirit of God, by
whom it was enabled to live wisely and blessedly, yet it does not cease
living a kind of life, though a miserable, because it is immortal by
creation.  So, too, the rebellious angels, though by sinning they did in
a sense die, because they forsook God, the Fountain of life, which while
they drank they were able to live wisely and well, yet they could not so
die as to utterly cease living and feeling, for they are immortals by
creation.  And so, after the final judgment, they shall be hurled into
the second death, and not even there be deprived of life or of
sensation, but shall suffer torment.  But those men who have been
embraced by God’s grace, and are become the fellow-citizens of the holy
angels who have continued in bliss, shall never more either sin or die,
being endued with spiritual bodies; yet, being clothed with immortality,
such as the angels enjoy, of which they cannot be divested even by
sinning, the nature of their flesh shall continue the same, but all
carnal corruption and unwieldiness shall be removed.

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p22"></span>There remains a question which must be
discussed, and, by the help of the Lord God of truth, solved:  If the
motion of concupiscence in the unruly members of our first parents arose
out of their sin, and only when the divine grace deserted them; and if
it was on that occasion that their eyes were opened to see, or, more
exactly, notice their nakedness, and that they covered their shame
because the shameless motion of their members was not subject to their
will,—how, then, would they have begotten children had they remained
sinless as they were created?  But as this book must be concluded, and
so large a question cannot be summarily disposed of, we may relegate it
to the following book, in which it will be more conveniently treated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_623"></span>[259:624](1020391.htm#fr_623.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p3"></span> [Gen.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.XIII.24-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[259:625](1020391.htm#fr_624.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p4"></span> [John
20.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[259:626](1020391.htm#fr_625.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p5"></span> [Gen.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.XIII.24-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[259:627](1020391.htm#fr_626.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p7"></span>   [2 Cor.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[260:628](1020391.htm#fr_627.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p8.7"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p9"></span> [1 Cor.
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[260:629](1020391.htm#fr_628.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p10"></span> [Eccles.
3.21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[260:630](1020391.htm#fr_629.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p11"></span> [Ps.
148.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[260:631](1020391.htm#fr_630.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p12"></span> [Matt.
28.19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[260:632](1020391.htm#fr_631.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p13"></span> [John
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[260:633](1020391.htm#fr_632.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p15"></span> “Breath,” Eng. ver.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[260:634](1020391.htm#fr_633.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p16"></span> [Gen.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[260:635](1020391.htm#fr_634.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p18"></span> [Ecclus.
24.3](../../../bib/apo/sir024.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[261:636](1020391.htm#fr_635.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p19"></span> [Rev.
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[261:637](1020391.htm#fr_636.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.24-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.24-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
15.44-49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.24-p21.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIV](1020392.md)
