[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020593)  [Next](1020595) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.21"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Whether There Ever Was a Roman
Republic Answering to the Definitions of Scipio in Cicero’s
Dialogue.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.21-p2"></span>This, then, is the place where I should
fulfill the promise gave in the second book of this work, <span
id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295) and explain, as briefly and clearly
as possible, that if we are to accept the definitions laid down by
Scipio in Cicero’s *De Republica*, there never was a Roman republic; for
he briefly defines a republic as the weal of the people.  And if this
definition be true, there never was a Roman republic, for the people’s
weal was never attained among the Romans.  For the people, according to
his definition, is an assemblage associated by a common acknowledgment
of right and by a community of interests.  And what he means by a common
acknowledgment of right he explains at large, showing that a republic
cannot be administered without justice.  Where, therefore, there is no
true justice there can be no right.  For that which is done by right is
justly done, and what is unjustly done cannot be done by right.  For the
unjust inventions of men are neither to be considered nor spoken of as
rights; for even they themselves say that right is that which flows from
the fountain of justice, and deny the definition which is commonly given
by those who misconceive the matter, that right is that which is useful
to the stronger party.  Thus, where there is not true justice there can
be no assemblage of men associated by a common acknowledgment of right,
and therefore there can be no people, as defined by Scipio or Cicero;
and if no people, then no weal of the people, but only of some
promiscuous multitude unworthy of the name of people.  Consequently, if
the republic is the weal of the people, and there is no people if it be
not associated by a common acknowledgment of right, and if there is no
right where there is no justice, then most certainly it follows that
there is no republic where there is no justice.  Further, justice is
that virtue which gives every one his due.  Where, then, is the justice
of man, when he deserts the true God and yields himself to impure
demons?  Is this to give every one his due?  Or is he who keeps back a
piece of ground from the purchaser, and gives it to a man who has no
right to it, unjust, while he who keeps back himself from the God who
made him, and serves wicked spirits, is just?

<span id="iv.XIX.21-p4"></span>This same book, *De Republica*, advocates
the cause of justice against injustice with great force and keenness. 
The pleading for injustice against justice was first heard, and it was
asserted that without injustice a republic could neither increase nor
even subsist, for it was laid down as an absolutely unassailable
position that it is unjust for some men to rule and some to serve; and
yet the imperial city to which the republic belongs cannot rule her
provinces without having recourse to this injustice.  It was replied in
behalf of justice, that this ruling of the provinces is just, because
servitude may be advantageous to the provincials, and is so when rightly
administered,—that is to say, when lawless men are prevented from doing
harm.  And further, as they became worse and worse so long as they were
free, they will <span id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="iv.XIX.21-Page_415"></span> improve by subjection.  To confirm this
reasoning, there is added an eminent example drawn from nature:  for
“why,” it is asked, “does God rule man, the soul the body, the reason
the passions and other vicious parts of the soul?”  This example leaves
no doubt that, to some, servitude is useful; and, indeed, to serve God
is useful to all.  And it is when the soul serves God that it exercises
a right control over the body; and in the soul itself the reason must be
subject to God if it is to govern as it ought the passions and other
vices.  Hence, when a man does not serve God, what justice can we
ascribe to him, since in this case his soul cannot exercise a just
control over the body, nor his reason over his vices?  And if there is
no justice in such an individual, certainly there can be none in a
community composed of such persons.  Here, therefore, there is not that
common acknowledgment of right which makes an assemblage of men a people
whose affairs we call a republic.  And why need I speak of the
advantageousness, the common participation in which, according to the
definition, makes a people?  For although, if you choose to regard the
matter attentively, you will see that there is nothing advantageous to
those who live godlessly, as every one lives who does not serve God but
demons, whose wickedness you may measure by their desire to receive the
worship of men though they are most impure spirits, yet what I have said
of the common acknowledgment of right is enough to demonstrate that,
according to the above definition, there can be no people, and therefore
no republic, where there is no justice.  For if they assert that in
their republic the Romans did not serve unclean spirits, but good and
holy gods, must we therefore again reply to this evasion, though already
we have said enough, and more than enough, to expose it?  He must be an
uncommonly stupid, or a shamelessly contentious person, who has read
through the foregoing books to this point, and can yet question whether
the Romans served wicked and impure demons.  But, not to speak of their
character, it is written in the law of the true God, “He that
sacrificeth unto any god save unto the Lord only, he shall be utterly
destroyed.” <span id="fr_1296"></span>[1297](#fn_1296)   He, therefore,
who uttered so menacing a commandment decreed that no worship should be
given either to good or bad gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[414:1296](1020594.htm#fr_1295) <span
id="iv.XIX.21-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.21-p3"></span> Ch. 21.

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[415:1297](1020594.htm#fr_1296) <span
id="iv.XIX.21-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.21-p5"></span> [Ex.
22.20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020)<span
id="iv.XIX.21-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020595)
