[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020347)  [Next](1020349.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.9"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Whether the Angels, Besides
Receiving from God Their Nature, Received from Him Also Their Good Will
by the Holy Spirit Imbuing Them with Love.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.9-p2"></span>There is, then, no natural efficient cause
or, if I may be allowed the expression, no essential cause, of the evil
will, since itself is the origin of evil in mutable spirits, by which
the good of their nature is diminished and corrupted; and the will is
made evil by nothing else than defection from God,—a defection of which
the cause, too, is certainly deficient.  But as to the good will, if we
should say that there is no efficient cause of it, we must beware of
giving currency to the opinion that the good will of the good angels is
not created, but is co-eternal with God.  For if they themselves are
created, how can we say that their good will was eternal?  But if
created, was it created along with themselves, or did they exist for a
time without it?  If along with themselves, then doubtless it was
created by Him who created them, and, as soon as ever they were created,
they attached themselves to Him who created them, with the love He
created in them.  And they are separated from the society of the rest,
because they have continued in the same good will; while the others have
fallen away to another will, which is an evil one, by the very fact of
its being a falling away from the good; from which, we may add, they
would not have fallen away had they been unwilling to do so.  But if the
good angels existed for a time without a good will, and produced it in
themselves without God’s interference, then it follows that they made
themselves better than He made them.  Away with such a thought!  For
without a good will, what were they but evil?  Or if they were not evil,
because they had not an evil will any more than a good one (for they had
not fallen away from that which as yet they had not begun to enjoy),
certainly they were not the same, not so good, as when they came to have
a good will.  Or if they could not make themselves better than they were
made by Him who is surpassed by none in His work, then certainly,
without His helpful operation, they could not come to possess that good
will which made them better.  And though their good will effected that
they did not turn to themselves, who had a more stinted existence, but
to Him who supremely is, and that, being united to Him, their own being
was enlarged, and they lived a wise and blessed life by His
communications to them, what does this prove but that the will, however
good it might be, would have continued helplessly only to desire Him,
had not He who had made their nature out of nothing, and yet capable of
enjoying Him, first stimulated it to desire Him, and then filled it with
Himself, and so made it better?

<span id="iv.XII.9-p3"></span>Besides, this too has to be inquired into,
whether, if the good angels made their own will good, they did so with
or without will?  If without, then it was not their doing.  If with, was
the will good or bad?  If bad, how could a bad will give birth to a good
one?  If good, then already they had a good will.  And who made this
will, which already they had, but He who created them with a good will,
or with that chaste love by which they cleaved to Him, in one and the
same act creating their nature, and endowing it with grace?  And thus we
are driven to believe that the holy angels never existed without a good
will or the love of God.  But the angels who, though created good, are
yet evil now, became so by their own will.  And this will was not made
evil by their good nature, unless by its voluntary defection from good;
for good is not the cause of evil, but a defection from good is.  These
angels, therefore, either received less of the grace of the divine love
than those who persevered in the same; or if both were created equally
good, then, while the one fell by their evil will, the others were more
abundantly assisted, and attained to that pitch of blessedness at which
they became certain they should never fall from it,—as we have already
shown in the preceding book. <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532.md)  
We must therefore acknowledge, with the praise due to the Creator, that
not only of holy men, but also of the holy angels, it can be said that
“the love of God is shed abroad <span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="iv.XII.9-Page_232"></span> in their hearts by the Holy Ghost, which
is given unto them.” <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533.md)   And that
not only of men, but primarily and principally of angels it is true, as
it is written, “It is good to draw near to God.” <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534.md)   And those who have this good in
common, have, both with Him to whom they draw near, and with one
another, a holy fellowship, and form one city of God—His living
sacrifice, and His living temple.  And I see that, as I have now spoken
of the rise of this city among the angels, it is time to speak of the
origin of that part of it which is hereafter to be united to the
immortal angels, and which at present is being gathered from among
mortal men, and is either sojourning on earth, or, in the persons of
those who have passed through death, is resting in the secret
receptacles and abodes of disembodied spirits.  For from one man, whom
God created as the first, the whole human race descended, according to
the faith of Holy Scripture, which deservedly is of wonderful authority
among all nations throughout the world; since, among its other true
statements, it predicted, by its divine foresight, that all nations
would give credit to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_532"></span>[231:533](1020348.htm#fr_532.md) <span
id="iv.XII.9-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.9-p4"></span> C. 13.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[232:534](1020348.htm#fr_533.md) <span
id="iv.XII.9-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.9-p5"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.XII.9-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[232:535](1020348.htm#fr_534.md) <span
id="iv.XII.9-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.9-p6"></span> [Ps.
73.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.XII.9-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020349.md)
