[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020682)  [Next](1020684.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.22"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—Of the Miseries and Ills to
Which the Human Race is Justly Exposed Through the First Sin, and from
Which None Can Be Delivered Save by Christ’s Grace.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.22-p2"></span>That the whole human race has been
condemned in its first origin, this life itself, if life it is to be
called, bears witness by the host of cruel ills with which it is
filled.  Is not this proved by the profound and dreadful ignorance which
produces all the errors that enfold the children of Adam, and from which
no man can be delivered without toil, pain, and fear?  Is it not proved
by his love of so many vain and hurtful things, which produces gnawing
cares, disquiet, griefs, fears, wild joys, quarrels, lawsuits, wars,
treasons, angers, hatreds, deceit, flattery, fraud, theft, robbery,
perfidy, pride, ambition, envy, murders, parricides, cruelty, ferocity,
wickedness, luxury, insolence, impudence, shamelessness, fornications,
adulteries, incests, and the numberless uncleannesses and unnatural acts
of both sexes, which it is shameful so much as to mention; sacrileges,
heresies, blasphemies, perjuries, oppression of the innocent, calumnies,
plots, falsehoods, false witnessings, unrighteous judgments, violent
deeds, plunderings, and whatever similar wickedness has found its way
<span id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span id="iv.XXII.22-Page_500"></span>
into the lives of men, though it cannot find its way into the conception
of pure minds?  These are indeed the crimes of wicked men, yet they
spring from that root of error and misplaced love which is born with
every son of Adam.  For who is there that has not observed with what
profound ignorance, manifesting itself even in infancy, and with what
superfluity of foolish desires, beginning to appear in boyhood, man
comes into this life, so that, were he left to live as he pleased, and
to do whatever he pleased, he would plunge into all, or certainly into
many of those crimes and iniquities which I mentioned, and could not
mention?

<span id="iv.XXII.22-p3"></span>But because God does not wholly desert
those whom He condemns, nor shuts up in His anger His tender mercies,
the human race is restrained by law and instruction, which keep guard
against the ignorance that besets us, and oppose the assaults of vice,
but are themselves full of labor and sorrow.  For what mean those
multifarious threats which are used to restrain the folly of children? 
What mean pedagogues, masters, the birch, the strap, the cane, the
schooling which Scripture says must be given a child, “beating him on
the sides lest he wax stubborn,” <span
id="fr_1652"></span>[1653](#fn_1652.md) and it be hardly possible or not
possible at all to subdue him?  Why all these punishments, save to
overcome ignorance and bridle evil desires—these evils with which we
come into the world?  For why is it that we remember with difficulty,
and without difficulty forget? learn with difficulty, and without
difficulty remain ignorant? are diligent with difficulty, and without
difficulty are indolent?  Does not this show what vitiated nature
inclines and tends to by its own weight, and what succor it needs if it
is to be delivered?  Inactivity, sloth, laziness, negligence, are vices
which shun labor, since labor, though useful, is itself a punishment.

<span id="iv.XXII.22-p5"></span>But, besides the punishments of
childhood, without which there would be no learning of what the parents
wish,—and the parents rarely wish anything useful to be taught,—who can
describe, who can conceive the number and severity of the punishments
which afflict the human race,—pains which are not only the accompaniment
of the wickedness of godless men, but are a part of the human condition
and the common misery,—what fear and what grief are caused by
bereavement and mourning, by losses and condemnations, by fraud and
falsehood, by false suspicions, and all the crimes and wicked deeds of
other men?  For at their hands we suffer robbery, captivity, chains,
imprisonment, exile, torture, mutilation, loss of sight, the violation
of chastity to satisfy the lust of the oppressor, and many other
dreadful evils.  What numberless casualties threaten our bodies from
without,—extremes of heat and cold, storms, floods, inundations,
lightning, thunder, hail, earthquakes, houses falling; or from the
stumbling, or shying, or vice of horses; from countless poisons in
fruits, water, air, animals; from the painful or even deadly bites of
wild animals; from the madness which a mad dog communicates, so that
even the animal which of all others is most gentle and friendly to its
own master, becomes an object of intenser fear than a lion or dragon,
and the man whom it has by chance infected with this pestilential
contagion becomes so rabid, that his parents, wife, children, dread him
more than any wild beast!  What disasters are suffered by those who
travel by land or sea!  What man can go out of his own house without
being exposed on all hands to unforeseen accidents?  Returning home
sound in limb, he slips on his own doorstep, breaks his leg, and never
recovers.  What can seem safer than a man sitting in his chair?  Eli the
priest fell from his, and broke his neck.  How many accidents do
farmers, or rather all men, fear that the crops may suffer from the
weather, or the soil, or the ravages of destructive animals?  Commonly
they feel safe when the crops are gathered and housed.  Yet, to my
certain knowledge, sudden floods have driven the laborers away, and
swept the barns clean of the finest harvest.  Is innocence a sufficient
protection against the various assaults of demons?  That no man might
think so, even baptized infants, who are certainly unsurpassed in
innocence, are sometimes so tormented, that God, who permits it, teaches
us hereby to bewail the calamities of this life, and to desire the
felicity of the life to come.  As to bodily diseases, they are so
numerous that they cannot all be contained even in medical books.  And
in very many, or almost all of them, the cures and remedies are
themselves tortures, so that men are delivered from a pain that destroys
by a cure that pains.  Has not the madness of thirst driven men to drink
human urine, and even their own?  Has not hunger driven men to eat human
flesh, and that the flesh not of bodies found dead, but of bodies slain
for the purpose?  Have not the fierce pangs of famine driven mothers to
eat their own children, incredibly savage as it seems?  In fine, sleep
itself, which is justly called repose, how little of repose there
sometimes is in it when disturbed with dreams and visions; and with what
terror is the wretched mind <span id="page_501">p. 501</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.22-Page_501"></span> overwhelmed by the appearances of
things which are so presented, and which, as it were so stand out before
the senses, that we can not distinguish them from realities!  How
wretchedly do false appearances distract men in certain diseases!  With
what astonishing variety of appearances are even healthy men sometimes
deceived by evil spirits, who produce these delusions for the sake of
perplexing the senses of their victims, if they cannot succeed in
seducing them to their side!

<span id="iv.XXII.22-p6"></span>From this hell upon earth there is no
escape, save through the grace of the Saviour Christ, our God and Lord. 
The very name Jesus shows this, for it means Saviour; and He saves us
especially from passing out of this life into a more wretched and
eternal state, which is rather a death than a life.  For in this life,
though holy men and holy pursuits afford us great consolations, yet the
blessings which men crave are not invariably bestowed upon them, lest
religion should be cultivated for the sake of these temporal advantages,
while it ought rather to be cultivated for the sake of that other life
from which all evil is excluded.  Therefore, also, does grace aid good
men in the midst of present calamities, so that they are enabled to
endure them with a constancy proportioned to their faith.  The world’s
sages affirm that philosophy contributes something to this,—that
philosophy which, according to Cicero, the gods have bestowed in its
purity only on a few men.  They have never given, he says, nor can ever
give, a greater gift to men.  So that even those against whom we are
disputing have been compelled to acknowledge, in some fashion, that the
grace of God is necessary for the acquisition, not, indeed, of any
philosophy, but of the true philosophy.  And if the true philosophy—this
sole support against the miseries of this life—has been given by Heaven
only to a few, it sufficiently appears from this that the human race has
been condemned to pay this penalty of wretchedness.  And as, according
to their acknowledgment, no greater gift has been bestowed by God, so it
must be believed that it could be given only by that God whom they
themselves recognize as greater than all the gods they worship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[500:1653](1020683.htm#fr_1652.md) <span
id="iv.XXII.22-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.22-p4"></span> [Ecclus.
30.12](../../../bib/apo/sir030.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.XXII.22-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020684.md)
