[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020195)  [Next](1020197.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.13"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.13-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.13-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—That When It is Expounded What
Saturn Is, What Genius Is, It Comes to This, that Both of Them are Shown
to Be Jupiter.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.13-p2"></span>But why speak more of this Jupiter, with
whom perchance all the rest are to be identified; so that, he being all,
the opinion as to the existence of many gods may remain as a mere
opinion, empty of all truth?  And they are all to be referred to him, if
his various parts and powers are thought of as so many gods, or if the
principle of mind which they think to be diffused through all things has
received the names of many gods from the various parts which the mass of
this visible world combines in itself, and from the manifold
administration of nature.  For what is Saturn also?  “One of the
principal gods,” he says, “who has dominion over all sowings.”  Does not
the exposition of the verses of Valerius Soranus teach that Jupiter is
the world, and that he emits all seeds from himself, and receives them
into himself?

<span id="iv.VII.13-p3"></span>It is he, then, with whom is the dominion
of all sowings.  What is Genius?  “He is the god who is set over, and
has the power of begetting, all things.”  Who else than the world do
they believe to have this power, to which it has been said:

<span id="iv.VII.13-p4"></span>“Almighty Jove, progenitor and mother?”

<span id="iv.VII.13-p5"></span>And when in another place he says that
Genius is the rational soul of every one, and therefore exists
separately in each individual, but that the corresponding soul of the
world is God, he just comes back to this same thing,—namely, that the
soul of the world itself is to be held to be, as it were, the universal
genius.  This, therefore, is what he calls Jupiter.  For if every genius
is a god, and the soul of every man a genius, it follows that the soul
of every man is a god.  But if very absurdity compels even these
theologists themselves to shrink from this, it remains that they call
that genius god by special and pre-eminent distinction, whom they call
the soul of the world, and therefore Jupiter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1020197.md)
