[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020027)  [Next](1020029.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—That Suicide Can Never Be
Prompted by Magnanimity.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p2"></span>But they who have laid violent hands on
themselves are perhaps to be admired for their greatness of soul, though
they cannot be applauded for the soundness of their judgment.  However,
if you look at the matter more closely, you will scarcely call it
greatness of soul, which prompts a man to kill himself rather than bear
up against some hardships of fortune, or sins in which he is not
implicated.  Is it not rather proof of a feeble mind, to be unable to
bear either the pains of bodily servitude or the foolish opinion of the
vulgar?  And is not that to be pronounced the greater mind, which rather
faces than flees the ills of life, and which, in comparison of the light
and purity of conscience, holds in small esteem the judgment of men, and
specially of the vulgar, which is frequently involved in a mist of
error?  And, therefore, if suicide is to be esteemed a magnanimous act,
none can take higher rank for magnanimity than that Cleombrotus, who (as
the story goes), when he had read Plato’s book in which he treats of the
immortality of the soul, threw himself from a wall, and so passed from
this life to that which he believed to be better.  For he was not hard
pressed by calamity, nor by any accusation, false or true, which he
could not very well have lived down; there was, in short, no motive but
only magnanimity urging him to seek death, and break away from the sweet
detention of this life.  And yet that this was a magnanimous rather than
a justifiable action, Plato himself, whom he had read, would have told
him; for he would certainly have been forward to commit, or at least to
recommend suicide, had not the same bright intellect which saw that the
soul was immortal, discerned also that to seek immortality by suicide
was to be prohibited rather than encouraged.

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p3"></span>Again, it is said many have killed
themselves to prevent an enemy doing so.  But we are not inquiring
whether it has been done, but whether it ought to have been done.  Sound
judgment is to be preferred even to examples, and indeed examples
harmonize with the voice of reason; but not all examples, but those only
which are distinguished by their piety, and are proportionately worthy
of imitation.  For suicide we cannot cite the example of patriarchs,
prophets, or apostles; though our Lord Jesus Christ, when He admonished
them to flee from city to city if they were persecuted, might very well
have taken that occasion to advise them to lay violent hands on
themselves, and so escape their persecutors.  But seeing He did not do
this, nor proposed this mode of departing this life, though He were
addressing His own friends for whom He had promised to prepare
everlasting mansions, it is obvious that such ex <span id="page_16">p.
16</span> <span id="iv.ii.xxiii-Page_16"></span> amples as are produced
from the “nations that forget God,” give no warrant of imitation to the
worshippers of the one true God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020029.md)
