[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020324)  [Next](1020326) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.21"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Of God’s Eternal and Unchangeable
Knowledge and Will, Whereby All He Has Made Pleased Him in the Eternal
Design as Well as in the Actual Result.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.21-p2"></span>For what else is to be understood by that
invariable refrain, “And God saw that it was good,” than the approval of
the work in its design, which is the wisdom of God?  For certainly God
did not in the actual achievement of the work first learn that it was
good, but, on the contrary, nothing would have been made had it not been
first known by Him.  While, therefore, He sees that that is good which,
had He not seen it before it was made, would never have been made, it is
plain that He is not discovering, but teaching that it is good.  Plato,
indeed, was bold enough to say that, when the universe was completed,
God was, as it were, elated with joy. <span
id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491)   And Plato was not so foolish as to
mean by this that God was rendered more blessed by the novelty of His
creation; but he wished thus to indicate that the work now completed met
with its Maker’s approval, as it had while yet in design.  It is not as
if the knowledge of God were of various kinds, knowing in different ways
things which as yet are not, things which are, and things which have
been.  For not in our fashion does He look forward to what is future,
nor at what is present, nor back upon what is past; but in a manner
quite different and far and profoundly remote from our way of thinking. 
For He does not pass from this to that by transition of thought, but
beholds all things with absolute unchangeableness; so that of those
things which emerge in time, the future, indeed, are not yet, and the
present are now, and the past no longer are; but all of these are by Him
comprehended in His stable and eternal presence.  Neither does He see in
one fashion by the eye, in another by the mind, for He is not composed
of mind and body; nor does His present knowledge differ from that which
it ever was or shall be, for those variations of time, past, present,
and future, though they alter our knowledge, do not affect His, “with
whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.” <span
id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492)   Neither is there any growth from
thought to thought in the conceptions of Him in whose spiritual vision
all things which He knows are at once embraced.  For as without any
movement that time can measure, He Himself moves all temporal things, so
He knows all times with a knowledge that time cannot measure.  And
therefore He saw that what He had made was good, when He saw that it was
good to make it.  And when He saw it made, He had not on that account a
twofold nor any way increased knowledge of it; as if He had less
knowledge before He made what He saw.  For certainly He would not be the
perfect worker He is, unless His knowledge were so perfect as to receive
no addition from His finished works.  Wherefore, if the only object had
been to inform us who made the light, it had been enough to say, “God
made the light;” and if further information regarding the means by which
it was made had been intended, it would have sufficed to say, “And God
said, Let there be light, and there was light,” that we might know not
only that God had made the world, but also that He had made it by the
word.  But because it was right that three leading truths regarding the
creature be intimated to us, viz., who made it, by what means, and why,
it is written, “God said, Let there be light, and there was light.  And
God saw the light that it was good.”  If, then, we ask who made it, it
was “God.”  If, by what means, He said “Let it be,” and it was.  If we
ask, why He made it, “it was good.”  Neither is there any author more
excellent than God, nor any skill more efficacious than the word of God,
nor any cause better than that good might be created by the good God. 
This also Plato has assigned as the most sufficient reason for the
creation of the world, that good works might be made by a good
God; <span id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) whether he read this
passage, or, perhaps, was informed of these things by those who had read
them, or, by his quick-sighted genius, penetrated to things spiritual
and invisible through the things that are created, or was instructed
regarding them by those who had discerned them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_491"></span>[216:492](1020325.htm#fr_491) <span
id="iv.XI.21-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.21-p3"></span> The reference is to the *Timæus*, p. 37
C., where he says, “When the parent Creator perceived this created image
of the eternal Gods in life and motion, He was delighted, and in His joy
considered how He might make it still liker its model.”

<span id="fn_492"></span>[216:493](1020325.htm#fr_492) <span
id="iv.XI.21-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.21-p4"></span> [Jas.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="iv.XI.21-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[216:494](1020325.htm#fr_493) <span
id="iv.XI.21-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.21-p5"></span> The passage referred to is in the
*Timæus* p. 29 D.:  “Let us say what was the cause of the Creator’s
forming this universe.  He was good; and in the good no envy is ever
generated about anything whatever.  Therefore, being free from envy, He
desired that all things should, as much as possible, resemble Himself.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020326)
