[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020086)  [Next](1020088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.14"></span>

<span id="iv.III.14-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.14-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—Of the Wickedness of the War
Waged by the Romans Against the Albans, and of the Victories Won by the
Lust of Power.</span>

<span id="iv.III.14-p2"></span>But what happened after Numa’s reign, and
under the other kings, when the Albans were provoked into war, with sad
results not to themselves alone, but also to the Romans?  The long peace
of Numa had become tedious; and with what endless slaughter and
detriment of both states did the Roman and Alban armies bring it to an
end!  For Alba, which had been founded by Ascanius, son of Æneas, and
which was more properly the mother of Rome than Troy herself, was
provoked to battle by Tullus Hostilius, king of Rome, and in the
conflict both inflicted and received such damage, that at length both
parties wearied of the struggle.  It was then devised that the war
should be decided by the combat of three twin-brothers from each army: 
from the Romans the three Horatii stood forward, from the Albans the
three Curiatii.  Two of the Horatii were overcome and disposed of by the
Curiatii; but by the remaining Horatius the three Curiatii were slain. 
Thus Rome remained victorious, but with such a sacrifice that only one
survivor returned to his home.  Whose was the loss on both sides?  Whose
the grief, but of the offspring of Æneas, the descendants of Ascanius,
the progeny of Venus, the grandsons of Jupiter?  For this, too, was a
“worse than civil” war, in which the belligerent states were mother and
daughter.  And to this combat of the three twin-brothers there was added
another atrocious and horrible catastrophe.  For as the two <span
id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span id="iv.III.14-Page_50"></span> nations
had formerly been friendly (being related and neighbors), the sister of
the Horatii had been betrothed to one of the Curiatii; and she, when she
saw her brother wearing the spoils of her betrothed, burst into tears,
and was slain by her own brother in his anger.  To me, this one girl
seems to have been more humane than the whole Roman people.  I cannot
think her to blame for lamenting the man to whom already she had
plighted her troth, or, as perhaps she was doing, for grieving that her
brother should have slain him to whom he had promised his sister.  For
why do we praise the grief of Æneas (in Virgil <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) .md) over the enemy cut down even by his
own hand?  Why did Marcellus shed tears over the city of Syracuse, when
he recollected, just before he destroyed, its magnificence and meridian
glory, and thought upon the common lot of all things?  I demand, in the
name of humanity, that if men are praised for tears shed over enemies
conquered by themselves, a weak girl should not be counted criminal for
bewailing her lover slaughtered by the hand of her brother.  While,
then, that maiden was weeping for the death of her betrothed inflicted
by her brother’s hand, Rome was rejoicing that such devastation had been
wrought on her mother state, and that she had purchased a victory with
such an expenditure of the common blood of herself and the Albans.

<span id="iv.III.14-p8"></span>Why allege to me the mere names and words
of “glory” and “victory?”  Tear off the disguise of wild delusion, and
look at the naked deeds:  weigh them naked, judge them naked.  Let the
charge be brought against Alba, as Troy was charged with adultery. 
There is no such charge, none like it found:  the war was kindled only
in order that there

<span id="iv.III.14-p9"></span>“Might sound in languid ears the cry

<span id="iv.III.14-p10"></span>Of Tullus and of victory.” <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md)

<span id="iv.III.14-p12"></span>This vice of restless ambition was the
sole motive to that social and parricidal war,—a vice which Sallust
brands in passing; for when he has spoken with brief but hearty
commendation of those primitive times in which life was spent without
covetousness, and every one was sufficiently satisfied with what he had,
he goes on:  “But after Cyrus in Asia, and the Lacedemonians and
Athenians in Greece, began to subdue cities and nations, and to account
the lust of sovereignty a sufficient ground for war, and to reckon that
the greatest glory consisted in the greatest empire;” <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) and so on, as I need not now quote. 
This lust of sovereignty disturbs and consumes the human race with
frightful ills.  By this lust Rome was overcome when she triumphed over
Alba, and praising her own crime, called it glory.  For, as our
Scriptures say, “the wicked boasteth of his heart’s desire, and blesseth
the covetous, whom the Lord abhorreth.” <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md)   Away, then, with these deceitful
masks, these deluding whitewashes, that things may be truthfully seen
and scrutinized.  Let no man tell me that this and the other was a
“great” man, because he fought and conquered so and so.  Gladiators
fight and conquer, and this barbarism has its meed of praise; but I
think it were better to take the consequences of any sloth, than to seek
the glory won by such arms.  And if two gladiators entered the arena to
fight, one being father, the other his son, who would endure such a
spectacle? who would not be revolted by it?  How, then, could that be a
glorious war which a daughter-state waged against its mother?  Or did it
constitute a difference, that the battlefield was not an arena, and that
the wide plains were filled with the carcasses not of two gladiators,
but of many of the flower of two nations; and that those contests were
viewed not by the amphitheatre, but by the whole world, and furnished a
profane spectacle both to those alive at the time, and to their
posterity, so long as the fame of it is handed down?

<span id="iv.III.14-p15"></span>Yet those gods, guardians of the Roman
empire, and, as it were, theatric spectators of such contests as these,
were not satisfied until the sister of the Horatii was added by her
brother’s sword as a third victim from the Roman side, so that Rome
herself, though she won the day, should have as many deaths to mourn. 
Afterwards, as a fruit of the victory, Alba was destroyed, though it was
there the Trojan gods had formed a third asylum after Ilium had been
sacked by the Greeks, and after they had left Lavinium, where Æneas had
founded a kingdom in a land of banishment.  But probably Alba was
destroyed because from it too the gods had migrated, in their usual
fashion, as Virgil says:

<span id="iv.III.14-p16"></span>“Gone from each fane, each sacred
shrine,

<span id="iv.III.14-p17"></span>Are those who made this realm
divine.” <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md)

<span id="iv.III.14-p19"></span>Gone, indeed, and from now their third
asylum, that Rome might seem all the wiser in committing herself to them
after they had deserted three other cities.  Alba, whose king Amulius
had banished his brother, displeased them; Rome, whose king Romulus had
slain <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span
id="iv.III.14-Page_51"></span> his brother, pleased them.  But before
Alba was destroyed, its population, they say, was amalgamated with the
inhabitants of Rome so that the two cities were one.  Well, admitting it
was so, yet the fact remains that the city of Ascanius, the third
retreat of the Trojan gods, was destroyed by the daughter-city. 
Besides, to effect this pitiful conglomerate of the war’s leavings, much
blood was spilt on both sides.  And how shall I speak in detail of the
same wars, so often renewed in subsequent reigns, though they seemed to
have been finished by great victories; and of wars that time after time
were brought to an end by great slaughters, and which yet time after
time were renewed by the posterity of those who had made peace and
struck treaties?  Of this calamitous history we have no small proof, in
the fact that no subsequent king closed the gates of war; and therefore
with all their tutelar gods, no one of them reigned in peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[50:142](1020087.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="iv.III.14-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.14-p3"></span> *Æneid*, x. 821, of Lausus:

<span id="iv.III.14-p4"></span>“But when Anchises’ son surveyed

<span id="iv.III.14-p5"></span>The fair, fair face so ghastly made,

<span id="iv.III.14-p6"></span>He groaned, by tenderness unmanned,

<span id="iv.III.14-p7"></span>And stretched the sympathizing hand,”
etc.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[50:143](1020087.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="iv.III.14-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.14-p11"></span> Virgil, *Æneid*, vi. 813.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[50:144](1020087.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="iv.III.14-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.14-p13"></span> Sallust, *Cat. Conj.* ii.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[50:145](1020087.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="iv.III.14-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.14-p14"></span> [Ps.
10.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.III.14-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[50:146](1020087.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="iv.III.14-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.III.14-p18"></span> *Æneid*, ii. 351–2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1020088.md)
