[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020382)  [Next](1020384.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIII.16"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.16-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIII.16-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—Concerning the Philosophers Who
Think that the Separation of Soul and Body is Not Penal, Though Plato
Represents the Supreme Deity as Promising to the Inferior Gods that They
Shall Never Be Dismissed from Their Bodies.</span>

<span id="iv.XIII.16-p2"></span>But the philosophers against whom we are
defending the city of God, that is, His Church seem to themselves to
have good cause to deride us, because we say that the separation of the
soul from the body is to be held as part of man’s punishment.  For they
suppose that the blessedness of the soul then only is complete, when it
is quite denuded of the body, and returns to God a pure and simple, and,
as it were, naked soul.  On this point, if I should find nothing in
their own literature to refute this opinion, I should be forced
laboriously to demonstrate that it is not the body, but the
corruptibility of the body, which is a burden to the soul.  Hence that
sentence of Scripture we quoted in a foregoing book, “For the
corruptible body presseth down the soul.” <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597.md)   The word corruptible is added to
show that the soul is burdened, not by any body whatsoever, but by the
body such as it has become in consequence of sin.  And even though the
word had not been added, we could understand nothing else.  But when
Plato most expressly declares that the gods who are made by the Supreme
have immortal bodies, and when he introduces their Maker himself,
promising them as a great boon that they should abide in their bodies
eternally, and never by any death be loosed from them, why do these
adversaries of ours, for the sake of troubling the Christian faith,
feign to be ignorant of what they quite well know, and even prefer to
contradict themselves rather than lose an opportunity of contradicting
us?  Here are Plato’s words, as Cicero has translated them, <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598.md) in which he introduces the Supreme
addressing the gods He had made, and saying, “Ye who are sprung from a
divine stock, consider of what works I am the parent and author.  These
(your bodies) are indestructible so long as I will it; although all that
is composed can be destroyed.  But it is wicked to dissolve what reason
has compacted.  But, seeing that ye have been born, ye cannot indeed be
immortal and indestructible; yet ye shall by no means be destroyed, nor
shall any fates consign you to death, and prove superior to my will,
which is a stronger assurance of your perpetuity than those bodies to
which ye were joined when ye were born.”  Plato, you see, says that the
gods are both mortal by the connection of the body and soul, and yet are
rendered immortal by the will and decree of their Maker.  If, therefore,
it is a punishment to the soul to be connected with any body whatever,
why does God address them as if they were afraid of death, that is, of
the separation, of soul and body?  Why does He seek to reassure them by
promising them immortality, not in virtue of their nature, which is
composite and not simple, but by virtue of His invincible will, whereby
He can effect that neither things born die, nor things compounded be
dissolved, but preserved eternally?

<span id="iv.XIII.16-p5"></span>Whether this opinion of Plato’s about
the stars is true or not, is another question.  For we cannot at once
grant to him that these luminous bodies or globes, which by day and
night shine on the earth with the light of their bodily substance, have
also intellectual and blessed souls which animate each its own body, as
he confidently affirms of the universe itself, as if it were one huge
animal, in which all other animals were contained. <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599.md)   But this, as I said, is another
question, which we have not undertaken to discuss at present.  This much
only I deemed right to bring forward, in opposition to those who so
pride themselves on being, or on being called Platonists, that they
blush to be Christians, and who cannot brook to be called by a name
which the common people also bear, lest they vulgarize the philosophers’
coterie, which is proud in proportion to its exclusiveness.  These men,
seeking a weak point in the Christian doctrine, select for attack the
eternity of the body, as if it were a contradiction to contend for the
blessedness of the soul, and to wish it to be always resident in the
body, bound, as it were, in a lamentable chain; and this although Plato,
their own founder and master, affirms that it <span id="page_253">p.
253</span> <span id="iv.XIII.16-Page_253"></span> was granted by the
Supreme as a boon to the gods He had made, that they should not die,
that is, should not be separated from the bodies with which He had
connected them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_597"></span>[252:598](1020383.htm#fr_597.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.16-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.16-p3"></span> [Wisd.
9.15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.XIII.16-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[252:599](1020383.htm#fr_598.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.16-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.16-p4"></span> A translation of part of the *Timæus*,
given in a little book of Cicero’s, *De Universo*.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[252:600](1020383.htm#fr_599.md) <span
id="iv.XIII.16-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIII.16-p6"></span> Plato, in the *Timæus*, represents the
Demiurgus as constructing the *kosmos* or universe to be a complete
representation of the idea of animal.  He planted in its centre a soul,
spreading outwards so as to pervade the whole body of the *kosmos*; and
then he introduced into it those various species of animals which were
contained in the idea of animal.  Among these animals stand first the
celestial, the gods embodied in the stars, and of these the oldest is
the earth, set in the centre of all, close packed round the great axis
which traverses the centre of the *kosmos.*—See the *Timæus* and Grote’s
*Plato*, iii. 250 et seq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020384.md)
