[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020433)  [Next](1020435.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.13"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.13-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.13-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—Whether, in Computing Years, We
Ought to Follow the Hebrew or the Septuagint.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.13-p2"></span>But if I say this, I shall presently be
answered, It is one of the Jews’ lies.  This, however, we have disposed
of above, showing that it cannot be that men of so just a reputation as
the seventy translators should have falsified their version.  However,
if I ask them which of the two is more credible, that the Jewish nation,
scattered far and wide, could have unanimously conspired to forge this
lie, and so, through envying others the authority of their Scriptures,
have deprived themselves of their verity; or that seventy men, who were
also themselves Jews, shut up in one place (for Ptolemy king of Egypt
had got them together for this work), should have envied foreign nations
that same truth, and by common consent inserted these errors:  who does
not see which can be more naturally and readily believed?  But far be it
from any prudent man to believe either that the Jews, however malicious
and wrong-headed, could have tampered with so many and so
widely-dispersed manuscripts; or that those renowned seventy individuals
had any common purpose to grudge the truth to the nations.  One must
therefore more plausibly maintain, that when first their labors began to
be transcribed from the copy in Ptolemy’s library, some such
misstatement might find its way into the first copy made, and from it
might be disseminated far and wide; and that this might arise from no
fraud, but from a mere copyist’s error.  This <span id="page_294">p.
294</span> <span id="iv.XV.13-Page_294"></span> is a sufficiently
plausible account of the difficulty regarding Methuselah’s life, and of
that other case in which there is a difference in the total of
twenty-four years.  But in those cases in which there is a methodical
resemblance in the falsification, so that uniformly the one version
allots to the period before a son and successor is born 100 years more
than the other, and to the period subsequent 100 years less, and *vice
versâ*, so that the totals may agree,—and this holds true of the first,
second, third, fourth, fifth, and seventh generations,—in these cases
error seems to have, if we may say so, a certain kind of constancy, and
savors not of accident, but of design.

<span id="iv.XV.13-p3"></span>Accordingly, that diversity of numbers
which distinguishes the Hebrew from the Greek and Latin copies of
Scripture, and which consists of a uniform addition and deduction of 100
years in each lifetime for several consecutive generations, is to be
attributed neither to the malice of the Jews nor to men so diligent and
prudent as the seventy translators, but to the error of the copyist who
was first allowed to transcribe the manuscript from the library of the
above-mentioned king.  For even now, in cases where numbers contribute
nothing to the easier comprehension or more satisfactory knowledge of
anything, they are both carelessly transcribed, and still more
carelessly emended.  For who will trouble himself to learn how many
thousand men the several tribes of Israel contained?  He sees no
resulting benefit of such knowledge.  Or how many men are there who are
aware of the vast advantage that lies hid in this knowledge?  But in
this case, in which during so many consecutive generations 100 years are
added in one manuscript where they are not reckoned in the other, and
then, after the birth of the son and successor, the years which were
wanting are added, it is obvious that the copyist who contrived this
arrangement designed to insinuate that the antediluvians lived an
excessive number of years only because each year was excessively brief,
and that he tried to draw the attention to this fact by his statement of
their age of puberty at which they became able to beget children.  For,
lest the incredulous might stumble at the difficulty of so long a
lifetime, he insinuated that 100 of their years equalled but ten of
ours; and this insinuation he conveyed by adding 100 years whenever he
found the age below 160 years or thereabouts, deducting these years
again from the period after the son’s birth, that the total might
harmonize.  By this means he intended to ascribe the generation of
offspring to a fit age, without diminishing the total sum of years
ascribed to the lifetime of the individuals.  And the very fact that in
the sixth generation he departed from this uniform practice, inclines us
all the rather to believe that when the circumstance we have referred to
required his alterations, he made them; seeing that when this
circumstance did not exist, he made no alteration.  For in the same
generation he found in the Hebrew <span class="c20"><span
id="iv.XV.13-p3.1"></span> ms.</span>, that Jared lived before he begat
Enoch 162 years, which, according to the short year computation, is
sixteen years and somewhat less than two months, an age capable of
procreation; and therefore it was not necessary to add 100 short years,
and so make the age twenty-six years of the usual length; and of course
it was not necessary to deduct, after the son’s birth, years which he
had not added before it.  And thus it comes to pass that in this
instance there is no variation between the two manuscripts.

<span id="iv.XV.13-p4"></span>This is corroborated still further by the
fact that in the eighth generation, while the Hebrew books assign
182 <span id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808.md) years to Methuselah before
Lamech’s birth, ours assign to him twenty less, though usually 100 years
are added to this period; then, after Lamech’s birth, the twenty years
are restored, so as to equalize the total in the two books.  For if his
design was that these 170 years be understood as seventeen, so as to
suit the age of puberty, as there was no need for him adding anything,
so there was none for his subtracting anything; for in this case he
found an age fit for the generation of children, for the sake of which
he was in the habit of adding those 100 years in cases where he did not
find the age already sufficient.  This difference of twenty years we
might, indeed, have supposed had happened accidentally, had he not taken
care to restore them afterwards as he had deducted them from the period
before, so that there might be no deficiency in the total.  Or are we
perhaps to suppose that there was the still more astute design of
concealing the deliberate and uniform addition of 100 years to the first
period and their deduction from the subsequent period—did he design to
conceal this by doing something similar, that is to say, adding and
deducting, not indeed a century, but some years, even in a case in which
there was no need for his doing so?  But whatever may be thought of
this, whether it be believed that he did so or not, whether, in fine, it
be so or not, I would have no manner of doubt that when any diversity is
found in the books, since both cannot be true to fact, we do well <span
id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span id="iv.XV.13-Page_295"></span> to
believe in preference that language out of which the translation was
made into another by translators.  For there are three Greek <span
class="c20"><span id="iv.XV.13-p5.1"></span>mss</span>., one Latin, and
one Syriac, which agree with one another, and in all of these Methuselah
is said to have died six years before the deluge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_808"></span>[294:809](1020434.htm#fr_808.md) <span
id="iv.XV.13-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.13-p5"></span> One hundred and eighty-seven is the
number given in the Hebrew, and one hundred and sixty-seven in the
Septuagint; but notwithstanding the confusion, the argument of Augustin
is easily followed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1020435.md)
