[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020597)  [Next](1020599.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.25"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.25-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.25-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—That Where There is No True
Religion There are No True Virtues.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.25-p2"></span>For though the soul may seem to rule the
body admirably, and the reason the vices, if the soul and reason do not
themselves obey God, as God has commanded them to serve Him, they have
no proper authority over the body and the vices.  For what kind of
mistress of the body and the vices can that mind be which is ignorant of
the true God, and which, instead of being subject to His authority, is
prostituted to the corrupting influences of the most vicious demons?  It
is for this reason that the virtues which it seems to itself to possess,
and by which it restrains the body and the vices that it may obtain and
keep what it desires, are rather vices than virtues so long as there is
no reference to God in the matter.  For although some suppose that
virtues which have a reference only to themselves, and are desired only
on their own account, are yet true and genuine virtues, the fact is that
even then they are inflated with <span id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span
id="iv.XIX.25-Page_419"></span> pride, and are therefore to be reckoned
vices rather than virtues.  For as that which gives life to the flesh is
not derived from flesh, but is above it, so that which gives blessed
life to man is not derived from man, but is something above him; and
what I say of man is true of every celestial power and virtue
whatsoever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020599.md)
