[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020417)  [Next](1020419) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.26"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—That We are to Believe that in
Paradise Our First Parents Begat Offspring Without Blushing.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.26-p2"></span>In Paradise, then, man lived as he
desired so long as he desired what God had commanded.  He lived in the
enjoyment of God, and was good by God’s goodness; he lived without any
want, and had it in his power so to live eternally.  He had food that he
might not hunger, drink that he might not thirst, the tree of life that
old age might not waste him.  There was in his body no corruption, nor
seed of corruption, which could produce in him any unpleasant
sensation.  He feared no inward disease, no outward accident.  Soundest
health blessed his body, absolute tranquillity his soul.  As in Paradise
there was no excessive heat or cold, so its inhabitants were exempt from
the vicissitudes of fear and desire.  No sadness of any kind was there,
nor any foolish joy; true gladness ceaselessly flowed from the presence
of God, who was loved “out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and
faith unfeigned.” <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759)   The honest
love of husband and wife made a sure harmony between them.  Body and
spirit worked harmoniously together, and the commandment was kept
without labor.  No languor made their leisure wearisome; no sleepiness
interrupted their desire to labor. <span
id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760)   *In tanta facilitate rerum et
felicitate hominum, absit ut suspicemur, non potuisse prolem seri sine
libidinis morbo:  sed eo voluntatis nutu moverentur illa membra qua
cætera, et sine ardoris illecebroso stimulo cum tranquillitate animi et
corporis nulla corruptione integritatis infunderetur gremio maritus
uxoris.  Neque enim quia experientia probari non potest, ideo credendum
non est; quando illas corporis partes non ageret turbidus calor, sed
spontanea potestas, sicut opus esset, adhiberet; ita tunc potuisse utero
conjugis salva integritate feminei genitalis virile semen immitti, sicut
nunc potest eadem integritate salva ex utero virginis fluxus menstrui
cruoris emitti.  Eadem quippe via posset illud injici, qua hoc potest
ejici.  Ut enim ad pariendum non doloris gemitus, sed maturitatis
impulsus feminea viscera relaxaret:  sic ad*   <span id="page_282">p.
282</span> <span id="iv.XIV.26-Page_282"></span> *fœtandum et
concipiendum non libidinis appetitus, sed voluntarius usus naturam
utramque conjungeret. * We speak of things which are now shameful, and
although we try, as well as we are able, to conceive them as they were
before they became shameful, yet necessity compels us rather to limit
our discussion to the bounds set by modesty than to extend it as our
moderate faculty of discourse might suggest.  For since that which I
have been speaking of was not experienced even by those who might have
experienced it,—I mean our first parents (for sin and its merited
banishment from Paradise anticipated this passionless generation on
their part),—when sexual intercourse is spoken of now, it suggests to
men’s thoughts not such a placid obedience to the will as is conceivable
in our first parents, but such violent acting of lust as they themselves
have experienced.  And therefore modesty shuts my mouth, although my
mind conceives the matter clearly.  But Almighty God, the supreme and
supremely good Creator of all natures, who aids and rewards good wills,
while He abandons and condemns the bad, and rules both, was not
destitute of a plan by which He might people His city with the fixed
number of citizens which His wisdom had foreordained even out of the
condemned human race, discriminating them not now by merits, since the
whole mass was condemned as if in a vitiated root, but by grace, and
showing, not only in the case of the redeemed, but also in those who
were not delivered, how much grace He has bestowed upon them.  For every
one acknowledges that he has been rescued from evil, not by deserved,
but by gratuitous goodness, when he is singled out from the company of
those with whom he might justly have borne a common punishment, and is
allowed to go scathless.  Why, then, should God not have created those
whom He foresaw would sin, since He was able to show in and by them both
what their guilt merited, and what His grace bestowed, and since, under
His creating and disposing hand, even the perverse disorder of the
wicked could not pervert the right order of things?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_759"></span>[281:760](1020418.htm#fr_759) <span
id="iv.XIV.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.26-p3"></span> [1 Tim.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="iv.XIV.26-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[281:761](1020418.htm#fr_760) <span
id="iv.XIV.26-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.26-p4"></span> Compare Basil’s *Homily on Paradise*,
and John Damascene, *De Fide Orthod.* ii. 11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020419)
