[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020015)  [Next](1020017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—That the Saints Lose Nothing in
Losing Temporal Goods.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p2"></span>These are the considerations which one
must keep in view, that he may answer the question whether any evil
happens to the faithful and godly which cannot be turned to profit.  Or
shall we say that the question is needless, and that the apostle is
vaporing when he says, “We know that all things work together for good
to them that love God?” <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md)

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p4"></span>They lost all they had.  Their faith? 
Their godliness?  The possessions of the hidden man of the heart, which
in the sight of God are of great price? <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md)   Did they lose these?  For these are the
wealth of Christians, to whom the wealthy apostle said, “Godliness with
contentment is great gain.  For we brought nothing into this world, and
it is certain we can carry nothing out.  And having food and raiment,
let us be therewith content.  But they that will be rich fall into
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition.  For the love of money is the
root of all evil; which, while some coveted after, they have erred from
the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.” <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md)

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p7"></span>They, then, who lost their worldly all in
the sack of Rome, if they owned their possessions as they had been
taught by the apostle, who himself was poor without, but rich
within,—that is to say, if they used the world as not using it,—could
say in the words of Job, heavily tried, but not overcome:  “Naked came I
out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither:  the Lord
gave, and the Lord hath taken away; as it pleased the Lord, so has it
come to pass:  blessed be the name of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md)   Like a good servant, Job counted the
will of his Lord his great possession, by obedience to which his soul
was enriched; nor did it grieve him to lose, while yet living, those
goods which he must shortly leave at his death.  But as to those feebler
spirits who, though they cannot be said to prefer earthly possessions to
Christ, do yet cleave to them with a somewhat immoderate attachment,
they have discovered by the pain of losing these things how much they
were sinning in loving them.  For their grief is of their own making; in
the words of the apostle quoted above, “they have pierced themselves
through with many sorrows.”  For it was well that they who had so long
despised these verbal admonitions should receive the teaching of
experience.  For when the apostle says, “They that will be rich fall
into temptation,” and so on, what he blames in riches is not the
possession of them, but the desire of them.  For elsewhere he says,
“Charge them that <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iv.ii.xi-Page_8"></span> are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
giveth us richly all things to enjoy; that they do good, that they be
rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying
up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life.” <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md)   They who were making such a use of
their property have been consoled for light losses by great gains, and
have had more pleasure in those possessions which they have securely
laid past, by freely giving them away, than grief in those which they
entirely lost by an anxious and selfish hoarding of them.  For nothing
could perish on earth save what they would be ashamed to carry away from
earth.  Our Lord’s injunction runs, “Lay not up for yourselves treasures
upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where
neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through nor steal:  for where your treasure is, there will your heart be
also.” <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md)   And they who have listened
to this injunction have proved in the time of tribulation how well they
were advised in not despising this most trustworthy teacher, and most
faithful and mighty guardian of their treasure.  For if many were glad
that their treasure was stored in places which the enemy chanced not to
light upon, how much better founded was the joy of those who, by the
counsel of their God, had fled with their treasure to a citadel which no
enemy can possibly reach!  Thus our Paulinus, bishop of Nola, <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) who voluntarily abandoned vast wealth and
became quite poor, though abundantly rich in holiness, when the
barbarians sacked Nola, and took him prisoner, used silently to pray, as
he afterwards told me, “O Lord, let me not be troubled for gold and
silver, for where all my treasure is Thou knowest.”  For all his
treasure was where he had been taught to hide and store it by Him who
had also foretold that these calamities would happen in the world. 
Consequently those persons who obeyed their Lord when He warned them
where and how to lay up treasure, did not lose even their earthly
possessions in the invasion of the barbarians; while those who are now
repenting that they did not obey Him have learnt the right use of
earthly goods, if not by the wisdom which would have prevented their
loss, at least by the experience which follows it.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p12"></span>But some good and Christian men have been
put to the torture, that they might be forced to deliver up their goods
to the enemy.  They could indeed neither deliver nor lose that good
which made themselves good.  If, however, they preferred torture to the
surrender of the mammon of iniquity, then I say they were not good men. 
Rather they should have been reminded that, if they suffered so severely
for the sake of money, they should endure all torment, if need be, for
Christ’s sake; that they might be taught to love Him rather who enriches
with eternal felicity all who suffer for Him, and not silver and gold,
for which it was pitiable to suffer, whether they preserved it by
telling a lie or lost it by telling the truth.  For under these tortures
no one lost Christ by confessing Him, no one preserved wealth save by
denying its existence.  So that possibly the torture which taught them
that they should set their affections on a possession they could not
lose, was more useful than those possessions which, without any useful
fruit at all, disquieted and tormented their anxious owners.  But then
we are reminded that some were tortured who had no wealth to surrender,
but who were not believed when they said so.  These too, however, had
perhaps some craving for wealth, and were not willingly poor with a holy
resignation; and to such it had to be made plain, that not the actual
possession alone, but also the desire of wealth, deserved such
excruciating pains.  And even if they were destitute of any hidden
stores of gold and silver, because they were living in hopes of a better
life,—I know not indeed if any such person was tortured on the
supposition that he had wealth; but if so, then certainly in confessing,
when put to the question, a holy poverty, he confessed Christ.  And
though it was scarcely to be expected that the barbarians should believe
him, yet no confessor of a holy poverty could be tortured without
receiving a heavenly reward.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p13"></span>Again, they say that the long famine laid
many a Christian low.  But this, too, the faithful turned to good uses
by a pious endurance of it.  For those whom famine killed outright it
rescued from the ills of this life, as a kindly disease would have done;
and those who were only hunger-bitten were taught to live more
sparingly, and inured to longer fasts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[7:53](1020016.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3"></span> [Rom.
8.28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[7:54](1020016.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p5"></span> [1 Pet.
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[7:55](1020016.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p6"></span> [1 Tim.
6.6-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[7:56](1020016.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p8"></span> [Job
1.21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[8:57](1020016.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p9"></span> [1 Tim.
6.17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[8:58](1020016.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p10"></span> [Matt.
6.19-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[8:59](1020016.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p11"></span> Paulinus was a native of Bordeaux, and
both by inheritance and marriage acquired great wealth, which, after his
conversion in his thirty-sixth year, he distributed to the poor.  He
became bishop of Nola in <span class="c20"><span
id="iv.ii.xi-p11.1"></span>A.D.</span> 409, being then in his
fifty-sixth year.  Nola was taken by Alaric shortly after the sack of
Rome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020017.md)
