[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020519)  [Next](1020521.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—Of the Kings and Times of the
Earthly City Which Were Synchronous with the Times of the Saints,
Reckoning from the Rise of Abraham.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.2-p2"></span>The society of mortals spread abroad
through the earth everywhere, and in the most diverse places, although
bound together by a certain fellowship of our common nature, is yet for
the most part divided against itself, and the strongest oppress the
others, because all follow after their own interests and lusts, while
what is longed for either suffices for none, or not for all, because it
is not the very thing.  For the vanquished succumb to the victorious,
preferring any sort of peace and safety to freedom itself; so that they
who chose to die rather than be slaves have been greatly wondered at. 
For in almost all nations the very voice of nature somehow proclaims,
that those who happen to be conquered should choose rather to be subject
to <span id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.2-Page_362"></span> their conquerors than to be killed by
all kinds of warlike destruction.  This does not take place without the
providence of God, in whose power it lies that any one either subdues or
is subdued in war; that some are endowed with kingdoms, others made
subject to kings.  Now, among the very many kingdoms of the earth into
which, by earthly interest or lust, society is divided (which we call by
the general name of the city of this world), we see that two, settled
and kept distinct from each other both in time and place, have grown far
more famous than the rest, first that of the Assyrians, then that of the
Romans.  First came the one, then the other.  The former arose in the
east, and, immediately on its close, the latter in the west.  I may
speak of other kingdoms and other kings as appendages of these.

<span id="iv.XVIII.2-p3"></span>Ninus, then, who succeeded his father
Belus, the first king of Assyria, was already the second king of that
kingdom when Abraham was born in the land of the Chaldees.  There was
also at that time a very small kingdom of Sicyon, with which, as from an
ancient date, that most universally learned man Marcus Varro begins, in
writing of the Roman race.  For from these kings of Sicyon he passes to
the Athenians, from them to the Latins, and from these to the Romans. 
Yet very little is related about these kingdoms, before the foundation
of Rome, in comparison with that of Assyria.  For although even Sallust,
the Roman historian, admits that the Athenians were very famous in
Greece, yet he thinks they were greater in fame than in fact.  For in
speaking of them he says, “The deeds of the Athenians, as I think, were
very great and magnificent, but yet somewhat less than reported by
fame.  But because writers of great genius arose among them, the deeds
of the Athenians were celebrated throughout the world as very great. 
Thus the virtue of those who did them was held to be as great as men of
transcendent genius could represent it to be by the power of laudatory
words.” <span id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133.md)   This city also
derived no small glory from literature and philosophy, the study of
which chiefly flourished there.  But as regards empire, none in the
earliest times was greater than the Assyrian, or so widely extended. 
For when Ninus the son of Belus was king, he is reported to have subdued
the whole of Asia, even to the boundaries of Libya, which as to number
is called the third part, but as to size is found to be the half of the
whole world.  The Indians in the eastern regions were the only people
over whom he did not reign; but after his death Semiramis his wife made
war on them.  Thus it came to pass that all the people and kings in
those countries were subject to the kingdom and authority of the
Assyrians, and did whatever they were commanded.  Now Abraham was born
in that kingdom among the Chaldees, in the time of Ninus.  But since
Grecian affairs are much better known to us than Assyrian, and those who
have diligently investigated the antiquity of the Roman nation’s origin
have followed the order of time through the Greeks to the Latins, and
from them to the Romans, who themselves are Latins, we ought on this
account, where it is needful, to mention the Assyrian kings, that it may
appear how Babylon, like a first Rome, ran its course along with the
city of God, which is a stranger in this world.  But the things proper
for insertion in this work in comparing the two cities, that is, the
earthly and heavenly, ought to be taken mostly from the Greek and Latin
kingdoms, where Rome herself is like a second Babylon.

<span id="iv.XVIII.2-p5"></span>At Abraham’s birth, then, the second
kings of Assyria and Sicyon respectively were Ninus and Europs, the
first having been Belus and Ægialeus.  But when God promised Abraham, on
his departure from Babylonia, that he should become a great nation, and
that in his seed all nations of the earth should be blessed, the
Assyrians had their seventh king, the Sicyons their fifth; for the son
of Ninus reigned among them after his mother Semiramis, who is said to
have been put to death by him for attempting to defile him by
incestuously lying with him.  Some think that she founded Babylon, and
indeed she may have founded it anew.  But we have told, in the sixteenth
book, when or by whom it was founded.  Now the son of Ninus and
Semiramis, who succeeded his mother in the kingdom, is also called Ninus
by some, but by others Ninias, a patronymic word.  Telexion then held
the kingdom of the Sicyons.  In his reign times were quiet and joyful to
such a degree, that after his death they worshipped him as a god by
offering sacrifices and by celebrating games, which are said to have
been first instituted on this occasion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[362:1134](1020520.htm#fr_1133.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.2-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.2-p4"></span> Sallust, *Bell. Cat.* c. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020521.md)
