[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020432)  [Next](1020434) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.12"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—Of the Opinion of Those Who Do Not
Believe that in These Primitive Times Men Lived So Long as is
Stated.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.12-p2"></span>For they are by no means to be listened to
who suppose that in those times years were differently reckoned, and
were so short that one of our years may be supposed to be equal to ten
of theirs.  So that they say, when we read or hear that some man lived
900 years, we should understand ninety, ten of those years making but
one of ours, and ten of ours equalling 100 of theirs.  Consequently, as
they suppose, Adam was twenty-three years of age when he begat Seth, and
Seth himself was twenty years and six months old when his son Enos was
born, though the Scripture calls these months 205 years.  For, on the
hypothesis of those whose opinion we are explaining, it was customary to
divide one such year as we have into ten parts, and to call each part a
year.  And each of these parts was composed of six days squared; because
God finished His works in six days, that He might rest the seventh.  Of
this I disputed according to my ability in the eleventh book. <span
id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806)   Now six squared, or six times six,
gives thirty-six days; and this multiplied by ten amounts to <span
id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span id="iv.XV.12-Page_293"></span> 360
days, or twelve lunar months.  As for the five remaining days which are
needed to complete the solar year, and for the fourth part of a day,
which requires that into every fourth or leap-year a day be added, the
ancients added such days as the Romans used to call “intercalary,” in
order to complete the number of the years.  So that Enos, Seth’s son,
was nineteen years old when his son Cainan was born, though Scripture
calls these years 190.  And so through all the generations in which the
ages of the antediluvians are given, we find in our versions that almost
no one begat a son at the age of 100 or under, or even at the age of 120
or thereabouts; but the youngest fathers are recorded to have been 160
years old and upwards.  And the reason of this, they say, is that no one
can beget children when he is ten years old, the age spoken of by those
men as 100, but that sixteen is the age of puberty, and competent now to
propagate offspring; and this is the age called by them 160.  And that
it may not be thought incredible that in these days the year was
differently computed from our own, they adduce what is recorded by
several writers of history, that the Egyptians had a year of four
months, the Acarnanians of six, and the Lavinians of thirteen
months. <span id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807)   The younger Pliny,
after mentioning that some writers reported that one man had lived 152
years, another ten more, others 200, others 300, that some had even
reached 500 and 600, and a few 800 years of age, gave it as his opinion
that all this must be ascribed to mistaken computation.  For some, he
says, make summer and winter each a year; others make each season a
year, like the Arcadians, whose years, he says, were of three months. 
He added, too, that the Egyptians, of whose little years of four months
we have spoken already, sometimes terminated their year at the wane of
each moon; so that with them there are produced lifetimes of 1000 years.

<span id="iv.XV.12-p5"></span>By these plausible arguments certain
persons, with no desire to weaken the credit of this sacred history, but
rather to facilitate belief in it by removing the difficulty of such
incredible longevity, have been themselves persuaded, and think they act
wisely in persuading others, that in these days the year was so brief
that ten of their years equal but one of ours, while ten of ours equal
100 of theirs.  But there is the plainest evidence to show that this is
quite false.  Before producing this evidence, however, it seems right to
mention a conjecture which is yet more plausible.  From the Hebrew
manuscripts we could at once refute this confident statement; for in
them Adam is found to have lived not 230 but 130 years before he begat
his third son.  If, then, this mean thirteen years by our ordinary
computation, then he must have begotten his first son when he was only
twelve or thereabouts.  Who can at this age beget children according to
the ordinary and familiar course of nature?  But not to mention him,
since it is possible he may have been able to beget his like as soon as
he was created,—for it is not credible that he was created so little as
our infants are,—not to mention him, his son was not 205 years old when
he begot Enos, as our versions have it, but 105, and consequently,
according to this idea, was not eleven years old.  But what shall I say
of his son Cainan, who, though by our version 170 years old, was by the
Hebrew text seventy when he beget Mahalaleel?  If seventy years in those
times meant only seven of our years, what man of seven years old begets
children?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_806"></span>[292:807](1020433.htm#fr_806) <span
id="iv.XV.12-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.12-p3"></span> C. 8.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[293:808](1020433.htm#fr_807) <span
id="iv.XV.12-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.12-p4"></span> On this subject see Wilkinson’s note to
the second book (appendix) of Rawlinson’s *Herodotus*, where all
available reference are given.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020434)
