[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020564)  [Next](1020566.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.47"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.47-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.47-p1.1"></span>Chapter 47.—Whether Before Christian Times
There Were Any Outside of the Israelite Race Who Belonged to the
Fellowship of the Heavenly City.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.47-p2"></span>Wherefore if we read of any
foreigner—that is, one neither born of Israel nor received by that
people into the canon of the sacred books—having prophesied something
about Christ, if it has come or shall come to our knowledge, we can
refer to it over and above; not that this is necessary, even if wanting,
but because it is not incongruous to believe that even in other nations
there may have been <span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.47-Page_390"></span> men to whom this mystery was revealed,
and who were also impelled to proclaim it, whether they were partakers
of the same grace or had no experience of it, but were taught by bad
angels, who, as we know, even confessed the present Christ, whom the
Jews did not acknowledge.  Nor do I think the Jews themselves dare
contend that no one has belonged to God except the Israelites, since the
increase of Israel began on the rejection of his elder brother.  For in
very deed there was no other people who were specially called the people
of God; but they cannot deny that there have been certain men even of
other nations who belonged, not by earthly but heavenly fellowship, to
the true Israelites, the citizens of the country that is above. 
Because, if they deny this, they can be most easily confuted by the case
of the holy and wonderful man Job, who was neither a native nor a
proselyte, that is, a stranger joining the people of Israel, but, being
bred of the Idumean race, arose there and died there too, and who is so
praised by the divine oracle, that no man of his times is put on a level
with him as regards justice and piety.  And although we do not find his
date in the chronicles, yet from his book, which for its merit the
Israelites have received as of canonical authority, we gather that he
was in the third generation after Israel.  And I doubt not it was
divinely provided, that from this one case we might know that among
other nations also there might be men pertaining to the spiritual
Jerusalem who have lived according to God and have pleased Him.  And it
is not to be supposed that this was granted to any one, unless the one
Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, <span
id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228.md) was divinely revealed to him; who
was pre-announced to the saints of old as yet to come in the flesh, even
as He is announced to us as having come, that the self-same faith
through Him may lead all to God who are predestinated to be the city of
God, the house of God, and the temple of God.  But whatever prophecies
concerning the grace of God through Christ Jesus are quoted, they may be
thought to have been forged by the Christians.  So that there is nothing
of more weight for confuting all sorts of aliens, if they contend about
this matter, and for supporting our friends, if they are truly wise,
than to quote those divine predictions about Christ which are written in
the books of the Jews, who have been torn from their native abode and
dispersed over the whole world in order to bear this testimony, so that
the Church of Christ has everywhere increased.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[390:1229](1020565.htm#fr_1228.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.47-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.47-p3"></span> [1 Tim.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.47-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 48](1020566.md)
