[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020253)  [Next](1020255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX.7"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.7-p1"></span><span class="c45"><span
id="iv.IX.7-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—That the Platonists Maintain that
the Poets Wrong the Gods</span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IX.7-p1.2"></span>by Representing Them as Distracted by Party
Feeling, to Which the Demons and Not the Gods, are Subject.</span>

<span id="iv.IX.7-p2"></span>But if any one says that it is not of all
the demons, but only of the wicked, that the poets, not without truth,
say that they violently love or hate certain men,—for it was of them
Apuleius said that they were driven about by strong currents of
emotion,—how <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="iv.IX.7-Page_170"></span> can we accept this interpretation, when
Apuleius, in the very same connection, represents all the demons, and
not only the wicked, as intermediate between gods and men by their
aerial bodies?  The fiction of the poets, according to him, consists in
their making gods of demons, and giving them the names of gods, and
assigning them as allies or enemies to individual men, using this
poetical license, though they profess that the gods are very different
in character from the demons, and far exalted above them by their
celestial abode and wealth of beatitude.  This, I say, is the poets’
fiction, to say that these are gods who are not gods, and that, under
the names of gods, they fight among themselves about the men whom they
love or hate with keen partisan feeling.  Apuleius says that this is not
far from the truth, since, though they are wrongfully called by the
names of the gods, they are described in their own proper character as
demons.  To this category, he says, belongs the Minerva of Homer, “who
interposed in the ranks of the Greeks to restrain Achilles.” <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344)   For that this was Minerva he
supposes to be poetical fiction; for he thinks that Minerva is a
goddess, and he places her among the gods whom he believes to be all
good and blessed in the sublime ethereal region, remote from intercourse
with men.  But that there was a demon favorable to the Greeks and
adverse to the Trojans, as another, whom the same poet mentions under
the name of Venus or Mars (gods exalted above earthly affairs in their
heavenly habitations), was the Trojans’ ally and the foe of the Greeks,
and that these demons fought for those they loved against those they
hated,—in all this he owned that the poets stated something very like
the truth.  For they made these statements about beings to whom he
ascribes the same violent and tempestuous passions as disturb men, and
who are therefore capable of loves and hatreds not justly formed, but
formed in a party spirit, as the spectators in races or hunts take
fancies and prejudices.  It seems to have been the great fear of this
Platonist that the poetical fictions should be believed of the gods, and
not of the demons who bore their names.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_344"></span>[170:345](1020254.htm#fr_344) <span
id="iv.IX.7-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IX.7-p3"></span> *De Deo. Soc.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1020255)
