[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020541)  [Next](1020543) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.24"></span> <span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.24-Page_374"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—That the Seven Sages Flourished
in the Reign of Romulus, When the Ten Tribes Which Were Called Israel
Were Led into Captivity by the Chaldeans, and Romulus, When Dead, Had
Divine Honors Conferred on Him.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.24-p2"></span>While Romulus reigned, Thales the
Milesian is said to have lived, being one of the seven sages, who
succeeded the theological poets, of whom Orpheus was the most renowned,
and were called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XVIII.24-p2.1"></span>Σοφοί</span>, that is, sages.  During that
time the ten tribes, which on the division of the people were called
Israel, were conquered by the Chaldeans and led captive into their
lands, while the two tribes which were called Judah, and had the seat of
their kingdom in Jerusalem, remained in the land of Judea.  As Romulus,
when dead, could nowhere be found, the Romans, as is everywhere
notorious, placed him among the gods,—a thing which by that time had
already ceased to be done, and which was not done afterwards till the
time of the Cæsars, and then not through error, but in flattery; so that
Cicero ascribes great praises to Romulus, because he merited such honors
not in rude and unlearned times, when men were easily deceived, but in
times already polished and learned, although the subtle and acute
loquacity of the philosophers had not yet culminated.  But although the
later times did not deify dead men, still they did not cease to hold and
worship as gods those deified of old; nay, by images, which the ancients
never had, they even increased the allurements of vain and impious
superstition, the unclean demons effecting this in their heart, and also
deceiving them by lying oracles, so that even the fabulous crimes of the
gods, which were not once imagined by a more polite age, were yet basely
acted in the plays in honor of these same false deities.  Numa reigned
after Romulus; and although he had thought that Rome would be better
defended the more gods there were, yet on his death he himself was not
counted worthy of a place among them, as if it were supposed that he had
so crowded heaven that a place could not be found for him there.  They
report that the Samian sibyl lived while he reigned at Rome, and when
Manasseh began to reign over the Hebrews,—an impious king, by whom the
prophet Isaiah is said to have been slain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020543)
