[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020346)  [Next](1020348) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.8"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Of the Misdirected Love Whereby the
Will Fell Away from the Immutable to the Mutable Good.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.8-p2"></span> This I do know, that the nature of God
can never, nowhere, nowise be defective, and that natures made of
nothing can.  These latter, however, the more being they have, and the
more good they do (for then they do something positive), the more they
have efficient causes; but in so far as they are defective in being, and
consequently do evil (for then what is their work but vanity?), they
have deficient causes.  And I know likewise, that the will could not
become evil, were it unwilling to become so; and therefore its failings
are justly punished, being not necessary, but voluntary.  For its
defections are not to evil things, but are themselves evil; that is to
say, are not towards things that are naturally and in themselves evil,
but the defection of the will is evil, because it is contrary to the
order of nature, and an abandonment of that which has supreme being for
that which has less.  For avarice is not a fault inherent in gold, but
in the man who inordinately loves gold, to the detriment of justice,
which ought to be held in incomparably higher regard than gold. <span
id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span id="iv.XII.8-Page_231"></span> Neither
is luxury the fault of lovely and charming objects, but of the heart
that inordinately loves sensual pleasures, to the neglect of temperance,
which attaches us to objects more lovely in their spirituality, and more
delectable by their incorruptibility.  Nor yet is boasting the fault of
human praise, but of the soul that is inordinately fond of the applause
of men, and that makes light of the voice of conscience.  Pride, too, is
not the fault of him who delegates power, nor of power itself, but of
the soul that is inordinately enamored of its own power, and despises
the more just dominion of a higher authority.  Consequently he who
inordinately loves the good which any nature possesses, even though he
obtain it, himself becomes evil in the good, and wretched because
deprived of a greater good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020348)
