[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020427)  [Next](1020429) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.7"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.7-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—Of the Cause of Cain’s Crime and His
Obstinacy, Which Not Even the Word of God Could Subdue.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p2"></span>But though God made use of this very mode
of address which we have been endeavoring to explain, and spoke to Cain
in that form by which He was wont to accommodate Himself to our first
parents and converse with them as a companion, what good influence had
it on Cain?  Did he not fulfill his wicked intention of killing his
brother even after he was warned by God’s voice?  For when God had made
a distinction between their sacrifices, neglecting Cain’s, regarding
Abel’s, which was doubtless intimated by some visible sign to that
effect; and when God had done so because the works of the one were evil
but those of his brother good, Cain was very wroth, and his countenance
fell.  For thus it is written:  “And the Lord said unto Cain, Why are
thou wroth, and why is thy countenance fallen?  If thou offerest
rightly, but dost not rightly distinguish, hast thou not sinned?  Fret
not thyself, for unto thee shall be his turning, and thou shalt rule
over him.” <span id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784)   In this admonition
administered by God to Cain, that clause indeed, “If thou offerest
rightly, but dost not rightly distinguish, hast thou not sinned?” is
obscure, inasmuch as it is not apparent for what reason or purpose it
was spoken, and many meanings have been put upon it, as each one who
discusses it attempts to interpret it according to the rule of faith. 
The truth is, that a sacrifice is “rightly offered” when it is offered
to the true God, to whom alone we must sacrifice.  And it is “not
rightly distinguished” when we do not rightly distinguish the places or
seasons or materials of the offering, or the person offering, or the
person to whom it is presented, or those to whom it is distributed for
food after the oblation.  Distinguishing <span
id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) is here used for
discriminating,—whether when an offering is made in a place where it
ought not or of a material which ought to be offered not there but
elsewhere; or when an offering is made at a wrong time, or of a material
suitable not then but at some other time; or when that is offered which
in no place nor any time ought to be offered; or when a man keeps to
himself choicer specimens of the same kind than he offers to God; or
when he or any other who may not lawfully partake profanely eats of the
oblation.  In which of these particulars Cain displeased God, it is
difficult to determine.  But the Apostle John, speaking of these
brothers, says, “Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his
brother.  And wherefore slew he him?  Because his own works were evil,
and his brother’s righteous.” <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786)  
He thus gives us to understand that God did not respect his offering
because it was not rightly “distinguished” in this, that he gave to God
something of his own but kept himself to himself.  For this all do who
follow not God’s will but their own, who live not with an upright but a
crooked heart, and yet offer to God such gifts as they suppose will
procure from Him that He aid them not by healing but by gratifying their
evil passions.  And this is the characteristic of the earthly city, that
it worships God or gods who may aid it in reigning victoriously and
peacefully on earth not through love of doing good, but through lust of
rule.  The good use the world that they may enjoy God:  the wicked, on
the contrary, that they may enjoy the world would fain use God,—those of
them, at least, who have attained to the belief that He is and takes an
interest in human affairs.  For they who have not yet attained even to
this belief are still at a much lower level.  Cain, then, when he saw
that God had respect to his brother’s sacrifice, but not to his own,
should have humbly chosen his good brother as his example, and not
proudly counted him his rival.  But he was wroth, and his countenance
fell.  This angry regret for another person’s goodness, even his
brother’s, was charged upon him by God as a great sin.  And He accused
him of it in the interrogation, “Why are thou wroth, and why is thy
countenance fallen?”  For God saw that he envied his brother, and of
this He accused him.  For to men, from whom the heart of their fellow is
hid, it might be doubtful and quite uncertain whether that sadness
bewailed his own wickedness by which, as he had learned, he had
displeased God, or his brother’s goodness, which had pleased God, and
won His favorable regard to his sacrifice.  But God, in giving the
reason why He refused to accept Cain’s offering and why Cain should
rather have been displeased at himself than at his brother, shows him
that though he was unjust in “not rightly distinguishing,” that is, not
rightly living and being unworthy to have his offering received, he was
more unjust by far in hating his just brother without a cause.

<span id="iv.XV.7-p6"></span>Yet He does not dismiss him without
counsel, holy, just, and good.  “Fret not <span id="page_289">p.
289</span> <span id="iv.XV.7-Page_289"></span> thyself,” He says, “for
unto thee shall be his turning, and thou shall rule over him.”  Over his
brother, does He mean?  Most certainly not.  Over what, then, but sin? 
For He had said, “Thou hast sinned,” and then He added, “Fret not
thyself, for to thee shall be its turning, and thou shall rule over
it.” <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787)   And the “turning” of sin
to the man can be understood of his conviction that the guilt of sin can
be laid at no other man’s door but his own.  For this is the
health-giving medicine of penitence, and the fit plea for pardon; so
that, when it is said, “To thee its turning,” we must not supply “shall
be,” but we must read, “To thee let its turning be,” understanding it as
a command, not as a prediction.  For then shall a man rule over his sin
when he does not prefer it to himself and defend it, but subjects it by
repentance; otherwise he that becomes protector of it shall surely
become its prisoner.  But if we understand this sin to be that carnal
concupiscence of which the apostle says, “The flesh lusteth against the
spirit,” <span id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) among the fruits of
which lust he names envy, by which assuredly Cain was stung and excited
to destroy his brother, then we may properly supply the words “shall
be,” and read, “To thee shall be its turning, and thou shalt rule over
it.”  For when the carnal part which the apostle calls sin, in that
place where he says, “It is not I who do it, but sin that dwelleth in
me,” <span id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789) that part which the
philosophers also call vicious, and which ought not to lead the mind,
but which the mind ought to rule and restrain by reason from illicit
motions,—when, then, this part has been moved to perpetrate any
wickedness, if it be curbed and if it obey the word of the apostle,
“Yield not your members instruments of unrighteousness unto sin,” <span
id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790) it is turned towards the mind and
subdued and conquered by it, so that reason rules over it as a subject. 
It was this which God enjoined on him who was kindled with the fire of
envy against his brother, so that he sought to put out of the way him
whom he should have set as an example.  “Fret not thyself,” or compose
thyself, He says:  withhold thy hand from crime; let not sin reign in
your mortal body to fulfill it in the lusts thereof, nor yield your
members instruments of unrighteousness unto sin.  “For to thee shall be
its turning,” so long as you do not encourage it by giving it the rein,
but bridle it by quenching its fire.  “And thou shalt rule over it;” for
when it is not allowed any external actings, it yields itself to the
rule of the governing mind and righteous will, and ceases from even
internal motions.  There is something similar said in the same divine
book of the woman, when God questioned and judged them after their sin,
and pronounced sentence on them all,—the devil in the form of the
serpent, the woman and her husband in their own persons.  For when He
had said to her, “I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception;
in sorrow shall thou bring forth children,” then He added, “and thy
turning shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.” <span
id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791)   What is said to Cain about his sin,
or about the vicious concupiscence of his flesh, is here said of the
woman who had sinned; and we are to understand that the husband is to
rule his wife as the soul rules the flesh.  And therefore, says the
apostle, “He that loveth his wife, loveth himself; for no man ever yet
hated his own flesh.” <span id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792)   This
flesh, then, is to be healed, because it belongs to ourselves:  is not
to be abandoned to destruction as if it were alien to our nature.  But
Cain received that counsel of God in the spirit of one who did not wish
to amend.  In fact, the vice of envy grew stronger in him; and, having
entrapped his brother, he slew him.  Such was the founder of the earthly
city.  He was also a figure of the Jews who slew Christ the Shepherd of
the flock of men, prefigured by Abel the shepherd of sheep:  but as this
is an allegorical and prophetical matter, I forbear to explain it now;
besides, I remember that I have made some remarks upon it in writing
against Faustus the Manichæan. <span id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_784"></span>[288:785](1020428.htm#fr_784) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p3"></span> [Gen.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007)<span id="iv.XV.7-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[288:786](1020428.htm#fr_785) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p4"></span> Literally, “division.”

<span id="fn_786"></span>[288:787](1020428.htm#fr_786) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p5"></span> [1 John
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012)<span id="iv.XV.7-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[289:788](1020428.htm#fr_787) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p7"></span> We alter the pronoun to suit Augustin’s
interpretation.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[289:789](1020428.htm#fr_788) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p8"></span> [Gal.
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span id="iv.XV.7-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[289:790](1020428.htm#fr_789) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p9"></span> [Rom.
7.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#017)<span id="iv.XV.7-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[289:791](1020428.htm#fr_790) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p10"></span> [Rom.
6.13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span id="iv.XV.7-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[289:792](1020428.htm#fr_791) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p11"></span> [Gen.
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span id="iv.XV.7-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[289:793](1020428.htm#fr_792) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p12"></span> [Eph.
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#029)<span id="iv.XV.7-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[289:794](1020428.htm#fr_793) <span
id="iv.XV.7-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.7-p13"></span> *C. Faustum. Man.* xii. c. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1020429)
