[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020164)  [Next](1020166) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.24"></span>

<span id="iv.V.24-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.24-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—What Was the Happiness of the
Christian Emperors, and How Far It Was True Happiness.</span>

<span id="iv.V.24-p2"></span>For neither do we say that certain
Christian emperors were therefore happy because they ruled a long time,
or, dying a peaceful death, left their sons to succeed them in the
empire, or subdued the enemies of the republic, or were able both to
guard against and to suppress the attempt of hostile citizens rising
against them.  These and other gifts or comforts of this sorrowful life
even certain worshippers of demons have merited to receive, who do not
belong to the kingdom of God to <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="iv.V.24-Page_105"></span> which these belong; and this is to be
traced to the mercy of God, who would not have those who believe in Him
desire such things as the highest good.  But we say that they are happy
if they rule justly; if they are not lifted up amid the praises of those
who pay them sublime honors, and the obsequiousness of those who salute
them with an excessive humility, but remember that they are men; if they
make their power the handmaid of His majesty by using it for the
greatest possible extension of His worship; if they fear, love, worship
God; if more than their own they love that kingdom in which they are not
afraid to have partners; if they are slow to punish, ready to pardon; if
they apply that punishment as necessary to government and defence of the
republic, and not in order to gratify their own enmity; if they grant
pardon, not that iniquity may go unpunished, but with the hope that the
transgressor may amend his ways; if they compensate with the lenity of
mercy and the liberality of benevolence for whatever severity they may
be compelled to decree; if their luxury is as much restrained as it
might have been unrestrained; if they prefer to govern depraved desires
rather than any nation whatever; and if they do all these things, not
through ardent desire of empty glory, but through love of eternal
felicity, not neglecting to offer to the true God, who is their God, for
their sins, the sacrifices of humility, contrition, and prayer.  Such
Christian emperors, we say, are happy in the present time by hope, and
are destined to be so in the enjoyment of the reality itself, when that
which we wait for shall have arrived.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020166)
