[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020709)  [Next](1020711.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—How the Wisdom of God Healed
Man.</span>

<span id="v.iv.xiv-p2"></span>13.  Moreover, as the use of remedies is
the way to health, so this remedy took up sinners to heal and restore
them.  And just as surgeons, when they bind up wounds, do it not in a
slovenly way, but carefully, that there may be a certain degree of
neatness in the binding, in addition to its mere usefulness, so our
medicine, Wisdom, was by His assumption of humanity adapted to our
wounds, curing some of them by their opposites, some of them by their
likes.  And just as he who ministers to a bodily hurt in some cases
applies contraries, as cold to hot, moist to dry, etc., and in other
cases applies likes, as a round cloth to a round wound, or an oblong
cloth to an oblong wound, and does not fit the same bandage to all
limbs, but puts like to like; in the same way the Wisdom of God in
healing man has applied Himself to his cure, being Himself healer and
medicine both in one.  Seeing, then, that man fell through pride, He
restored him through humility.  We were ensnared by the wisdom of the
serpent:  we are set free by the foolishness of God.  Moreover, just as
the former was called wisdom, but was in reality the folly of those who
despised God, so the latter is called foolishness, but is true wisdom in
those who overcome the devil.  We used our immortality so badly as to
incur the penalty of death:  Christ used His mortality so well as to
restore us to life.  The disease was brought in through a woman’s
corrupted soul:  the remedy came through a woman’s virgin body.  To the
same class of opposite remedies it belongs, that our vices are cured by
the example of His virtues.  On the other hand, the following are, as it
were, bandages made in the same shape as the limbs and wounds to which
they are applied:  He was born of a woman to deliver us who fell through
a woman:  He came as a man to save us who are men, as a mortal to save
us who are mortals, by death to save us who were dead.  And those who
can follow out the matter more fully, who are not hurried on by the
necessity of carrying out a set undertaking, will find many other points
of instruction in considering the remedies, whether opposites or likes,
employed in the medicine of Christianity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1020711.md)
