[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020093)  [Next](1020095.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.21"></span>

<span id="iv.III.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Of the Ingratitude of Rome to
Scipio, Its Deliverer, and of Its Manners During the Period Which
Sallust Describes as the Best.</span>

<span id="iv.III.21-p2"></span>Omitting many things, that I may not
exceed the limits of the work I have proposed to myself, I come to the
epoch between the second and last Punic wars, during which, according to
Sallust, the Romans lived with the greatest virtue and concord.  Now, in
this period of virtue and harmony, the great Scipio, the liberator of
Rome and Italy, who had with surprising ability brought to a close the
second Punic war—that horrible, destructive, dangerous contest—who had
defeated Hannibal and subdued Carthage, and whose whole life is said to
have been dedicated to the gods, and cherished in their temples,—this
Scipio, after such a triumph, was obliged to yield to the accusations of
his enemies, and to leave his country, which his valor had saved and
liberated, to spend the remainder <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span
id="iv.III.21-Page_58"></span> of his days in the town of Liternum, so
indifferent to a recall from exile, that he is said to have given orders
that not even his remains should lie in his ungrateful country.  It was
at that time also that the pro-consul Cn. Manlius, after subduing the
Galatians, introduced into Rome the luxury of Asia, more destructive
than all hostile armies.  It was then that iron bedsteads and expensive
carpets were first used; then, too, that female singers were admitted at
banquets, and other licentious abominations were introduced.  But at
present I meant to speak, not of the evils men voluntarily practise, but
of those they suffer in spite of themselves.  So that the case of
Scipio, who succumbed to his enemies, and died in exile from the country
he had rescued, was mentioned by me as being pertinent to the present
discussion; for this was the reward he received from those Roman gods
whose temples he saved from Hannibal, and who are worshipped only for
the sake of securing temporal happiness.  But since Sallust, as we have
seen, declares that the manners of Rome were never better than at that
time, I therefore judged it right to mention the Asiatic luxury then
introduced, that it might be seen that what he says is true, only when
that period is compared with the others during which the morals were
certainly worse, and the factions more violent.  For at that time—I mean
between the second and third Punic war—that notorious Lex Voconia was
passed, which prohibited a man from making a woman, even an only
daughter, his heir; than which law I am at a loss to conceive what could
be more unjust.  It is true that in the interval between these two Punic
wars the misery of Rome was somewhat less.  Abroad, indeed, their forces
were consumed by wars, yet also consoled by victories; while at home
there were not such disturbances as at other times.  But when the last
Punic war had terminated in the utter destruction of Rome’s rival, which
quickly succumbed to the other Scipio, who thus earned for himself the
surname of Africanus, then the Roman republic was overwhelmed with such
a host of ills, which sprang from the corrupt manners induced by
prosperity and security, that the sudden overthrow of Carthage is seen
to have injured Rome more seriously than her long-continued hostility. 
During the whole subsequent period down to the time of Cæsar Augustus,
who seems to have entirely deprived the Romans of liberty,—a liberty,
indeed, which in their own judgment was no longer glorious, but full of
broils and dangers, and which now was quite enervated and
languishing,—and who submitted all things again to the will of a
monarch, and infused as it were a new life into the sickly old age of
the republic, and inaugurated a fresh *régime*;—during this whole
period, I say, many military disasters were sustained on a variety of
occasions, all of which I here pass by.  There was specially the treaty
of Numantia, blotted as it was with extreme disgrace; for the sacred
chickens, they say, flew out of the coop, and thus augured disaster to
Mancinus the consul; just as if, during all these years in which that
little city of Numantia had withstood the besieging army of Rome, and
had become a terror to the republic, the other generals had all marched
against it under unfavorable auspices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020095.md)
