[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020295)  [Next](1020297.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.25"></span>

<span id="iv.X.25-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.25-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—That All the Saints, Both Under the
Law and Before It, Were Justified by Faith in the Mystery of Christ’s
Incarnation.</span>

<span id="iv.X.25-p2"></span>It was by faith in this mystery, and
godliness of life, that purification was attainable even by the saints
of old, whether before the law was given to the Hebrews (for God and the
angels were even then present as instructors), or in the periods under
the law, although the promises of spiritual things, being presented in
figure, seemed to be carnal, and hence the name of Old Testament.  For
it was then the prophets lived, by whom, as by angels, the same promise
was announced; and among them was he whose grand and divine sentiment
regarding the end and supreme good of man I have just now quoted, “It is
good for me to cleave to God.” <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422.md)  
In this psalm the distinction between the Old and New Testaments is
distinctly announced.  For the Psalmist says, that when he saw that the
carnal and earthly promises were abundantly enjoyed by the ungodly, his
feet were almost gone, his steps had well-nigh slipped; and that it
seemed to him as if he had served God in vain, when he saw that those
who despised God increased in that prosperity which he looked for at
God’s hand.  He says, too, that, in investigating this matter with the
desire of understanding why it was so, he had labored in vain, until he
went into the sanctuary of God, and understood the end of those whom he
had erroneously considered happy.  Then he understood that they were
cast down by that very thing, as he says, which they had made their
boast, and that they had been consumed and perished for their
inequities; and <span id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span
id="iv.X.25-Page_196"></span> that that whole fabric of temporal
prosperity had become as a dream when one awaketh, and suddenly finds
himself destitute of all the joys he had imaged in sleep.  And, as in
this earth or earthy city they seemed to themselves to be great, he
says, “O Lord, in Thy city Thou wilt reduce their image to nothing.”  He
also shows how beneficial it had been for him to seek even earthly
blessings only from the one true God, in whose power are all things, for
he says, “As a beast was I before Thee, and I am always with Thee.”  “As
a beast,” he says, meaning that he was stupid.  For I ought to have
sought from Thee such things as the ungodly could not enjoy as well as
I, and not those things which I saw them enjoying in abundance, and
hence concluded I was serving Thee in vain, because they who declined to
serve Thee had what I had not.  Nevertheless, “I am always with Thee,”
because even in my desire for such things I did not pray to other gods. 
And consequently he goes on, “Thou hast holden me by my right hand, and
by Thy counsel Thou hast guided me, and with glory hast taken me up;” as
if all earthly advantages were left-hand blessings, though, when he saw
them enjoyed by the wicked, his feet had almost gone.  “For what,” he
says, “have I in heaven, and what have I desired from Thee upon earth?” 
He blames himself, and is justly displeased with himself; because,
though he had in heaven so vast a possession (as he afterwards
understood), he yet sought from his God on earth a transitory and
fleeting happiness;—a happiness of mire, we may say.  “My heart and my
flesh,” he says, “fail, O God of my heart.”  Happy failure, from things
below to things above!  And hence in another psalm He says, “My soul
longeth, yea, even faileth, for the courts of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423.md)   Yet, though he had said of both his
heart and his flesh that they were failing, he did not say, O God of my
heart and my flesh, but, O God of my heart; for by the heart the flesh
is made clean.  Therefore, says the Lord, “Cleanse that which is within,
and the outside shall be clean also.” <span
id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424.md)   He then says that God Himself,—not
anything received from Him, but Himself,—is his portion.  “The God of my
heart, and my portion for ever.”  Among the various objects of human
choice, God alone satisfied him.  “For, lo,” he says, “they that are far
from Thee shall perish:  Thou destroyest all them that go a-whoring from
Thee,”—that is, who prostitute themselves to many gods.  And then
follows the verse for which all the rest of the psalm seems to prepare: 
“It is good for me to cleave to God,”—not to go far off; not to go
a-whoring with a multitude of gods.  And then shall this union with God
be perfected, when all that is to be redeemed in us has been redeemed. 
But for the present we must, as he goes on to say, “place our hope in
God.”  “For that which is seen,” says the apostle, “is not hope.  For
what a man sees, why does he yet hope for?  But if we hope for that we
see not, then do we with patience wait for it.” <span
id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425.md)   Being, then, for the present
established in this hope, let us do what the Psalmist further indicates,
and become in our measure angels or messengers of God, declaring His
will, and praising His glory and His grace.  For when he had said, “To
place my hope in God,” he goes on, “that I may declare all Thy praises
in the gates of the daughter of Zion.”  This is the most glorious city
of God; this is the city which knows and worships one God:  she is
celebrated by the holy angels, who invite us to their society, and
desire us to become fellow-citizens with them in this city; for they do
not wish us to worship them as our gods, but to join them in worshipping
their God and ours; nor to sacrifice to them, but, together with them,
to become a sacrifice to God.  Accordingly, whoever will lay aside
malignant obstinacy, and consider these things, shall be assured that
all these blessed and immortal spirits, who do not envy us (for if they
envied they were not blessed), but rather love us, and desire us to be
as blessed as themselves, look on us with greater pleasure, and give us
greater assistance, when we join them in worshipping one God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, than if we were to offer to themselves sacrifice
and worship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_422"></span>[195:423](1020296.htm#fr_422.md) <span
id="iv.X.25-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.25-p3"></span> [Ps.
73.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.X.25-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[196:424](1020296.htm#fr_423.md) <span
id="iv.X.25-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.25-p4"></span> [Ps.
84.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.X.25-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[196:425](1020296.htm#fr_424.md) <span
id="iv.X.25-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.25-p5"></span> [Matt.
23.26](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#026.md)<span id="iv.X.25-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[196:426](1020296.htm#fr_425.md) <span
id="iv.X.25-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.25-p6"></span> [Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.X.25-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020297.md)
