[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020542)  [Next](1020544) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.25"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.25-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.25-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—What Philosophers Were Famous
When Tarquinius Priscus Reigned Over the Romans, and Zedekiah Over the
Hebrews, When Jerusalem Was Taken and the Temple Overthrown.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.25-p2"></span>When Zedekiah reigned over the Hebrews,
and Tarquinius Priscus, the successor of Ancus Martius, over the Romans,
the Jewish people was led captive into Babylon, Jerusalem and the temple
built by Solomon being overthrown.  For the prophets, in chiding them
for their iniquity and impiety, predicted that these things should come
to pass, especially Jeremiah, who even stated the number of years. 
Pittacus of Mitylene, another of the sages, is reported to have lived at
that time.  And Eusebius writes that, while the people of God were held
captive in Babylon, the five other sages lived, who must be added to
Thales, whom we mentioned above, and Pittacus, in order to make up the
seven.  These are Solon of Athens, Chilo of Lacedæmon, Periander of
Corinth, Cleobulus of Lindus, and Bias of Priene.  These flourished
after the theological poets, and were called sages, because they
excelled other men in a certain laudable line of life, and summed up
some moral precepts in epigrammatic sayings.  But they left posterity no
literary monuments, except that Solon is alleged to have given certain
laws to the Athenians, and Thales was a natural philosopher, and left
books of his doctrine in short proverbs.  In that time of the Jewish
captivity, Anaximander, Anaximenes, and Xenophanes, the natural
philosophers, flourished.  Pythagoras also lived then, and at this time
the name philosopher was first used.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020544)
