[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020209)  [Next](1020211.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.27"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.27-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.27-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Concerning the Figments of the
Physical Theologists, Who Neither Worship the True Divinity, Nor Perform
the Worship Wherewith the True Divinity Should Be Served.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.27-p2"></span>We see that these select gods have,
indeed, become more famous than the rest; not, however, that their
merits may be brought to light, but that their opprobrious deeds may not
be hid.  Whence it is more credible that they were men, as not only
poetic but also historical literature has handed down.  For this which
Virgil says,

<span id="iv.VII.27-p3"></span>“Then from Olympus’ heights came down

<span id="iv.VII.27-p4"></span>Good Saturn, exiled from his throne

<span id="iv.VII.27-p5"></span>By Jove, his mightier heir;” <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290.md)

<span id="iv.VII.27-p7"></span>and what follows with reference to this
affair, is fully related by the historian Euhemerus, and has been
translated into Latin by Ennius.  And as they who have written before us
in the Greek or in the Latin tongue against such errors as these have
said much concerning this matter, I have thought it unnecessary to dwell
upon it.  When I consider those physical reasons, then, by which learned
and acute men attempt to turn human things into divine things, all I see
is that they have been able to refer these things only to temporal works
and to that which has a corporeal nature, and even though invisible
still mutable; and this is by no means the true God.  But if this
worship had been performed as the symbolism of ideas at least congruous
with religion, though it would indeed have been cause of grief that the
true God was not announced and proclaimed by its symbolism, nevertheless
it could have been in some degree borne with, when it did not occasion
and command the performance of such foul and abominable things.  But
since it is impiety to worship the body or the soul for the true God, by
whose indwelling alone the soul is happy, how much more impious is it to
worship those things through which neither soul nor body can obtain
either salvation or human honor?  Wherefore if with temple, priest, and
sacrifice, which are due to the true God, any element of the world be
worshipped, or any created spirit, even though not impure and evil, that
worship is still evil, not because the things are evil by which the
worship is performed, but because those things ought only to be used in
the worship of Him to whom alone such worship and service are due.  But
if any one insist that he worships the one true God,—that is, the
Creator of every soul and of every body,—with stupid and monstrous
idols, with human victims, with putting a wreath on the male organ, with
the wages of unchastity, with the cutting of limbs, with emasculation,
with the consecration of effeminates, with impure and obscene plays,
such a one does not sin because he worships One who ought not to be
worshipped, but because he worships Him who ought to be worshipped in a
way in which He ought not to be worshipped.  But he who worships with
such things,—that is, foul and obscene things,—and that not the true
God, namely, the maker of soul and body, but a creature, even though not
a wicked creature, whether it be soul or body, or soul and body
together, twice sins against God, because he both worships for God what
is not God, and also worships with such things as neither God nor what
is not God ought to be worshipped with.  It is, indeed, manifest how
these pagans worship,—that is, how shamefully and criminally they
worship; but what or whom they worship would have been left in
obscurity, had not their history testi <span id="page_139">p. 139</span>
<span id="iv.VII.27-Page_139"></span> fied that those same confessedly
base and foul rites were rendered in obedience to the demands of the
gods, who exacted them with terrible severity.  Wherefore it is evident
beyond doubt that this whole civil theology is occupied in inventing
means for attracting wicked and most impure spirits, inviting them to
visit senseless images, and through these to take possession of stupid
hearts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_290"></span>[138:291](1020210.htm#fr_290.md) <span
id="iv.VII.27-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.27-p6"></span> Virgil, *Æneid,* viii. 319–20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1020211.md)
