[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020201)  [Next](1020203.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.19"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.19-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.19-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Concerning the Interpretations
Which Compose the Reason of the Worship of Saturn.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.19-p2"></span>They said, says Varro, that Saturn was
wont to devour all that sprang from him, because seeds returned to the
earth from whence they sprang.  And when it is said that a lump of earth
was put before Saturn to be devoured instead of Jupiter, it is
signified, he says, that before the art of ploughing was discovered,
seeds were buried in the earth by the hands of men.  The earth itself,
then, and not seeds, should have been called Saturn, because it in a
manner devours what it has brought forth, when the seeds which have
sprung from it return again into it.  And what has Saturn’s receiving of
a lump of earth instead of Jupiter to do with this, that the seeds were
covered in the soil by the hands of men?  Was the seed kept from being
devoured, like other things, by being covered with the soil?  For what
they say would imply that he who put on the soil took away the seed, as
Jupiter is said to have been taken away when the lump of soil was
offered to Saturn instead of him, and not rather that the soil, by
covering the seed, only caused it to be devoured the more eagerly. 
Then, in that way, Jupiter is the seed, and not the cause of the seed,
as was said a little before.

<span id="iv.VII.19-p3"></span>But what shall men do who cannot find
anything wise to say, because they are interpreting foolish things? 
Saturn has a pruning-knife.  That, says Varro, is on account of
agriculture.  Certainly in Saturn’s reign there as yet existed no
agriculture, and therefore the former times of Saturn are spoken of,
because, as the same Varro interprets the fables, the primeval men lived
on those seeds which the earth produced spontaneously.  Perhaps he
received a pruning-knife when he had lost his sceptre; that he who had
been a king, and lived at ease during the first part of his time, should
become a laborious workman whilst his son occupied the throne.  Then he
says that boys were wont to be immolated to him by certain peoples, the
Carthaginians for instance; and also that adults were immolated by some
nations, for example the Gauls—because, of all seeds, the human race is
the best.  What need we say more concerning this most cruel vanity.  Let
us rather attend to and hold by this, that these interpretations are not
carried up to the true God,—a living, incorporeal, unchangeable nature,
from whom a blessed life enduring for ever may be obtained,—but that
they end in things which are corporeal, temporal, mutable, and mortal. 
And whereas it is said in the fables that Saturn castrated his father
Cœlus, this signifies, says Varro, that the divine seed belongs to
Saturn, and not to Cœlus; for this reason, as far as a reason can be
discovered, namely, that in heaven <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278.md) nothing is born from seed.  But, lo! 
Saturn, if he is the son of Cœlus, is the son of Jupiter.  For they
affirm times without number, and that emphatically, that the
heavens <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md) are Jupiter.  Thus those
things which come not of the truth, do very often, without being
impelled by any one, themselves overthrow one another.  He says that
Saturn was called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.VII.19-p5.1"></span>Κρονος</span>, which in the Greek tongue
signifies a space of time, <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md)
because, without that, seed cannot be productive.  These and many other
things are said concerning Saturn, and they are all referred to seed. 
But Saturn surely, with all that great power, might have sufficed for
seed.  Why are other gods demanded for it, especially Liber and Libera,
that is, Ceres?—concerning whom again, as far as seed is concerned, he
says as many things as if he had said nothing concerning Saturn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_278"></span>[133:279](1020202.htm#fr_278.md) <span
id="iv.VII.19-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.19-p4"></span> *Cælo.*

<span id="fn_279"></span>[133:280](1020202.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="iv.VII.19-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.19-p5"></span> *Cælum.*

<span id="fn_280"></span>[133:281](1020202.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="iv.VII.19-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.19-p6"></span> Sc. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.VII.19-p6.1"></span>Χρόνος</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020203.md)
