[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020364)  [Next](1020366) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XII.26"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XII.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—Of that Opinion of the
Platonists, that the Angels Were Themselves Indeed Created by God, But
that Afterwards They Created Man’s Body.</span>

<span id="iv.XII.26-p2"></span>It is obvious, that in attributing the
creation of the other animals to those inferior gods who were made by
the Supreme, he meant it to be understood that the immortal part was
taken from God Himself, and that these minor creators added the mortal
part; that is to say, he meant them to be considered the creators of our
bodies, but not of our souls.  But since Porphyry maintains that if the
soul is to be purified all entanglement with a body must be escaped
from; and at the same time agrees with Plato and the Platonistsin
thinking that those who have not spent a temperate and honorable life
return to mortal bodies as their punishment (to bodies of brutes in
Plato’s opinion, to human bodies in Porphyry’s); it follows that those
whom they would have us worship as our parents and authors, that they
may plausibly call them gods, are, after all, but the forgers of our
fetters and chains,—not our creators, but our jailers and turnkeys, who
lock us up in the most bitter and melancholy house of correction.  Let
the Platonists, then, either cease menacing us with our bodies as the
punishment of our souls, or preaching that we are to worship as gods
those whose work upon us they exhort us by all means in our power to
avoid and escape from.  But, indeed, both opinions are quite false.  It
is false that souls return again to this life to be punished; and it is
false that there is any other creator of anything in heaven or earth,
than He who made the heaven and the earth.  For if we live in a body
only to expiate our sins, how says Plato in another place, that the
world could not have been the most beautiful and good, had it not been
filled with all kinds of creatures, mortal and immortal? <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574)   But if our creation even as mortals
be a divine benefit, how is it a punishment to be restored to a body,
that is, to a divine benefit?  And if God, as Plato continually
maintains, embraced in His eternal intelligence the ideas both of the
universe and of all the animals, how, then, should He not with His own
hand make them all?  Could He be unwilling to be the constructor of
works, the idea and plan of which called for His ineffable and ineffably
to be praised intelligence?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_574"></span>[243:575](1020365.htm#fr_574) <span
id="iv.XII.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XII.26-p3"></span> The deity, desirous of making the
universe in all respects resemble the most beautiful and entirely
perfect of intelligible objects, formed it into one visible animal,
containing within itself all the other animals with which it is
naturally allied.—*Timæus*, c. xi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020366)
