[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020298)  [Next](1020300) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.28"></span>

<span id="iv.X.28-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.28-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—How It is that Porphyry Has Been So
Blind as Not to Recognize the True Wisdom—Christ.</span>

<span id="iv.X.28-p2"></span>You drive men, therefore, into the most
palpable error.  And yet you are not ashamed of doing so much harm,
though you call yourself a lover of virtue and wisdom.  Had you been
true and faithful in this profession, you would have recognized Christ,
the virtue of God and the wisdom of God, and would not, in the pride of
vain science, have revolted from His wholesome humility.  Nevertheless
you acknowledge that the spiritual part of the soul can be purified by
the virtue of chastity without the aid of those theurgic arts and
mysteries which you wasted your time in learning.  You even say,
sometimes, that these mysteries do not raise the soul after death, so
that, after the termination of this life, they seem to be of no service
even to the part you call spiritual; and yet you recur on every
opportunity to these arts, for no other purpose, so far as I see, than
to appear an accomplished theurgist, and gratify those who are curious
in illicit arts, or else to inspire others with the same curiosity.  But
we give you all praise for saying that this art is to be feared, both on
account of the legal enactments against it, and by reason of the danger
involved in the very practice of it.  And would that in this, at least,
you were listened to by its wretched votaries, that they might be
withdrawn from entire absorption in it, or might even be preserved from
tampering with it at all!  You say, indeed, that ignorance, and the
numberless vices resulting from it, cannot be removed by any mysteries,
but only by the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.28-p2.1"></span>πατρικὸς νοῦς</span>, that is, the Father’s
mind or intellect conscious of the Father’s will.  But that Christ is
this mind you do not believe; for Him you despise on account of the body
He took of a woman and the shame of the cross; for your lofty wisdom
spurns such low and contemptible things, and soars to more exalted
regions.  But He fulfills what the holy prophets truly predicted
regarding Him:  “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to
nought the prudence of the prudent.” <span
id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428)   For He does not destroy and bring to
nought His own gift in them, but what they arrogate to themselves, and
do not hold of Him.  And hence the apostle, having quoted this testimony
from the prophet, adds, “Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where
is the disputer of this world?  Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of
this world?  For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom
knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe.  For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek
after wisdom; but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a
stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which
are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God.  Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and
the weakness of God is stronger <span id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="iv.X.28-Page_199"></span> than men.” <span
id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429)   This is despised as a weak and
foolish thing by those who are wise and strong in themselves; yet this
is the grace which heals the weak, who do not proudly boast a
blessedness of their own, but rather humbly acknowledge their real
misery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_428"></span>[198:429](1020299.htm#fr_428) <span
id="iv.X.28-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.28-p3"></span> [Isa.
29.14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)<span id="iv.X.28-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[199:430](1020299.htm#fr_429) <span
id="iv.X.28-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.28-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
1.19-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019)<span
id="iv.X.28-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](1020300)
