[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020092)  [Next](1020094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.20"></span>

<span id="iv.III.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Of the Destruction of the
Saguntines, Who Received No Help from the Roman Gods, Though Perishing
on Account of Their Fidelity to Rome.</span>

<span id="iv.III.20-p2"></span>But among all the disasters of the second
Punic war, there occurred none more lamentable, or calculated to excite
deeper complaint, than the fate of the Saguntines.  This city of Spain,
eminently friendly to Rome, was destroyed by its fidelity to the Roman
people.  For when Hannibal had broken treaty with the Romans, he sought
occasion for provoking them to war, and accordingly made a fierce
assault upon Saguntum.  When this was reported at Rome, ambassadors were
sent to Hannibal, urging him to raise the siege; and when this
remonstrance was neglected, they proceeded to Carthage, lodged complaint
against the breaking of the treaty, and returned <span id="page_57">p.
57</span> <span id="iv.III.20-Page_57"></span> to Rome without
accomplishing their object.  Meanwhile the siege went on; and in the
eighth or ninth month, this opulent but ill-fated city, dear as it was
to its own state and to Rome, was taken, and subjected to treatment
which one cannot read, much less narrate, without horror.  And yet,
because it bears directly on the matter in hand, I will briefly touch
upon it.  First, then, famine wasted the Saguntines, so that even human
corpses were eaten by some:  so at least it is recorded.  Subsequently,
when thoroughly worn out, that they might at least escape the ignominy
of falling into the hands of Hannibal, they publicly erected a huge
funeral pile, and cast themselves into its flames, while at the same
time they slew their children and themselves with the sword.  Could
these gods, these debauchees and gourmands, whose mouths water for fat
sacrifices, and whose lips utter lying divinations,—could they not do
anything in a case like this?  Could they not interfere for the
preservation of a city closely allied to the Roman people, or prevent it
perishing for its fidelity to that alliance of which they themselves had
been the mediators?  Saguntum, faithfully keeping the treaty it had
entered into before these gods, and to which it had firmly bound itself
by an oath, was besieged, taken, and destroyed by a perjured person.  If
afterwards, when Hannibal was close to the walls of Rome, it was the
gods who terrified him with lightning and tempest, and drove him to a
distance, why, I ask, did they not thus interfere before?  For I make
bold to say, that this demonstration with the tempest would have been
more honorably made in defence of the allies of Rome—who were in danger
on account of their reluctance to break faith with the Romans, and had
no resources of their own—than in defence of the Romans themselves, who
were fighting in their own cause, and had abundant resources to oppose
Hannibal.  If, then, they had been the guardians of Roman prosperity and
glory, they would have preserved that glory from the stain of this
Saguntine disaster; and how silly it is to believe that Rome was
preserved from destruction at the hands of Hannibal by the guardian care
of those gods who were unable to rescue the city of Saguntum from
perishing through its fidelity to the alliance of Rome.  If the
population of Saguntum had been Christian, and had suffered as it did
for the Christian faith (though, of course, Christians would not have
used fire and sword against their own persons), they would have suffered
with that hope which springs from faith in Christ—the hope not of a
brief temporal reward, but of unending and eternal bliss.  What, then,
will the advocates and apologists of these gods say in their defence,
when charged with the blood of these Saguntines; for they are
professedly worshipped and invoked for this very purpose of securing
prosperity in this fleeting and transitory life?  Can anything be said
but what was alleged in the case of Regulus’ death?  For though there is
a difference between the two cases, the one being an individual, the
other a whole community, yet the cause of destruction was in both cases
the keeping of their plighted troth.  For it was this which made Regulus
willing to return to his enemies, and this which made the Saguntines
unwilling to revolt to their enemies.  Does, then, the keeping of faith
provoke the gods to anger?  Or is it possible that not only individuals,
but even entire communities, perish while the gods are propitious to
them?  Let our adversaries choose which alternative they will.  If, on
the one hand, those gods are enraged at the keeping of faith, let them
enlist perjured persons as their worshippers.  If, on the other hand,
men and states can suffer great and terrible calamities, and at last
perish while favored by the gods, then does their worship not produce
happiness as its fruit.  Let those, therefore, who suppose that they
have fallen into distress because their religious worship has been
abolished, lay aside their anger; for it were quite possible that did
the gods not only remain with them, but regard them with favor, they
might yet be left to mourn an unhappy lot, or might, even like Regulus
and the Saguntines, be horribly tormented, and at last perish miserably.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020094.md)
