[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020187)  [Next](1020189) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.5"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Concerning the More Secret Doctrine
of the Pagans, and Concerning the Physical Interpretations.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.5-p2"></span>But let us hear their own physical
interpretations by which they attempt to color, as with the appearance
of profounder doctrine, the baseness of most miserable error.  Varro, in
the first place, commends these interpretations so strongly as to say,
that the ancients invented the images, badges, and adornments of the
gods, in order that when those who went to the mysteries should see them
with their bodily eyes, they might with the eyes of their mind see the
soul of the world, and its parts, that is, the true gods; and also that
the meaning which was intended by those who made their images with the
human form, seemed to be this,—namely, that the mind of mortals, which
is in a human body, is very like to the immortal mind, <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) just as vessels might be placed to
represent the gods, as, for instance, a wine-vessel might be placed in
the temple of Liber, to signify wine, that which is contained being
signified by that which contains.  Thus by an image which had the human
form the rational soul was signified, because the human form is the
vessel, as it were, in which that nature is wont to be contained which
they <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="iv.VII.5-Page_126"></span> attribute to God, or to the gods.  These
are the mysteries of doctrine to which that most learned man penetrated
in order that he might bring them forth to the light.  But, O thou most
acute man, hast thou lost among those mysteries that prudence which led
thee to form the sober opinion, that those who first established those
images for the people took away fear from the citizens and added error,
and that the ancient Romans honored the gods more chastely without
images?  For it was through consideration of them that thou wast
emboldened to speak these things against the later Romans.  For if those
most ancient Romans also had worshipped images, perhaps thou wouldst
have suppressed by the silence of fear all those sentiments (true
sentiments, nevertheless) concerning the folly of setting up images, and
wouldst have extolled more loftily, and more loquaciously, those
mysterious doctrines consisting of these vain and pernicious fictions. 
Thy soul, so learned and so clever (and for this I grieve much for
thee), could never through these mysteries have reached its God; that
is, the God by whom, not with whom, it was made, of whom it is not a
part, but a work,—that God who is not the soul of all things, but who
made every soul, and in whose light alone every soul is blessed, if it
be not ungrateful for His grace.

<span id="iv.VII.5-p4"></span>But the things which follow in this book
will show what is the nature of these mysteries, and what value is to be
set upon them.  Meanwhile, this most learned man confesses as his
opinion that the soul of the world and its parts are the true gods, from
which we perceive that his theology (to wit, that same natural theology
to which he pays great regard) has been able, in its completeness, to
extend itself even to the nature of the rational soul.  For in this book
(concerning the select gods) he says a very few things by anticipation
concerning the natural theology; and we shall see whether he has been
able in that book, by means of physical interpretations, to refer to
this natural theology that civil theology, concerning which he wrote
last when treating of the select gods.  Now, if he has been able to do
this, the whole is natural; and in that case, what need was there for
distinguishing so carefully the civil from the natural?  But if it has
been distinguished by a veritable distinction, then, since not even this
natural theology with which he is so much pleased is true (for though it
has reached as far as the soul, it has not reached to the true God who
made the soul), how much more contemptible and false is that civil
theology which is chiefly occupied about what is corporeal, as will be
shown by its very interpretations, which they have with such diligence
sought out and enucleated, some of which I must necessarily mention!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_263"></span>[125:264](1020188.htm#fr_263) <span
id="iv.VII.5-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.5-p3"></span> Cicero, *Tusc. Quæst.* v. 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020189)
