[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020603)  [Next](1020605.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—That in the Mingled Web of Human
Affairs God’s Judgment is Present, Though It Cannot Be Discerned.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.2-p2"></span>In this present time we learn to bear with
equanimity the ills to which even good men are subject, and to hold
cheap the blessings which even the wicked enjoy.  And consequently, even
in those conditions of life in which the justice of God is not apparent,
His teaching is salutary.  For we do not know by what judgment of God
this good man is poor and that bad man rich; why he who, in our opinion,
ought to suffer acutely for his abandoned life enjoys himself, while
sorrow pursues him whose praiseworthy life leads us to suppose he should
be happy; why the innocent man is dismissed from the bar not only
unavenged, but even condemned, being either wronged by the iniquity of
the judge, or overwhelmed by false evidence, while his guilty adversary,
on the other hand, is not only discharged with impunity, but even has
his claims admitted; why the ungodly enjoys good health, while the godly
pines in sickness; why ruffians are of the soundest constitution, while
they who could not hurt any one even with a word are from infancy
afflicted with complicated disorders; why he who is useful to society is
cut off by premature death, while those who, as it might seem, ought
never to have been so much as born have lives of unusual length; why he
who is full of crimes is crowned with honors, while the blameless man is
buried in the darkness of neglect.  But who can collect or enumerate all
the contrasts of this kind?  But if this anomalous state of things were
uniform in this life, in which, as the sacred Psalmist says, “Man is
like to vanity, his days as a shadow that passeth away,” <span
id="fr_1315"></span>[1316](#fn_1315.md) —so uniform that none but wicked
men won the transitory prosperity of earth, while only the good suffered
its ills,—this could be referred to the just and even benign judgment of
God.  We might suppose that they who were not destined to obtain those
everlasting benefits which constitute human blessedness were either
deluded by transitory blessings as the just reward of their wickedness,
or were, in God’s mercy, consoled by them, and that they who were not
destined to suffer eternal torments were afflicted with temporal
chastisement for their sins, or were stimulated to greater attainment in
virtue.  But now, as it is, since we not only see good men involved in
the ills of life, and bad men enjoying the good of it, which seems
unjust, but also that evil often overtakes evil men, and good surprises
the good, the rather on this account are God’s judgments unsearchable,
and His ways past finding out.  Although, therefore, we do not know by
what judgment these things are done or permitted to be done by God, with
whom is the highest virtue, the highest wisdom, the highest justice, no
infirmity, no rashness, no unrighteousness, yet it is salutary for us to
learn to hold cheap such things, be they good or evil, as attach
indifferently to good men and bad, and to covet those good things which
belong only to good men, and flee those evils which belong only to evil
men.  But when we shall have come to that judgment, the date of which is
called peculiarly the day of judgment, and sometimes the day of the
Lord, we shall then recognize the justice of all God’s judgments, not
only of such as shall then be pronounced, but, of all which take effect
from the beginning, or may take effect before that time.  And in that
day we shall also recognize with what justice so many, or almost all,
the just judgments of God in the present life defy the scrutiny of human
sense or insight, though in this matter it is not concealed from pious
minds that what is concealed is just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[422:1316](1020604.htm#fr_1315.md) <span
id="iv.XX.2-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.2-p3"></span> [Ps.
144.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.XX.2-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020605.md)
