[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020331)  [Next](1020333.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.28"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.28-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.28-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—Whether We Ought to Love the Love
Itself with Which We Love Our Existence and Our Knowledge of It, that So
We May More Nearly Resemble the Image of the Divine Trinity.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.28-p2"></span>We have said as much as the scope of this
work demands regarding these two things, to wit, our existence, and our
knowledge of it, and how much they are loved by us, and how there is
found even in the lower creatures a kind of likeness of these things,
and yet with a difference.  We have yet to speak of the love wherewith
they are loved, to determine whether this love itself is loved.  And
doubtless it is; and this is the proof.  Because in men who are justly
loved, it is rather love itself that is loved; for he is not justly
called a good man who knows what is good, but who loves it.  Is it not
then obvious that we love in ourselves the very love wherewith we love
whatever good we love?  For there is also a love wherewith we love that
which we ought not to love; and this love is hated by him who loves that
wherewith he loves what ought to be loved.  For it is quite possible for
both to exist in one man.  And this co-existence is good for a man, to
the end that this love which conduces to our living well may grow, and
the other, which leads us to evil may decrease, until our whole life be
perfectly healed and transmuted into good.  For if we were beasts, we
should love the fleshly and sensual life, and this would be our
sufficient good; and when it was well with us in respect of it, we
should seek nothing beyond.  In like manner, if we were trees, we could
not, indeed, in the strict sense of the word, love anything;
nevertheless we should seem, as it were, to long for that by which we
might become more abundantly and luxuriantly fruitful.  If we were
stones, or waves, or wind, or flame, or anything of that kind, we should
want, indeed, both sensation and life, yet should possess a kind of
attraction towards our own proper position and natural order.  For the
specific gravity of bodies is, as it were, their love, whether they are
carried downwards by their weight, or upwards by their levity.  For the
body is borne by its gravity, as the spirit by love, whithersoever it is
borne. <span id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498.md)   But we are men, created
in the image of our Creator, whose eternity is true, and whose truth is
eternal, whose love is eternal and true, and who Himself is the eternal,
true, and adorable Trinity, without confusion, without separation; and,
therefore, while, as we run over all the works which He has established,
we may detect, as it were, His footprints, now more and now less
distinct even in those things that are beneath us, since they could not
so much as exist, or be bodied forth in any shape, or follow and observe
any law, had they not been made by Him who supremely is, and is
supremely good and supremely wise; yet in ourselves beholding His image,
let us, like that younger son of the gospel, come to ourselves, and
arise and return to Him from whom by our sin we had departed.  There our
being will have no death, our knowledge no error, our love no mishap. 
But now, though we are assured of our possession of these three things,
not on the testimony of others, but by our own consciousness of their
presence, and because we see them with our own most truthful interior
vision, yet, as we cannot of our <span id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span
id="iv.XI.28-Page_222"></span> selves know how long they are to
continue, and whether they shall never cease to be, and what issue their
good or bad use will lead to, we seek for others who can acquaint us of
these things, if we have not already found them.  Of the trustworthiness
of these witnesses, there will, not now, but subsequently, be an
opportunity of speaking.  But in this book let us go on as we have
begun, with God’s help, to speak of the city of God, not in its state of
pilgrimage and mortality, but as it exists ever immortal in the
heavens,—that is, let us speak of the holy angels who maintain their
allegiance to God, who never were, nor ever shall be, apostate, between
whom and those who forsook light eternal and became darkness, God, as we
have already said, made at the first a separation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_498"></span>[221:499](1020332.htm#fr_498.md) <span
id="iv.XI.28-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.28-p3"></span> Compare the *Confessions,* xiii. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](1020333.md)
