[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020037)  [Next](1020039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxiii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 32.—Of the Establishment of Scenic
Entertainments.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxiii-p2"></span>Know then, ye who are ignorant of
this, and ye who feign ignorance be reminded, while you murmur against
Him who has freed you from such rulers, that the scenic games,
exhibitions of shameless folly and license, were established at Rome,
not by men’s vicious cravings, but by the appointment of your gods. 
Much more pardonably might you have rendered divine honors to Scipio
than to such gods as these.  The gods were not so moral as their
pontiff.  But give me now your attention, if your mind, inebriated by
its deep potations of error, can take in any sober truth.  The gods
enjoined that games be exhibited in their honor to stay a physical
pestilence; their pontiff prohibited the theatre from being constructed,
to prevent a moral pestilence.  If, then, there remains in you
sufficient mental enlightenment to prefer the soul to the body, choose
whom you will worship.  Besides, though the pestilence was stayed, this
was not because the voluptuous madness of stage-plays had taken
possession of a warlike people hitherto accustomed only to the games of
the circus; but these astute and wicked spirits, foreseeing that in due
course the pestilence would shortly cease, took occasion to infect, not
the bodies, but the morals of their worshippers, with a far more serious
disease.  And in this pestilence these gods <span id="page_21">p.
21</span> <span id="iv.ii.xxxiii-Page_21"></span> find great enjoyment,
because it benighted the minds of men with so gross a darkness and
dishonored them with so foul a deformity, that even quite recently (will
posterity be able to credit it?) some of those who fled from the sack of
Rome and found refuge in Carthage, were so infected with this disease,
that day after day they seemed to contend with one another who should
most madly run after the actors in the theatres.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](1020039)
