[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020843)  [Next](1020845) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.IV_1.26"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.IV_1.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—In Every Style the Orator Should
Aim at Perspicuity, Beauty, and Persuasiveness.</span>

<span id="v.IV_1.26-p2"></span>55.  Now in regard to the three
conditions I laid down a little while ago <span
id="fr_2006"></span>[2007](#fn_2006) as necessary to be fulfilled by any
one who wishes to speak with wisdom and eloquence, viz., perspicuity,
beauty of style, and persuasive power, we are not to understand that
these three qualities attach themselves respectively to the three
several styles of speech, one to each, so that perspicuity is a merit
peculiar to the subdued style, beauty to the temperate, and persuasive
power to the majestic.  On the contrary, all speech, whatever its style,
ought constantly to aim at, and as far as possible to display, all these
three merits.  For we do not like even what we say in the subdued style
to pall upon the hearer; and therefore we would be listened to, not with
intelligence merely, but with pleasure as well.  Again, why do we
enforce what we teach by divine testimony, except that we wish to carry
the hearer with us, that is, to com <span id="page_595">p. 595</span>
<span id="v.IV_1.26-Page_595"></span> pel his assent by calling in the
assistance of Him of whom it is said, “Thy testimonies are very
sure”? <span id="fr_2007"></span>[2008](#fn_2007)   And when any one
narrates a story, even in the subdued style, what does he wish but to be
believed?  But who will listen to him if he do not arrest attention by
some beauty of style?  And if he be not intelligible, is it not plain
that he can neither give pleasure nor enforce conviction?  The subdued
style, again, in its own naked simplicity, when it unravels questions of
very great difficulty, and throws an unexpected light upon them; when it
worms out and brings to light some very acute observations from a
quarter whence nothing was expected; when it seizes upon and exposes the
falsity of an opposing opinion, which seemed at its first statement to
be unassailable; especially when all this is accompanied by a natural,
unsought grace of expression, and by a rhythm and balance of style which
is not ostentatiously obtruded, but seems rather to be called forth by
the nature of the subject: this style, so used, frequently calls forth
applause so great that one can hardly believe it to be the subdued
style.  For the fact that it comes forth without either ornament or
defense, and offers battle in its own naked simplicity, does not hinder
it from crushing its adversary by weight of nerve and muscle, and
overwhelming and destroying the falsehood that opposes it by the mere
strength of its own right arm.  How explain the frequent and vehement
applause that waits upon men who speak thus, except by the pleasure that
truth so irresistibly established, and so victoriously defended,
naturally affords?  Wherefore the Christian teacher and speaker ought,
when he uses the subdued style, to endeavor not only to be clear and
intelligible, but to give pleasure and to bring home conviction to the
hearer.

<span id="v.IV_1.26-p5"></span>57.  Eloquence of the temperate style,
also, must, in the case of the Christian orator, be neither altogether
without ornament, nor unsuitably adorned, nor is it to make the giving
of pleasure its sole aim, which is all it professes to accomplish in the
hands of others; but in its encomiums and censures it should aim at
inducing the hearer to strive after or avoid or renounce what it
condemns.  On the other hand, without perspicuity this style cannot give
pleasure.  And so the three qualities, perspicuity, beauty, and
persuasiveness, are to be sought in this style also; beauty, of course,
being its primary object.

<span id="v.IV_1.26-p6"></span>58.  Again, when it becomes necessary to
stir and sway the hearer’s mind by the majestic style (and this is
always necessary when he admits that what you say is both true and
agreeable, and yet is unwilling to act accordingly), you must, of
course, speak in the majestic style.  But who can be moved if he does
not understand what is said? and who will stay to listen if he receives
no pleasure?  Wherefore, in this style, too, when an obdurate heart is
to be persuaded to obedience, you must speak so as to be both
intelligible and pleasing, if you would be heard with a submissive mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[594:2007](1020844.htm#fr_2006) <span
id="v.IV_1.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.26-p3"></span> Chaps. xv. and xvii.

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[595:2008](1020844.htm#fr_2007) <span
id="v.IV_1.26-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.IV_1.26-p4"></span> [Ps.
93.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005)<span id="v.IV_1.26-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020845)
