[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020764)  [Next](1020766.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxviii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 28.—To What Extent History is an
Aid.</span>

<span id="v.v.xxviii-p2"></span> 42.  Anything, then, that we learn from
history about the chronology of past times assists us very much in
understanding the Scriptures, even if it be learnt without the pale of
the Church as a matter of childish instruction.  For we frequently seek
information about a variety of matters by use of the Olympiads, and the
names of the consuls; and ignorance of the consulship in which our Lord
was born, and that in which He suffered, has led some into the error of
supposing that He was forty-six years of age when He suffered, that
being the number of years He was told by the Jews the temple (which He
took as a symbol of His body) was in building. <span
id="fr_1814"></span>[1815](#fn_1814.md)   Now we know on the authority of
the evangelist that He was about thirty years of age when He was
baptized; <span id="fr_1815"></span>[1816](#fn_1815.md) but the number of
years He lived afterwards, although by putting His actions together we
can make it out, yet that no shadow of doubt might arise from another
source, can be ascertained more clearly and more certainly from a
comparison of profane history with the gospel.  It will still be
evident, however, that it was not without a purpose it was said that the
temple was forty and six years in building; so that, as more secret
formation of the body which, for our sakes, the only-begotten Son of
God, by whom all things were made, condescended to put on. <span
id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816.md)

<span id="v.v.xxviii-p6"></span> 43.  As to the utility of history,
moreover, passing over the Greeks, what a great question our own Ambrose
has set at rest!  For, when the readers and admirers of Plato dared
calumniously to assert that our Lord Jesus Christ learnt all those
sayings of His, which they are compelled to admire and praise, from the
books of Plato—because (they urged) it cannot be denied that Plato lived
long before the coming of our Lord!—did not the illustrious bishop, when
by his investigations into profane history he had discovered that Plato
made a journey into Egypt at the time when Jeremiah the prophet was
there, <span id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817.md) show that it is much
more likely that Plato was through Jeremiah’s means initiated into our
literature, so as to be able to teach and write those views of his which
are so justly praised?  For not even Pythagoras himself, from whose
successors these men assert Plato learnt theology, lived at a date prior
to the books of that Hebrew race, among whom the worship of one God
sprang up, and of whom as concerning the flesh our Lord came.  And thus,
when we reflect upon the dates, it becomes much more probable that those
philosophers learnt whatever they said that was good and true from our
literature, than that the Lord Jesus Christ learnt from the writings of
Plato,—a thing which it is the height of folly to believe.

<span id="v.v.xxviii-p8"></span>44.  And even when in the course of an
historical narrative former institutions of men are described, the
history itself is not to be reckoned among human institutions; because
things that are past and gone and cannot be undone are to be reckoned as
belonging to the course of time, of which God is the author and
governor.  For it is one thing to tell what has been done, another to
show what ought to be done.  History narrates what has been done,
faithfully and with advantage; but the books of the haruspices, and all
writings of the same kind, aim at teaching what ought to be done or
observed, using the boldness of an adviser, not the fidelity of a
narrator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[549:1815](1020765.htm#fr_1814.md) <span
id="v.v.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxviii-p3"></span> [John
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019.md)<span
id="v.v.xxviii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1815"></span>[549:1816](1020765.htm#fr_1815.md) <span
id="v.v.xxviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxviii-p4"></span> [Luke
3.23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023.md)<span
id="v.v.xxviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[549:1817](1020765.htm#fr_1816.md) <span
id="v.v.xxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxviii-p5"></span> See above, chap. xvi.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[549:1818](1020765.htm#fr_1817.md) <span
id="v.v.xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxviii-p7"></span> Augustin himself corrected this
mistake.  *Retractations*, ii. 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](1020766.md)
