[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020424)  [Next](1020426.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.4"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.4-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.4-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—Of the Conflict and Peace of the
Earthly City.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.4-p2"></span>But the earthly city, which shall not be
everlasting (for it will no longer be a city when it has been committed
to the extreme penalty), has its good in this world, and rejoices in it
with such joy as such things can afford.  But as this is not a good
which can discharge its devotees of all distresses, this city is often
divided against itself by litigations, wars, quarrels, and such
victories as are either life-destroying or short-lived.  For each part
of it that arms against another part of it seeks to triumph over the
nations through itself in bondage to vice.  If, when it has conquered,
it is inflated with pride, its victory is life-destroying; but if it
turns its thoughts upon the common casualties of our mortal condition,
and is rather anxious concerning the disasters that may befall it than
elated with the successes already achieved, this victory, though of a
higher kind, is still only short-lived; for it cannot abidingly rule
over those whom it has victoriously subjugated.  But the things which
this city desires cannot justly be said to be evil, for it is itself, in
its own kind, better than all other human good.  For it desires earthly
peace for the sake of enjoying earthly goods, and it makes war in order
to attain to this peace; since, if it has conquered, and there remains
no one to resist it, it enjoys a peace which it had not while there were
opposing parties who contested for the enjoyment of those things which
were too small to satisfy both.  This peace is purchased by toilsome
wars; it is obtained by what they style a glorious victory.  Now, when
victory remains with the party which had the juster cause, who hesitates
to congratulate the victor, and style it a desirable peace?  These
things, then, are good things, and without doubt the gifts of God.  But
if they neglect the better things of the heavenly city, which are
secured by eternal victory and peace never-ending, and so inordinately
covet these present good things that they believe them to be the only
desirable things, or love them better than those things which are
believed to be better,—if this be so, then it is necessary that misery
follow and ever increase.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1020426.md)
