[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020533)  [Next](1020535) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.16"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.16-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.16-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—Of Diomede, Who After the
Destruction of Troy Was Placed Among the Gods, While His Companions are
Said to Have Been Changed into Birds.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.16-p2"></span>Troy was overthrown, and its
destruction was everywhere sung and made well known even to boys; for it
was signally published and spread abroad, both by its own greatness and
by writers of excellent style.  And this was done in the reign of
Latinus the son of Faunus, from whom the kingdom began to be called
Latium instead of Laurentum.  The victorious Greeks, on leaving Troy
destroyed and returning to their own countries, were torn and crushed by
divers and horrible calamities.  Yet even from among them they increased
the number of their gods for they made Diomede a god.  They allege that
his return home was prevented by a divinely imposed punishment, and they
prove, not by fabulous and poetic falsehood, but by historic
attestation, that his companions were turned into birds.  Yet they think
that, even although he was made a god, he could neither restore them to
the human form by his own power, nor yet obtain it from Jupiter his
king, as a favor granted to a new inhabitant of heaven.  They also say
that his temple is in the island of Diomedæa, not far from Mount
Garganus in Apulia, and that these birds fly round about this temple,
and worship in it with such wonderful obedience, that they fill their
beaks with water and sprinkle it; and if Greeks, or those born of the
Greek race, come there, they are not only still, but fly to meet them;
but if they are foreigners, they fly up at their heads, and wound them
with such severe strokes as even to kill them.  For they are said to be
well enough armed for these combats with their hard and large beaks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020535)
