[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020512)  [Next](1020514.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVII.20"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVII.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Of David’s Reign and Merit; And
of His Son Solomon, and that Prophecy Relating to Christ Which is Found
Either in Those Books Which are Joined to Those Written by Him, or in
Those Which are Indubitably His.</span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p2"></span>David therefore reigned in the earthly
Jerusalem, a son of the heavenly Jerusalem, much praised by the divine
testimony; for even his faults are overcome by great piety, through the
most salutary humility of his repentance, that he is altogether one of
those of whom he himself says, “Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered.” <span
id="fr_1111"></span>[1112](#fn_1111.md)   After him Solomon his son reigned
over the same whole people, who, as was said before, began to reign
while his father was still alive.  This man, after good beginnings, made
a bad end.  For indeed “prosperity, which wears out the minds of the
wise,” <span id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112.md) hurt him more than
that wisdom profited him, which even yet is and shall hereafter be
renowned, and was then praised far and wide.  He also is found to have
prophesied in his books, of which three are received as of canonical
authority, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs.  But it has
been customary to ascribe to Solomon other two, of which one is called
Wisdom, the other Ecclesiasticus, on account of some resemblance of
style,—but the more learned have no doubt that they are not his; yet of
old the Church, especially the Western, received them into authority,—in
the one of which, called the Wisdom of Solomon, the passion of Christ is
most openly prophesied.  For indeed His impious murderers are quoted as
saying, “Let us lie in wait for the righteous, for he is unpleasant to
us, and contrary to our works; and he upbraideth us with our
transgressions of the law, and objecteth to our disgrace the
transgressions of our education.  He professeth to have the knowledge of
God, and he calleth himself the Son of God.  He was made to reprove our
thoughts.  He is grievous for as even to behold; for his life is unlike
other men’s and his ways are different.  We are esteemed of him as
counterfeits; and he abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness.  He
extols the latter end of the righteous; and glorieth that he hath God
for his Father.  Let us see, therefore, if his words be true; and let us
try what shall happen to him, and we shall know what shall be the end of
him.  For if the righteous be the Son of God, He will undertake for him,
and deliver him out of the hand of those that are against him.  Let us
put him to the question with contumely and torture, that we may know his
reverence, and prove his patience.  Let us condemn him to the most
shameful death; for by His own sayings He shall be respected.  These
things did they imagine, and were mistaken; for their own malice hath
quite blinded them.” <span id="fr_1113"></span>[1114](#fn_1113.md)  But in
Ecclesiasticus the future faith of the nations is predicted in this
manner:  “Have mercy upon us, O God, Ruler of all, and send Thy fear
upon all the nations:  lift up Thine hand over the strange nations, and
let them see Thy power.  As Thou wast sanctified in us before them, so
be Thou sanctified in them before us, and let them acknowledge Thee,
according as we also have acknowledged Thee; for there is not a God
beside Thee, O Lord.” <span id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114.md)   We
see this prophecy in the form of a wish and prayer fulfilled through
Jesus Christ.  But the things which are not written in the canon of the
Jews cannot be quoted against their contradictions with so great
validity.

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p7"></span>But as regards those three books which
it is evident are Solomon’s and held canonical by the Jews, to show what
of this kind may be found in them pertaining to Christ and the Church
demands a laborious discussion, which, if now entered on, would lengthen
this work unduly.  Yet what we read in the Proverbs of impious men
saying, “Let us unrighteously hide in the earth the righteous man; yea,
let us swallow him up alive as hell, and let us take away his memory
from the earth:  let us seize his precious possession,” <span
id="fr_1115"></span>[1116](#fn_1115.md) is not so obscure that it may not
be understood, without laborious exposition, of Christ and His
possession the Church.  Indeed, the gospel parable about the wicked
husbandmen shows that our Lord Jesus Himself said something like it: 
“This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be
ours.” <span id="fr_1116"></span>[1117](#fn_1116.md) <span id="page_358">p.
358</span> <span id="iv.XVII.20-Page_358"></span> In like manner also
that passage in this same book, on which we have already touched <span
id="fr_1117"></span>[1118](#fn_1117.md) when we were speaking of the barren
woman who hath born seven, must soon after it was uttered have come to
be understood of only Christ and the Church by those who knew that
Christ was the Wisdom of God.  “Wisdom hath builded her an house, and
hath set up seven pillars; she hath sacrificed her victims, she hath
mingled her wine in the bowl; she hath also furnished her table.  She
hath sent her servants summoning to the bowl with excellent
proclamation, saying, Who is simple, let him turn aside to me.  And to
the void of sense she hath said, Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the
wine which I have mingled for you.” <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[1119](#fn_1118.md)   Here certainly we perceive that
the Wisdom of God, that is, the Word co-eternal with the Father, hath
builded Him an house, even a human body in the virgin womb, and hath
subjoined the Church to it as members to a head, hath slain the martyrs
as victims, hath furnished a table with wine and bread, where appears
also the priesthood after the order of Melchizedek, and hath called the
simple and the void of sense, because, as saith the apostle, “He hath
chosen the weak things of this world that He might confound the things
which are mighty.” <span id="fr_1119"></span>[1120](#fn_1119.md)   Yet to
these weak ones she saith what follows, “Forsake simplicity, that ye may
live; and seek prudence, that ye may have life.” <span
id="fr_1120"></span>[1121](#fn_1120.md)   But to be made partakers of this
table is itself to begin to have life.  For when he says in another
book, which is called Ecclesiastes, “There is no good for a man, except
that he should eat and drink,” <span
id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121.md) what can he be more credibly
understood to say, than what belongs to the participation of this table
which the Mediator of the New Testament Himself, the Priest after the
order of Melchizedek, furnishes with His own body and blood?  For that
sacrifice has succeeded all the sacrifices of the Old Testament, which
were slain as a shadow of that which was to come; wherefore also we
recognize the voice in the 40th Psalm as that of the same Mediator
speaking through prophesy, “Sacrifice and offering Thou didst not
desire; but a body hast Thou perfected for me.” <span
id="fr_1122"></span>[1123](#fn_1122.md)   Because, instead of all these
sacrifices and oblations, His body is offered, and is served up to the
partakers of it.  For that this Ecclesiastes, in this sentence about
eating and drinking, which he often repeats, and very much commends,
does not savor the dainties of carnal pleasures, is made plain enough
when he says, “It is better to go into the house of mourning than to go
into the house of feasting.” <span id="fr_1123"></span>[1124](#fn_1123.md)
  And a little after He says, “The heart of the wise is in the house of
mourning, and the heart of the simple in the house of feasting.” <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124.md)   But I think that more worthy of
quotation from this book which relates to both cities, the one of the
devil, the other of Christ, and to their kings, the devil and Christ: 
“Woe to thee, O land,” he says, “when thy king is a youth, and thy
princes eat in the morning!  Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is
the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in season, in fortitude, and not
in confusion!” <span id="fr_1125"></span>[1126](#fn_1125.md)   He has
called the devil a youth, because of the folly and pride, and rashness
and unruliness, and other vices which are wont to abound at that age;
but Christ is the Son of nobles, that is, of the holy patriarchs, of
those belonging to the free city, of whom He was begotten in the flesh. 
The princes of that and other cities are eaters in the morning, that is,
before the suitable hour, because they do not expect the seasonable
felicity, which is the true, in the world to come, desiring to be
speedily made happy with the renown of this world; but the princes of
the city of Christ patiently wait for the time of a blessedness that is
not fallacious.  This is expressed by the words, “in fortitude, and not
in confusion,” because hope does not deceive them; of which the apostle
says, “But hope maketh not ashamed.” <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126.md)   A psalm also saith, “For they
that hope in Thee shall not be put to shame.” <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127.md)   But now the Song of Songs is a
certain spiritual pleasure of holy minds, in the marriage of that King
and Queen-city, that is, Christ and the Church.  But this pleasure is
wrapped up in allegorical veils, that the Bridegroom may be more
ardently desired, and more joyfully unveiled, and may appear; to whom it
is said in this same song, “Equity hath delighted Thee; <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128.md) and the bride who there hears,
“Charity is in thy delights.” <span id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129.md)
  We pass over many things in silence, in our desire to finish this
work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[357:1112](1020513.htm#fr_1111.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p3"></span> [Ps.
32.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[357:1113](1020513.htm#fr_1112.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p4"></span> Sallust, *Bell. Cat.* c. xi.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[357:1114](1020513.htm#fr_1113.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p5"></span> [Wisd.
2.12-21](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[357:1115](1020513.htm#fr_1114.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p6"></span> [Ecclus.
36.1-5](../../../bib/apo/sir036.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[357:1116](1020513.htm#fr_1115.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p8"></span> [Prov.
1.11-13](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[357:1117](1020513.htm#fr_1116.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p9"></span> [Matt.
21.38](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[358:1118](1020513.htm#fr_1117.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p10"></span> Ch. 4.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[358:1119](1020513.htm#fr_1118.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p11"></span> [Prov.
9.1-5](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p11.1"></span> (ver. 1 is quoted above in ch. 4).

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[358:1120](1020513.htm#fr_1119.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p12"></span> [1 Cor.
1.27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[358:1121](1020513.htm#fr_1120.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p13"></span> [Prov.
9.6](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[358:1122](1020513.htm#fr_1121.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p14"></span> [Eccl.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#024.md), [Eccl.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#013.md), [Eccl.
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018.md), [Eccl.
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[358:1123](1020513.htm#fr_1122.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p15"></span> [Ps.
40.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[358:1124](1020513.htm#fr_1123.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p16"></span> [Eccles.
7.2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[358:1125](1020513.htm#fr_1124.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p17"></span> [Eccles.
7.4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[358:1126](1020513.htm#fr_1125.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p18"></span> [Eccl.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[358:1127](1020513.htm#fr_1126.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p19"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[358:1128](1020513.htm#fr_1127.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p20"></span> [Ps.
69.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p20.1"></span>?

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[358:1129](1020513.htm#fr_1128.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p21"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[358:1130](1020513.htm#fr_1129.md) <span
id="iv.XVII.20-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVII.20-p22"></span> [Song of Sol.
7.6](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.XVII.20-p22.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020514.md)
