[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020622)  [Next](1020624) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.21"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.21-p1.1"></span>Chapter 21.—Utterances of the Prophet Isaiah
Regarding the Resurrection of the Dead and the Retributive
Judgment.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p2"></span>The prophet Isaiah says, “The dead shall
rise again, and all who were in the graves shall rise again; and all who
are in the earth shall rejoice:  for the dew which is from Thee is their
health, and the earth of the wicked shall fall.” <span
id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412)   All the former part of this
passage relates to the resurrection of the blessed; but the words, “the
earth of the wicked shall fall,” is rightly understood as meaning that
the bodies of the wicked shall fall into the ruin of damnation.  And if
we would more exactly and carefully scrutinize the words which refer to
the resurrection of the good, we may refer to the first resurrection the
words, “the dead shall rise again,” and to the second the following
words, “and all who were in the graves shall rise again.”  And if we ask
what relates to those saints whom the Lord at His coming shall find
alive upon earth, the following clause may suitably be referred to them;
“All who are in the earth shall rejoice:  for the dew which is from Thee
is their health.”  By “health” in this place it is best to understand
immortality.  For that is the most perfect health which is not repaired
by nourishment as by a daily remedy.  In like manner the same prophet,
affording hope to the good and terrifying the wicked regarding the day
of judgment, says, “Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will flow down upon
them as a river of peace, and upon the glory of the Gentiles as a
rushing torrent; their sons shall be carried on the shoulders, and shall
be comforted on the knees.  As one whom his mother comforteth, so shall
I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.  And ye shall
see, and your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall rise up like a
herb; and the hand of the Lord shall be known by His worshippers, and He
shall threaten the contumacious.  For, behold, the Lord shall come as a
fire, and as a whirlwind His chariots, to execute vengeance with
indignation, and wasting with a flame of fire.  For with fire of the
Lord shall all the earth be judged, and all flesh with His sword:  many
shall be wounded by the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413)   In His promise to the good he
says that He will flow down as a river of peace, that is to say, in the
greatest possible abundance of peace.  With this peace we shall in the
end be refreshed; but of this we have spoken abundantly in the preceding
book.  It is this river in which he says He shall flow down upon those
to whom He promises so great happiness, that we may understand that in
the region of that felicity, which is in heaven, all things are
satisfied from this river.  But because there shall thence flow, even
upon earthly bodies, the peace of incorruption and immortality,
therefore he says that He shall flow down as this river, that He may as
it were pour Himself from things above to things beneath, and make men
the equals of the angels.  By “Jerusalem,” too, we should understand not
that which serves with her children, but that which, according to the
apostle, is our free mother, eternal in the heavens. <span
id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414)   In her we shall be comforted as
we pass toilworn from earth’s cares and calamities, and be taken up as
her children on her knees and shoulders.  Inexperienced and new to such
blandishments, we shall be received into unwonted bliss.  There we shall
see, and our heart shall rejoice.  He does not say what we shall see;
but what but God, that the promise in the Gospel may be fulfilled in us,
“Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God?” <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415)   What shall we see but all those
things which now we see not, but believe in, and of which the idea we
form, according to our feeble capacity, is incomparably less than the
reality?  “And ye shall see,” he says, “and your heart shall rejoice.” 
Here ye believe, there ye shall see.

<span id="iv.XX.21-p7"></span>But because he said, “Your heart shall
rejoice,” lest we should suppose that the blessings of that Jerusalem
are only spiritual, <span id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="iv.XX.21-Page_441"></span> he adds, “And your bones shall rise up
like a herb,” alluding to the resurrection of the body, and as it were
supplying an omission he had made.  For it will not take place when we
have seen; but we shall see when it has taken place.  For he had already
spoken of the new heavens and the new earth, speaking repeatedly, and
under many figures, of the things promised to the saints, and
saying,“There shall be new heavens, and a new earth:  and the former
shall not be remembered nor come into mind; but they shall find in it
gladness and exultation.  Behold, I will make Jerusalem an exultation,
and my people a joy.  And I will exult in Jerusalem, and joy in my
people; and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her;” <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416) and other promises, which some
endeavor to refer to carnal enjoyment during the thousand years.  For,
in the manner of prophecy, figurative and literal expressions are
mingled, so that a serious mind may, by useful and salutary effort,
reach the spiritual sense; but carnal sluggishness, or the slowness of
an uneducated and undisciplined mind, rests in the superficial letter,
and thinks there is nothing beneath to be looked for.  But let this be
enough regarding the style of those prophetic expressions just quoted. 
And now, to return to their interpretation.  When he had said, “And your
bones shall rise up like a herb,” in order to show that it was the
resurrection of the good, though a bodily resurrection, to which he
alluded, he added, “And the hand of the Lord shall be known by His
worshippers.”  What is this but the hand of Him who distinguishes those
who worship from those who despise Him?  Regarding these the context
immediately adds, “And He shall threaten the contumacious,” or, as
another translator has it, “the unbelieving.”  He shall not actually
threaten then, but the threats which are now uttered shall then be
fulfilled in effect.  “For behold,” he says, “the Lord shall come as a
fire, and as a whirlwind His chariots, to execute vengeance with
indignation, and wasting with a flame of fire.  For with fire of the
Lord shall all the earth be judged, and all flesh with His sword:  many
shall be wounded by the Lord.”  By *fire, whirlwind, sword*, he means
the judicial punishment of God.  For he says that the Lord Himself shall
come as a fire, to those, that is to say, to whom His coming shall be
penal.  By His *chariots* (for the word is plural) we suitably
understand the ministration of angels.  And when he says that all flesh
and all the earth shall be judged with His fire and sword, we do not
understand the spiritual and holy to be included, but the earthly and
carnal, of whom it is said that they “mind earthly things,” <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417) and “to be carnally minded is
death,” <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418) and whom the Lord
calls simply flesh when He says, “My Spirit shall not always remain in
these men, for they are flesh.” <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419)   As to the words, “Many shall be
wounded by the Lord,” this wounding shall produce the second death.  It
is possible, indeed, to understand *fire, sword,* and *wound* in a good
sense.  For the Lord said that He wished to send fire on the
earth. <span id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420)   And the cloven
tongues appeared to them as fire when the Holy Spirit came. <span
id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421)   And our Lord says, “I am not come
to send peace on earth, but a sword.” <span
id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422)   And Scripture says that the word
of God is a doubly sharp sword, <span
id="fr_1423"></span>[1424](#fn_1423) on account of the two edges, the
two Testaments.  And in the Song of Songs the holy Church says that she
is wounded with love, <span id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424)
—pierced, as it were, with the arrow of love.  But here, where we read
or hear that the Lord shall come to execute vengeance, it is obvious in
what sense we are to understand these expressions.

<span id="iv.XX.21-p17"></span>After briefly mentioning those who shall
be consumed in this judgment, speaking of the wicked and sinners under
the figure of the meats forbidden by the old law, from which they had
not abstained, he summarily recounts the grace of the new testament,
from the first coming of the Saviour to the last judgment, of which we
now speak; and herewith he concludes his prophecy.  For he relates that
the Lord declares that He is coming to gather all nations, that they may
come and witness His glory. <span id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425)  
For, as the apostle says, “All have sinned and are in want of the glory
of God.” <span id="fr_1426"></span>[1427](#fn_1426)   And he says that
He will do wonders among them, at which they shall marvel and believe in
Him; and that from them He will send forth those that are saved into
various nations, and distant islands which have not heard His name nor
seen His glory, and that they shall declare His glory among the nations,
and shall *bring* the brethren of those to whom the prophet was
speaking, *i.e*., shall bring to the faith under God the Father the
brethren of the elect Israelites; and that they shall bring from all
nations an offering to the Lord on beasts of burden and waggons (which
are understood to mean the aids furnished by God in the shape of angelic
or human ministry), to the holy city Jerusalem, which at present is
scattered over the earth, in the faithful saints.  For where divine aid
is given, men <span id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span
id="iv.XX.21-Page_442"></span> believe, and where they believe, they
come.  And the Lord compared them, in a figure, to the children of
Israel offering sacrifice to Him in His house with psalms, which is
already everywhere done by the Church; and He promised that from among
them He would choose for Himself priests and Levites, which also we see
already accomplished.  For we see that priests and Levites are now
chosen, not from a certain family and blood, as was originally the rule
in the priesthood according to the order of Aaron, but as befits the new
testament, under which Christ is the High Priest after the order of
Melchisedec, in consideration of the merit which is bestowed upon each
man by divine grace.  And these priests are not to be judged by their
mere title, which is often borne by unworthy men, but by that holiness
which is not common to good men and bad.

<span id="iv.XX.21-p20"></span>After having thus spoken of this mercy of
God which is now experienced by the Church, and is very evident and
familiar to us, he foretells also the ends to which men shall come when
the last judgment has separated the good and the bad, saying by the
prophet, or the prophet himself speaking for God, “For as the new
heavens and the new earth shall remain before me, said the Lord, so
shall your seed and your name remain, and there shall be to them month
after month, and <span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="iv.XX.21-Page_443"></span> Sabbath after Sabbath.  All flesh shall
come to worship before me in Jerusalem, said the Lord.  And they shall
go out, and shall see the members of the men who have sinned against
me:  their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and
they shall be for a spectacle to all flesh.” <span
id="fr_1427"></span>[1428](#fn_1427)   At this point the prophet closed
his book, as at this point the world shall come to an end.  Some,
indeed, have translated “carcases” <span
id="fr_1428"></span>[1429](#fn_1428) instead of “members of the men,”
meaning by *carcases* the manifest punishment of the body, although
*carcase* is commonly used only of dead flesh, while the bodies here
spoken of shall be animated, else they could not be sensible of any
pain; but perhaps they may, without absurdity, be called carcases, as
being the bodies of those who are to fall into the second death.  And
for the same reason it is said, as I have already quoted, by this same
prophet, “The earth of the wicked shall fall.” <span
id="fr_1429"></span>[1430](#fn_1429)   It is obvious that those
translators who use a different word for *men* do not mean to include
only males, for no one will say that the women who sinned shall not
appear in that judgment; but the male sex, being the more worthy, and
that from which the woman was derived, is intended to include both
sexes.  But that which is especially pertinent to our subject is this,
that since the words “All flesh shall come,” apply to the good, for the
people of God shall be composed of every race of men,—for all men shall
not be present, since the greater part shall be in punishment,—but, as I
was saying, since *flesh* is used of the good, and *members* or
*carcases* of the bad, certainly it is thus put beyond a doubt that that
judgment in which the good and the bad shall be allotted to their
destinies shall take place after the resurrection of the body, our faith
in which is thoroughly established by the use of these words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[440:1413](1020623.htm#fr_1412) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p3"></span> [Isa.
26.19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)<span id="iv.XX.21-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[440:1414](1020623.htm#fr_1413) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p4"></span> [Isa.
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016)<span id="iv.XX.21-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[440:1415](1020623.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p5"></span> [Gal.
4.26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="iv.XX.21-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[440:1416](1020623.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p6"></span> [Matt.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="iv.XX.21-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[441:1417](1020623.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p8"></span> [Isa.
65.17-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017)<span
id="iv.XX.21-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[441:1418](1020623.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p9"></span> [Phil.
3.19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span id="iv.XX.21-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[441:1419](1020623.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p10"></span> [Rom.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006)<span id="iv.XX.21-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[441:1420](1020623.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p11"></span> [Gen.
6.3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)<span id="iv.XX.21-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[441:1421](1020623.htm#fr_1420) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p12"></span> [Luke
12.49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span
id="iv.XX.21-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[441:1422](1020623.htm#fr_1421) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p13"></span> [Acts
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)<span id="iv.XX.21-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[441:1423](1020623.htm#fr_1422) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p14"></span> [Matt.
10.34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)<span
id="iv.XX.21-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[441:1424](1020623.htm#fr_1423) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p15"></span> [Heb.
4.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="iv.XX.21-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[441:1425](1020623.htm#fr_1424) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p16"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#005)<span id="iv.XX.21-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[441:1426](1020623.htm#fr_1425) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p18"></span> [Isa.
66.18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#018)<span
id="iv.XX.21-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[441:1427](1020623.htm#fr_1426) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p19"></span> [Rom.
3.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="iv.XX.21-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[443:1428](1020623.htm#fr_1427) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p21"></span> [Isa.
66.22-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022)<span
id="iv.XX.21-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[443:1429](1020623.htm#fr_1428) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p22"></span> As the Vulgate:  *cadavera virorum.*

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[443:1430](1020623.htm#fr_1429) <span
id="iv.XX.21-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.21-p23"></span> Here Augustin inserts the remark, “Who
does not see that *cadavera* (carcases) are so called from *cadendo*
(falling)?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](1020624)
