[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020414)  [Next](1020416.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.23"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.23-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.23-p1.1"></span>Chapter 23.—Whether Generation Should Have
Taken Place Even in Paradise Had Man Not Sinned, or Whether There Should
Have Been Any Contention There Between Chastity and Lust.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.23-p2"></span>But he who says that there should have
been neither copulation nor generation but for sin, virtually says that
man’s sin was necessary to complete the number of the saints.  For if
these two by not sinning should have continued to live alone, because,
as is supposed, they could not have begotten children had they not
sinned, then certainly sin was necessary in order that there might be
not only two but many righteous men.  And if this cannot be maintained
without absurdity, we must rather believe that the number of the saints
fit to complete this most blessed city would have been as great though
no one had sinned, as it is now that the grace of God gathers its
citizens out of the multitude of sinners, so long as the children of
this world generate and are generated. <span
id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754.md)

<span id="iv.XIV.23-p4"></span>And therefore that marriage, worthy of
the happiness of Paradise, should have had desirable fruit without the
shame of lust, had there been no sin.  But how that could be, there is
now no example to teach us.  Nevertheless, it ought not to seem
incredible that one member might serve the will without lust then, since
so many serve it now.  Do we now move our feet and hands when we will to
do the things we would by means of these members? do we meet with no
resistance in them, but perceive that they are ready servants of the
will, both in our own case and in that of others, and especially of
artisans employed in mechanical operations, by which the weakness and
clumsiness of nature become, through industrious exercise, wonderfully
dexterous? and shall we not believe that, like as all those members
obediently serve the will, so also should the members have discharged
the function of generation, though lust, the award of disobedience, had
been awanting?  Did not Cicero, in discussing the difference of
governments in his *De Republica*, adopt a simile from human nature, and
say that we command our bodily members as children, they are so
obedient; but that the vicious parts of the soul must be treated as
slaves, and be coerced with a more stringent authority?  And no doubt,
in the order of nature, the soul is more excellent than the body; and
yet the soul commands the body more easily than itself.  Nevertheless
this lust, of which we at present speak, is the more shameful on this
account, because the soul is therein neither master of itself, so as not
to lust at all, nor of the body, so as to keep the members under the
control of the will; for if they were thus ruled, there should be no
shame.  But now the soul is ashamed that the body, which by nature is
inferior and subject to it, should resist its authority.  For in the
resistance experienced by the soul in the other emotions there is less
shame, because the resistance is from itself, and thus, when it is
conquered by itself, itself is the conqueror, although the conquest is
inordinate and vicious, because accomplished by those parts of the soul
which ought to be subject to reason, yet, being accomplished by its own
parts and energies, the conquest is, as I say, its own.  For when the
soul conquers itself to a due subordination, so that its unreasonable
motions are controlled by reason, while it again is subject to God, this
is a conquest virtuous and praiseworthy.  Yet there is less shame when
the soul is resisted by its own vicious parts than when its will and
order are resisted by the body, which is distinct from and inferior to
it, and dependent on it for life itself.

<span id="iv.XIV.23-p5"></span>But so long as the will retains under its
authority the other members, without which the members excited by lust
to resist the will cannot accomplish what they seek, chastity is
preserved, and the delight of sin foregone.  And certainly, had not
culpable disobedience been visited with penal disobedience, the marriage
of Paradise should have been ignorant of this struggle and rebellion,
this quarrel between will and lust, that the will may be satisfied and
lust restrained, but those members, <span id="page_280">p. 280</span>
<span id="iv.XIV.23-Page_280"></span> like all the rest, should have
obeyed the will.  The field of generation <span
id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755.md) should have been sown by the organ
created for this purpose, as the earth is sown by the hand.  And whereas
now, as we essay to investigate this subject more exactly, modesty
hinders us, and compels us to ask pardon of chaste ears, there would
have been no cause to do so, but we could have discoursed freely, and
without fear of seeming obscene, upon all those points which occur to
one who meditates on the subject.  There would not have been even words
which could be called obscene, but all that might be said of these
members would have been as pure as what is said of the other parts of
the body.  Whoever, then, comes to the perusal of these pages with
unchaste mind, let him blame his disposition, not his nature; let him
brand the actings of his own impurity, not the words which necessity
forces us to use, and for which every pure and pious reader or hearer
will very readily pardon me, while I expose the folly of that scepticism
which argues solely on the ground of its own experience, and has no
faith in anything beyond.  He who is not scandalized at the apostle’s
censure of the horrible wickedness of the women who “changed the natural
use into that which is against nature,” <span
id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756.md) will read all this without being
shocked, especially as we are not, like Paul, citing and censuring a
damnable uncleanness, but are explaining, so far as we can, human
generation, while with Paul we avoid all obscenity of language.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_754"></span>[279:755](1020415.htm#fr_754.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.23-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.23-p3"></span> [Luke
20.34](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.XIV.23-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[280:756](1020415.htm#fr_755.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.23-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.23-p6"></span> See Virgil, *Georg*. iii. 136.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[280:757](1020415.htm#fr_756.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.23-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.23-p7"></span> [Rom.
1.26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026.md)<span id="iv.XIV.23-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](1020416.md)
