[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020168)  [Next](1020170) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VI.i"></span>

<span id="iv.VI.i-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VI.i-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="iv.VI.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.VI.i-p2.1"></span>In</span> the five former books, I think I have
sufficiently disputed against those who believe that the many false
gods, which the Christian truth shows to be useless images, or unclean
spirits and pernicious demons, or certainly creatures, not the Creator,
are to be worshipped for the advantage of this mortal life, and of
terrestrial affairs, with that rite and service which the Greeks call
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.VI.i-p2.2"></span> λατρεία</span>, and
which is due to the one true God.  And who does not know that, in the
face of excessive stupidity and obstinacy, neither these five nor any
other number of books whatsoever could be enough, when it is esteemed
the glory of vanity to yield to no amount of strength on the side of
truth,—certainly to his destruction over whom so heinous a vice
tyrannizes?  For, notwithstanding all the assiduity of the physician who
attempts to effect a cure, the disease remains unconquered, not through
any fault of his, but because of the incurableness of the sick man.  But
those who thoroughly weigh the things which they read, having understood
and considered them, without any, or with no great and excessive degree
of that obstinacy which belongs to a long-cherished error, will more
readily judge that, in the five books already finished, we have done
more than the necessity of the question demanded, than that we have
given it less discussion than it required.  And they cannot have doubted
but that all the hatred which the ignorant attempt to bring upon the
Christian religion on account of the disasters of this life, and the
destruction and change which befall terrestrial things, whilst the
learned do not merely dissimulate, but encourage that hatred, contrary
to their own consciences, being possessed by a mad impiety;—they cannot
have doubted, I say, but that this hatred is devoid of right reflection
and reason, and full of most light temerity, and most pernicious
animosity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](1020170)
