[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020403)  [Next](1020405) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.12"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—Of the Nature of Man’s First
Sin.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.12-p2"></span>If any one finds a difficulty in
understanding why other sins do not alter human nature as it was altered
by the transgression of those first human beings, so that on account of
it this nature is subject to the great corruption <span id="page_273">p.
273</span> <span id="iv.XIV.12-Page_273"></span> we feel and see, and to
death, and is distracted and tossed with so many furious and contending
emotions, and is certainly far different from what it was before sin,
even though it were then lodged in an animal body,—if, I say, any one is
moved by this, he ought not to think that that sin was a small and light
one because it was committed about food, and that not bad nor noxious,
except because it was forbidden; for in that spot of singular felicity
God could not have created and planted any evil thing.  But by the
precept He gave, God commended obedience, which is, in a sort, the
mother and guardian of all the virtues in the reasonable creature, which
was so created that submission is advantageous to it, while the
fulfillment of its own will in preference to the Creator’s is
destruction.  And as this commandment enjoining abstinence from one kind
of food in the midst of great abundance of other kinds was so easy to
keep,—so light a burden to the memory,—and, above all, found no
resistance to its observance in lust, which only afterwards sprung up as
the penal consequence of sin, the iniquity of violating it was all the
greater in proportion to the ease with which it might have been kept.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020405)
