[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020035)  [Next](1020037.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—That Those Who Complain of
Christianity Really Desire to Live Without Restraint in Shameful
Luxury.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxxi-p2"></span>If the famous Scipio Nasica were now
alive, who was once your pontiff, and was unanimously chosen by the
senate, when, in the panic created by the Punic war, they sought for the
best citizen to entertain the Phrygian goddess, he would curb this
shamelessness of yours, though you would perhaps scarcely dare to look
upon the countenance of such a man.  For why in your calamities do you
complain of Christianity, unless because you desire to enjoy your
luxurious license unrestrained, and to lead an abandoned and profligate
life without the interruption of any uneasiness or disaster?  For
certainly your desire for peace, and prosperity, and plenty is not
prompted by any purpose of using these blessings honestly, that is to
say, with moderation, sobriety, temperance, and piety; for your purpose
rather is to run riot in an endless variety of sottish pleasures, and
thus to generate from your prosperity a moral pestilence which will
prove a thousandfold more disastrous than the fiercest enemies.  It was
<span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="iv.ii.xxxi-Page_20"></span>
such a calamity as this that Scipio, your chief pontiff, your best man
in the judgment of the whole senate, feared when he refused to agree to
the destruction of Carthage, Rome’s rival and opposed Cato, who advised
its destruction.  He feared security, that enemy of weak minds, and he
perceived that a wholesome fear would be a fit guardian for the
citizens.  And he was not mistaken; the event proved how wisely he had
spoken.  For when Carthage was destroyed, and the Roman republic
delivered from its great cause of anxiety, a crowd of disastrous evils
forthwith resulted from the prosperous condition of things.  First
concord was weakened, and destroyed by fierce and bloody seditions; then
followed, by a concatenation of baleful causes, civil wars, which
brought in their train such massacres, such bloodshed, such lawless and
cruel proscription and plunder, that those Romans who, in the days of
their virtue, had expected injury only at the hands of their enemies,
now that their virtue was lost, suffered greater cruelties at the hands
of their fellow-citizens.  The lust of rule, which with other vices
existed among the Romans in more unmitigated intensity than among any
other people, after it had taken possession of the more powerful few,
subdued under its yoke the rest, worn and wearied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](1020037.md)
