[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020440)  [Next](1020442) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.20"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—How It is that Cain’s Line
Terminates in the Eighth Generation, While Noah, Though Descended from
the Same Father, Adam, is Found to Be the Tenth from Him.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.20-p2"></span>Some one will say, If the writer of this
history intended, in enumerating the generations from Adam through his
son Seth, to descend through them to Noah, in whose time the deluge
occurred, and from him again to trace the connected generations down to
Abraham, with whom Matthew begins the pedigree of Christ the eternal
King of the city of God, what did he intend by enumerating the
generations from Cain, and to what terminus did he mean to trace them? 
We reply, To the deluge, by which the whole stock of the earthly city
was destroyed, but repaired by the sons of Noah.  For the earthly city
and community of men who live after the flesh will never fail until the
end of this world, of which our Lord says, “The children of this world
generate, and are generated.” <span id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829)  
But the city of God, which sojourns in this world, is conducted by
regeneration to the world to come, of which the children neither
generate nor are generated.  In this world generation is common to both
cities; though even now the city of God has many thousand citizens who
abstain from the act of generation; yet the other city also has some
citizens who imitate these, though erroneously.  For to that city belong
also those who have erred from the faith, and introduced divers
heresies; for they live according to man, not according to God.  And the
Indian gymnosophists, who are said to philosophize in the solitudes of
India in a state of nudity, are its citizens; and they abstain from
marriage.  For continence is not a good thing, except when it is
practised in the faith of the highest good, that is, God.  Yet no one is
found to have practised it before the deluge; for indeed even Enoch
himself, the seventh from Adam, who is said to have been translated
without dying, begat sons and daughters before he was translated, and
among these was Methuselah, by whom the succession of the recorded
generations is maintained.

<span id="iv.XV.20-p4"></span>Why, then, is so small a number of Cain’s
generations registered, if it was proper to trace them to the deluge,
and if there was no such delay of the date of puberty as to preclude the
hope of offspring for a hundred or more years?  For if the author of
this book had not in view some one to whom he might rigidly trace the
series of generations, as he designed in those which sprang from Seth’s
seed to descend to Noah, and thence to start again by a rigid order,
what need was there of omitting the first-born sons for the sake of
descending to Lamech, in whose sons that line terminates,—that is to
say, in the eighth generation from Adam, or the seventh from Cain,—as if
from this point he had wished to pass on to another series, by which he
might reach either the Israelitish people, among whom the earthly
Jerusalem presented a prophetic figure of the heavenly city, or to Jesus
Christ, “according to the flesh, who is over all, God blessed for
ever,” <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) the Maker and Ruler of
the heavenly city?  What, I say, was the need of this, seeing that the
whole of Cain’s posterity were destroyed in the deluge?  From this it is
manifest that they are the first-born sons who are registered in this
genealogy.  Why, then, are there so few of them?  Their numbers in the
period before the deluge must have been greater, if the date of puberty
bore no proportion to their longevity, and they had children before they
were a hundred years old.  For supposing they were on an average thirty
years old when they began to beget children, then, as there are eight
generations, including Adam and Lamech’s children, 8 times 30 gives 240
years; did they then produce no more children in all the rest of the
time before the deluge?  With what intention, then, did he who wrote
this record make no mention of subsequent generations?  For from Adam to
the deluge there are reckoned, according to our copies of Scripture,
2262 years, <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) and according to the
He <span id="page_301">p. 301</span> <span
id="iv.XV.20-Page_301"></span> brew text, 1656 years.  Supposing, then,
the smaller number to be the true one, and subtracting from 1656 years
240, is it credible that during the remaining 1400 and odd years until
the deluge the posterity of Cain begat no children?

<span id="iv.XV.20-p7"></span>But let any one who is moved by this call
to mind that when I discussed the question, how it is credible that
those primitive men could abstain for so many years from begetting
children, two modes of solution were found,—either a puberty late in
proportion to their longevity, or that the sons registered in the
genealogies were not the first-born, but those through whom the author
of the book intended to reach the point aimed at, as he intended to
reach Noah by the generations of Seth.  So that, if in the generations
of Cain there occurs no one whom the writer could make it his object to
reach by omitting the first-born and inserting those who would serve
such a purpose, then we must have recourse to the supposition of late
puberty, and say that only at some age beyond a hundred years they
became capable of begetting children, so that the order of the
generations ran through the first-born, and filled up even the whole
period before the deluge, long though it was.  It is, however, possible
that, for some more secret reason which escapes me, this city, which we
say is earthly, is exhibited in all its generations down to Lamech and
his sons, and that then the writer withholds from recording the rest
which may have existed before the deluge.  And without supposing so late
a puberty in these men, there might be another reason for tracing the
generations by sons who were not first-born, viz., that the same city
which Cain built, and named after his son Enoch, may have had a widely
extended dominion and many kings, not reigning simultaneously, but
successively, the reigning king begetting always his successor.  Cain
himself would be the first of these kings; his son Enoch, in whose name
the city in which he reigned was built, would be the second; the third
Irad, whom Enoch begat; the fourth Mehujael, whom Irad begat; the fifth
Methusael, whom Mehujael begat; the sixth Lamech, whom Methusael begat,
and who is the seventh from Adam through Cain.  But it was not necessary
that the first-born should succeed their fathers in the kingdom, but
those would succeed who were recommended by the possession of some
virtue useful to the earthly city, or who were chosen by lot, or the son
who was best liked by his father would succeed by a kind of hereditary
right to the throne.  And the deluge may have happened during the
lifetime and reign of Lamech, and may have destroyed him along with all
other men, save those who were in the ark.  For we cannot be surprised
that, during so long a period from Adam to the deluge, and with the ages
of individuals varying as they did, there should not be an equal number
of generations in both lines, but seven in Cain’s, and ten in Seth’s;
for as I have already said, Lamech is the seventh from Adam, Noah the
tenth; and in Lamech’s case not one son only is registered, as in the
former instances, but more, because it was uncertain which of them would
have succeeded when he died, if there had intervened any time to reign
between his death and the deluge.

<span id="iv.XV.20-p8"></span>But in whatever manner the generations of
Cain’s line are traced downwards, whether it be by first-born sons or by
the heirs to the throne, it seems to me that I must by no means omit to
notice that, when Lamech had been set down as the seventh from Adam,
there were named, in addition, as many of his children as made up this
number to eleven, which is the number signifying sin; for three sons and
one daughter are added.  The wives of Lamech have another signification,
different from that which I am now pressing.  For at present I am
speaking of the children, and not of those by whom the children were
begotten.  Since, then, the law is symbolized by the number ten,—whence
that memorable Decalogue,—there is no doubt that the number eleven,
which goes beyond <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) ten,
symbolizes the transgression of the law, and consequently sin.  For this
reason, eleven veils of goat’s skin were ordered to be hung in the
tabernacle of the testimony, which served in the wanderings of God’s
people as an ambulatory temple.  And in that haircloth there was a
reminder of sins, because the goats were to be set on the left hand of
the Judge; and therefore, when we confess our sins, we prostrate
ourselves in haircloth, as if we were saying what is written in the
psalm, “My sin is ever before me.” <span
id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833)   The progeny of Adam, then, by Cain
the murderer, is completed in the number eleven, which symbolizes sin;
and this number itself is made up by a woman, as it was by the same sex
that beginning was made of sin by which we all die.  And it was
committed that the pleasure of the flesh, which resists the spirit,
might follow; and so Naamah, the daughter of Lamech, means “pleasure.” 
But from Adam to Noah, in the line of Seth, there are ten generations. 
And to Noah three sons are added, of whom, <span id="page_302">p.
302</span> <span id="iv.XV.20-Page_302"></span> while one fell into sin,
two were blessed by their father; so that, if you deduct the reprobate
and add the gracious sons to the number, you get twelve,—a number
signalized in the case of the patriarchs and of the apostles, and made
up of the parts of the number seven multiplied into one another,—for
three times four, or four times three, give twelve.  These things being
so, I see that I must consider and mention how these two lines, which by
their separate genealogies depict the two cities, one of earth-born, the
other of regenerated persons, became afterwards so mixed and confused,
that the whole human race, with the exception of eight persons, deserved
to perish in the deluge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_829"></span>[300:830](1020441.htm#fr_829) <span
id="iv.XV.20-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.20-p3"></span> [Luke
20.34](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#034)<span id="iv.XV.20-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[300:831](1020441.htm#fr_830) <span
id="iv.XV.20-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.20-p5"></span> [Rom.
9.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.XV.20-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[300:832](1020441.htm#fr_831) <span
id="iv.XV.20-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.20-p6"></span> Eusebius, Jerome, Bede, and others, who
follow the Septuagint, reckon only 2242 years, which Vives explains by
supposing Augustin to have made a copyist’s error.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[301:833](1020441.htm#fr_832) <span
id="iv.XV.20-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.20-p9"></span> *Transgreditur*.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[301:834](1020441.htm#fr_833) <span
id="iv.XV.20-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.20-p10"></span> [Ps.
51.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)<span id="iv.XV.20-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020442)
