[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020059)  [Next](1020061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.17"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.17-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.17-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—Of the Rape of the Sabine Women,
and Other Iniquities Perpetrated in Rome’s Palmiest Days.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.17-p2"></span>But possibly we are to find the reason
for this neglect of the Romans by their gods, in the saying of Sallust,
that “equity and virtue prevailed among the Romans not more by <span
id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="iv.II_1.17-Page_32"></span> force of
laws than of nature.” <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111)   I
presume it is to this inborn equity and goodness of disposition we are
to ascribe the rape of the Sabine women.  What, indeed, could be more
equitable and virtuous, than to carry off by force, as each man was fit,
and without their parents’ consent, girls who were strangers and guests,
and who had been decoyed and entrapped by the pretence of a spectacle! 
If the Sabines were wrong to deny their daughters when the Romans asked
for them, was it not a greater wrong in the Romans to carry them off
after that denial?  The Romans might more justly have waged war against
the neighboring nation for having refused their daughters in marriage
when they first sought them, than for having demanded them back when
they had stolen them.  War should have been proclaimed at first; it was
then that Mars should have helped his warlike son, that he might by
force of arms avenge the injury done him by the refusal of marriage, and
might also thus win the women he desired.  There might have been some
appearance of “right of war” in a victor carrying off, in virtue of this
right, the virgins who had been without any show of right denied him;
whereas there was no “right of peace” entitling him to carry off those
who were not given to him, and to wage an unjust war with their justly
enraged parents.  One happy circumstance was indeed connected with this
act of violence, viz., that though it was commemorated by the games of
the circus, yet even this did not constitute it a precedent in the city
or realm of Rome.  If one would find fault with the results of this act,
it must rather be on the ground that the Romans made Romulus a god in
spite of his perpetrating this iniquity; for one cannot reproach them
with making this deed any kind of precedent for the rape of women.

<span id="iv.II_1.17-p4"></span>Again, I presume it was due to this
natural equity and virtue, that after the expulsion of King Tarquin,
whose son had violated Lucretia, Junius Brutus the consul forced Lucius
Tarquinius Collatinus, Lucretia’s husband and his own colleague, a good
and innocent man, to resign his office and go into banishment, on the
one sole charge that he was of the name and blood of the Tarquins.  This
injustice was perpetrated with the approval, or at least connivance, of
the people, who had themselves raised to the consular office both
Collatinus and Brutus.  Another instance of this equity and virtue is
found in their treatment of Marcus Camillus.  This eminent man, after he
had rapidly conquered the Veians, at that time the most formidable of
Rome’s enemies, and who had maintained a ten years’ war, in which the
Roman army had suffered the usual calamities attendant on bad
generalship, after he had restored security to Rome, which had begun to
tremble for its safety, and after he had taken the wealthiest city of
the enemy, had charges brought against him by the malice of those that
envied his success, and by the insolence of the tribunes of the people;
and seeing that the city bore him no gratitude for preserving it, and
that he would certainly be condemned, he went into exile, and even in
his absence was fined 10,000 asses.  Shortly after, however, his
ungrateful country had again to seek his protection from the Gauls.  But
I cannot now mention all the shameful and iniquitous acts with which
Rome was agitated, when the aristocracy attempted to subject the people,
and the people resented their encroachments, and the advocates of either
party were actuated rather by the love of victory than by any equitable
or virtuous consideration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[32:112](1020060.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iv.II_1.17-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.17-p3"></span> Sallust, *Cat. Con.* ix.  Compare the
similar saying of Tacitus regarding the chastity of the Germans: 
*Plusque ibi boni mores valent, quam alibi bonæ leges*  (*Germ.* xix.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1020061)
