[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020584)  [Next](1020586.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.12"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.12-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.12-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—That Even the Fierceness of War
and All the Disquietude of Men Make Towards This One End of Peace, Which
Every Nature Desires.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.12-p2"></span>Whoever gives even moderate attention to
human affairs and to our common nature, will recognize that if there is
no man who does not wish to be joyful, neither is there any one who does
not wish to have peace.  For even they who make war desire nothing but
victory,—desire, that is to say, to attain to peace with glory.  For
what else is victory than the conquest of those who resist us? and when
this is done there is peace.  It is therefore with the desire for peace
that wars are waged, even by those who take pleasure in exercising their
warlike nature in command and battle.  And hence it is obvious that
peace is the end sought for by war.  For every man seeks peace by waging
war, but no man seeks war by making peace.  For even they who
intentionally interrupt the peace in which they are living have no
hatred of peace, but only wish it changed into a peace that suits them
better.  They do not, therefore, wish to have no peace, but only one
more to their mind.  And in the case of sedition, when men have
separated themselves from the community, they yet do not effect what
they wish, unless they maintain some kind of peace with their
fellow-conspirators.  And therefore even robbers take care to maintain
peace with their comrades, that they may with greater effect and greater
safety invade the peace of other men.  And if an individual happen to be
of such unrivalled strength, and to be so jealous of partnership, that
he trusts himself with no comrades, but makes his own plots, and commits
depredations and murders on his own account, yet he maintains some
shadow of peace with such persons as he is unable to kill, and from whom
he wishes to conceal his deeds.  In his own home, too, he makes it his
aim to be at peace with his wife and children, and any other members of
his household; for unquestionably their prompt obedience to his every
look is a source of pleasure to him.  And if this be not rendered, he is
angry, he chides and punishes; and even by this storm he secures the
calm peace of his own home, as occasion demands.  For he sees that peace
cannot be maintained unless all the members of the same domestic circle
be subject to one head, such as he himself is in his own house.  And
therefore if a city or nation offered to submit itself to him, to serve
him in the same style as he had made his household serve him, he would
no longer lurk in a brigand’s hiding-places, but lift his head in open
day as a king, though the same coveteousness and wicked <span
id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span id="iv.XIX.12-Page_408"></span> ness
should remain in him.  And thus all men desire to have peace with their
own circle whom they wish to govern as suits themselves.  For even those
whom they make war against they wish to make their own, and impose on
them the laws of their own peace.

<span id="iv.XIX.12-p3"></span>But let us suppose a man such as poetry
and mythology speak of,—a man so insociable and savage as to be called
rather a semi-man than a man. <span id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279.md)
  Although, then, his kingdom was the solitude of a dreary cave, and he
himself was so singularly bad-hearted that he was named <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XIX.12-p4.1"></span>Κακός</span>, which is
the Greek word for *bad*; though he had no wife to soothe him with
endearing talk, no children to play with, no sons to do his bidding, no
friend to enliven him with intercourse, not even his father Vulcan
(though in one respect he was happier than his father, not having
begotten a monster like himself); although he gave to no man, but took
as he wished whatever he could, from whomsoever he could, when he could
yet in that solitary den, the floor of which, as Virgil <span
id="fr_1280"></span>[1281](#fn_1280.md) says, was always reeking with
recent slaughter, there was nothing else than peace sought, a peace in
which no one should molest him, or disquiet him with any assault or
alarm.  With his own body he desired to be at peace, and he was
satisfied only in proportion as he had this peace.  For he ruled his
members, and they obeyed him; and for the sake of pacifying his mortal
nature, which rebelled when it needed anything, and of allaying the
sedition of hunger which threatened to banish the soul from the body, he
made forays, slew, and devoured, but used the ferocity and savageness he
displayed in these actions only for the preservation of his own life’s
peace.  So that, had he been willing to make with other men the same
peace which he made with himself in his own cave, he would neither have
been called bad, nor a monster, nor a semi-man.  Or if the appearance of
his body and his vomiting smoky fires frightened men from having any
dealings with him, perhaps his fierce ways arose not from a desire to do
mischief, but from the necessity of finding a living.  But he may have
had no existence, or, at least, he was not such as the poets fancifully
describe him, for they had to exalt Hercules, and did so at the expense
of Cacus.  It is better, then, to believe that such a man or semi-man
never existed, and that this, in common with many other fancies of the
poets, is mere fiction.  For the most savage animals (and he is said to
have been almost a wild beast) encompass their own species with a ring
of protecting peace.  They cohabit, beget, produce, suckle, and bring up
their young, though very many of them are not gregarious, but
solitary,—not like sheep, deer, pigeons, starlings, bees, but such as
lions, foxes, eagles, bats.  For what tigress does not gently purr over
her cubs, and lay aside her ferocity to fondle them?  What kite,
solitary as he is when circling over his prey, does not seek a mate,
build a nest, hatch the eggs, bring up the young birds, and maintain
with the mother of his family as peaceful a domestic alliance as he
can?  How much more powerfully do the laws of man’s nature move him to
hold fellowship and maintain peace with all men so far as in him lies,
since even wicked men wage war to maintain the peace of their own
circle, and wish that, if possible, all men belonged to them, that all
men and things might serve but one head, and might, either through love
or fear, yield themselves to peace with him!  It is thus that pride in
its perversity apes God.  It abhors equality with other men under Him;
but, instead of His rule, it seeks to impose a rule of its own upon its
equals.  It abhors, that is to say, the just peace of God, and loves its
own unjust peace; but it cannot help loving peace of one kind or other. 
For there is no vice so clean contrary to nature that it obliterates
even the faintest traces of nature.

<span id="iv.XIX.12-p6"></span>He, then, who prefers what is right to
what is wrong, and what is well-ordered to what is perverted, sees that
the peace of unjust men is not worthy to be called peace in comparison
with the peace of the just.  And yet even what is perverted must of
necessity be in harmony with, and in dependence on, and in some part of
the order of things, for otherwise it would have no existence at all. 
Suppose a man hangs with his head downwards, this is certainly a
perverted attitude of body and arrangement of its members; for that
which nature requires to be above is beneath, and *vice versâ*.  This
perversity disturbs the peace of the body, and is therefore painful. 
Nevertheless the spirit is at peace with its body, and labors for its
preservation, and hence the suffering; but if it is banished from the
body by its pains, then, so long as the bodily framework holds together,
there is in the remains a kind of peace among the members, and hence the
body remains suspended.  And inasmuch as the earthly body tends towards
the earth, and rests on the bond by which it is suspended, it tends thus
to its natural peace, and the voice of its own weight demands a place
for it to rest; and though now lifeless and without feeling, it does not
fall from the peace that is natural to its place in creation, whether it
already has it, or is tending towards it.  For if you apply embalming
preparations to <span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="iv.XIX.12-Page_409"></span> prevent the bodily frame from mouldering
and dissolving, a kind of peace still unites part to part, and keeps the
whole body in a suitable place on the earth,—in other words, in a place
that is at peace with the body.  If, on the other hand, the body receive
no such care, but be left to the natural course, it is disturbed by
exhalations that do not harmonize with one another, and that offend our
senses; for it is this which is perceived in putrefaction until it is
assimilated to the elements of the world, and particle by particle
enters into peace with them.  Yet throughout this process the laws of
the most high Creator and Governor are strictly observed, for it is by
Him the peace of the universe is administered.  For although minute
animals are produced from the carcass of a larger animal, all these
little atoms, by the law of the same Creator, serve the animals they
belong to in peace.  And although the flesh of dead animals be eaten by
others, no matter where it be carried, nor what it be brought into
contact with, nor what it be converted and changed into, it still is
ruled by the same laws which pervade all things for the conservation of
every mortal race, and which bring things that fit one another into
harmony.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[408:1280](1020585.htm#fr_1279.md) <span
id="iv.XIX.12-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.12-p4"></span> He refers to the giant Cacus.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[408:1281](1020585.htm#fr_1280.md) <span
id="iv.XIX.12-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.12-p5"></span> *Æneid*, viii. 195.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1020586.md)
