[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020670)  [Next](1020672.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.10"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.10-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.10-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—That the Martyrs Who Obtain Many
Miracles in Order that the True God May Be Worshipped, are Worthy of
Much Greater Honor Than the Demons, Who Do Some Marvels that They
Themselves May Be Supposed to Be God.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.10-p2"></span>Here perhaps our adversaries will say
that their gods also have done some wonderful things, if now they begin
to compare their gods to our dead men.  Or will they also say that they
have gods taken from among dead men, such as Hercules, Romulus, and many
others whom they fancy to have been received into the number of the
gods?  But our martyrs are not our gods; for we know that the martyrs
and we have both but one God, and that the same.  Nor yet are the
miracles which they maintain to have been done by means of their temples
at all comparable to those which are done by the tombs of our martyrs. 
If they seem similar, their gods have been defeated by our martyrs as
<span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span id="iv.XXII.10-Page_492"></span>
Pharaoh’s magi were by Moses.  In reality, the demons wrought these
marvels with the same impure pride with which they aspired to be the
gods of the nations; but the martyrs do these wonders, or rather God
does them while they pray and assist, in order that an impulse may be
given to the faith by which we believe that they are not our gods, but
have, together with ourselves, one God.  In fine, they built temples to
these gods of theirs, and set up altars, and ordained priests, and
appointed sacrifices; but to our martyrs we build, not temples as if
they were gods, but monuments as to dead men whose spirits live with
God.  Neither do we erect altars at these monuments that we may
sacrifice to the martyrs, but to the one God of the martyrs and of
ourselves; and in this sacrifice they are named in their own place and
rank as men of God who conquered the world by confessing Him, but they
are not invoked by the sacrificing priest.  For it is to God, not to
them, he sacrifices, though he sacrifices at their monument; for he is
God’s priest, not theirs.  The sacrifice itself, too, is the body of
Christ, which is not offered to them, because they themselves are this
body.  Which then can more readily be believed to work miracles?  They
who wish themselves to be reckoned gods by those on whom they work
miracles, or those whose sole object in working any miracle is to induce
faith in God, and in Christ also as God?  They who wished to turn even
their crimes into sacred rites, or those who are unwilling that even
their own praises be consecrated, and seek that everything for which
they are justly praised be ascribed to the glory of Him in whom they are
praised?  For in the Lord their souls are praised.  Let us therefore
believe those who both speak the truth and work wonders.  For by
speaking the truth they suffered, and so won the power of working
wonders.  And the leading truth they professed is that Christ rose from
the dead, and first showed in His own flesh the immortality of the
resurrection which He promised should be ours, either in the beginning
of the world to come, or in the end of this world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1020672.md)
