[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020032)  [Next](1020034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxviii-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Whether Voluntary Death Should
Be Sought in Order to Avoid Sin.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxviii-p2"></span>There remains one reason for suicide
which I mentioned before, and which is thought a sound one,—namely, to
prevent one’s falling into sin either through the blandishments of
pleasure or the violence of pain.  If this reason were a good one, then
we should be impelled to exhort men at once to destroy themselves, as
soon as they have been washed in the laver of regeneration, and have
received the forgiveness of all sin.  Then is the time to escape all
future sin, when all past sin is blotted out.  And if this escape be
lawfully secured by suicide, why not then specially?  Why does any
baptized person hold his hand from taking his own life?  Why does any
person who is freed from the hazards of this life again expose himself
to them, when he has power so easily to rid himself of them all, and
when it is written, “He who loveth danger shall fall into it?” <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md)   Why does he love, or at least face, so
many serious dangers, by remaining in this life from which he may
legitimately depart?  But is any one so blinded and twisted in his moral
nature, and so far astray from the truth, as to think that, though a man
ought to make away with himself for fear of being led into sin by the
oppression of one man, his master, he ought yet to live, and so expose
himself to the hourly temptations of this world, both to all those evils
which the oppression of one master involves, and to numberless other
miseries in which this life inevitably implicates us?  What reason,
then, is there for our consuming time in those exhortations by which we
seek to animate the baptized, either to virginal chastity, or vidual
continence, or matrimonial fidelity, when we have so much more simple
and compendious a method of deliverance from sin, by persuading those
who are fresh from baptism to put an end to their lives, and so pass to
their Lord pure and well-conditioned?  If any one thinks that such
persuasion should be attempted, I say not he is foolish, but mad.  With
what face, then, can he say to any man, “Kill yourself, lest to your
small sins you add a heinous sin, while you live under an unchaste
master, whose conduct is that of a barbarian?”  How can he say this, if
he cannot without wickedness say, “Kill yourself, now that you are
washed from all your sins, lest you fall again into similar or even
aggravated sins, while you live in a world which has such power to
allure by its unclean pleasures, to torment by its horrible cruelties,
to overcome by its errors and terrors?”  It is wicked to say this; it is
therefore wicked to kill oneself.  For if there could be any just cause
of suicide, this were so.  And since not even this is so, there is none.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[18:81](1020033.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxviii-p3"></span> [Ecclus.
3.27](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1020034.md)
