[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020425)  [Next](1020427.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.5"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.5-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.5-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Of the Fratricidal Act of the
Founder of the Earthly City, and the Corresponding Crime of the Founder
of Rome.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.5-p2"></span>Thus the founder of the earthly city was a
fratricide.  Overcome with envy, he slew his own brother, a citizen of
the eternal city, and a sojourner on earth.  So that we cannot be
surprised that this first specimen, or, as the Greeks say, archetype of
crime, should, long afterwards, find a corresponding crime at the
foundation of that city which was destined to reign over so many
nations, and be the head of this earthly city of which we speak.  For of
that city also, as one of their poets has mentioned, “the first walls
were stained with a brother’s blood,” <span
id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773.md) or, as Roman history records, Remus
was slain by his brother Romulus.  And thus there is no difference
between the foundation of this city and of the earthly city, unless it
be that Romulus and Remus were both citizens of the earthly city.  Both
desired to have the glory of founding the Roman republic, but both could
not have as much glory as if one only claimed it; for he who wished to
have the glory of ruling would certainly rule less if his power were
shared by a living consort.  In order, therefore, that the whole glory
might be enjoyed by one, his consort was removed; and by this crime the
empire was made larger indeed, <span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="iv.XV.5-Page_287"></span> but inferior, while otherwise it would
have been less, but better.  Now these brothers, Cain and Abel, were not
both animated by the same earthly desires, nor did the murderer envy the
other because he feared that, by both ruling, his own dominion would be
curtailed,—for Abel was not solicitous to rule in that city which his
brother built,—he was moved by that diabolical, envious hatred with
which the evil regard the good, for no other reason than because they
are good while themselves are evil.  For the possession of goodness is
by no means diminished by being shared with a partner either permanent
or temporarily assumed; on the contrary, the possession of goodness is
increased in proportion to the concord and charity of each of those who
share it.  In short, he who is unwilling to share this possession cannot
have it; and he who is most willing to admit others to a share of it
will have the greatest abundance to himself.  The quarrel, then, between
Romulus and Remus shows how the earthly city is divided against itself;
that which fell out between Cain and Abel illustrated the hatred that
subsists between the two cities, that of God and that of men.  The
wicked war with the wicked; the good also war with the wicked.  But with
the good, good men, or at least perfectly good men, cannot war; though,
while only going on towards perfection, they war to this extent, that
every good man resists others in those points in which he resists
himself.  And in each individual “the flesh lusteth against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh.” <span
id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774.md)   This spiritual lusting, therefore,
can be at war with the carnal lust of another man; or carnal lust may be
at war with the spiritual desires of another, in some such way as good
and wicked men are at war; or, still more certainly, the carnal lusts of
two men, good but not yet perfect, contend together, just as the wicked
contend with the wicked, until the health of those who are under the
treatment of grace attains final victory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_773"></span>[286:774](1020426.htm#fr_773.md) <span
id="iv.XV.5-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.5-p3"></span> Lucan, *Phar.* i. 95.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[287:775](1020426.htm#fr_774.md) <span
id="iv.XV.5-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.5-p4"></span> [Gal.
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.XV.5-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1020427.md)
