[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020245)  [Next](1020247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.27"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.27-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.27-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Concerning the Nature of the
Honor Which the Christians Pay to Their Martyrs.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.27-p2"></span>But, nevertheless, we do not build
temples, and ordain priests, rites, and sacrifices for these same
martyrs; for they are not our gods, but their God is our God.  Certainly
we honor their reliquaries, as the memorials of holy men of God who
strove for the truth even to the death of their bodies, that the true
religion might be made known, and false and fictitious religions
exposed.  For if there were some before them who thought that these
religions were really false and fictitious, they were afraid to give
expression to their convictions.  But who ever heard a priest of the
faithful, standing at an altar built for the honor and worship of God
over the holy body of some martyr, say in the prayers, I offer to thee a
sacrifice, O Peter, or O Paul, or O Cyprian? for it is to God that
sacrifices are offered at their tombs,—the God who made them both men
and martyrs, and associated them with holy angels in celestial honor;
and the reason why we pay such honors to their memory is, that by so
doing we may both give thanks to the true God for their victories, and,
by recalling them afresh to remembrance, may stir ourselves up to
imitate them by seeking to obtain like crowns and palms, calling to our
help that same God on whom they called.  Therefore, whatever honors the
religious may pay in the places of the martyrs, they are but honors
rendered to their memory, <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) not
sacred rites or sacrifices offered to dead men as to gods.  And even
such as bring thither food,—which, indeed, is not done by the better
Christians, and in most places of the world is not done at all,—do so in
order that it may be sanctified to them through the merits of the
martyrs, in the name of the Lord of the martyrs, first presenting the
food and offering prayer, and thereafter taking it away to be eaten, or
to be in part bestowed upon <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="iv.VIII.27-Page_165"></span> the needy. <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332)   But he who knows the one sacrifice
of Christians, which is the sacrifice offered in those places, also
knows that these are not sacrifices offered to the martyrs.  It is,
then, neither with divine honors nor with human crimes, by which they
worship their gods, that we honor our martyrs; neither do we offer
sacrifices to them, or convert the crimes of the gods into their sacred
rites.  For let those who will and can read the letter of Alexander to
his mother Olympias, in which he tells the things which were revealed to
him by the priest Leon, and let those who have read it recall to memory
what it contains, that they may see what great abominations have been
handed down to memory, not by poets, but by the mystic writings of the
Egyptians, concerning the goddess Isis, the wife of Osiris, and the
parents of both, all of whom, according to these writings, were royal
personages.  Isis, when sacrificing to her parents, is said to have
discovered a crop of barley, of which she brought some ears to the king
her husband, and his councillor Mercurius, and hence they identify her
with Ceres.  Those who read the letter may there see what was the
character of those people to whom when dead sacred rites were instituted
as to gods, and what those deeds of theirs were which furnished the
occasion for these rites.  Let them not once dare to compare in any
respect those people, though they hold them to be gods, to our holy
martyrs, though we do not hold them to be gods.  For we do not ordain
priests and offer sacrifices to our martyrs, as they do to their dead
men, for that would be incongruous, undue, and unlawful, such being due
only to God; and thus we do not delight them with their own crimes, or
with such shameful plays as those in which the crimes of the gods are
celebrated, which are either real crimes committed by them at a time
when they were men, or else, if they never were men, fictitious crimes
invented for the pleasure of noxious demons.  The god of Socrates, if he
had a god, cannot have belonged to this class of demons.  But perhaps
they who wished to excel in this art of making gods, imposed a god of
this sort on a man who was a stranger to, and innocent of any connection
with that art.  What need we say more?  No one who is even moderately
wise imagines that demons are to be worshipped on account of the blessed
life which is to be after death.  But perhaps they will say that all the
gods are good, but that of the demons some are bad and some good, and
that it is the good who are to be worshipped, in order that through them
we may attain to the eternally blessed life.  To the examination of this
opinion we will devote the following book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_331"></span>[164:332](1020246.htm#fr_331) <span
id="iv.VIII.27-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.27-p3"></span> *Ornamenta memoriarum.*

<span id="fn_332"></span>[165:333](1020246.htm#fr_332) <span
id="iv.VIII.27-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.27-p4"></span> Comp. *The Confessions,* vi. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IX](1020247)
