[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020193)  [Next](1020195.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.11"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Concerning the Surnames of
Jupiter, Which are Referred Not to Many Gods, But to One and the Same
God.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.11-p2"></span>They have called him Victor, Invictus,
Opitulus, Impulsor, Stator, Centumpeda, Supinalis, Tigillus, Almus,
Ruminus, and other names which it were long to enumerate.  But these
surnames they have given to one god on account of diverse causes and
powers, but yet have not compelled him to be, on account of so many
things, as many gods.  They gave him these surnames because he conquered
all things; because he was conquered by none; because he brought help to
the needy; because he had the power of impelling, stopping, stablishing,
throwing on the back; because as a beam <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271.md) he held together and sustained the
world; because he nourished all things; because, like the pap, <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272.md) he nourished animals.  Here, we
perceive, are some great things and some small things; and yet it is one
who is said to perform them all.  I think that the causes and the
beginnings of things, on account of which they have thought that the one
world is two gods, Jupiter and Janus, are nearer to each other than the
holding together of the world, and the giving of the pap to animals; and
yet, on account of these two works so far apart from each other, both in
nature and dignity, there has not been any necessity for the existence
of two gods; but one Jupiter has been called, on account of the one
Tigillus, on account of the other Ruminus.  I am unwilling to say that
the giving of the pap to sucking animals might have become Juno rather
than Jupiter, especially when there was the goddess Rumina to help and
to serve her in this work; for I think it may be replied that Juno
herself is nothing else than Jupiter, according to those verses of
Valerius Soranus, where it has been said:

<span id="iv.VII.11-p5"></span>“Almighty Jove, progenitor of kings, and
things, and gods,

<span id="iv.VII.11-p6"></span>And eke the mother of the gods,” etc.

<span id="iv.VII.11-p7"></span>Why, then, was he called Ruminus, when
they who may perchance inquire more diligently may find that he is also
that goddess Rumina?

<span id="iv.VII.11-p8"></span>If, then, it was rightly thought unworthy
of the majesty of the gods, that in one ear of corn one god should have
the care of the joint, another that of the husk, how much more unworthy
of that majesty is it, that one thing, and that of the lowest kind, even
the giving of the pap to animals that they may be nourished, should be
under the care of two gods, one of whom is Jupiter himself, the very
king of all things, who does this not along with his own wife, but with
some ignoble Rumina (unless perhaps he himself is Rumina, being Ruminus
for males and Rumina for females)!  I should certainly have said that
they had been unwilling to apply to Jupiter a feminine name, had he not
been styled in these verses “progenitor and mother,” and had I not read
among other surnames of his that of Pecunia \[money\], which we found as
a goddess among those petty deities, as I have already mentioned in the
fourth book.  But since both males and females have money
\[*pecuniam*\], why has he not been called both Pecunius and Pecunia? 
That is their concern.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_271"></span>[129:272](1020194.htm#fr_271.md) <span
id="iv.VII.11-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.11-p3"></span> Tigillus.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[129:273](1020194.htm#fr_272.md) <span
id="iv.VII.11-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.11-p4"></span> Ruma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020195.md)
