[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020558)  [Next](1020560.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII.41"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.41-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVIII.41-p1.1"></span>Chapter 41.—About the Discord of
Philosophic Opinion, and the Concord of the Scriptures that are Held as
Canonical by the Church.</span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.41-p2"></span>But let us omit further examination of
history, and return to the philosophers from whom we digressed to these
things.  They seem to have labored in their studies for no other end
than to find out how to live in a way proper for laying hold of
blessedness.  Why, then, have the disciples dissented from their
masters, and the fellow-disciples from one another, except because as
men they have sought after these things by human sense and human
reasonings?  Now, although there might be among them a desire of glory,
so that each wished to be thought wiser and more acute than another, and
in no way addicted to the judgment of others, but the inventor of his
own dogma and opinion, yet I may grant that there were some, or even
very many of them, whose love of truth severed them from their teachers
or fellow-disciples, that they might strive for what they thought was
the truth, whether it was so or not.  But what can human misery do, or
how or where can it reach forth, so as to attain blessedness, if divine
authority does not lead it?  Finally, let our authors, among whom the
canon of the sacred books is fixed and bounded, be far from disagreeing
in any respect.  It is not without good reason, then, that not merely a
few people prating in the schools and gymnasia in captious disputations,
but so many and great people, both learned and unlearned, in countries
and cities, have believed that God spoke to them or by them, *i.e*. the
canonical writers, when they wrote these books.  There ought, indeed, to
be but few of them, lest on account of their multitude what ought to be
religiously esteemed should grow cheap; and yet not so few that their
agreement should not be wonderful.  For among the multitude of
philosophers, who in their works have left behind them the monuments of
their dogmas, no one will easily find any who agree in all their
opinions.  But to show this is too long a task for this work.

<span id="iv.XVIII.41-p3"></span>But what author of any sect is so
approved in this demon-worshipping city, that the rest who have differed
from or opposed him in opinion have been disapproved?  The Epicureans
asserted that human affairs were not under the providence of the gods;
and the Stoics, holding the opposite opinion, agreed that they were
ruled and defended by favora <span id="page_385">p. 385</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII.41-Page_385"></span> ble and tutelary gods.  Yet were not
both sects famous among the Athenians?  I wonder, then, why Anaxagoras
was accused of a crime for saying that the sun was a burning stone, and
denying that it was a god at all; while in the same city Epicurus
flourished gloriously and lived securely, although he not only did not
believe that the sun or any star was a god, but contended that neither
Jupiter nor any of the gods dwelt in the world at all, so that the
prayers and supplications of men might reach them!  Were not both
Aristippus and Antisthenes there, two noble philosophers and both
Socratic? yet they placed the chief end of life within bounds so diverse
and contradictory, that the first made the delight of the body the chief
good, while the other asserted that man was made happy mainly by the
virtue of the mind.  The one also said that the wise man should flee
from the republic; the other, that he should administer its affairs. 
Yet did not each gather disciples to follow his own sect?  Indeed, in
the conspicuous and well-known porch, in gymnasia, in gardens, in places
public and private, they openly strove in bands each for his own
opinion, some asserting there was one world, others innumerable worlds;
some that this world had a beginning, others that it had not; some that
it would perish, others that it would exist always; some that it was
governed by the divine mind, others by chance and accident; some that
souls are immortal, others that they are mortal,—and of those who
asserted their immortality, some said they transmigrated through beasts,
others that it was by no means so; while of those who asserted their
mortality, some said they perished immediately after the body, others
that they survived either a little while or a longer time, but not
always; some fixing supreme good in the body, some in the mind, some in
both; others adding to the mind and body external good things; some
thinking that the bodily senses ought to be trusted always, some not
always, others never.  Now what people, senate, power, or public dignity
of the impious city has ever taken care to judge between all these and
other well-nigh innumerable dissensions of the philosophers, approving
and accepting some, and disapproving and rejecting others?  Has it not
held in its bosom at random, without any judgment, and confusedly, so
many controversies of men at variance, not about fields, houses, or
anything of a pecuniary nature, but about those things which make life
either miserable or happy?  Even if some true things were said in it,
yet falsehoods were uttered with the same licence; so that such a city
has not amiss received the title of the mystic Babylon.  For Babylon
means confusion, as we remember we have already explained.  Nor does it
matter to the devil, its king, how they wrangle among themselves in
contradictory errors, since all alike deservedly belong to him on
account of their great and varied impiety.

<span id="iv.XVIII.41-p4"></span>But that nation, that people, that
city, that republic, these Israelites, to whom the oracles of God were
entrusted, by no means confounded with similar licence false prophets
with the true prophets; but, agreeing together, and differing in
nothing, acknowledged and upheld the authentic authors of their sacred
books.  These were their philosophers, these were their sages, divines,
prophets, and teachers of probity and piety.  Whoever was wise and lived
according to them was wise and lived not according to men, but according
to God who hath spoken by them.  If sacrilege is forbidden there, God
hath forbidden it.  If it is said, “Honor thy father and thy
mother,” <span id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214.md) God hath commanded
it.  If it is said, “Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not
kill, Thou shall not steal,” <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215.md)
and other similar commandments, not human lips but the divine oracles
have enounced them.  Whatever truth certain philosophers, amid their
false opinions, were able to see, and strove by laborious discussions to
persuade men of,—such as that God had made this world, and Himself most
providently governs it, or of the nobility of the virtues, of the love
of country, of fidelity in friendship, of good works and everything
pertaining to virtuous manners, although they knew not to what end and
what rule all these things were to be referred,—all these, by words
prophetic, that is, divine, although spoken by men, were commended to
the people in that city, and not inculcated by contention in arguments,
so that he who should know them might be afraid of contemning, not the
wit of men, but the oracle of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[385:1215](1020559.htm#fr_1214.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.41-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.41-p5"></span> [Ex.
20.12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.41-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[385:1216](1020559.htm#fr_1215.md) <span
id="iv.XVIII.41-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII.41-p6"></span> [Ex.
20.13-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.41-p6.1"></span>, the order as in [Mark
10.19](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.XVIII.41-p6.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 42](1020560.md)
