[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020680)  [Next](1020682) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XXII.20"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.20-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XXII.20-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—That, in the Resurrection, the
Substance of Our Bodies, However Disintegrated, Shall Be Entirely
Reunited.</span>

<span id="iv.XXII.20-p2"></span>Far be it from us to fear that the
omnipotence of the Creator cannot, for the resuscitation and reanimation
of our bodies, recall all the portions which have been consumed by
beasts or fire, or have been dissolved into dust or ashes, or have
decomposed into water, or evaporated into the air.  Far from us be the
thought, that anything which escapes our observation in any most hidden
recess of nature either evades the knowledge or transcends the power of
the Creator of all things.  Cicero, the great authority of our
adversaries, wishing to define God as accurately as possible, says, “God
is a mind free and independent, without materiality, perceiving and
moving all things, and itself endowed with eternal movement.” <span
id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648)   This he found in the systems of
the greatest philosophers.  Let me ask, then, in their own language, how
anything can either lie hid from Him who perceives all things, or
irrevocably escape Him who moves all things?

<span id="iv.XXII.20-p4"></span>This leads me to reply to that question
which seems the most difficult of all,—To whom, in the resurrection,
will belong the flesh of a dead man which has become the flesh of a
living man?  For if some one, famishing for want and pressed with
hunger, use human flesh as food,—an extremity not unknown, as both
ancient history and the unhappy experience of our own days have taught
us,—can it be contended, with any show of reason, that all the flesh
eaten has been evacuated, and that none of it has been assimilated to
the substance of the eater though the very emaciation which existed
before, and has now disappeared, sufficiently indicates what large
deficiencies have been filled up with this food?  But I have already
made some remarks which will suffice for the solution of this difficulty
also.  For all the flesh which hunger has consumed finds its way into
the air by evaporation, whence, as we have said, God Almighty can recall
it.  That flesh, therefore, shall be restored to the man in whom it
first became human flesh.  For it must be looked upon as borrowed by the
other person, and, like a pecuniary loan, must be returned to the
lender.  His own flesh, however, which he lost by famine, shall be
restored to him by Him who can recover even what has evaporated.  And
though it had been absolutely annihilated, so that no part of its
substance remained in any secret spot of nature, the Almighty could
restore it by such means as He saw fit.  For this sentence, uttered by
the Truth, “Not a hair of your head shall perish,” forbids us to suppose
that, though no hair of a man’s head can perish, yet the large portions
of his flesh eaten and consumed by the famishing can perish.

<span id="iv.XXII.20-p5"></span>From all that we have thus considered,
and discussed with such poor ability as we can command, we gather this
conclusion, that in <span id="page_499">p. 499</span> <span
id="iv.XXII.20-Page_499"></span> the resurrection of the flesh the body
shall be of that size which it either had attained or should have
attained in the flower of its youth, and shall enjoy the beauty that
arises from preserving symmetry and proportion in all its members.  And
it is reasonable to suppose that, for the preservation of this beauty,
any part of the body’s substance, which, if placed in one spot, would
produce a deformity, shall be distributed through the whole of it, so
that neither any part, nor the symmetry of the whole, may be lost, but
only the general stature of the body somewhat increased by the
distribution in all the parts of that which, in one place, would have
been unsightly.  Or if it is contended that each will rise with the same
stature as that of the body he died in, we shall not obstinately dispute
this, provided only there be no deformity, no infirmity, no languor, no
corruption,—nothing of any kind which would ill become that kingdom in
which the children of the resurrection and of the promise shall be equal
to the angels of God, if not in body and age, at least in happiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[498:1649](1020681.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="iv.XXII.20-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XXII.20-p3"></span> Cic. *Tusc. Quæst.* i. 27.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020682)
