[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020271)  [Next](1020273.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.1-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.1-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—That the Platonists Themselves Have
Determined that God Alone Can Confer Happiness Either on Angels or Men,
But that It Yet Remains a Question Whether Those Spirits Whom They
Direct Us to Worship, that We May Obtain Happiness, Wish Sacrifice to Be
Offered to Themselves, or to the One God Only.</span>

<span id="iv.X.1-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iv.X.1-p2.1"></span>It</span> is the decided opinion of all who use
their brains, that all men desire to be happy.  But who are happy, or
how they become so, these are questions about which the weakness of
human understanding stirs endless and angry controversies, in which
philosophers have wasted their strength and expended their leisure.  To
adduce and discuss their various opinions would be tedious, and is
unnecessary.  The reader may remember what we said in the eighth book,
while making a selection of the philosophers with whom we might discuss
the question regarding the future life of happiness, whether we can
reach it by paying divine honors to the one true God, the Creator of all
gods, or by worshipping many gods, and he will not expect us to repeat
here the same argument, especially as, even if he has forgotten it, he
may refresh his memory by reperusal.  For we made selection of the
Platonists, justly esteemed the noblest of the philosophers, because
they had the wit to perceive that the human soul, immortal and rational,
or intellectual, as it is, cannot be happy except by partaking of the
light of that God by whom both itself and the world were made; and also
that the happy life which all men desire cannot be reached by any who
does not cleave with a pure and holy love to that one supreme good, the
unchangeable God.  But as even these philosophers, whether accommodating
to the folly and ignorance of the people, or, as the apostle says,
“becoming vain in their imaginations,” <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368.md) supposed or allowed others to suppose
that many gods should be worshipped, so that some of them considered
that divine honor by worship and sacrifice should be rendered even to
the demons (an error I have already exploded), we must now, by God’s
help, ascertain what is thought about our religious worship and piety by
those immortal and blessed spirits, who dwell in the heavenly places
among dominations, principalities, powers, whom the Platonists call
gods, and some either good demons, or, like us, angels,—that is to say,
to put it more plainly, whether the angels desire us to offer sacrifice
and worship, and to consecrate our possessions and ourselves, to them or
only to God, theirs and ours.

<span id="iv.X.1-p4"></span>For this is the worship which is due to the
Divinity, or, to speak more accurately, to the Deity; and, to express
this worship in a single word as there does not occur to me any Latin
term sufficiently exact, I shall avail myself, whenever necessary, of a
Greek word. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.1-p4.1"></span>Λατρεία</span>, whenever it occurs in Scripture,
is rendered by the word service.  But that service which is due to men,
and in reference to which the apostle writes that servants must be
subject to their own masters, <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369.md) is
usually designated by another word in Greek, <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370.md) whereas the service which is paid to
God alone by worship, is always, or almost always, called <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.X.1-p6.2"></span>λατρεία</span> in the usage
of those who wrote from the divine oracles.  This cannot so well be
called simply “cultus,” for in that case it would not seem to be due
exclusively to God; for the same word is applied to the respect <span
id="page_181">p. 181</span> <span id="iv.X.1-Page_181"></span> we pay
either to the memory or the living presence of men.  From it, too, we
derive the words agriculture, colonist, and others. <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371.md)   And the heathen call their gods
“cœlicolæ,” not because they worship heaven, but because they dwell in
it, and as it were colonize it,—not in the sense in which we call those
colonists who are attached to their native soil to cultivate it under
the rule of the owners, but in the sense in which the great master of
the Latin language says, “There was an ancient city inhabited by Tyrian
colonists.” <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372.md)   He called them
colonists, not because they cultivated the soil, but because they
inhabited the city.  So, too, cities that have hived off from larger
cities are called colonies.  Consequently, while it is quite true that,
using the word in a special sense, “cult” can be rendered to none but
God, yet, as the word is applied to other things besides, the cult due
to God cannot in Latin be expressed by this word alone.

<span id="iv.X.1-p9"></span>The word “religion” might seem to express
more definitely the worship due to God alone, and therefore Latin
translators have used this word to represent <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.1-p9.1"></span>θρησκεία</span>; yet, as not only the
uneducated, but also the best instructed, use the word religion to
express human ties, and relationships, and affinities, it would
inevitably introduce ambiguity to use this word in discussing the
worship of God, unable as we are to say that religion is nothing else
than the worship of God, without contradicting the common usage which
applies this word to the observance of social relationships.  “Piety,”
again, or, as the Greeks say, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.1-p9.2"></span>εὐσέβεια</span>, is commonly understood as the
proper designation of the worship of God.  Yet this word also is used of
dutifulness to parents.  The common people, too, use it of works of
charity, which, I suppose, arises from the circumstance that God enjoins
the performance of such works, and declares that He is pleased with them
instead of, or in preference to sacrifices.  From this usage it has also
come to pass that God Himself is called pious, <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373.md) in which sense the Greeks never use
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.X.1-p10.3"></span>εὐσεβεῖν</span>,
though <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.1-p10.4"></span>εὐσέβεια</span> is applied to works of charity
by their common people also.  In some passages of Scripture, therefore,
they have sought to preserve the distinction by using not <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.X.1-p10.5"></span>εὐσέβεια</span>, the more
general word, but <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.1-p10.6"></span>θεοσέβεια</span>, which literally denotes the
worship of God.  We, on the other hand, cannot express either of these
ideas by one word.  This worship, then, which in Greek is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.X.1-p10.7"></span>λατρεία</span>, and in
Latin “servitus” \[service\], but the service due to God only; this
worship, which in Greek is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.1-p10.8"></span>θρησκεία</span>, and in Latin “religio,” but
the religion by which we are bound to God only; this worship, which they
call <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.1-p10.9"></span>θεοσέβεια</span>, but which we cannot express
in one word, but call it the worship of God,—this, we say, belongs only
to that God who is the true God, and who makes His worshippers
gods. <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374.md)   And therefore, whoever
these immortal and blessed inhabitants of heaven be, if they do not love
us, and wish us to be blessed, then we ought not to worship them; and if
they do love us and desire our happiness, they cannot wish us to be made
happy by any other means than they themselves have enjoyed,—for how
could they wish our blessedness to flow from one source, theirs from
another?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_368"></span>[180:369](1020272.htm#fr_368.md) <span
id="iv.X.1-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.1-p3"></span> [Rom.
1.21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.X.1-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[180:370](1020272.htm#fr_369.md) <span
id="iv.X.1-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.1-p5"></span> [Eph.
6.5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.X.1-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[180:371](1020272.htm#fr_370.md) <span
id="iv.X.1-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.X.1-p6"></span> Namely, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.X.1-p6.1"></span>δουλεία</span>:  comp. *Quæst in Exod.* 94;
*Quæst. in Gen.* 21; *Contra Faustum,* 15. 9, etc.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[181:372](1020272.htm#fr_371.md) <span
id="iv.X.1-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.X.1-p7"></span> *Agricolæ, coloni, incolæ.*

<span id="fn_372"></span>[181:373](1020272.htm#fr_372.md) <span
id="iv.X.1-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.1-p8"></span> Virgil, *Æn.*, i. 12.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[181:374](1020272.htm#fr_373.md) <span
id="iv.X.1-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.X.1-p10"></span> [2 Chr.
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#009.md), [Eccl.
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.X.1-p10.1"></span>;
[Judith 7.20](../../../bib/apo/jdt007.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.X.1-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[181:375](1020272.htm#fr_374.md) <span
id="iv.X.1-p10.10"></span>

<span id="iv.X.1-p11"></span> [Ps.
82.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.X.1-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020273.md)
