[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020117)  [Next](1020119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.13"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.13-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.13-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—Concerning Those Who Assert that
Only Rational Animals are Parts of the One God.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.13-p2"></span>But if they contend that only rational
animals, such as men, are parts of God, I do not really see how, if the
whole world is God, they can separate beasts from being parts of Him. 
But what need is there of striving about that?  Concerning the rational
animal himself,—that is, man,—what more unhappy belief can be
entertained than that a part of God is whipped when a boy is whipped? 
And who, unless he is quite mad, could bear the thought that parts of
God can become lascivi <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="iv.IV.13-Page_72"></span> ous, iniquitous, impious, and altogether
damnable?  In brief, why is God angry at those who do not worship Him,
since these offenders are parts of Himself?  It remains, therefore, that
they must say that all the gods have their own lives; that each one
lives for himself, and none of them is a part of any one; but that all
are to be worshipped,—at least as many as can be known and worshipped;
for they are so many it is impossible that all can be so.  And of all
these, I believe that Jupiter, because he presides as king, is thought
by them to have both established and extended the Roman empire.  For if
he has not done it, what other god do they believe could have attempted
so great a work, when they must all be occupied with their own offices
and works, nor can one intrude on that of another?  Could the kingdom of
men then be propagated and increased by the king of the gods?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1020119)
