[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020281)  [Next](1020283.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.11"></span>

<span id="iv.X.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Of Porphyry’s Epistle to Anebo, in
Which He Asks for Information About the Differences Among Demons.</span>

<span id="iv.X.11-p2"></span>It was a better tone which Porphyry adopted
in his letter to Anebo the Egyptian, in which, assuming the character of
an inquirer consulting him, he unmasks and explodes these sacrilegious
arts.  In that letter, indeed, he repudiates all demons, whom he
maintains to be so foolish as to be attracted by the sacrificial vapors,
and therefore residing not in the ether, but in the air beneath the
moon, and indeed in the moon itself.  Yet he has not the boldness to
attribute to all the demons all the deceptions and malicious and foolish
practices which justly move his indignation.  For, though he
acknowledges that as a race demons are foolish, he so far accommodates
himself to popular ideas as to call some of them benignant demons.  He
expresses surprise that sacrifices not only incline the gods, but also
compel and force them to do what men wish; and he is at a loss to
understand how the sun and moon, and other visible celestial bodies,—for
bodies he does not doubt that they are,—are considered gods, if the gods
are distinguished from the demons by their incorporeality; also, if they
are gods, how some are called beneficent and others hurtful, and how
they, being corporeal, are numbered with the gods, who are incorporeal. 
He inquires further, and still as one in doubt, whether diviners and
wonderworkers are men of unusually powerful souls, or whether the power
to do these things is communicated by spirits from without.  He inclines
to the latter opinion, on the ground that it is by the use of stones and
herbs that they lay spells on people, and open closed doors, and do
similar wonders.  And on this account, he says, some suppose that there
is a race of beings whose property it is to listen to men,—a race
deceitful, full of contrivances, capable of assuming all forms,
simulating gods, demons, and dead men,—and that it is this race which
bring about all these things which have the appearance of good or evil,
but that what is really good they never help us in, and are indeed
unacquainted with, for they make wickedness easy, but throw obstacles in
the path of those who eagerly follow virtue; and that they are filled
with pride and rashness, delight in sacrificial odors, are taken with
flattery.  These and the other characteristics of this race of deceitful
and malicious spirits, who come into the souls of men and delude their
senses, both in sleep and waking, he describes not as things of which he
is himself convinced, but only with so much suspicion and doubt as to
cause him to speak of them as commonly received opinions.  We should
sympathize with this great philosopher in the difficulty he experienced
in acquainting himself with and confidently assailing the whole
fraternity of devils, which any Christian old woman would unhesitatingly
describe and most unreservedly detest.  Perhaps, however, he shrank from
offending Anebo, to whom he was writing, himself the most eminent patron
of these mysteries, or the others who marvelled at these magical feats
as divine works, and closely allied to the worship of the gods.

<span id="iv.X.11-p3"></span>However, he pursues this subject, and,
still in the character of an inquirer, mentions some things which no
sober judgment could attribute to any but malicious and deceitful
powers.  He asks why, after the better class of spirits have been
invoked, the worse should be commanded to perform the wicked desires of
men; why they do not hear a man who has just left a woman’s embrace,
while they themselves make no scruple of tempting men to incest and
adultery; why their priests are commanded to abstain from animal food
for fear of being polluted by the corporeal exhalations, while they
themselves are attracted by the fumes of sacrifices and other
exhalations; why the initiated are forbidden to touch a dead body, while
their mysteries are celebrated almost entirely by means of dead bodies;
why <span id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span
id="iv.X.11-Page_188"></span> it is that a man addicted to any vice
should utter threats, not to a demon or to the soul of a dead man, but
to the sun and moon, or some of the heavenly bodies, which he
intimidates by imaginary terrors, that he may wring from them a real
boon,—for he threatens that he will demolish the sky, and such like
impossibilities,—that those gods, being alarmed, like silly children,
with imaginary and absurd threats, may do what they are ordered. 
Porphyry further relates that a man, Chæremon, profoundly versed in
these sacred or rather sacrilegious mysteries, had written that the
famous Egyptian mysteries of Isis and her husband Osiris had very great
influence with the gods to compel them to do what they were ordered,
when he who used the spells threatened to divulge or do away with these
mysteries, and cried with a threatening voice that he would scatter the
members of Osiris if they neglected his orders.  Not without reason is
Porphyry surprised that a man should utter such wild and empty threats
against the gods,—not against gods of no account, but against the
heavenly gods, and those that shine with sidereal light,—and that these
threats should be effectual to constrain them with resistless power, and
alarm them so that they fulfill his wishes.  Not without reason does he,
in the character of an inquirer into the reasons of these surprising
things, give it to be understood that they are done by that race of
spirits which he previously described as if quoting other people’s
opinions,—spirits who deceive not, as he said, by nature, but by their
own corruption, and who simulate gods and dead men, but not, as he said,
demons, for demons they really are.  As to his idea that by means of
herbs, and stones, and animals, and certain incantations and noises, and
drawings, sometimes fanciful, and sometimes copied from the motions of
the heavenly bodies, men create upon earth powers capable of bringing
about various results, all that is only the mystification which these
demons practise on those who are subject to them, for the sake of
furnishing themselves with merriment at the expense of their dupes. 
Either, then, Porphyry was sincere in his doubts and inquiries, and
mentioned these things to demonstrate and put beyond question that they
were the work, not of powers which aid us in obtaining life, but of
deceitful demons; or, to take a more favorable view of the philosopher,
he adopted this method with the Egyptian who was wedded to these errors,
and was proud of them, that he might not offend him by assuming the
attitude of a teacher, nor discompose his mind by the altercation of a
professed assailant, but, by assuming the character of an inquirer, and
the humble attitude of one who was anxious to learn, might turn his
attention to these matters, and show how worthy they are to be despised
and relinquished.  Towards the conclusion of his letter, he requests
Anebo to inform him what the Egyptian wisdom indicates as the way to
blessedness.  But as to those who hold intercourse with the gods, and
pester them only for the sake of finding a runaway slave, or acquiring
property, or making a bargain of a marriage, or such things, he declares
that their pretensions to wisdom are vain.  He adds that these same
gods, even granting that on other points their utterances were true,
were yet so ill-advised and unsatisfactory in their disclosures about
blessedness, that they cannot be either gods or good demons, but are
either that spirit who is called the deceiver, or mere fictions of the
imagination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020283.md)
