[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020428)  [Next](1020430.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XV.8"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.8-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XV.8-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—What Cain’s Reason Was for Building
a City So Early in the History of the Human Race.</span>

<span id="iv.XV.8-p2"></span>At present it is the history which I aim at
defending, that Scripture may not be reckoned incredible when it relates
that one man built a city at a time in which there seem to have been but
four men upon earth, or rather indeed but three, after one brother slew
the other,—to wit, the first man the father of all, and Cain himself,
and his son Enoch, by whose name the city was itself called.  But they
who are moved by this consideration forget to take into account that the
writer of the sacred history does not necessarily mention all the men
who might be alive at that time, but those only whom the scope of his
work required him to name.  The design of that writer (who in this
matter was the instrument of the Holy Ghost) was to descend to Abraham
<span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span id="iv.XV.8-Page_290"></span>
through the successions of ascertained generations propagated from one
man, and then to pass from Abraham’s seed to the people of God, in whom,
separated as they were from other nations, was prefigured and predicted
all that relates to the city whose reign is eternal, and to its king and
founder Christ, which things were foreseen in the Spirit as destined to
come; yet neither is this object so effected as that nothing is said of
the other society of men which we call the earthly city, but mention is
made of it so far as seemed needful to enhance the glory of the heavenly
city by contrast to its opposite.  Accordingly, when the divine
Scripture, in mentioning the number of years which those men lived,
concludes its account of each man of whom it speaks, with the words,
“And he begat sons and daughters, and all his days were so and so, and
he died,” are we to understand that, because it does not name those sons
and daughters, therefore, during that long term of years over which one
lifetime extended in those early days, there might not have been born
very many men, by whose united numbers not one but several cities might
have been built?  But it suited the purpose of God, by whose inspiration
these histories were composed, to arrange and distinguish from the first
these two societies in their several generations,—that on the one side
the generations of men, that is to say, of those who live according to
man, and on the other side the generations of the sons of God, that is
to say, of men living according to God, might be traced down together
and yet apart from one another as far as the deluge, at which point
their dissociation and association are exhibited:  their dissociation,
inasmuch as the generations of both lines are recorded in separate
tables, the one line descending from the fratricide Cain, the other from
Seth, who had been born to Adam instead of him whom his brother slew;
their association, inasmuch as the good so deteriorated that the whole
race became of such a character that it was swept away by the deluge,
with the exception of one just man, whose name was Noah, and his wife
and three sons and three daughters-in-law, which eight persons were
alone deemed worthy to escape from that desolating visitation which
destroyed all men.

<span id="iv.XV.8-p3"></span>Therefore, although it is written, “And
Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and bare Enoch, and he builded a
city and called the name of the city after the name of his son
Enoch,” <span id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794.md) it does not follow that
we are to believe this to have been his first-born; for we cannot
suppose that this is proved by the expression “he knew his wife,” as if
then for the first time he had had intercourse with her.  For in the
case of Adam, the father of all, this expression is used not only when
Cain, who seems to have been his first-born, was conceived, but also
afterwards the same Scripture says, “Adam knew Eve his wife, and she
conceived, and bare a son, and called his name Seth.” <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795.md)   Whence it is obvious that Scripture
employs this expression neither always when a birth is recorded nor then
only when the birth of a first-born is mentioned.  Neither is it
necessary to suppose that Enoch was Cain’s first-born because he named
his city after him.  For it is quite possible that though he had other
sons, yet for some reason the father loved him more than the rest. 
Judah was not the first-born, though he gives his name to Judæa and the
Jews.  But even though Enoch was the first-born of the city’s founder,
that is no reason for supposing that the father named the city after him
as soon as he was born; for at that time he, being but a solitary man,
could not have founded a civic community, which is nothing else than a
multitude of men bound together by some associating tie.  But when his
family increased to such numbers that he had quite a population, then it
became possible to him both to build a city, and give it, when founded,
the name of his son.  For so long was the life of those antediluvians,
that he who lived the shortest time of those whose years are mentioned
in Scripture attained to the age of 753 years. <span
id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796.md)   And though no one attained the age
of a thousand years, several exceeded the age of nine hundred.  Who then
can doubt that during the lifetime of one man the human race might be so
multiplied that there would be a population to build and occupy not one
but several cities?  And this might very readily be conjectured from the
fact that from one man, Abraham, in not much more than four hundred
years, the numbers of the Hebrew race so increased, that in the exodus
of that people from Egypt there are recorded to have been six hundred
thousand men capable of bearing arms, <span
id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797.md) and this over and above the Idumæans,
who, though not numbered with Israel’s descendants, were yet sprung from
his brother, also a grandson of Abraham; and over and above the other
nations which were of the same stock of Abraham, though not through
Sarah,—that is, his descendants by Hagar and Keturah, the Ishmaelites,
Midianites, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_794"></span>[290:795](1020429.htm#fr_794.md) <span
id="iv.XV.8-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.8-p4"></span> [Gen.
4.17](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.XV.8-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[290:796](1020429.htm#fr_795.md) <span
id="iv.XV.8-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.8-p5"></span> [Gen.
4.25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.XV.8-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[290:797](1020429.htm#fr_796.md) <span
id="iv.XV.8-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.8-p6"></span> Lamech, according to the LXX.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[290:798](1020429.htm#fr_797.md) <span
id="iv.XV.8-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XV.8-p7"></span> [Ex.
12.37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037.md)<span id="iv.XV.8-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1020430.md)
