[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020135)  [Next](1020137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IV.31"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.31-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.IV.31-p1.1"></span>Chapter 31.—Concerning the Opinions of Varro,
Who, While Reprobating the Popular Belief, Thought that Their Worship
Should Be Confined to One God, Though He Was Unable to Discover the True
God.</span>

<span id="iv.IV.31-p2"></span>What says Varro himself, whom we grieve to
have found, although not by his own judgment, placing the scenic plays
among things divine?  When in many passages he is exhorting, like a
religious man, to the worship of the gods, does he not in doing so admit
that he does not in his own judgment believe those things which he
relates that the Roman state has instituted; so that he does not
hesitate to affirm that if he were founding a new state, he could
enumerate the gods and their names better by the rule of nature?  But
being born into a nation already ancient, he says that he finds himself
bound to accept the traditional names and surnames of the gods, and the
histories connected with them, and that his purpose in investigating and
publishing these details is to incline the people to worship the gods,
and not to despise them.  By which words this most acute man
sufficiently indicates that he does not publish all things, because they
would not only have been contemptible to himself, but would have seemed
despicable even to the rabble, unless they had been passed over in
silence.  I should be thought to conjecture these things, unless he
himself, in another passage, had openly said, in speaking of religious
rites, that many things are true which it is not only not useful for the
common people to know, but that it is expedient that the people should
think otherwise, even though falsely, and therefore the Greeks have shut
up the religious ceremonies and mysteries in silence, and within walls. 
In this he no doubt expresses the policy of the so-called wise men by
whom states and peoples are ruled.  Yet by this crafty device the malign
demons are wonderfully delighted, who possess alike the deceivers and
the deceived, and from whose tyranny nothing sets free save the grace of
God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="iv.IV.31-p3"></span>The same most acute and learned author
also says, that those alone seem to him to have perceived what God is,
who have believed Him to be the soul of the world, governing it by
design and reason. <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185)   And by
this, it appears, that although he did not attain to the truth,—for the
true God is not a soul, but the maker and author of the soul,—yet if he
could have been free to go against the prejudices of custom, he could
have confessed and counselled others that the one God ought to be
worshipped, who governs the world by design and reason; so that on this
subject only this point would remain to be debated with him, that he had
called Him a soul, and not rather the creator of the soul.  He says,
also, that the ancient Romans, for more than a hundred and seventy
years, worshipped the gods without an image. <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186)   “And if this custom,” he says,
“could have remained till now, the gods would have been more purely
worshipped.”  In favor of this opinion, he cites as a witness among
others the Jewish nation; nor does he hesitate to conclude that passage
by saying of those who first consecrated images for the people, that
they have both taken away religious fear from their fellow-citizens, and
increased error, wisely thinking that the gods easily fall into contempt
when exhibited under the stolidity of images.  But as he does not say
they have transmitted error, but that they have increased it, he
therefore wishes it to be understood that there was error already when
there were no images.  Wherefore, when he says they alone have perceived
what God is who have believed Him to be the governing soul of the world,
and thinks that the rites of religion would have been more purely
observed without images, who fails to see how near he has come to the
truth?  For if he had been able to do anything against so inveterate an
error, he would certainly have given it as his opinion both that the one
God should be worshipped, and that He should be worshipped <span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="iv.IV.31-Page_82"></span> without an
image; and having so nearly discovered the truth, perhaps he might
easily have been put in mind of the mutability of the soul, and might
thus have perceived that the true God is that immutable nature which
made the soul itself.  Since these things are so, whatever ridicule such
men have poured in their writings against the plurality of the gods,
they have done so rather as compelled by the secret will of God to
confess them, than as trying to persuade others.  If, therefore, any
testimonies are adduced by us from these writings, they are adduced for
the confutation of those who are unwilling to consider from how great
and malignant a power of the demons the singular sacrifice of the
shedding of the most holy blood, and the gift of the imparted Spirit,
can set us free.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[81:186](1020136.htm#fr_185) <span
id="iv.IV.31-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.31-p4"></span> See Cicero, *De Nat. Deor.* i. 2.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[81:187](1020136.htm#fr_186) <span
id="iv.IV.31-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.IV.31-p5"></span> Plutarch’s *Numa,* c. 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](1020137)
