[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020474)  [Next](1020476) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVI.26"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XVI.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—Of God’s Attestation to Abraham,
by Which He Assures Him, When Now Old, of a Son by the Barren Sarah, and
Appoints Him the Father of the Nations, and Seals His Faith in the
Promise by the Sacrament of Circumcision.</span>

<span id="iv.XVI.26-p2"></span>After these things Ishmael was born of
Hagar; and Abraham might think that in him <span id="page_326">p.
326</span> <span id="iv.XVI.26-Page_326"></span> was fulfilled what God
had promised him, saying, when he wished to adopt his home-born servant,
“This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth of thee, he
shall be thine heir.” <span id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919)  
Therefore, lest he should think that what was promised was fulfilled in
the handmaid’s son, “when Abram was ninety years old and nine, God
appeared to him, and said unto him, I am God; be well-pleasing in my
sight, and be without complaint, and I will make my covenant between me
and thee, and will fill thee exceedingly.” <span
id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920)

<span id="iv.XVI.26-p5"></span>Here there are more distinct promises
about the calling of the nations in Isaac, that is, in the son of the
promise, by which grace is signified, and not nature; for the son is
promised from an old man and a barren old woman.  For although God
effects even the natural course of procreation, yet where the agency of
God is manifest, through the decay or failure of nature, grace is more
plainly discerned.  And because this was to be brought about, not by
generation, but by regeneration, circumcision was enjoined now, when a
son was promised of Sarah.  And by ordering all, not only sons, but also
home-born and purchased servants to be circumcised, he testifies that
this grace pertains to all.  For what else does circumcision signify
than a nature renewed on the putting off of the old?  And what else does
the eighth day mean than Christ, who rose again when the week was
completed, that is, after the Sabbath?  The very names of the parents
are changed:  all things proclaim newness, and the new covenant is
shadowed forth in the old.  For what does the term old covenant imply
but the concealing of the new?  And what does the term new covenant
imply but the revealing of the old?  The laughter of Abraham is the
exultation of one who rejoices, not the scornful laughter of one who
mistrusts.  And those words of his in his heart, “Shall a son be born to
me that am an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years
old, bear?” are not the words of doubt, but of wonder.  And when it is
said, “And I will give to thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land in
which thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting
possession,” if it troubles any one whether this is to be held as
fulfilled, or whether its fulfilment may still be looked for, since no
kind of earthly possession can be everlasting for any nation whatever,
let him know that the word translated everlasting, by our writers is
what the Greeks term <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.XVI.26-p5.1"></span>αἰώ·νιον</span>, which is derived from <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.XVI.26-p5.2"></span>αἰὼ·ν</span>, the Greek
for *sæculum*, an age.  But the Latins have not ventured to translate
this by *secular*, lest they should change the meaning into something
widely different.  For many things are called secular which so happen in
this world as to pass away even in a short time; but what is termed
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.XVI.26-p5.3"></span>αἰω·νιον</span>
either has no end, or lasts to the very end of this world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_919"></span>[326:920](1020475.htm#fr_919) <span
id="iv.XVI.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.26-p3"></span> [Gen.
15.4](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#004)<span id="iv.XVI.26-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[326:921](1020475.htm#fr_920) <span
id="iv.XVI.26-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVI.26-p4"></span> [Gen.
17.1-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XVI.26-p4.1"></span>.  The passage is given in full by Augustin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1020476)
