[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020023)  [Next](1020025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—Of the Violence Which May Be Done
to the Body by Another’s Lust, While the Mind Remains Inviolate.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p2"></span>But is there a fear that even another’s
lust may pollute the violated?  It will not pollute, if it be
another’s:  if it pollute, it is not another’s, but is shared also by
the polluted.  But since purity is a virtue of the soul, and has for its
companion virtue, the fortitude which will rather endure all ills than
consent to evil; and since no one, however magnanimous and pure, has
always the disposal of his own body, but can control only the consent
and refusal of his will, what sane man can suppose that, if his body be
seized and forcibly made use of to satisfy the lust of another, he
thereby loses his purity?  For if purity can be thus destroyed, then
assuredly purity is no virtue of the soul; nor can it be numbered among
those good things by which the life is made good, but among the good
things of the body, in the same category as strength, beauty, sound and
unbroken health, and, in short, all such good things as may be
diminished without at all diminishing the goodness and rectitude of our
life.  But if purity be nothing better than these, why should the body
be perilled that it may be preserved?  If, on the other hand, it belongs
to the soul, then not even when the body is violated is it lost.  Nay
more, the virtue of holy continence, when it resists the uncleanness of
carnal lust, sanctifies even the body, and therefore when this
continence remains unsubdued, even the sanctity of the body is
preserved, because the will to use it holily remains, and, so far as
lies in the body itself, the power also.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p3"></span>For the sanctity of the body does not
consist in the integrity of its members, nor in their exemption from all
touch; for they are <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="iv.ii.xix-Page_13"></span> exposed to various accidents which do
violence to and wound them, and the surgeons who administer relief often
perform operations that sicken the spectator.  A midwife, suppose, has
(whether maliciously or accidentally, or through unskillfulness)
destroyed the virginity of some girl, while endeavoring to ascertain
it:  I suppose no one is so foolish as to believe that, by this
destruction of the integrity of one organ, the virgin has lost anything
even of her bodily sanctity.  And thus, so long as the soul keeps this
firmness of purpose which sanctifies even the body, the violence done by
another’s lust makes no impression on this bodily sanctity, which is
preserved intact by one’s own persistent continence.  Suppose a virgin
violates the oath she has sworn to God, and goes to meet her seducer
with the intention of yielding to him, shall we say that as she goes she
is possessed even of bodily sanctity, when already she has lost and
destroyed that sanctity of soul which sanctifies the body?  Far be it
from us to so misapply words.  Let us rather draw this conclusion, that
while the sanctity of the soul remains even when the body is violated,
the sanctity of the body is not lost; and that, in like manner, the
sanctity of the body is lost when the sanctity of the soul is violated,
though the body itself remains intact.  And therefore a woman who has
been violated by the sin of another, and without any consent of her own,
has no cause to put herself to death; much less has she cause to commit
suicide in order to avoid such violation, for in that case she commits
certain homicide to prevent a crime which is uncertain as yet, and not
her own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1020025)
