[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020588)  [Next](1020590.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIX.16"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.16-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIX.16-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—Of Equitable Rule.</span>

<span id="iv.XIX.16-p2"></span>And therefore, although our righteous
fathers <span id="fr_1288"></span>[1289](#fn_1288.md) had slaves, and
administered their domestic affairs so as to distinguish between the
condition of slaves and the heirship of sons in regard to the blessings
of this life, yet in regard to the worship of God, in whom we hope for
eternal blessings, they took an equally loving oversight of all the
members of their household.  And this is so much in accordance with the
natural order, that the head of the household was called
*paterfamilias*; and this name has been so generally accepted, that even
those whose rule is unrighteous are glad to apply it to themselves.
<span id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span id="iv.XIX.16-Page_412"></span>
But those who are true fathers of their households desire and endeavor
that all the members of their household, equally with their own
children, should worship and win God, and should come to that heavenly
home in which the duty of ruling men is no longer necessary, because the
duty of caring for their everlasting happiness has also ceased; but,
until they reach that home, masters ought to feel their position of
authority a greater burden than servants their service.  And if any
member of the family interrupts the domestic peace by disobedience, he
is corrected either by word or blow, or some kind of just and legitimate
punishment, such as society permits, that he may himself be the better
for it, and be readjusted to the family harmony from which he had
dislocated himself.  For as it is not benevolent to give a man help at
the expense of some greater benefit he might receive, so it is not
innocent to spare a man at the risk of his falling into graver sin.  To
be innocent, we must not only do harm to no man, but also restrain him
from sin or punish his sin, so that either the man himself who is
punished may profit by his experience, or others be warned by his
example.  Since, then, the house ought to be the beginning or element of
the city, and every beginning bears reference to some end of its own
kind, and every element to the integrity of the whole of which it is an
element, it follows plainly enough that domestic peace has a relation to
civic peace,—in other words, that the well-ordered concord of domestic
obedience and domestic rule has a relation to the well-ordered concord
of civic obedience and civic rule.  And therefore it follows, further,
that the father of the family ought to frame his domestic rule in
accordance with the law of the city, so that the household may be in
harmony with the civic order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[411:1289](1020589.htm#fr_1288.md) <span
id="iv.XIX.16-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIX.16-p3"></span> The patriarchs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1020590.md)
