[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020183)  [Next](1020185) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VII.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.1-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VII.1-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—Whether, Since It is Evident that
Deity is Not to Be Found in the Civil Theology, We are to Believe that
It is to Be Found in the Select Gods.</span>

<span id="iv.VII.1-p2"></span>If there is any one whom the sixth book,
which I have last finished, has not persuaded that this divinity, or, so
to speak, deity—for this word also our authors do not hesitate to use,
in order to translate more accurately that which the Greeks call <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.VII.1-p2.1"></span>θεότης</span>;—if there is
any one, I say, whom the sixth book has not persuaded that this divinity
or deity is not to be found in that theology which they call civil, and
which Marcus Varro has explained in sixteen books,—that is, that the
happiness of eternal life is not attainable through the worship of gods
such as states have established to be worshipped, and that in such a
form,—perhaps, when he has read this book, he will not have anything
further to desire in order to the clearing up of this question.  For it
is possible that some one may think that at least the select and chief
gods, whom Varro comprised in his last book, and of whom we have not
spoken sufficiently, are to be worshipped on account of the blessed
life, which is none other than eternal.  In respect to which matter I do
not say what Tertullian said, perhaps more wittily than truly, “If gods
are selected like onions, certainly the rest are rejected as bad.” <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249)   I do not say this, for I see that
even from among the select, some are selected for some greater and more
excellent office:  as in warfare, when recruits have been elected, there
are some again elected from among those for the performance of some
greater military service; and in the church, when persons are elected to
be overseers, certainly the rest are not rejected, since all good
Christians are deservedly called elect; in the erection of a building
corner-stones are elected, though the other stones, which are destined
for other parts of the structure, are not rejected; grapes are elected
for eating, whilst the others, which we leave for drinking, are not
rejected.  There is no need of adducing many illustrations, since the
thing is evident.  Wherefore the selection of certain gods from among
many affords no proper reason why either he who wrote on this subject,
or the worshippers of the gods, or the gods themselves, should be
spurned.  We ought rather to seek to know what gods these are, and for
what purpose they may appear to have been selected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_249"></span>[122:250](1020184.htm#fr_249) <span
id="iv.VII.1-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.VII.1-p3"></span> Tert. *Apol.* 13, *Nec electio sine
reprobatione;* and *Ad Nationes,* ii. 9, *Si dei bulbi seliguntur, qui
non seliguntur, reprobi pronuntiantur.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1020185)
