[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020312)  [Next](1020314.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XI.9"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.9-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XI.9-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—What the Scriptures Teach Us to
Believe Concerning the Creation of the Angels.</span>

<span id="iv.XI.9-p2"></span>At present, since I have undertaken to
treat of the origin of the holy city, and first of the holy angels, who
constitute a large part of this city, and indeed the more blessed part,
since they have never been expatriated, I will give myself to the task
of explaining, by God’s help, and as far as seems suitable, the
Scriptures which relate to this point.  Where Scripture speaks of the
world’s creation, it is not plainly said whether or when the angels were
created; but if mention of them is made, it is implicitly under the name
of “heaven,” when it is said, “In the beginning God created the heavens
and the earth,” or perhaps rather under the name of “light,” of which
presently.  But that they were wholly omitted, I am unable to believe,
because it is written that God on the seventh day rested from all His
works which He made; and this very book itself begins, “In the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth,” so that before heaven and earth
God seems to have made nothing.  Since, therefore, He began with the
heavens and the earth,—and the earth itself, as Scripture adds, was at
first invisible and formless, light not being as yet made, and darkness
covering the face of the deep (that is to say, covering an undefined
chaos of earth and sea, for where light is not, darkness must needs
be),—and then when all things, which are recorded to have been completed
in six days, were created and arranged, <span id="page_210">p.
210</span> <span id="iv.XI.9-Page_210"></span> how should the angels be
omitted, as if they were not among the works of God, from which on the
seventh day He rested?  Yet, though the fact that the angels are the
work of God is not omitted here, it is indeed not explicitly mentioned;
but elsewhere Holy Scripture asserts it in the clearest manner.  For in
the Hymn of the Three Children in the Furnace it was said, “O all ye
works of the Lord bless ye the Lord;” <span
id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461.md) and among these works mentioned
afterwards in detail, the angels are named.  And in the psalm it is
said, “Praise ye the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the heights. 
Praise ye Him, all His angels; praise ye Him, all His hosts.  Praise ye
Him, sun and moon; praise him, all ye stars of light.  Praise Him, ye
heaven of heavens; and ye waters that be above the heavens.  Let them
praise the name of the Lord; for He commanded, and they were
created.” <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462.md)   Here the angels are
most expressly and by divine authority said to have been made by God,
for of them among the other heavenly things it is said, “He commanded,
and they were created.”  Who, then, will be bold enough to suggest that
the angels were made after the six days’ creation?  If any one is so
foolish, his folly is disposed of by a scripture of like authority,
where God says, “When the stars were made, the angels praised me with a
loud voice.” <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463.md)   The angels
therefore existed before the stars; and the stars were made the fourth
day.  Shall we then say that they were made the third day?  Far from it;
for we know what was made that day.  The earth was separated from the
water, and each element took its own distinct form, and the earth
produced all that grows on it.  On the second day, then?  Not even on
this; for on it the firmament was made between the waters above and
beneath, and was called “Heaven,” in which firmament the stars were made
on the fourth day.  There is no question, then, that if the angels are
included in the works of God during these six days, they are that light
which was called “Day,” and whose unity Scripture signalizes by calling
that day not the “first day,” but “one day.” <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464.md)   For the second day, the third, and
the rest are not other days; but the same “one” day is repeated to
complete the number six or seven, so that there should be knowledge both
of God’s works and of His rest.  For when God said, “Let there be light,
and there was light,” if we are justified in understanding in this light
the creation of the angels, then certainly they were created partakers
of the eternal light which is the unchangeable Wisdom of God, by which
all things were made, and whom we call the only-begotten Son of God; so
that they, being illumined by the Light that created them, might
themselves become light and be called “Day,” in participation of that
unchangeable Light and Day which is the Word of God, by whom both
themselves and all else were made.  “The true Light, which lighteth
every man that cometh into the world,” <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465.md) —this Light lighteth also every pure
angel, that he may be light not in himself, but in God; from whom if an
angel turn away, he becomes impure, as are all those who are called
unclean spirits, and are no longer light in the Lord, but darkness in
themselves, being deprived of the participation of Light eternal.  For
evil has no positive nature; but the loss of good has received the name
“evil.” <span id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_461"></span>[210:462](1020313.htm#fr_461.md) <span
id="iv.XI.9-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.9-p3"></span> Ver. 35.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[210:463](1020313.htm#fr_462.md) <span
id="iv.XI.9-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.9-p4"></span> [Ps.
148.1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.XI.9-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[210:464](1020313.htm#fr_463.md) <span
id="iv.XI.9-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.9-p5"></span> [Job
38.7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.XI.9-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[210:465](1020313.htm#fr_464.md) <span
id="iv.XI.9-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.9-p6"></span> Vives here notes that the Greek
theologians and Jerome held, with Plato, that spiritual creatures were
made first, and used by God in the creation of things material.  The
Latin theologians and Basil held that God made all things at once.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[210:466](1020313.htm#fr_465.md) <span
id="iv.XI.9-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.9-p7"></span> [John
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.XI.9-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[210:467](1020313.htm#fr_466.md) <span
id="iv.XI.9-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XI.9-p8"></span> *Mali enim nulla natura est:  sed amissio
boni, mali nomen accepit*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1020314.md)
