[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020631)  [Next](1020633) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XX.30"></span> <span id="page_449">p. 449</span> <span
id="iv.XX.30-Page_449"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XX.30-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—That in the Books of the Old
Testament, Where It is Said that God Shall Judge the World, the Person
of Christ is Not Explicitly Indicated, But It Plainly Appears from Some
Passages in Which the Lord God Speaks that Christ is Meant.</span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p2"></span>There are many other passages of Scripture
bearing on the last judgment of God,—so many, indeed, that to cite them
all would swell this book to an unpardonable size.  Suffice it to have
proved that both Old and New Testament enounce the judgment.  But in the
Old it is not so definitely declared as in the New that the judgment
shall be administered by Christ, that is, that Christ shall descend from
heaven as the Judge; for when it is therein stated by the Lord God or
His prophet that the Lord God shall come, we do not necessarily
understand this of Christ.  For both the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost are the Lord God.  We must not, however, leave this without
proof.  And therefore we must first show how Jesus Christ speaks in the
prophetical books under the title of the Lord God, while yet there can
be no doubt that it is Jesus Christ who speaks; so that in other
passages where this is not at once apparent, and where nevertheless it
is said that the Lord God will come to that last judgment, we may
understand that Jesus Christ is meant.  There is a passage in the
prophet Isaiah which illustrates what I mean.  For God says by the
prophet, “Hear me, Jacob and Israel, whom I call.  I am the first, and I
am for ever:  and my hand has founded the earth, and my right hand has
established the heaven.  I will call them, and they shall stand
together, and be gathered, and hear.  Who has declared to them these
things?  In love of thee I have done thy pleasure upon Babylon, that I
might take away the seed of the Chaldeans.  I have spoken, and I have
called:  I have brought him, and have made his way prosperous.  Come ye
near unto me, and hear this.  I have not spoken in secret from the
beginning; when they were made, there was I.  And now the Lord God and
His Spirit hath sent me.” <span id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476)  
It was Himself who was speaking as the Lord God; and yet we should not
have understood that it was Jesus Christ had He not added, “And now the
Lord God and His Spirit hath sent me.”  For He said this with reference
to the form of a servant, speaking of a future event as if it were past,
as in the same prophet we read, “He was led as a sheep to the
slaughter,” <span id="fr_1477"></span>[1478](#fn_1477) not “He shall be
led;” but the past tense is used to express the future.  And prophecy
constantly speaks in this way.

<span id="iv.XX.30-p5"></span>There is also another passage in Zechariah
which plainly declares that the Almighty sent the Almighty; and of what
persons can this be understood but of God the Father and God the Son? 
For it is written, “Thus saith the Lord Almighty, After the glory hath
He sent me unto the nations which spoiled you; for he that toucheth you
toucheth the apple of His eye.  Behold, I will bring mine hand upon
them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants:  and ye shall know
that the Lord Almighty hath sent me.” <span
id="fr_1478"></span>[1479](#fn_1478)   Observe, the Lord Almighty saith
that the Lord Almighty sent Him.  Who can presume to understand these
words of any other than Christ, who is speaking to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel?  For He says in the Gospel, “I am not sent save to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel,” <span
id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479) which He here compared to the pupil
of God’s eye, to signify the profoundest love.  And to this class of
sheep the apostles themselves belonged.  But after the glory, to wit, of
His resurrection,—for before it happened the evangelist said that “Jesus
was not yet glorified,” <span id="fr_1480"></span>[1481](#fn_1480) —He
was sent unto the nations in the persons of His apostles; and thus the
saying of the psalm was fulfilled, “Thou wilt deliver me from the
contradictions of the people; Thou wilt set me as the head of the
nations,” <span id="fr_1481"></span>[1482](#fn_1481) so that those who
had spoiled the Israelites, and whom the Israelites had served when they
were subdued by them, were not themselves to be spoiled in the same
fashion, but were in their own persons to become the spoil of the
Israelites.  For this had been promised to the apostles when the Lord
said, “I will make you fishers of men.” <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[1483](#fn_1482)   And to one of them He says, “From
henceforth thou shalt catch men.” <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483)   They were then to become a spoil,
but in a good sense, as those who are snatched from that strong one when
he is bound by a stronger. <span id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484)

<span id="iv.XX.30-p13"></span>In like manner the Lord, speaking by the
same prophet, says, “And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will
seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.  And I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
spirit of grace and mercy; and they shall look upon me because they have
insulted me, and they shall mourn for Him as for one very dear, and
shall be in bitterness as for an only-begotten.” <span
id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485)   To whom but to God does it belong
to destroy all the nations that are hostile <span id="page_450">p.
450</span> <span id="iv.XX.30-Page_450"></span> to the holy city
Jerusalem, which “come against it,” that is, are opposed to it, or, as
some translate, “come upon it,” as if putting it down under them; or to
pour out upon the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem the
spirit of grace and mercy?  This belongs doubtless to God, and it is to
God the prophet ascribes the words; and yet Christ shows that He is the
God who does these so great and divine things, when He goes on to say,
“And they shall look upon me because they have insulted me, and they
shall mourn for Him as if for one very dear (or beloved), and shall be
in bitterness for Him as for an only-begotten.”  For in that day the
Jews—those of them, at least, who shall receive the spirit of grace and
mercy—when they see Him coming in His majesty, and recognize that it is
He whom they, in the person of their parents, insulted when He came
before in His humiliation, shall repent of insulting Him in His
passion:  and their parents themselves, who were the perpetrators of
this huge impiety, shall see Him when they rise; but this will be only
for their punishment, and not for their correction.  It is not of them
we are to understand the words, “And I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and
mercy, and they shall look upon me because they have insulted me;” but
we are to understand the words of their descendants, who shall at that
time believe through Elias.  But as we say to the Jews, You killed
Christ, although it was their parents who did so, so these persons shall
grieve that they in some sort did what their progenitors did.  Although,
therefore, those that receive the spirit of mercy and grace, and
believe, shall not be condemned with their impious parents, yet they
shall mourn as if they themselves had done what their parents did. 
Their grief shall arise not so much from guilt as from pious affection. 
Certainly the words which the Septuagint have translated, “They shall
look upon me because they insulted me,” stand in the Hebrew,“They shall
look upon me whom they pierced.” <span
id="fr_1486"></span>[1487](#fn_1486)   And by this word the crucifixion
of Christ is certainly more plainly indicated.  But the Septuagint
translators preferred to allude to the insult which was involved in His
whole passion.  For in point of fact they insulted Him both when He was
arrested and when He was bound, when He was judged, when He was mocked
by the robe they put on Him and the homage they did on bended knee, when
He was crowned with thorns and struck with a rod on the head, when He
bore His cross, and when at last He hung upon the tree.  And therefore
we recognize more fully the Lord’s passion when we do not confine
ourselves to one interpretation, but combine both, and read both
“insulted” and “pierced.”

<span id="iv.XX.30-p16"></span>When, therefore, we read in the
prophetical books that God is to come to do judgment at the last, from
the mere mention of the judgment, and although there is nothing else to
determine the meaning, we must gather that Christ is meant; for though
the Father will judge, He will judge by the coming of the Son.  For He
Himself, by His own manifested presence, “judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to the Son;” <span
id="fr_1487"></span>[1488](#fn_1487) for as the Son was judged as a man,
He shall also judge in human form.  For it is none but He of whom God
speaks by Isaiah under the name of Jacob and Israel, of whose seed
Christ took a body, as it is written, “Jacob is my servant, I will
uphold Him; Israel is mine elect, my Spirit has assumed Him:  I have put
my Spirit upon Him; He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.  He
shall not cry, nor cease, neither shall His voice be heard without.  A
bruised reed shall He not break, and the smoking flax shall He not
quench:  but in truth shall He bring forth judgment.  He shall shine and
shall not be broken, until He sets judgment in the earth:  and the
nations shall hope in His name.” <span
id="fr_1488"></span>[1489](#fn_1488)   The Hebrew has not “Jacob” and
“Israel;” but the Septuagint translators, wishing to show the
significance of the expression “my servant,” and that it refers to the
form of a servant in which the Most High humbled Himself, inserted the
name of that man from whose stock He took the form of a servant.  The
Holy Spirit was given to Him, and was manifested, as the evangelist
testifies, in the form of a dove. <span
id="fr_1489"></span>[1490](#fn_1489)   He brought forth judgment to the
Gentiles, because He predicted what was hidden from them.  In His
meekness He did not cry, nor did He cease to proclaim the truth.  But
His voice was not heard, nor is it heard, without, because He is not
obeyed by those who are outside of His body.  And the Jews themselves,
who persecuted Him, He did not break, though as a bruised reed they had
lost their integrity, and as smoking flax their light was quenched; for
He spared them, having come to be judged and not yet to judge.  He
brought forth judgment in truth, declaring that they should be punished
did they persist in their wickedness.  His face shone on the
Mount, <span id="fr_1490"></span>[1491](#fn_1490) His fame in the
world.  He is not broken nor overcome, because neither in Himself nor in
His <span id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span
id="iv.XX.30-Page_451"></span> Church has persecution prevailed to
annihilate Him.  And therefore that has not, and shall not, be brought
about which His enemies said or say, “When shall He die, and His name
perish?” <span id="fr_1491"></span>[1492](#fn_1491) “until He set
judgment in the earth.”  Behold, the hidden thing which we were seeking
is discovered.  For this is the last judgment, which He will set in the
earth when He comes from heaven.  And it is in Him, too, we already see
the concluding expression of the prophecy fulfilled:  “In His name shall
the nations hope.”  And by this fulfillment, which no one can deny, men
are encouraged to believe in that which is most impudently denied.  For
who could have hoped for that which even those who do not yet believe in
Christ now see fulfilled among us, and which is so undeniable that they
can but gnash their teeth and pine away?  Who, I say, could have hoped
that the nations would hope in the name of Christ, when He was arrested,
bound, scourged, mocked, crucified, when even the disciples themselves
had lost the hope which they had begun to have in Him?  The hope which
was then entertained scarcely by the one thief on the cross, is now
cherished by nations everywhere on the earth, who are marked with the
sign of the cross on which He died that they may not die eternally.

<span id="iv.XX.30-p22"></span>That the last judgment, then, shall be
administered by Jesus Christ in the manner predicted in the sacred
writings is denied or doubted by no one, unless by those who, through
some incredible animosity or blindness, decline to believe these
writings, though already their truth is demonstrated to all the world. 
And at or in connection with that judgment the following events shall
come to pass, as we have learned:  Elias the Tishbite shall come; the
Jews shall believe; Antichrist shall persecute; Christ shall judge; the
dead shall rise; the good and the wicked shall be separated; the world
shall be burned and renewed.  All these things, we believe, shall come
to pass; but how, or in what order, human understanding cannot perfectly
teach us, but only the experience of the events themselves.  My opinion,
however, is, that they will happen in the order in which I have related
them.

<span id="iv.XX.30-p23"></span>Two books yet remain to be written by me,
in order to complete, by God’s help, what I promised.  One of these will
explain the punishment of the wicked, the other the happiness of the
righteous; and in them I shall be at special pains to refute, by God’s
grace, the arguments by which some unhappy creatures seem to themselves
to undermine the divine promises and threatenings, and to ridicule as
empty words statements which are the most salutary nutriment of faith. 
But they who are instructed in divine things hold the truth and
omnipotence of God to be the strongest arguments in favor of those
things which, however incredible they seem to men, are yet contained in
the Scriptures, whose truth has already in many ways been proved; for
they are sure that God can in no wise lie, and that He can do what is
impossible to the unbelieving.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[449:1477](1020632.htm#fr_1476) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p3"></span> [Isa.
48.12-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012)<span
id="iv.XX.30-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[449:1478](1020632.htm#fr_1477) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p4"></span> [Isa.
53.7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iv.XX.30-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[449:1479](1020632.htm#fr_1478) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p6"></span> [Zech.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009)<span id="iv.XX.30-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[449:1480](1020632.htm#fr_1479) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p7"></span> [Matt.
15.24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span id="iv.XX.30-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[449:1481](1020632.htm#fr_1480) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p8"></span> [John
7.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span id="iv.XX.30-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[449:1482](1020632.htm#fr_1481) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p9"></span> [Ps.
18.43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043)<span id="iv.XX.30-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[449:1483](1020632.htm#fr_1482) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p10"></span> [Matt.
4.19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019)<span id="iv.XX.30-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[449:1484](1020632.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p11"></span> [Luke
5.10](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#010)<span id="iv.XX.30-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[449:1485](1020632.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p12"></span> [Matt.
12.29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)<span
id="iv.XX.30-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[449:1486](1020632.htm#fr_1485) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p14"></span> [Zech.
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span id="iv.XX.30-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[450:1487](1020632.htm#fr_1486) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p15"></span> So the Vulgate.

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[450:1488](1020632.htm#fr_1487) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p17"></span> [John
5.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="iv.XX.30-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[450:1489](1020632.htm#fr_1488) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p18"></span> [Isa.
42.1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)<span
id="iv.XX.30-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[450:1490](1020632.htm#fr_1489) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p19"></span> [John
1.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032)<span id="iv.XX.30-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[450:1491](1020632.htm#fr_1490) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p20"></span> [Matt.
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002)<span id="iv.XX.30-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[451:1492](1020632.htm#fr_1491) <span
id="iv.XX.30-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XX.30-p21"></span> [Ps.
41.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005)<span id="iv.XX.30-p21.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXI](1020633)
