[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020064)  [Next](1020066.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.22"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.22-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.22-p1.1"></span>Chapter 22.—That the Roman Gods Never Took
Any Steps to Prevent the Republic from Being Ruined by
Immorality.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.22-p2"></span>But what is relevant to the present
question is this, that however admirable our adversaries say the
republic was or is, it is certain that by the testimony of their own
most learned writers it had become, long before the coming of Christ,
utterly wicked and dissolute, and indeed had no existence, but had been
destroyed by profligacy.  To prevent this, surely these guardian gods
ought to have given precepts of morals and a rule of life to the people
by whom they were worshipped in so many temples, with so great a variety
of priests and sacrifices, with such numberless and diverse rites, so
many festal solemnities, so many celebrations of magnificent games.  But
in all this the demons only looked after their own interest, and cared
not at all how their worshippers lived, or rather were at pains to
induce them to lead an abandoned life, so long as they paid these
tributes to their honor, and regarded them with fear.  If any one denies
this, let him produce, let him point to, let him read the laws which the
gods had given against sedition, and which the Gracchi transgressed when
they threw everything into confusion; or those Marius, and Cinna, and
Carbo broke when they involved their country in civil wars, most
iniquitous and unjustifiable in their causes, cruelly conducted, and yet
more cruelly terminated; or those which Sylla scorned, whose life,
character, and deeds, as described by Sallust and other historians, are
the abhorrence of all mankind.  Who will deny that at that time the
republic had become extinct?

<span id="iv.II_1.22-p3"></span>Possibly they will be bold enough to
suggest in defence of the gods, that they abandoned the city on account
of the profligacy <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="iv.II_1.22-Page_37"></span> of the citizens, according to the lines
of Virgil:

<span id="iv.II_1.22-p4"></span>“Gone from each fane, each sacred
shrine,

<span id="iv.II_1.22-p5"></span>Are those who made this realm
divine.” <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md)

<span id="iv.II_1.22-p7"></span>But, firstly, if it be so, then they
cannot complain against the Christian religion, as if it were that which
gave offence to the gods and caused them to abandon Rome, since the
Roman immorality had long ago driven from the altars of the city a cloud
of little gods, like as many flies.  And yet where was this host of
divinities, when, long before the corruption of the primitive morality,
Rome was taken and burnt by the Gauls?  Perhaps they were present, but
asleep?  For at that time the whole city fell into the hands of the
enemy, with the single exception of the Capitoline hill; and this too
would have been taken, had not—the watchful geese aroused the sleeping
gods!  And this gave occasion to the festival of the goose, in which
Rome sank nearly to the superstition of the Egyptians, who worship
beasts and birds.  But of these adventitious evils which are inflicted
by hostile armies or by some disaster, and which attach rather to the
body than the soul, I am not meanwhile disputing.  At present I speak of
the decay of morality, which at first almost imperceptibly lost its
brilliant hue, but afterwards was wholly obliterated, was swept away as
by a torrent, and involved the republic in such disastrous ruin, that
though the houses and walls remained standing the leading writers do not
scruple to say that the republic was destroyed.  Now, the departure of
the gods “from each fane, each sacred shrine,” and their abandonment of
the city to destruction, was an act of justice, if their laws
inculcating justice and a moral life had been held in contempt by that
city.  But what kind of gods were these, pray, who declined to live with
a people who worshipped them, and whose corrupt life they had done
nothing to reform?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[37:114](1020065.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="iv.II_1.22-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.22-p6"></span> *Æneid*, ii. 351–2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](1020066.md)
