[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020071)  [Next](1020073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.29"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.29-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.29-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29.—An Exhortation to the Romans to
Renounce Paganism.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.29-p2"></span>This, rather, is the religion worthy of
your desires, O admirable Roman race,—the progeny of your Scævolas and
Scipios, of Regulus, and of Fabricius.  This rather covet, this
distinguish from that foul vanity and crafty malice of the devils.  If
there is in your nature any eminent virtue, only by true piety is it
purged and perfected, while by impiety it is wrecked and punished. 
Choose now what you will pursue, that your praise may be not in
yourself, but in the true God, in whom is no error.  For of popular
glory you have had your share; but by the secret providence of God, the
true religion was not offered to your choice.  Awake, it is now day; as
you have already awaked in the persons of some in whose perfect virtue
and sufferings for the true faith we glory:  for they, contending on all
sides with hostile powers, and conquering them all by bravely dying,
have purchased for us this country of ours with their blood; to which
country we invite you, and exhort you to add yourselves to the number of
the citizens of this city, which also has a sanctuary <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) of its own in the true remission of
sins. <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="iv.II_1.29-Page_42"></span> Do not listen to those degenerate sons
of thine who slander Christ and Christians, and impute to them these
disastrous times, though they desire times in which they may enjoy
rather impunity for their wickedness than a peaceful life.  Such has
never been Rome’s ambition even in regard to her earthly country.  Lay
hold now on the celestial country, which is easily won, and in which you
will reign truly and for ever.  For there shall thou find no vestal
fire, no Capitoline stone, but the one true God.

<span id="iv.II_1.29-p4"></span>“No date, no goal will here ordain:

<span id="iv.II_1.29-p5"></span>But grant an endless, boundless
reign.” <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md)

<span id="iv.II_1.29-p7"></span>No longer, then, follow after false and
deceitful gods; abjure them rather, and despise them, bursting forth
into true liberty.  Gods they are not, but malignant spirits, to whom
your eternal happiness will be a sore punishment.  Juno, from whom you
deduce your origin according to the flesh, did not so bitterly grudge
Rome’s citadels to the Trojans, as these devils whom yet ye repute gods,
grudge an everlasting seat to the race of mankind.  And thou thyself
hast in no wavering voice passed judgment on them, when thou didst
pacify them with games, and yet didst account as infamous the men by
whom the plays were acted.  Suffer us, then, to assert thy freedom
against the unclean spirits who had imposed on thy neck the yoke of
celebrating their own shame and filthiness.  The actors of these divine
crimes thou hast removed from offices of honor; supplicate the true God,
that He may remove from thee those gods who delight in their crimes,—a
most disgraceful thing if the crimes are really theirs, and a most
malicious invention if the crimes are feigned.  Well done, in that thou
hast spontaneously banished from the number of your citizens all actors
and players.  Awake more fully:  the majesty of God cannot be
propitiated by that which defiles the dignity of man.  How, then, can
you believe that gods who take pleasure in such lewd plays, belong to
the number of the holy powers of heaven, when the men by whom these
plays are acted are by yourselves refused admission into the number of
Roman citizens even of the lowest grade?  Incomparably more glorious
than Rome, is that heavenly city in which for victory you have truth;
for dignity, holiness; for peace, felicity; for life, eternity.  Much
less does it admit into its society such gods, if thou dost blush to
admit into thine such men.  Wherefore, if thou wouldst attain to the
blessed city, shun the society of devils.  They who are propitiated by
deeds of shame, are unworthy of the worship of right-hearted men.  Let
these, then, be obliterated from your worship by the cleansing of the
Christian religion, as those men were blotted from your citizenship by
the censor’s mark.

<span id="iv.II_1.29-p8"></span>But, so far as regards carnal benefits,
which are the only blessings the wicked desire to enjoy, and carnal
miseries, which alone they shrink from enduring, we will show in the
following book that the demons have not the power they are supposed to
have; and although they had it, we ought rather on that account to
despise these blessings, than for the sake of them to worship those
gods, and by worshipping them to miss the attainment of these blessings
they grudge us.  But that they have not even this power which is
ascribed to them by those who worship them for the sake of temporal
advantages, this, I say, I will prove in the following book; so let us
here close the present argument.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[41:118](1020072.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="iv.II_1.29-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.29-p3"></span> Alluding to the sanctuary given to all
who fled to Rome in its early days.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[42:119](1020072.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="iv.II_1.29-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.29-p6"></span> Virgil, *Æneid*, i. 278.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](1020073.md)
