[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020024)  [Next](1020026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Of Lucretia, Who Put an End to Her
Life Because of the Outrage Done Her.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p2"></span>This, then, is our position, and it seems
sufficiently lucid.  We maintain that when a woman is violated while her
soul admits no consent to the iniquity, but remains inviolably chaste,
the sin is not hers, but his who violates her.  But do they against whom
we have to defend not only the souls, but the sacred bodies too of these
outraged Christian captives,—do they, perhaps, dare to dispute our
position?  But all know how loudly they extol the purity of Lucretia,
that noble matron of ancient Rome.  When King Tarquin’s son had violated
her body, she made known the wickedness of this young profligate to her
husband Collatinus, and to Brutus her kinsman, men of high rank and full
of courage, and bound them by an oath to avenge it.  Then, heart-sick,
and unable to bear the shame, she put an end to her life.  What shall we
call her?  An adulteress, or chaste?  There is no question which she
was.  Not more happily than truly did a declaimer say of this sad
occurrence:  “Here was a marvel:  there were two, and only one committed
adultery.”  Most forcibly and truly spoken.  For this declaimer, seeing
in the union of the two bodies the foul lust of the one, and the chaste
will of the other, and giving heed not to the contact of the bodily
members, but to the wide diversity of their souls, says:  “There were
two, but the adultery was committed only by one.”

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p3"></span>But how is it, that she who was no partner
to the crime bears the heavier punishment of the two?  For the adulterer
was only banished along with his father; she suffered the extreme
penalty.  If that was not impurity by which she was unwillingly
ravished, then this is not justice by which she, being chaste, is
punished.  To you I appeal, ye laws and judges of Rome.  Even after the
perpetration of great enormities, you do not suffer the criminal to be
slain untried.  If, then, one were to bring to your bar this case, and
were to prove to you that a woman not only untried, but chaste and
innocent, had been killed, would you not visit the murderer with
punishment proportionably severe?  This crime was committed by Lucretia;
that Lucretia so celebrated and lauded slew the innocent, chaste,
outraged Lucretia.  Pronounce sentence.  But if you cannot, because
there does not appear any one whom you can punish, why do you extol with
such unmeasured laudation her who slew an innocent and chaste woman? 
Assuredly you will find it impossible to defend her before the judges of
the realms below, if they be such as your poets are fond of representing
them; for she is among those

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p4"></span>“Who guiltless sent themselves to doom,

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p5"></span>And all for loathing of the day,

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p6"></span>In madness threw their lives away.”

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p7"></span>And if she with the others wishes to
return,

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p8"></span>“Fate bars the way:  around their keep

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p9"></span>The slow unlovely waters creep,

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p10"></span>And bind with ninefold chain.” <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77)

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p12"></span>Or perhaps she is not there, because she
slew herself conscious of guilt, not of innocence?  She herself alone
knows her reason; but what if she was betrayed by the pleasure of the
act, and gave some consent to Sextus, though so violently abusing her,
and then was so affected with remorse, that she thought death alone
could expiate her sin?  Even though this were the case, she ought still
to have held her hand from suicide, if she could with her false <span
id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="iv.ii.xx-Page_14"></span> gods have
accomplished a fruitful repentance.  However, if such were the state of
the case, and if it were false that there were two, but one only
committed adultery; if the truth were that both were involved in it, one
by open assault, the other by secret consent, then she did not kill an
innocent woman; and therefore her erudite defenders may maintain that
she is not among that class of the dwellers below “who guiltless sent
themselves to doom.”  But this case of Lucretia is in such a dilemma,
that if you extenuate the homicide, you confirm the adultery:  if you
acquit her of adultery, you make the charge of homicide heavier; and
there is no way out of the dilemma, when one asks, If she was
adulterous, why praise her? if chaste, why slay her?

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p13"></span>Nevertheless, for our purpose of refuting
those who are unable to comprehend what true sanctity is, and who
therefore insult over our outraged Christian women, it is enough that in
the instance of this noble Roman matron it was said in her praise,
“There were two, but the adultery was the crime of only one.”  For
Lucretia was confidently believed to be superior to the contamination of
any consenting thought to the adultery.  And accordingly, since she
killed herself for being subjected to an outrage in which she had no
guilty part, it is obvious that this act of hers was prompted not by the
love of purity, but by the overwhelming burden of her shame.  She was
ashamed that so foul a crime had been perpetrated upon her, though
without her abetting; and this matron, with the Roman love of glory in
her veins, was seized with a proud dread that, if she continued to live,
it would be supposed she willingly did not resent the wrong that had
been done her.  She could not exhibit to men her conscience but she
judged that her self-inflicted punishment would testify her state of
mind; and she burned with shame at the thought that her patient
endurance of the foul affront that another had done her, should be
construed into complicity with him.  Not such was the decision of the
Christian women who suffered as she did, and yet survive.  They declined
to avenge upon themselves the guilt of others, and so add crimes of
their own to those crimes in which they had no share.  For this they
would have done had their shame driven them to homicide, as the lust of
their enemies had driven them to adultery.  Within their own souls, in
the witness of their own conscience, they enjoy the glory of chastity. 
In the sight of God, too, they are esteemed pure, and this contents
them; they ask no more:  it suffices them to have opportunity of doing
good, and they decline to evade the distress of human suspicion, lest
they thereby deviate from the divine law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[13:78](1020025.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p11"></span> Virgil, *Æneid*, vi. 434.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1020026)
