[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020067)  [Next](1020069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.25"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.25-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.25-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—How Powerfully the Evil Spirits
Incite Men to Wicked Actions, by Giving Them the Quasi-Divine Authority
of Their Example.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.25-p2"></span>Now, who does not hereby
comprehend,—unless he has preferred to imitate such gods rather than by
divine grace to withdraw himself from their fellowship,—who does not see
how eagerly these evil spirits strive by their example to lend, as it
were, divine authority to crime?  Is not this proved by the fact that
they were seen in a wide plain in Campania rehearsing among themselves
the battle which shortly after took place there with great bloodshed
between the armies of Rome?  For at first there were heard loud crashing
noises, and afterwards many reported that they had seen for some days
together two armies engaged.  And when this battle ceased, they found
the ground all indented with just such footprints of men and horses as a
great conflict would leave.  If, then, the deities were veritably
fighting with one another, the civil wars of men are sufficiently
justified; yet, by the way, let it be observed that such pugnacious gods
must be very wicked or very wretched.  If, however, it was but a
sham-fight, what did they intend by this, but that the civil wars of the
Romans should seem no wickedness, but an imitation of the gods?  For
already the civil wars had begun; and before this, some lamentable
battles and execrable massacres had occurred.  Already many had been
moved by the story of the soldier, who, on stripping the spoils of his
slain foe, recognized in the stripped corpse his own brother, and, with
deep curses on civil wars, slew himself there and then on his brother’s
body.  To disguise the bitterness of such tragedies, and kindle
increasing ardor in this monstrous warfare, these malign demons, who
were reputed and worshipped as gods, fell upon this plan of revealing
themselves in a state of civil war, that no compunction for
fellow-citizens might cause the Romans to shrink from such battles, but
that the human criminality might be justified by the divine example.  By
a like craft, too, did these evil spirits command that scenic
entertainments, of which I have already spoken, should be instituted and
dedicated to them.  And in these entertainments the poetical
compositions and actions of the drama ascribed such iniquities to the
gods, that every one might safely imitate them, whether he believed the
gods had actually done such things, or, not believing this, yet
perceived that they most eagerly desired to be represented as having
done them.  And that no one might suppose, that in representing the gods
as fighting with one another, the poets had slandered them, and imputed
to them unworthy actions, the gods themselves, to complete the
deception, confirmed the compositions of the poets by exhibiting their
own battles to the eyes of men, not only through actions in the
theatres, but in their own persons on the actual field.

<span id="iv.II_1.25-p3"></span>We have been forced to bring forward
these facts, because their authors have not scrupled to say and to write
that the Roman republic had already been ruined by the depraved moral
habits of the citizens, and had ceased to exist before the advent of our
Lord Jesus Christ.  Now this ruin they do not impute to their own gods,
though they impute to our Christ the evils of this life, which cannot
ruin good men, be they alive or dead.  And this they do, though our
Christ has issued so many precepts inculcating virtue and restraining
vice; while their own gods have done nothing whatever to preserve that
republic that served them, and to restrain it from ruin by such
precepts, but have rather hastened its destruction, by corrupting its
morality through their pestilent example.  No one, I <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span id="iv.II_1.25-Page_40"></span> fancy,
will now be bold enough to say that the republic was then ruined because
of the departure of the gods “from each fane, each sacred shrine,” as if
they were the friends of virtue, and were offended by the vices of men. 
No, there are too many presages from entrails, auguries, soothsayings,
whereby they boastingly proclaimed themselves prescient of future events
and controllers of the fortune of war,—all which prove them to have been
present.  And had they been indeed absent the Romans would never in
these civil wars have been so far transported by their own passions as
they were by the instigations of these gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1020069)
