[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020402)  [Next](1020404) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.11"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.11-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.11-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—Of the Fall of the First Man, in
Whom Nature Was Created Good, and Can Be Restored Only by Its
Author.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.11-p2"></span>But because God foresaw all things, and
was therefore not ignorant that man also would fall, we ought to
consider this holy city in connection with what God foresaw and
ordained, and not according to our own ideas, which do not embrace God’s
ordination.  For man, by his sin, could not disturb the divine counsel,
nor compel God to change what He had decreed; for God’s foreknowledge
had anticipated both,—that is to say, both how evil the man whom He had
created good should become, and what good He Himself should even thus
derive from him.  For though God is said to change His determinations
(so that in a tropical sense the Holy Scripture says even that God
repented <span id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722) ), this is said with
reference to man’s expectation, or the order of natural causes, and not
with reference to that which the Almighty had foreknown that He would
do.  Accordingly God, as it is written, made man upright, <span
id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723) and consequently with a good will. 
For if he had not had a good will, he could not have been upright.  The
good will, then, is the work of God; for God created him with it.  But
the first evil will, which preceded all man’s evil acts, was rather a
kind of falling away from the work of God to its own works than any
positive work.  And therefore the acts resulting were evil, not having
God, but the will itself for their end; so that the will or the man
himself, so far as his will is bad, was as it were the evil tree
bringing forth evil fruit.  Moreover, the bad will, though it be not in
harmony with, but opposed to nature, inasmuch as it is a vice or
blemish, yet it is true of it as of all vice, that it cannot exist
except in a nature, and only in a nature created out of nothing, and not
in that which the Creator has begotten of Himself, as He begot the Word,
by whom all things were made.  For though God formed man of the dust of
the earth, yet the earth itself, and every earthly material, is
absolutely created out of nothing; and man’s soul, too, God created out
of <span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span
id="iv.XIV.11-Page_272"></span> nothing, and joined to the body, when He
made man.  But evils are so thoroughly overcome by good, that though
they are permitted to exist, for the sake of demonstrating how the most
righteous foresight of God can make a good use even of them, yet good
can exist without evil, as in the true and supreme God Himself, and as
in every invisible and visible celestial creature that exists above this
murky atmosphere; but evil cannot exist without good, because the
natures in which evil exists, in so far as they are natures, are good. 
And evil is removed, not by removing any nature, or part of a nature,
which had been introduced by the evil, but by healing and correcting
that which had been vitiated and depraved.  The will, therefore, is then
truly free, when it is not the slave of vices and sins.  Such was it
given us by God; and this being lost by its own fault, can only be
restored by Him who was able at first to give it.  And therefore the
truth says, “If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed;” <span id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724) which is equivalent to
saying, If the Son shall save you, ye shall be saved indeed.  For He is
our Liberator, inasmuch as He is our Saviour.

<span id="iv.XIV.11-p6"></span>Man then lived with God for his rule in a
paradise at once physical and spiritual.  For neither was it a paradise
only physical for the advantage of the body, and not also spiritual for
the advantage of the mind; nor was it only spiritual to afford enjoyment
to man by his internal sensations, and not also physical to afford him
enjoyment through his external senses.  But obviously it was both for
both ends.  But after that proud and therefore envious angel (of whose
fall I have said as much as I was able in the eleventh and twelfth books
of this work, as well as that of his fellows, who, from being God’s
angels, became his angels), preferring to rule with a kind of pomp of
empire rather than to be another’s subject, fell from the spiritual
Paradise, and essaying to insinuate his persuasive guile into the mind
of man, whose unfallen condition provoked him to envy now that himself
was fallen, he chose the serpent as his mouthpiece in that bodily
Paradise in which it and all the other earthly animals were living with
those two human beings, the man and his wife, subject to them, and
harmless; and he chose the serpent because, being slippery, and moving
in tortuous windings, it was suitable for his purpose.  And this animal
being subdued to his wicked ends by the presence and superior force of
his angelic nature, he abused as his instrument, and first tried his
deceit upon the woman, making his assault upon the weaker part of that
human alliance, that he might gradually gain the whole, and not
supposing that the man would readily give ear to him, or be deceived,
but that he might yield to the error of the woman.  For as Aaron was not
induced to agree with the people when they blindly wished him to make an
idol, and yet yielded to constraint; and as it is not credible that
Solomon was so blind as to suppose that idols should be worshipped, but
was drawn over to such sacrilege by the blandishments of women; so we
cannot believe that Adam was deceived, and supposed the devil’s word to
be truth, and therefore transgressed God’s law, but that he by the
drawings of kindred yielded to the woman, the husband to the wife, the
one human being to the only other human being.  For not without
significance did the apostle say, “And Adam was not deceived, but the
woman being deceived was in the transgression;” <span
id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725) but he speaks thus, because the woman
accepted as true what the serpent told her, but the man could not bear
to be severed from his only companion, even though this involved a
partnership in sin.  He was not on this account less culpable, but
sinned with his eyes open.  And so the apostle does not say, “He did not
sin,” but “He was not deceived.”  For he shows that he sinned when he
says, “By one man sin entered into the world,” <span
id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726) and immediately after more distinctly,
“In the likeness of Adam’s transgression.”  But he meant that those are
deceived who do not judge that which they do to be sin; but he knew. 
Otherwise how were it true “Adam was not deceived?” But having as yet no
experience of the divine severity, he was possibly deceived in so far as
he thought his sin venial.  And consequently he was not deceived as the
woman was deceived, but he was deceived as to the judgment which would
be passed on his apology:  “The woman whom thou gavest to be with me,
she gave me, and I did eat.” <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727)  
What need of saying more?  Although they were not both deceived by
credulity, yet both were entangled in the snares of the devil, and taken
by sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_722"></span>[271:723](1020403.htm#fr_722) <span
id="iv.XIV.11-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.11-p3"></span> [Gen.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#006), [1 Sam.
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011)<span
id="iv.XIV.11-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[271:724](1020403.htm#fr_723) <span
id="iv.XIV.11-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.11-p4"></span> [Eccles.
7.29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#029)<span id="iv.XIV.11-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[272:725](1020403.htm#fr_724) <span
id="iv.XIV.11-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.11-p5"></span> 1 John 8.36<span
id="iv.XIV.11-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[272:726](1020403.htm#fr_725) <span
id="iv.XIV.11-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.11-p7"></span> [1 Tim.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014)<span id="iv.XIV.11-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[272:727](1020403.htm#fr_726) <span
id="iv.XIV.11-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.11-p8"></span> [Rom.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="iv.XIV.11-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[272:728](1020403.htm#fr_727) <span
id="iv.XIV.11-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.11-p9"></span> [Gen.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#012)<span id="iv.XIV.11-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1020404)
