[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020710)  [Next](1020712) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="v.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Faith is Buttressed by the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, and is Stimulated by His Coming to
Judgment.</span>

<span id="v.iv.xv-p2"></span>14.  The belief of the resurrection of our
Lord from the dead, and of His ascension into heaven, has strengthened
our faith by adding a great buttress of hope.  For it clearly shows how
freely He laid down His life for us when He had it in His power thus to
take it up again.  With what assurance, then, is the hope of believers
animated, when they reflect how great He was who suffered so great
things for them while they were still in unbelief!  And when men look
for Him to come from heaven as the judge of quick and dead, it strikes
great terror into the careless, so that they betake themselves to
diligent preparation, and learn by holy living to long for His approach,
instead of quaking at it on account of their evil deeds.  And what
tongue can tell, or what imagination can conceive, the reward He will
bestow at the last, when we consider that for our comfort in this
earthly journey He has given us so freely of His Spirit, that in the
adversities of this life we may retain our confidence in, and love for,
Him whom as yet we see not; and that He has also given to each gifts
suitable for the building up of His Church, that we may do what He
points out as right to be done, not only without a murmur, but even with
delight?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1020712)
