[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020166)  [Next](1020168) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.V.26"></span>

<span id="iv.V.26-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.V.26-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—On the Faith and Piety of
Theodosius Augustus.</span>

<span id="iv.V.26-p2"></span>And on this account, Theodosius not only
preserved during the lifetime of Gratian that fidelity which was due to
him, but also, after his death, he, like a true Christian, took his
little brother Valentinian under his protection, as joint emperor, after
he had been expelled by Maximus, the murderer of his father.  He guarded
him with paternal affection, though he might without any difficulty have
got rid of him, being entirely destitute of all resources, had he been
animated with the desire of extensive empire, and not with the ambition
of being a benefactor.  It was therefore a far greater pleasure to him,
when he had adopted the boy, and preserved to him his imperial dignity,
to console him by his very humanity and kindness.  Afterwards, when that
success was rendering Maximus terrible, Theodosius, in the midst of his
perplexing anxieties, was not drawn away to follow the suggestions of a
sacrilegious and unlawful curiosity, but sent to John, whose abode was
in the desert of Egypt,—for he had learned that this servant of God
(whose fame was spreading abroad) was endowed with the gift of
prophecy,—and from him he received assurance of victory.  Immediately
the slayer of the tyrant Maximus, with the deepest feelings of
compassion and respect, restored the boy Valentinianus to his share in
the empire from which he had been driven.  Valentinianus being soon
after slain by secret assassination, <span id="page_106">p. 106</span>
<span id="iv.V.26-Page_106"></span> or by some other plot or accident,
Theodosius, having again received a response from the prophet, and
placing entire confidence in it, marched against the tyrant Eugenius,
who had been unlawfully elected to succeed that emperor, and defeated
his very powerful army, more by prayer than by the sword.  Some soldiers
who were at the battle reported to me that all the missiles they were
throwing were snatched from their hands by a vehement wind, which blew
from the direction of Theodosius’ army upon the enemy; nor did it only
drive with greater velocity the darts which were hurled against them,
but also turned back upon their own bodies the darts which they
themselves were throwing.  And therefore the poet Claudian, although an
alien from the name of Christ, nevertheless says in his praises of him,
“O prince, too much beloved by God, for thee Æolus pours armed tempests
from their caves; for thee the air fights, and the winds with one accord
obey thy bugles.” <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228)   But the
victor, as he had believed and predicted, overthrew the statues of
Jupiter, which had been, as it were, consecrated by I know not what kind
of rites against him, and set up in the Alps.  And the thunderbolts of
these statues, which were made of gold, he mirthfully and graciously
presented to his couriers who (as the joy of the occasion permitted)
were jocularly saying that they would be most happy to be struck by such
thunderbolts.  The sons of his own enemies, whose fathers had been slain
not so much by his orders as by the vehemence of war, having fled for
refuge to a church, though they were not yet Christians, he was anxious,
taking advantage of the occasion, to bring over to Christianity, and
treated them with Christian love.  Nor did he deprive them of their
property, but, besides allowing them to retain it, bestowed on them
additional honors.  He did not permit private animosities to affect the
treatment of any man after the war.  He was not like Cinna, and Marius,
and Sylla, and other such men, who wished not to finish civil wars even
when they were finished, but rather grieved that they had arisen at all,
than wished that when they were finished they should harm any one.  Amid
all these events, from the very commencement of his reign, he did not
cease to help the troubled church against the impious by most just and
merciful laws, which the heretical Valens, favoring the Arians, had
vehemently afflicted.  Indeed, he rejoiced more to be a member of this
church than he did to be a king upon the earth.  The idols of the
Gentiles he everywhere ordered to be overthrown, understanding well that
not even terrestrial gifts are placed in the power of demons, but in
that of the true God.  And what could be more admirable than his
religious humility, when, compelled by the urgency of certain of his
intimates, he avenged the grievous crime of the Thessalonians, which at
the prayer of the bishops he had promised to pardon, and, being laid
hold of by the discipline of the church, did penance in such a way that
the sight of his imperial loftiness prostrated made the people who were
interceding for him weep more than the consciousness of offence had made
them fear it when enraged?  These and other similar good works, which it
would be long to tell, he carried with him from this world of time,
where the greatest human nobility and loftiness are but vapor.  Of these
works the reward is eternal happiness, of which God is the giver, though
only to those who are sincerely pious.  But all other blessings and
privileges of this life, as the world itself, light, air, earth, water,
fruits, and the soul of man himself, his body, senses, mind, life, He
lavishes on good and bad alike.  And among these blessings is also to be
reckoned the possession of an empire, whose extent He regulates
according to the requirements of His providential government at various
times.  Whence, I see, we must now answer those who, being confuted and
convicted by the most manifest proofs, by which it is shown that for
obtaining these terrestrial things, which are all the foolish desire to
have, that multitude of false gods is of no use, attempt to assert that
the gods are to be worshipped with a view to the interest, not of the
present life, but of that which is to come after death.  For as to those
who, for the sake of the friendship of this world, are willing to
worship vanities, and do not grieve that they are left to their puerile
understandings, I think they have been sufficiently answered in these
five books; of which books, when I had published the first three, and
they had begun to come into the hands of many, I heard that certain
persons were preparing against them an answer of some kind or other in
writing.  Then it was told me that they had already written their
answer, but were waiting a time when they could publish it without
danger.  Such persons I would advise not to desire what cannot be of any
advantage to them; for it is very easy for a man to seem to himself to
have answered arguments, when he has only been unwilling to be silent. 
For what is more loquacious than vanity?  And though it be able, if it
like, to shout more loudly than the truth, it is not, for all that, more
powerful than the truth.  But let men consider diligently all <span
id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span id="iv.V.26-Page_107"></span> the
things that we have said, and if, perchance, judging without party
spirit, they shall clearly perceive that they are such things as may
rather be shaken than torn up by their most impudent garrulity, and, as
it were, satirical and mimic levity, let them restrain their
absurdities, and let them choose rather to be corrected by the wise than
to be lauded by the foolish.  For if they are waiting an opportunity,
not for liberty to speak the truth, but for license to revile, may not
that befall them which Tully says concerning some one, “Oh, wretched
man! who was at liberty to sin?” <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229)
  Wherefore, whoever he be who deems himself happy because of license to
revile, he would be far happier if that were not allowed him at all; for
he might all the while, laying aside empty boast, be contradicting those
to whose views he is opposed by way of free consultation with them, and
be listening, as it becomes him, honorably, gravely, candidly, to all
that can be adduced by those whom he consults by friendly disputation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_228"></span>[106:229](1020167.htm#fr_228) <span
id="iv.V.26-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.26-p3"></span> *Panegyr, de tertio Honorii consulatu.*

<span id="fn_229"></span>[107:230](1020167.htm#fr_229) <span
id="iv.V.26-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.V.26-p4"></span> *Tusc. Quæst.*v. 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI](1020168)
