[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020224)  [Next](1020226.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.VIII.6"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.6-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.VIII.6-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Concerning the Meaning of the
Platonists in that Part of Philosophy Called Physical.</span>

<span id="iv.VIII.6-p2"></span>These philosophers, then, whom we see not
undeservedly exalted above the rest in fame and glory, have seen that no
material body is God, and therefore they have transcended all bodies in
seeking for God.  They have seen that whatever is changeable is not the
most high God, and therefore they have transcended every soul and all
changeable spirits in seeking the supreme.  They have seen also that, in
every changeable thing, the form which makes it that which it is,
whatever be its mode or nature, can only *be* through Him who truly
*is*, because He is unchangeable.  And therefore, whether we consider
the whole body of the world, its figure, qualities, and orderly
movement, and also all the bodies which are in it; or whether we
consider all life, either that which nourishes and maintains, as the
life of trees, or that which, besides this, has also sensation, as the
life of beasts; or that which adds to all these intelligence, as the
life of man; or that which does not need the support of nutriment, but
only maintains, feels, understands, as the life of angels,—all can only
*be* through Him who absolutely *is*.  For to Him it is not one thing to
*be*, and another to live, as though He could *be*, not living; nor is
it to Him one thing to live, and another thing to understand, as though
He could live, not understanding; nor is it to Him one thing to
understand, another thing to be blessed, as though He could understand
and not be blessed.  But to Him to live, to understand, to be blessed,
are to *be*.  They have understood, from this unchangeableness and this
simplicity, that all things must have been made by Him, and that He
could Himself have been made by none.  For they have considered that
whatever *is* is either body or life, and that life is something better
than body, and that the nature of body is sensible, <span
id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span id="iv.VIII.6-Page_149"></span> and
that of life intelligible.  Therefore they have preferred the
intelligible nature to the sensible.  We mean by sensible things such
things as can be perceived by the sight and touch of the body; by
intelligible things, such as can be understood by the sight of the
mind.  For there is no corporeal beauty, whether in the condition of a
body, as figure, or in its movement, as in music, of which it is not the
mind that judges.  But this could never have been, had there not existed
in the mind itself a superior form of these things, without bulk,
without noise of voice, without space and time.  But even in respect of
these things, had the mind not been mutable, it would not have been
possible for one to judge better than another with regard to sensible
forms.  He who is clever, judges better than he who is slow, he who is
skilled than he who is unskillful, he who is practised than he who is
unpractised; and the same person judges better after he has gained
experience than he did before.  But that which is capable of more and
less is mutable; whence able men, who have thought deeply on these
things, have gathered that the first form is not to be found in those
things whose form is changeable.  Since, therefore, they saw that body
and mind might be more or less beautiful in form, and that, if they
wanted form, they could have no existence, they saw that there is some
existence in which is the first form, unchangeable, and therefore not
admitting of degrees of comparison, and in that they most rightly
believed was the first principle of things which was not made, and by
which all things were made.  Therefore that which is known of God He
manifested to them when His invisible things were seen by them, being
understood by those things which have been made; also His eternal power
and Godhead by whom all visible and temporal things have been
created. <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md)   We have said enough
upon that part of theology which they call physical, that is, natural.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[149:301](1020225.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="iv.VIII.6-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.VIII.6-p3"></span> [Rom.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.VIII.6-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1020226.md)
