[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020300)  [Next](1020302) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.X.30"></span>

<span id="iv.X.30-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.X.30-p1.1"></span>Chapter 30.—Porphyry’s Emendations and
Modifications of Platonism.</span>

<span id="iv.X.30-p2"></span>If it is considered unseemly to emend
anything which Plato has touched, why did Porphyry himself make
emendations, and these not a few? for it is very certain that Plato
wrote that the souls of men return after death to the bodies of
beasts. <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433)   Plotinus also,
Porphyry’s teacher, held this opinion; <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434) yet Porphyry justly rejected it.  He
was of opinion that human souls return indeed into human bodies, but not
into the bodies they had left, but other new bodies.  He shrank from the
other opinion, lest a woman who had returned into a mule might possibly
carry her own son on her back.  He did not shrink, however, from a
theory which admitted the possibility of a mother coming back into a
girl and marrying her own son.  How much more honorable a creed is that
which was taught by the holy and truthful angels, uttered by the
prophets who were moved by God’s Spirit, preached by Him who was
foretold as the coming Saviour by His forerunning heralds, and by the
apostles whom He sent forth, and who filled the whole world with the
gospel,—how much more honorable, I say, is the belief that souls return
once for all to their own bodies, than that they return again and again
to divers bodies?  Nevertheless Porphyry, as I have said, did
considerably improve upon this opinion, in so far, at least, as he
maintained that human souls could transmigrate only into human bodies,
and made no scruple about demolishing the bestial prisons into which
Plato had wished to cast them.  He says, too, that God put the soul into
the world that it might recognize the evils of matter, and return to the
Father, and be for ever emancipated from the polluting contact of
matter.  And although here is some inappropriate thinking (for the soul
is rather given to the body that it may do good; for it would not learn
evil unless it did it), yet he corrects the opinion of other Platonists,
and that on a point of no small importance, inasmuch as he avows that
the soul, which is purged from all evil and received to the Father’s
presence, <span id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span
id="iv.X.30-Page_201"></span> shall never again suffer the ills of this
life.  By this opinion he quite subverted the favorite Platonic dogma,
that as dead men are made out of living ones, so living men are made out
of dead ones; and he exploded the idea which Virgil seems to have
adopted from Plato, that the purified souls which have been sent into
the Elysian fields (the poetic name for the joys of the blessed) are
summoned to the river Lethe, that is, to the oblivion of the past,

<span id="iv.X.30-p5"></span>“That earthward they may pass once more,

<span id="iv.X.30-p6"></span>Remembering not the things before,

<span id="iv.X.30-p7"></span>And with a blind propension yearn

<span id="iv.X.30-p8"></span>To fleshly bodies to return.” <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435)

<span id="iv.X.30-p10"></span>This found no favor with Porphyry, and
very justly; for it is indeed foolish to believe that souls should
desire to return from that life, which cannot be very blessed unless by
the assurance of its permanence, and to come back into this life, and to
the pollution of corruptible bodies, as if the result of perfect
purification were only to make defilement desirable.  For if perfect
purification effects the oblivion of all evils, and the oblivion of
evils creates a desire for a body in which the soul may again be
entangled with evils, then the supreme felicity will be the cause of
infelicity, and the perfection of wisdom the cause of foolishness, and
the purest cleansing the cause of defilement.  And, however long the
blessedness of the soul last, it cannot be founded on truth, if, in
order to be blessed, it must be deceived.  For it cannot be blessed
unless it be free from fear.  But, to be free from fear, it must be
under the false impression that it shall be always blessed,—the *false*
impression, for it is destined to be also at some time miserable.  How,
then, shall the soul rejoice in truth, whose joy is founded on
falsehood?  Porphyry saw this, and therefore said that the purified soul
returns to the Father, that it may never more be entangled in the
polluting contact with evil.  The opinion, therefore, of some
Platonists, that there is a necessary revolution carrying souls away and
bringing them round again to the same things, is false.  But, were it
true, what were the advantage of knowing it?  Would the Platonists
presume to allege their superiority to us, because we were in this life
ignorant of what they themselves were doomed to be ignorant of when
perfected in purity and wisdom in another and better life, and which
they must be ignorant of if they are to be blessed?  If it were most
absurd and foolish to say so, then certainly we must prefer Porphyry’s
opinion to the idea of a circulation of souls through constantly
alternating happiness and misery.  And if this is just, here is a
Platonist emending Plato, here is a man who saw what Plato did not see,
and who did not shrink from correcting so illustrious a master, but
preferred truth to Plato.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_433"></span>[200:434](1020301.htm#fr_433) <span
id="iv.X.30-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.30-p3"></span> Comp. Euseb. *Præp. Evan*. xiii. 16.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[200:435](1020301.htm#fr_434) <span
id="iv.X.30-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.30-p4"></span> *Ennead,* iii. 4, 2.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[201:436](1020301.htm#fr_435) <span
id="iv.X.30-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.X.30-p9"></span> *Æneid,* vi. 750, 751.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](1020302)
