[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020101)  [Next](1020103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.III.29"></span>

<span id="iv.III.29-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.III.29-p1.1"></span>Chapter 29.—A Comparison of the Disasters
Which Rome Experienced During the Gothic and Gallic Invasions, with
Those Occasioned by the Authors of the Civil Wars.</span>

<span id="iv.III.29-p2"></span>What fury of foreign nations, what
barbarian ferocity, can compare with this victory of citizens over
citizens?  Which was more disastrous, more hideous, more bitter to
Rome:  the recent Gothic and the old Gallic invasion, or the cruelty
displayed by Marius and Sylla and their partisans against men who were
members of the same body as themselves?  The Gauls, indeed, massacred
all the senators they found in any part of the city except the Capitol,
which alone was defended; but they at least sold life to those who were
in the Capitol, though they might have starved them out if they could
not have stormed it.  The Goths, again, spared so many senators, that it
is the more surprising that they killed any.  But Sylla, while Marius
was still living, established himself as conqueror in the Capitol, which
the Gauls had not violated, and thence issued his death-warrants; and
when Marius had escaped by flight, though destined to return more fierce
and bloodthirsty than ever, Sylla issued from the Capitol even decrees
of the senate for the slaughter and confiscation of the property of many
citizens.  Then, when Sylla left, what did the Marian faction hold
sacred or spare, when they gave no quarter even to Mucius, a citizen, a
senator, a pontiff, and though clasping in piteous embrace the very
altar in which, they say, reside the destinies of Rome?  And that final
proscription list of Sylla’s, not to mention countless other massacres,
despatched more senators than the Goths could even plunder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](1020103)
