[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020044)  [Next](1020046.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.II_1.2"></span>

<span id="iv.II_1.2-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.II_1.2-p1.1"></span>Chapter 2.—Recapitulation of the Contents of
the First Book.</span>

<span id="iv.II_1.2-p2"></span>In the foregoing book, having begun to
speak of the city of God, to which I have resolved, Heaven helping me,
to consecrate the whole of this work, it was my first endeavor to reply
to those who attribute the wars by which the world is being devastated,
and especially the recent sack of Rome by the barbarians, to the
religion of Christ, which prohibits the offering of abominable
sacrifices to devils.  I have shown that they ought rather to attribute
it to Christ, that for His <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span
id="iv.II_1.2-Page_24"></span> name’s sake the barbarians, in
contravention of all custom and law of war, threw open as sanctuaries
the largest churches, and in many instances showed such reverence to
Christ, that not only His genuine servants, but even those who in their
terror feigned themselves to be so, were exempted from all those
hardships which by the custom of war may lawfully be inflicted.  Then
out of this there arose the question, why wicked and ungrateful men were
permitted to share in these benefits; and why, too, the hardships and
calamities of war were inflicted on the godly as well as on the
ungodly.  And in giving a suitably full answer to this large question, I
occupied some considerable space, partly that I might relieve the
anxieties which disturb many when they observe that the blessings of
God, and the common and daily human casualties, fall to the lot of bad
men and good without distinction; but mainly that I might minister some
consolation to those holy and chaste women who were outraged by the
enemy, in such a way as to shock their modesty, though not to sully
their purity, and that I might preserve them from being ashamed of life,
though they have no guilt to be ashamed of.  And then I briefly spoke
against those who with a most shameless wantonness insult over those
poor Christians who were subjected to those calamities, and especially
over those broken-hearted and humiliated, though chaste and holy women;
these fellows themselves being most depraved and unmanly profligates,
quite degenerate from the genuine Romans, whose famous deeds are
abundantly recorded in history, and everywhere celebrated, but who have
found in their descendants the greatest enemies of their glory.  In
truth, Rome, which was founded and increased by the labors of these
ancient heroes, was more shamefully ruined by their descendants, while
its walls were still standing, than it is now by the razing of them. 
For in this ruin there fell stones and timbers; but in the ruin those
profligates effected, there fell, not the mural, but the moral bulwarks
and ornaments of the city, and their hearts burned with passions more
destructive than the flames which consumed their houses.  Thus I brought
my first book to a close.  And now I go on to speak of those calamities
which that city itself, or its subject provinces, have suffered since
its foundation; all of which they would equally have attributed to the
Christian religion, if at that early period the doctrine of the gospel
against their false and deceiving gods had been as largely and freely
proclaimed as now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](1020046.md)
