[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020029)  [Next](1020031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—That in that Virtue in Which
Regulus Excels Cato, Christians are Pre-Eminently Distinguished.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxv-p2"></span>Our opponents are offended at our
preferring to Cato the saintly Job, who endured dreadful evils in his
body rather than deliver himself from all torment by self-inflicted
death; or other saints, of whom it is recorded in our authoritative and
trustworthy books that they bore captivity and the oppression of their
enemies rather than commit suicide.  But their own books authorize us to
prefer to Marcus Cato, Marcus Regulus.  For Cato had never conquered
Cæsar; and when conquered by him, disdained to submit himself to him,
and that he might escape this submission put himself to death.  Regulus,
on the contrary, had formerly conquered the Carthaginians, and in
command of the army of Rome had won for the Roman republic a victory
which no citizen could bewail, and which the enemy himself was
constrained to admire; yet afterwards, when he in his turn was defeated
by them, he preferred to be their captive rather than to put himself
beyond their reach by suicide.  Patient under the domination of the
Carthaginians, and constant in his love of the Romans, he neither
deprived the one of his conquered body, nor the other of his unconquered
spirit.  Neither was it love of life that prevented him from killing
himself.  This was plainly enough indicated by his unhesitatingly
returning, on account of his promise and oath, to the same enemies whom
he had more grievously provoked by his words in the senate than even by
his arms in battle.  Having such a contempt of life, and preferring to
end it by whatever torments excited enemies might contrive, rather than
terminate it by his own hand, he could not more distinctly have declared
how great a crime he judged suicide to be.  Among all their famous and
remarkable citizens, the Romans have no better man to boast of than
this, who was neither corrupted by prosperity, for he remained a very
poor man after winning such victories; nor broken by adversity, for he
returned intrepidly to the most miserable end.  But if the bravest and
most renowned heroes, who had but an earthly country to defend, and who,
though they had but false gods, yet rendered them a true worship, and
carefully kept their oath to them; if these men, who by the custom and
right of war put conquered enemies to the sword, yet shrank from putting
an end to their own lives even when conquered by their enemies; if,
though they had no fear at all of death, they would yet rather suffer
slavery than commit suicide, how much rather must Christians, the
worshippers of the true God, the aspirants to a heavenly citizenship,
shrink from this act, if in God’s providence they have been for a season
delivered into the hands of their enemies to prove or to correct them! 
And certainly, Christians subjected to this humiliating condition will
not be deserted by the Most High, who for their sakes <span
id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span id="iv.ii.xxv-Page_17"></span> humbled
Himself.  Neither should they forget that they are bound by no laws of
war, nor military orders, to put even a conquered enemy to the sword;
and if a man may not put to death the enemy who has sinned, or may yet
sin against him, who is so infatuated as to maintain that he may kill
himself because an enemy has sinned, or is going to sin, against him?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1020031)
