[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020418)  [Next](1020420.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XIV.27"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.27-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.XIV.27-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—Of the Angels and Men Who Sinned,
and that Their Wickedness Did Not Disturb the Order of God’s
Providence.</span>

<span id="iv.XIV.27-p2"></span>The sins of men and angels do nothing to
impede the “great works of the Lord which accomplish His will.” <span
id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761.md)   For He who by His providence and
omnipotence distributes to every one his own portion, is able to make
good use not only of the good, but also of the wicked.  And thus making
a good use of the wicked angel, who, in punishment of his first wicked
volition, was doomed to an obduracy that prevents him now from willing
any good, why should not God have permitted him to tempt the first man,
who had been created upright, that is to say, with a good will?  For he
had been so constituted, that if he looked to God for help, man’s
goodness should defeat the angel’s wickedness; but if by proud
self-pleasing he abandoned God, his Creator and Sustainer, he should be
conquered.  If his will remained upright, through leaning on God’s help,
he should be rewarded; if it became wicked, by forsaking God, he should
be punished.  But even this trusting in God’s help could not itself be
accomplished without God’s help, although man had it in his own power to
relinquish the benefits of divine grace by pleasing himself.  For as it
is not in our power to live in this world without sustaining ourselves
by food, while it is in our power to refuse this nourishment and cease
to live, as those do who kill themselves, so it was not in man’s power,
even in Paradise, to live as he ought without God’s help; but it was in
his power to live wickedly, though thus he should cut short his
happiness, and incur very just punishment.  Since, then, God was not
ignorant that man would fall, why should He not have suffered him to be
tempted by an angel who hated and envied him?  It was not, indeed, that
He was unaware that he should be conquered. but because He foresaw that
by the man’s seed, aided by divine grace, this same devil himself should
be conquered, to the greater glory of the saints.  All was brought about
in such a manner, that neither did any future event escape God’s
foreknowledge, nor did His foreknowledge compel any one to sin, and so
as to demonstrate in the experience of the intelligent creation, human
and angelic, how great a difference there is between the private
presumption of the creature and the Creator’s protection.  For who will
dare to believe or say that it was not in God’s power to prevent both
angels and men from sinning?  But God preferred to leave this in their
power, and thus to show both what evil could be wrought by their pride,
and what good by His grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_761"></span>[282:762](1020419.htm#fr_761.md) <span
id="iv.XIV.27-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.XIV.27-p3"></span> [Ps.
111.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.XIV.27-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1020420.md)
