[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1020025)  [Next](1020027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—That Christians Have No Authority
for Committing Suicide in Any Circumstances Whatever.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p2"></span>It is not without significance, that in
no passage of the holy canonical books there can be found either divine
precept or permission to take away our own life, whether for the sake of
entering on the enjoyment of immortality, or of shunning, or ridding
ourselves of anything whatever.  Nay, the law, rightly interpreted, even
prohibits suicide, where it says, “Thou shalt not kill.”  This is proved
especially by the omission of the words “thy neighbor,” which are
inserted when false witness is forbidden:  “Thou shalt not bear false
witness against thy neighbor.”  Nor yet should any one on this account
suppose he has not broken this commandment if he has borne false witness
only against himself.  For the love of our neighbor is regulated by the
love of ourselves, as it is written, “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself.”  If, then, he who makes false statements about himself is not
less guilty of bearing false witness than if he had made them to the
injury of his neighbor; although in the commandment prohibiting false
witness only his neighbor is mentioned, and persons taking no pains to
understand it might suppose that a man was allowed to be a false witness
to his own hurt; how much greater reason have we to understand that a
man may not kill himself, since in the commandment, “Thou shalt not
kill,” there is no limitation added nor any exception made in favor of
any one, and least of all in favor of him on whom the command is laid! 
And so some attempt to extend this command even to beasts and cattle, as
if it forbade us to take life from any creature.  But if so, why not
extend it also to the plants, and all that is rooted in and nourished by
the earth?  For though this class of creatures have no sensation, yet
they also are said to live, and consequently they can die; and
therefore, if violence be done them, can be killed.  So, too, the
apostle, when speaking of the seeds of such things as these, says, “That
which thou sowest is not quickened except it die;” and in the Psalm it
is said, “He killed their vines with hail.”  Must we therefore reckon it
a breaking of this commandment, “Thou shalt not kill,” to pull a
flower?  Are we thus insanely to countenance the foolish error of the
Manichæans?  Putting aside, then, these ravings, if, when we say, Thou
shalt not kill, we do not understand this of the plants, since they have
no sensa <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span
id="iv.ii.xxi-Page_15"></span> tion, nor of the irrational animals that
fly, swim, walk, or creep, since they are dissociated from us by their
want of reason, and are therefore by the just appointment of the Creator
subjected to us to kill or keep alive for our own uses; if so, then it
remains that we understand that commandment simply of man.  The
commandment is, “Thou shall not kill man;” therefore neither another nor
yourself, for he who kills himself still kills nothing else than man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1020027)
